THE  HISTORY  OF  ROME, 
BY  GEORGE  BAKER,  A.  M. 
PREFACE 
Titus  Livius,  the  illustrious  author  of  the  Roman 
History,  descended  from  a  noble  family  in  Rome,  mid 
was  born  at  Patavium,  now  called  Padua,  in  Italy,  in 
the  694th  year  of  Rome,  fifty-eight  years  before  the 
commencement  of  the  Christian  aera. 
Like  many  other  literary  men,  his  life  was  contem¬ 
plative,  rather  than  active;  very  few  particulars,  there¬ 
fore,  concerning  him,  have  come  down  to  us.  He  re¬ 
sided  at  Rome  for  a  considerable  time,  where  he  was 
much  noticed,  and  highly  honoured,  by  Augustus;  to 
whom  he  was  previously  known,  it  is  said,  by  some 
writings  which  he  had  dedicated  to  him.  Seneca,  how¬ 
ever,  is  silent  upon  the  subject  of  this  supposed  dedi¬ 
cation,  though  he  mentions  the  work  itself,  which,  he 
says,  consisted  of  moral  and  philosophical  dialogues. 
He  appears  to  have  conceived  the  project  of  writing 
his  history,  immediately  upon  his  settling  at  Rome;  or, 
pmfaaps,  he  came  thither  for  the  purpose  of  collecting 
the  necessary  materials  for  that  great  work. 

13293 

vi 

PREFACE. 

Aagustus  appointed  him  preceptor  to  his  grandson 
Claudius,  afterwards  emperor.  But  he  seems  not  much 
to  have  attended  to  the  advantage  which  might  have 
resulted  from  so  advantageous  a  connection,  and  to 
have  occupied  himself,  entirely,  in  the  composition  of 
his  history;  parts  of  which,  as  they  were  finished,  he 
read  to  Augustus  and  Macsenas. 
Distracted  with  the  tumult,  and  disgusted,  it  may  be, 
with  the  intrigues  and  cabals  of  Rome,  he  sought  re¬ 
tirement  and  tranquillity  in  the  beautiful  countiy,  and 
delightful  climate,  of  ^Naples.  Here,  enjoying  uninter¬ 
rupted  literary  ease  and  quiet,  he  continued  his  labour, 
and  finished  his  work,  comprising,  in  an  hundred  and 
forty-two  books,  the  history  of  Rome,  from  the  foun¬ 
dation  of  that  city  to  the  death  of  Drusus,  containing  a 
period  of  seven  hundred  and  forty-three  yeans,  ending 
nine  years  before  the  birth  of  our  Saviour.  Having 
completed  this  great  work,  he  returned  to  pass  the  re¬ 
mainder  of  his  days  in  his  native  country,  where  he 
died,  A.  D.  1 7,  at  the  age  of  seventy-five  years. 
What  family  he  left  behind  him,  is  not  known.  Quin¬ 
tilian,  however,  mentions  that  he  had  a  son,  for  whose 
instruction  he  drew  up  some  excellent  observations  on 
rhetoric;  and  there  is  also  reason  to  suppose  that  he 
had  a  daughter,  married  to  Lucius  Magius,  an  orator, 
who  is  advantageously  spoken  of  by  Seneca. 
How  highly  his  works  were  esteemed,  and  himself 
personally  honoured  and  respected,  may  be  gathered 
from  the  manner  in  which  he  is  mentioned  by  many 
ancient  authors.  Tacitus  tells  us,*  that  “T.  Livius, 

^  Annal,  ir?,  34. 

PBEFACE. 

Vll 

that  adoairable  historian,  not  more  distinguished  by  his* 
eloquence  than  by  his  fidelity,  was  so  lavish  in  his 
praise  of  Pompey,  that  Augustus  called  him  the  Pom¬ 
peian:  and  yet  his  friendship  for  him  was  unalterahle/’ 
The  younger  Pliny  informs  us,*  that  “  a  certain  inha¬ 
bitant  of  the  city  of  Cadiz  was  so  struck  with  the  illus¬ 
trious  character  of  Livy,  that  he  travelled  to  Rome  on 
purpose  to  see  that  great  genius;  and  as  soon  as  he  had 
satisfied  his  curiosity,  returned  home.” 
Of  the  hundred  and  forty-two  hooks,  of  which  the 
history  of  RonoTe  originally  consisted,  thirty-five  only 
have  come  down  to  us.  The  contents  of  the  whole, 
the  hundred  and  thirty-seventh  and  eighth  excepted, 
have  been  preserved;  compiled,  as  some,  without  any 
good  reason,  have  supposed,  by  Livy  himself;  while 
others,  with  equal  improhability,  have  asserted  them  to 
be  the  work  of  Lucius  Floras,  author  of  a  portion  of 
Roman  history.  Whoever  may  have  been  the  compi¬ 
ler,  a  fact  as  useless,  as  it  is  now  impossible  to  ascer¬ 
tain,  they  are  highly  curious;  and  although  they  contain 
hut  a  faint  outline,  yet  they  serve  to  convey  some  idea 
of  the  original,  and  greatly  excite  regret  at  the  loss  of 
so  large  a  portion  of  this  valuable  work. 
The  parts  of  this  history  which  we  now  possess,  are, 
the  first  decade:  for  it  appears,  from  his  having  prefix¬ 
ed  separate  prefatory  introductions  to  each  portion, 
that  the  author  had  divided  his  work  into  distinct  parts, 
consisting  each  of  ten  books.  The  first  decade  com¬ 
mences  with  the  foundation  of  the  city  of  Rome,  and 
rapidly  runs  over  the  affairs  of  four  hundred  and  sixty 
*  Ep.  U.  3. 

Tiii 

PREFACE. 

years.  The  seeoad  decade  is  lost:  it  oon^rised  a  pe¬ 
riod  of  seventy-five  years;  the  principal  occurrence  in 
it  was  the  first  Punic  war,  in  which  the  Komans,  after 
a  long  and  arduous  struggle,  were  finally  victorious. 
The  third  decade  is  extant:  it  contains  a  particular  and 
well-detailed  account  of  the  second  Punic  war;  the 
kmgest,  as  our  author  himself  observes,  and  the  most 
hazardous  war,  the  Romans  had  ever  been  engaged  in; 
in  the  course  of  which  they  gained  so  many  advantages, 
and  acquired  so  much  military  experience,  that  no  na¬ 
tion  was  ever  able,  afterwards,  to  withsland  them.  The 
fourth  decade  contains  the  Macedonian  war  against 
Philip,  and  the  Asiatic  against  Antiochus.  These  are 
related  at  considerable  length,  insomuch  that  the  ten 
books  comprise  a  space  of  twenty-three  years  only.  Of 
the  fifth  decade,  the  first  five  books  only  remain,  and 
these  very  imperfect  They  give  an  account  of  the 
war  with  Perseus  king  of  Macedonia,  who  gains  seve¬ 
ral  advantages  against  the  Romans,  but  is  at  length 
subdued,  and  his  kingdom  reduced  to  the  form  of  a  Ro¬ 
man  province;  of  the  corruption  of  several  Roman  go¬ 
vernors  in  the  administration  of  the  provinces,  and  their 
punishment;  and  of  the  third  Punic  war,  which  lasted 
only  five  years. 
Of  the  remaining  books,  it  has  been  already  said, 
that  the  contents  only  have  been  preserved;  and  they 
serve  to  show  us  the  greatness  of  our  loss,  the  greatest 
literary  loss,  perhaps,  owing  to  the  ravages  of  the  time. 
Livy  had  employed  forty-five  books  in  the  history  of  six 
centuries;  but  so  many,  so  various,  and  so  interesting 
were  the  events,  which  he  had  before  him  for  selection, 

PREFACE. 

IX 

in  the  latter  period  of  the  Republic,  that  it  took  him 
above  double  that  number  to  relate  the  occurrences  of 
little  more  than  an  hundred  and  twenty  years.  From 
the  admirable  manner  in  which  he  has  written  the  for¬ 
mer  part  of  his  History,  we  may  judge  of  what  must 
have  been  the  merit  of  this  latter  part,  which  fails,  us, 
unfortunately,  at  a  most  remarkable  period,  when  ra¬ 
tional  curiosity  is  raised  to  the  highest  pitch.  Nor  can 
we  doubt  the  excellence  of  its  execution,  when  we 
consider  how  much  better,  and  how  much  more  copi¬ 
ous  his  materials  must  have  been;  for,  besides  what  he 
could  draw  from  his  own  personal  knowledge,  having 
lived  among,  and  conversed  familiarly  with,  the  most 
considerable  men  in  the  empire,  who  were  themselves 
principal  actors  in  the  important  transactions  which  he 
relates,  he  had  access  to  the  best  possible  written  ma¬ 
terials;  to  the  memoirs  of  Syila,  Caesar,  Labienus,  Pol- 
lio,  Augustus,  and  many  others  which  were  then  ex¬ 
tant.  What  would  we  not  give  tor  the  picture,  finished 
by  so  able  a  hand,  from  the  sketches  of  such  masters.^ 
What  delight  would  it  not  afford  us,  to  see  the  whole 
progress  of  a  government  from  liberty  to  servitude? — 
the  whole  series  of  causes  and  effects,  apparent  and 
real,  public  and  private? — those  wdiich  all  men  saw, 
and  all  good  men  opjwsed  and  lamented,  at  the  time; 
and  those  which  were  so  disguised  to  the  prejudices^ 
to  the  partialities,  of  a  divided  people,  and  even  to  the 
corruption  of  mankind,  that  many  did  not,  and  that 
many  could  pretend  they  did  not,  (fiscern  them,  till  it 
was  too  late  to  resist  them?  I  own,  says  a  noble  author,* 
*  Belingbroke. 
VOL.  1. — b 

X 

PKEFACE. 

I  should  be  glad  to  exchange  what  we  have  of  this  His* 
tory,  for  what  we  have  not. 
Much  as  our  historian  was  adniired,  and  highly  as 
he  was  respected,  yet  he  was  not  without  his  detractors. 
He  was  charged  with  patavinity  in  his  writings.  The 
firet  person  who  brought  this  charge  against,  him,  seems 
to  have  been  Asinius  Pollio,  a  polite  and  elegant  wri¬ 
ter,  and  a  distinguished  ornament  of  the  age  of  Au¬ 
gustus.* 
In  what  this  patavinity  consisted,  no  ancient  author 
having  defined  it,  it  is  not  now  easy  to  say;  and,  ac¬ 
cordingly,  it  is  a  matter  which  has  been  much  disputed. 
Some  will  have  it,  that  it  was  a  political  term,  and  that 
it  signified  an  attachment  to  the  Pompeian  party: 
others  contend  that  it  meant  a  hatred  to  the  Gauls;  that 
it  was  symbolical  of  some  blameable  particularity,  they 
know  not  what.  The  more  probable  opinion,  however, 
seems,  from  the  term  itself^  to  be,  that  it  signified  some 
provincial  peculiarity  of  dialect.  Ancient  Italy,  like 
modem  Italy,  had  its  differences,  not  of  idiom  merely, 
but  of  language,  in  every  different  province.  In 
portion  as  their  language  varies,  at  this  day,  from  the 
purity  of  the  Tuscan  dialect,  they  become  almost  un¬ 
intelligible  to  each  other;  with  difficulty  can  a  Vene¬ 
tian  and  a  Neapolitan  converse  together;  that  is,  the 
people:  for  the  well-educated  in  every  country  learn  to 
speak  and  write  the  dialect  of  the  metropolis;  althou^, 
if  brought  up  in  their  own  provinces,  however  nearly 
their  language  maf  approach  the  purity  of  that  of  the 

*  Quintil.  Instit.  i.  5*  viii.  1. 

FKBFACE. 

Xt 

capital,  yet  it  will  ever  retain  some  tincture  of  provin¬ 
ciality. 
If  this  supposition  of  the  meaning  of  the  word  pata- 
vinity  be  right,  the  fact,  upon  such  authority  as  that  of 
Pollio,  must  be  admitted;  although  in  what,  precisely, 
it  consisted,  it  is  not,  at  present,  perhaps,  possible  to 
determine.  Much  has  been  written  upon  the  subject, 
which  in  reality  seems  now  to  be  an  idle  inquiry;  and, 
as  a  dissertation  upon  this  matter  could  afford  neither 
instruction  nor  entertainment  to  the  mere  English  rea¬ 
der,  for  whose  use  the  following  translation  is  princi¬ 
pally  intended,  we  shall  dismiss  the  subject  with  ob¬ 
serving,  that  what  Quintilian  has  not  told  us,  no  mo¬ 
dern  scholar  will  ever,  it  is  probable,  have  penetration 
enough  to  discover;  and  we  may  be  also  allowed  to 
suppose  that,  whatever  these  peculiarities  may  have 
been,  as  that  great  critic  has  not  thought  them  worth 
pointing  out,  they  cannot  have  been  either  very  nume¬ 
rous,  or  of  very  material  consequence. 
Nor  will,  perhaps,  another  objection,  made  by  mo¬ 
dern  critics,  be  deemed  of  much  greater  weight  They 
dislike,  it  seems,  the  plan  of  his  History,  and  they 
found  that  dislike,  chiefly  on  the  speeches  which  he  so 
frequently  introduces,  which,  they  contend,  it  is  not 
probable  could  have  been  spoken  upon  the  occasions 
alleged;  and  therefore  they  pronounce  them  to  be  vio¬ 
lations  of  truth.  That  many  of  them  were  not  spoken 
by  the  persons  to  whom  they  are  ascribed,  nor  upon 
the  occasions  alleged,  must  be  admitted:  but  they  do 
not,  upon  that  account,  violate  the  truth  of  history. 
Nobody  can  suppose  that  our  author  ever  meant  to 

XU 

PREFACE. 

impede  upon  his  readers,  and  to  make  them  believe 
that  what  he  has  given  us,  as  said  by  the  different  per¬ 
sons  whom  he  introduces,  was  really  said  by  them;  the 
supposition  is  absurd.  He  could  only  mean  to  vary  his 
style;  and  to  enliven  and  embellish  matter,  which,  if 
continued  in  the  even  and  unvaried  tone  of  narration, 
would  be  sometimes  heavy  and  tedious;  making  these 
supposed  speeches  a  vehicle  for  conveying,  and  that  in 
a  very  lively  manner,  the  arguments  far  and  against  a 
proposed  measure;  and  he  thus  often  brings  into  them 
a  relation  of  facts,  chiefly  facts  of  remoter  times,  and 
much  more  agreeably  than  he  eould  have  interwoven 
them  into  his  narrative,  which  should  always  be  pro¬ 
gressive.  Modern  historians,  it  is  true,  have  rejected 
this  plan:  but  Livy  is  not  reprehensible,  because  his 
ideas  of  historic  structure  were  different  from  theirs. 
He  chose  rather  to  conform  himself  to  a  custom  which 
prevailed  very  generally  before  his  time,  and  which 
succeeding  writers,  of  great  taste  and  judgment,  have 
approved  and  adopted.  The  conduct  of  Livy,  in  this 
respect,  if  necessary,  might  be  justified  by  the  example 
of  Herodotus,  Xenophon,  Polybius,  Sallust,  Tacitus, 
and  others,  whose  histories  abound  with  speeches. 
These  speeches  frequently  give  a  more  perfect  idea  of 
the  character  of  the  supposed  speaker,  than  could  ea¬ 
sily  have  been  done  by  mere  description;  and  it  must 
be  acknowledged,  that  the  facts  which  they  sometimes 
contain,  would,  if  thrown  into  formal  narrative,  with 
episodes  and  digressions,  lose  much  of  their  animation 
and  force,  and  consequently  much  of  their  grace  and 
beauty. 

PUEFACE. 

When  we  consider 'the  use  of  such  speeches,  we 
shall  not  perhaps  feel  inclined  to  give  theoi  up,  although 
many  are  to  be  held  as  mere  fictions;  contrived,  how¬ 
ever,  with  much  ingenuity,  and  for  the  laudable  pur¬ 
pose  of  conveying  useful  reflections  and  salutary  ad¬ 
monitions.  But  though  it  be  admitted,  that  several  of 
them  are  fictitious,  yet  it  may  be  contended  that  they 
are  not  all  so.  Many  of  those  delivered  in  the  senate, 
in  popular  assemblies,  in  conventions  of  ambassadors, 
and  other  the  like  occasions,  are  most  probably  genu¬ 
ine;  and,  if  they  are  so,  they  furnish  us  with  very  cu¬ 
rious  specimens  of  ancient  eloquence.  Public  speak¬ 
ers  among  the  Romans  w’ere  in  the  habit  of  publishing 
their  speeches  upon  particular  occasions;  and  others, 
delivered  upon  important  occurrences,  would,  doubt¬ 
less,  be  noted  down,  and  circulated,  by  those  who 
were  curious  about,  and  probably  interested  in,  tlie 
subjects  of  them.  We  know  that,  in  our  own  times-, 
the  substance  of  speeches  in  the  British  parliament, 
and  other  asseoiblies,  has  often  been  accurately  col¬ 
lected,  and  carefully  preserved;  and  we  may,  therefore, 
reasonably  suppose  tliat  speeches  in  the  Roman  senate, 
upon  matters  in  which  the  whole  community  were 
deeply  interested,  would  be  heard  with  equal  attention^ 
and  preserved  with  equal  care. 
A  charge,  of  a  very  heavy  nature,  has  been  brought 
against  our  author,  w  hich,  were  it  well  founded,  would 
utterly  disqualify  him  fiom  writing  a  credible  history. 
He  is  accused  of  superstitious  credulity.  That  he  was 
of  a  serious  and  religious  turn  of  mind  is  sufficiently 
apparent  from  many  passages  in  his  history,  in  which 

XIV 

FEEFACS. 

be  severely  reprehends  the  licentiousness  and  profli¬ 
gacy  of  flie  times  he  lived  in,  and  applauds  the  simpli- 
ci^  qS  conduct,  and  sanctity  of  manners,  of  ancient 
days,  when  “  that  disregard  of  the  gods,  which  prevails 
in  the  present  age,  had  not  taken  place;  nor  did  every 
one,  by  his  own  interpretations,  accommodate  oaths 
and  tlm  laws  to  his  particular  views,  but  rather  adapted 
his  practice  to  them.”*  Again,  speaking  of  Spurius 
Psqurius,  he  describes  him  as  a  “  youth,  born  in  an  age 
when  that  sort  of  learning  which  inculcates  contempt 
of  the  gods  was  yet  unknown/’f  Numberless  passa¬ 
ges,  to  this  effect,  might  be  cited;  suffice  it,  however, 
to  observe,  that,  while  reprehending,  with  strong  indig¬ 
nation,  the  profane,  the  impious,  and  the  immoral 
among  his  countrymen,  he  omits  no  opportunity  of 
plauding  the  virtuous  and  the  good. 
But,  to  be  religious  is  one  thing;  to  be  superstitious 
is  another.  He  has  certainly  recorded  many  and  mon¬ 
strous  prodigies;  to  enumerate  which  would  be  both 
tedious  and  disgusting.  As,  however,  they  were  not 
merely  the  subject  of  popular  tales  and  vulgar  conver¬ 
sation,  but  the  objects  of  particular  attention,  noticed 
.always  by  the  magistrates,  and  even  by  the  senate, 
whom  we  frequently  find  ordering  expiations  of  them, 
it  was  his  duty,  as  an  historian,  to  relate  them,  since 
they  thus  made  a  part  of  the  public  transactions  of  the 
times.  And  this  he  does  with  great  caution;  apparently 
anxious  lest  he  should  be  supposed  to  believe  in  such 
absurdities,  and  protesting,  as  it  were,  against  the  im- 

^  B.  ili* 

t  B.  X.  40. 

PREFACE. 

XV 

putation  of  saperstition.  Thus,  upon  an  oecasiou 
where  he  relates  extraordioary  prodigies,  (more  extra¬ 
ordinary,  indeed,  than  in  any  other  part  of  his  history,) 
he  introduces  his  account  of  them  by  saying, — “  Nu¬ 
merous  prodigies  were  reported  to  have  happened  this 
year;  and  the  more  they  were  credited  by  simple  and 
superstitious  people,  the  more  such  stories  multiplied.”* 
He  generally  prefaces  the  mention  of  all  such,  with  a 
reserve  as  to  his  own  belief  of  them: — Many  prodi¬ 
gies  were  reported.”!  “  It  was  believed  that  crows 
bad  not  only  torn  with  their  beaks  some  gold  in  the 
capitol,  but  had  even  eaten  it.”J  And  again;  “  Fires 
from  heaven,  breaking  out  in  various  places,  had,  as 
was  said,”§  &c.  Nor  is  he  at  all  scrupulous  in  decla¬ 
ring  these  numerous  prodigies  to  derive  their  origin 
from  superstitious  weakness;  thus, — “  So  apt  is  super¬ 
stitious  weakness  to  introduce  the  deities  into  the  most 
trivial  occurrences  ”||  “  The  mention  of  one  prodigy 
was,  as  usual,  followed  by  reports  of  others.”1f  “  From 
this  cause  arose  abundance  of  superstitious  notions; 
and  the  minds  of  the  people  became  disposed  both  to 
believe  and  to  propagate  accounts  of  prodigies,  of 
which  a  very  great  number  were  reported.”**  “  The 
consuls  expiated  several  prodigies  which  had  been  re¬ 
ported.  ”ft  “  Several  deceptions  of  the  eyes  and  ears 
were  credited  One  is  almost  tempted  to  think,  that 
those  who  charge  our  author  with  credulity,  had  never 
read  him;  Otherwise,  haw  could  they  overlook  such  pas- 
*  B,  xxiv.  10.  t  B.  xxvii.  4.  i  B.  xxx.  2. 
§  B.  xxxix.  22.  j|  B.  xxvii.  23.  IF  lb.  37. 
**  B.  xxix.  14.  B.  xxiv,  44.  it  IbW. 

xn 

PREFACE. 

sages  as  these,  and  especially  the  following,  in  which 
he  s^tns  aware  that  such  a  charge  might  be  brought 
against  him,  and  labours  to  obviate  it.'* — “  In  propor¬ 
tion  as  the  war  was  protracted  to  a  greater  length,  and 
successes  and  disappointments  produced  various  altera- 
tmns,  not  only  in  the  situations,  but  in  the  sentiments 
of  men,  superstitious  observances,  and  these  mostly  in¬ 
troduced  from  abroad,  gained  such  ground  among  the 
people  in  general,  that  it  seemed  as  if  either  mankind, 
or  the  deities,  had  undergone  some  sudden  change.”* 
From  the  passages  here  adduced,  and  very  many 
others  to  the  same  purport  might  be  quoted,  it  may  be 
confidently  pronounced,  that  our  author  was  not  the 
dupe  of  those  vulgar  rumours,  those  “  deceptions  of  the 
eyes  and  ears,*”  which  yet  he  has  thought  it  his  duty  to 
record.  And,  in  truth,  it  seems  as  if  the  people  them¬ 
selves,  at  least  the  more  enlightened  of  them,  were 
equally  inclined,  if  established  custom  would  have  al¬ 
lowed,  to  disregard  them:  “  They  grew  weary,”  we  are 
told,  “  not  only  of  the  thing  itself,  but  of  the  religious 
rites  enjoined  in  consequence;  for  neither  could  the 
senate  be  convened,  nor  the  business  of  the  pubUc  be 
transacted,  the  consuls  were  so  constantly  employed  in 
sacrifices  and  expiations.”!  And  accordingly,  with  a 
view  to  diminish  the  reports  of  these  miracles,  and  the 
troublesome  ceremonies  consequent  thereupon,  the 
consuls,  by  direction  of  the  senate,  published  an  edict, 
that  when  “  on  any  day  public  .worship  should  be  or¬ 
dered,  in  consequence  of  the  report  of  an  earthquake. 

'  ii.  XXV.  1. 

”  B.  xxxiv,  55. 

nuffAcs. 

ifo  thoidd  report  onr^M^fee  4»4#«t 
day.”*  lodMd,  1k»w  very  ^  Maalesaa^ 
had  in  omens,  prodi^^  smd  ai^^sei^  we  rnay^sim 
Ijrom  a  rema^able  order  ma^  ^  t^t, 
ing  from  a  i^msul  the  ^  mim>anMe 
in  no  less  tl^  three  victims  smsee^v^- sma'lfeod; 
“  they  erd^ed  him,^’  says  the  wb^&mkb 
sacrificing  the  larger  nctims,  us^^e  oawm  iedM^d 
{Wove  favoarabte.”f  *  *  .  ,  - 
It  may  he  a^ed,  »if  Livy,  the  aeciide,  aod  lary 
mtaiy,  perhaps  die  greater  nmaihmr,  <^  &e  pe^le^ 
hdieved  thcee  ommis  and  pro^hgi^  ^he»^ 
Ha  ai»wers  dm-c^stion  hkasetf;  I.  am  well  aamie^” 
he  says,  ^  Jlhat,  ttoeogh  the  aaiafe  dknr^snd  lo  re^im, 
which  hM  led  mmi  into  the  fme^nt  preva^i^f^M^i 
of  the  gods  Qeeer  gving  poi^ids  any  fntare  erai^ 
no  proi£^ie8  are  imw  either  re^Hied  geveremew^ 
or  recorded  is  inster^  Bot,^  fo^my  pmrt,  a^fai  lam 
writing  ^  transactioim  of  a^«^  - lanes,  my  aenh^ 
orams,  i  know  not  how,  heocmne  aad  I  fe^  a 
kind  of  rehpmis  stwe,  whieb  compels  mo  to  mnsider 
&at  evems,  which  the  men  of  dmse  dtnos,  renowned 
for  w^om,  judged  deservi^  of  Bm  Mtentkm  «i  go¬ 
vernment,  ami  of  publk  expkdtm,  meist  roetmUy  ht 
wm*hy  <rf  a  pha^e  in  my  Hfetory  ”!  m  h'udi,  U 
mint  be  allewed,  that  m  ac^W^  eC,  lha  rdigmis  m- 
remoaim,  and  the  supnr^Mimn^^imwspee^  of  differ¬ 
ent  aadcNm  ad  different  pmiods,  nod  the  leaet 
rious  chapter  m  ^le  history  oflheiramam  mind. 
*  B.  xxxjv.  55.  t  B.  xH.  15.  1:  B,  xlii.  IS. 
VOL.  I. — c 

PREFACE. 

SCFiti 
‘^A  stiii  heavier  hath  been  brought  against  out 
author  ;  indeed,'  the  heaviest  that  can  be  alleged  again^ 
sua  fai^fHfiafiv  nameljr^  the  violation  of  the  first  great 
law  af  hi^ry;  which  is,  not  to  dare  to  assert  any  thing 
false,  and  not  to  suf^ress  trutb.*  He  who  couH 
not  be  warped  by  views  of  private  interest,  has  yet 
been  supposed,  from  an  excess  of  zeal  for  the  honour 
and  glory  of  his  country,  in  some  instances  to  have 
gone  beyond  the  truth,  in  others  to  have  suppressed  it 
It  been  ahneady  mentioned  how  highly  he  was 
esteemed  by  A^ustns,  mid  that  he  had  even  received 
ito^ineen^erahle  marks  of  favour  from  him.  Yet  he 
does  not  seem  to  have  courted  this  esteem,  or  those  fa¬ 
vours,  by  any  particular  attention  on  his  part;  nor  to 
have  endeavoured  to  r^y  them,  by  tlie  only  return 
which  authors  esm  make,  the  loadmg  their  patrons  with 
pliiiaps  undeserved  praises.  Although,  at  fibe  time 
when  he  wrote  his  History,  Augustus  was  in  'complete 
p(»smsioii  of  the  Roman  empire,  yet  he  names  him  but 
three  times,  and  then  bnt  in  a  slight  and  cursory  man¬ 
ner;  not  availing  himself  of  the  opportunity  to  heap 
adulation  upon  ium,  but  simply  giving  him  that  praise 
to  which  he  was  unquestionably  entitled.  On  occasion 
of  shutting  the  tempde  of  Janus,  he  takes  the  opportu¬ 
nity  of  mentioning,  that  it  had  been  but  twice  shut  since 
the  reign  of  Numa;  the  first  time  in  the  consulship  of 
Titus  Manlius,  on  the  termination  of  the  first  Punic 
war,  and  that  “  the  happiness  of  seeing  it  shut  £^aio, 
the  gods  granted  to  our  own  times,  when,  after  the  bat- 
*’  Cic,  de  Orat» 

PREFACE. 

XiR 
tie  of  Actram,  the  emperor,  Gassar  Augustus,  estab¬ 
lished  universal  peace  on  land  and  sea.”*  As  Augustus 
was  highly  vain  of  this  circumstance,  had  our  author^ 
dispositbn  led  him  to  flatter  this  master  of  the  worlds 
it  would  have  afforded  him  an  excellent  opportunity; 
as  would  another  occasion,  where,  speaking  of  spolia 
cjnma,  deposited  by  Cossus  in  one  of  the  temples,  be 
appeals  to  the  testimony  of  Augustus  Caesar,  whom  he 
styles  “the  founder  or  restorer  of  all  our  temples.”! 
But  above  all,  he  might  have  found  a  niche  for  him,  as 
well  as  others  of  h#  family,  when  he  mentions  the  dis¬ 
tinguished  victory  gained  by  Livius  and  Nero  over  Has- 
drtibal.J  He  relates  the  affair  itself  in  very  splendid 
tejrms,  and  bestows  the  most  exalted  praises  on  the  ad¬ 
mirable  conduct  of  those  victorious  generals.  He  who 
was  tiius  rigidly  tenacious,  when  private  motives, 
friendship,  or  interest  might  have  swayed  Wm,  is,  nev¬ 
ertheless,  accused,  from  national  vanity,  of  having  writ¬ 
ten  with  partialitf ;  and  of  having  sometimes  exaggerat¬ 
ed,  and  sometimes  concealed,  the  truth. 
It  must  be  acknowledged  that,  when  the  grandeur  of 
the  Homan  empire  presents  itself  to  bis  mind,  he  is  not 
always  sufficiently  reserved  in  ffie  terms  which  he 
uses.  Thus,  speaking  of  Cincinnatas,^  so  early  as  the 
396th  year  of  Rome,  he  caHs  him  “  the  sole  hope  of  the 
empire  of  Rome,”  at  a  time  when  we  know  that  this 
thus  pompously  announced  empire  extended  not  more 
than  twenty  miles  beyond  the  city.  And  again,  not 
'  R  i.  19. 
‘  B.  xxvii,  4Tt  48,  49. 

t  B.  IV.  20. 
>  B,  iii.  20. 

FBEfAOS. 

Bsoof  jem  he  istrodoces  Oaaiileius  bof»tiiig  of 
its  “  eternsd  duratioB  st^  immeose  ms^nitude/’f  WhMi 
we  find  him  aj^ying  utch  ms^niftceBt  teraos  to  fhe 
Roman  state,  thee  in  its  iQ&ncy,  we  ma^  suppose  him 
to  have  iar^t  the  pmriod  of  which  he  was- writing,  and 
to  have  had {sresent  to  his  mind. the  s^dendor  tmd  ex¬ 
tent  to  which  it  had  attsdaed  at  the  time  when  he  him¬ 
self  lived  and  wrote.  He  even  puts  the  same  ki^age 
into  the  mouths  of  foreigners,  and  of  enemies:  he  makes 
Hanndml  call  Rome  “  the  capikl  of  the  world, at  a 
time  when  the  Romans  had  not  evi^  the  whole  of  Italy 
in  sc^jection,  and  no  possessions  whatever  out  of  Italy, 
teEcept  a  part  of  Sicily  and  Sardinia.  In  the  same  vain- 
^ktrioas  boasting  strain  he  tells  us,§  tiiat  the  Rpmans 
“  were  never  worsted  by  the  enemy’s  cavalry,  never 
by  their  infantry,  never  in  open  fight,  never  on  equal 
'grouirf.”  He  sc^ais  here  not  to  have  recollected,  what 
be  afterwards  a^;^wledges,||  that,  in  the  first  battle 
with  Hannibal,  "  it  manifestly  appeared  that  the  Car¬ 
thaginian  was  superior  in  cavalry*,  and,  consequently, 
that  open  plains,  simh  as  those  between  the  Po  and  the 
Alps,  were  onfavourable  to  the  Romans.^’  Although 
he  thus  asserte,  in  unqualified  terms,  that  the  Romans 
were  never  worstedln  the  open  field,  yet  be  gives  very 
just  and  ^ndid  accounts,,  net  onty  of  this  battle  with 
Hinnibai,  but  of  another  also  against  the  same  com¬ 
mander,  and  of  tiiat  of  the  AUia,  against  tile  Gauls,  in 
*  Y.  R.  310-  t  B.  iv.  4-  B.  xxi.  SO. 
^  B-  ix.  19.  '!  B.  x»i.  47. 

PBEFAC8. 

xxi 
every  «ae  of  the  Bwaans  ^rere  eooipletdy  over- 
tlirown. 
t 
But  these,  it  is  prolmUe,  should  rsdher  be  considered 
as  inadvertencies  than  falsehoods^  and,  however  inclin* 
ed  we  may  be  to  overlook  or  excuse  (hem,  we  shall 
not,  perhaps,  find  it  easy  to  justify  some  other  omis> 
sions,  or  «han^,  which  he  has  made  in  his  narrative, 
rejecting  facts  which,  if  fairly  and  fully  related,  wouW 
do  no  honour  to  his  country;  or  would  tend,  in  some 
degree,  to  tarnish  the  lustre  of  those  celebrated  cha¬ 
racters  which  he  holds  up  to  our  admiration. 
Polybius  is  allowed  to  be  an  author  of  consummate 
judgment,  indefatigable  industry,  and  strict  versmity. 
Livy  bimsdf  admits  that  he  is  entitled  to  entire  credit. 
He  takes  extraordinary  pains  to  investigate  the  causes 
of  the  second  Punic  war,  and  to  determine  which  of 
^  ‘two  nations  had  incurred  the  guilt  of  breach  of 
treaty.  He  discusses  the  matter  at  considerate  loigth,'* 
tttating  accurately,  and  carefully  examining,  the  facts 
and  arguments  urged  on  both,  sides;  and  brings  the 
matter  to  this  issue,|^tbat,  if  the  war  is  to  be  consider¬ 
ed  as  taking  its  rise  from  the  destruction  of  Saguntum, 
(he  Car&a^ians  were  in  die  wrong;  but  by  no  means 
so,  if  the  naattm-  Imi  taken  up  somewhat  higher,  and  the 
hidung  of  Sardinia  hy  tl^  Romans,  and  the  imposing  a 
tnbuto  upon  that  idand,  be  included  in  the  account: 
fiw  that,  thra,  the  Carthaginians  did  no  more  than  take 
occasion  to  avenge  an  injury  done  them. 
New,  how  stands  die  account  of  this  affair,  accord- 
*  Lib,  X. 

xxu 

PHEFACE. 

iog  to  Livy?*  From  this  disquisition  of  Polybius,  he 
carefully  selects,  and  strongly  states,  every  thing  which 
tends  to  favour  the  cause  of  the  Romans;  but  passes 
over  in  silence  every  fact,  and  every  argument,  urged 
by  the  Greek  historian  in  favour  of  the  Carthaginians; 
and  thus  he  makes  the  worse  appear  the  better  cause. 
It  has  been  urged  in  defence  of  Livy,  that,  in  his 
twelfth  book,  he  gave  the  account  of  the  affair  of  Sar¬ 
dinia;  and  that,  if  that  book  had  not  been  lost,  it  might 
from  thence  have  appeared,  that  the  conduct  of  the 
Romans  in  that  transaction  was  perfectly  justifiable; 
and  that;  consequently,  what  he  has  suppressed  of  Po¬ 
lybius’s  argument,  he  has  omitted,  not  so  much  to  fa¬ 
vour  the  cause  of  his  own  countrymen,  as  because  he 
knew  the  allegations  therein  to  be  false.  It  must,  how¬ 
ever,  be  observed,  that  Polybius  was  neither  a  Homan 
nor  a  Carthaginian;  that  he  has  always  been  held  to  be 
an  historian  of  the  highest  credit,  and  the  strictest  im¬ 
partiality;  that  he  lived  nearer  the  times  he  writes  of 
than  Livy,  and  was  a  most  diligent  inquirer  into  the 
truth  of  the  facts  which  he  relatesbin  his  history;  that 
he  was  by  no  means  unfriendly  to  the  Romans,  but  the 
contrary,  taking  all  opportunities  to  speak  of  them  with 
the  highest  praise.  -  ♦ 
It  is  not  meant  here  to  detract  from  the  merit  of 
Livy  as  an  historian,  by  the  mention  of  such  particulars 
as  these.  It  may  be  assumed  as  a  maxim,  that  no  his¬ 
torian  of  his  own  country  can  be,  strictly  speaking, 
impartial;  he  may  intend  to  be  so;  but  the  mind  will 
^  B.  xxi.  19. 

PMEFACE 

xxiit 

be  under  an  invoiontery  bias,  influenced  by  some  se¬ 
er^  inclination,  of  which  he  himself  may  be  uncon¬ 
scious;  be  may  believe  what  he  asserts,  and  yet  it  may 
not  be  true. 
:  Anotlier  instance  of  his  partiality  to  his  countrymen 
may  be  found  in  his  account  of  the  murder  of  Brachyl- 
las,*  who;  he  tells  us,  was  made  Boeotarch,  or  chief 
magistrate  of  the  Boeotians,  “  for  no  other  reason,  than 
because  he  had  been  commander  of  the  Boeotian^serv- 
it^in  the  army  of  Philip;  passing  by  Zeuxippus,  Pisis- 
tratus,  and  the  others  who  had  promoted  the  alliance 
with  Rome.”  That  these  men,  offended  at  present, 
and  alarmed  about  future  consequences,  resolved  to 
take  off  Brachyllas,  and  accordingly  procured  six  as¬ 
sassins,  who  put  him  to  death.  In  these,  and  other 
circumstances,  our  author  perfectly  agrees  with  Poly¬ 
bius,  whose  account  of  this  whole  affair  he  seems  to 
have  almost  literally  copied;  with  the  omission,  how¬ 
ever,  out  of  tenderness  for  the  character  of  Q,uintius, 
of  a  very  material  circumstance;  which  is,  that  the 
project  of  murdering  Brachyllas  was  first  opened  in  a 
conference  between  Zeuxis,  Pisistratus,  and  Quintius, 
who  told  them,  that  be  would  not  himself  do  any  thing 
to  promote  it;  but  that,  if  they  were  disposed  to  the 
execution  of  such  a  plan,  he  would  do  nothing  to  ob¬ 
struct  it:  and  he  adds,  that  he  directed  them  to  confer 
upon  the  matter  with  Alexamenes,  the  iBtolian,  who 
was  the  person,  he  says,  that  procured  the  assassins. 
Another,  and  a  very  remarkable  instance  of  partia- 
*  B.  xxxiii.  27,  2fi. 

PBBFJICE. 

ixiv 
to  tbo  <^araK>ter  of  his  couBhyoien,  we  haiT«  m  -iui 
celebrate  su»:oBnt  erf  Scipio  Afticaous;  who  seems, 
above  all  otii^rs  meationed  ia  his  Uistorf,  to  have  en¬ 
gaged  his  fondest,  and,  as  he  himself  admits,  his  frar* 
tiai  attention:  for  when  he  first  iirtrodoces  him,  he  do^ 
H  in  the  most  s^vantageons  mannor,  as  a  jrontb  who 
had  scarcelj  attained  to  manhood,  i^scning  his  fiither, 
wfe)  was  wounded  in  a  battle  with  Hannibal.  “  This,’' 
sajs  Ij^,*  “  is  the  same  youth  who  is,  beieafter,  4o  en^ 
joy^the  renown  (rf  termina^g  #m  war,  and  to  receive 
the  tifie  orf  Afi’icaiHiB,  on  acoonnt  o£  hi%^orions  vkhny 
ovor  Hannibal  and  the  Carfim^nians.’’  He  tb^,  m  a 
manner,  avows  his  partiadity;  tm*  be  tells  us,  Utat  Coe* 
fins  attribuks  the  honour  of  saving  the  con^  to  a 
^ve,  by  nation  a  Ligurian:  “bat  I  rather  wish  tte 
account  to  be  true  which  gives  it  to  his  son;  and  so  file 
tact  is  represented  by  most  authors,  and  generally- be¬ 
lieved.” 
That  Scipio  was  a  most  accomplished  character, 
eminently  distinguished  by  his  military  talmits,  valour, 
coolness  patience  under  difficulties,  and  moderation  in 
victory,  of  most  gentie  manners,  and  a  most  generous 
temper,  never  ha®  been,  nor  ever  will  he  denied.  Jfet, 
if  other  writers  knew  the  truth,  and  have  spt^en  k,  be 
was  not  that  model  of  ahsdute  perfection  which  Livy 
paints  him;  and  perhaps,  had  he  been  the  cold  and  un¬ 
impassioned  stoic,  which  he  describes  him  to  have 
been,  he  had  deserved  less  {U'aise  than  is  undouht^j^ 
due  to  him,  when  considered,  as  other  authors  reiwe- 
sent  him,  of  a  very  different  temperament.  . 
‘  E.  xxsi.  46. 

PREFACE. 

XXV 

That  he  generously  restored  a  beautiful  captive  to 
her  parents,  and  to  her  intended  spouse,  Livy  and  Po¬ 
lybius  are  agreed;  but  they  differ  somewhat  in  the  ac¬ 
count  of  that  affair.  Polybius  tells  us,*  that  a  party  of 
Roman  youth,  having  taken  captive  a  damsel  of  exqui¬ 
site  beauty,  brought  her  to  Scipio,  whom  they  knew 
to  be  much  attached  to  the  sex;  and  he  makes  Scipio 
say  to  them,  that  “  a  more  acceptable  gift  could  not 
have  been  presented  to  him,  were  he  in  a  private  sta¬ 
tion:  but  that,  in  his  situation  of  general,  he  could  by 
no  means  accept  of  it.”  Livy  suppresses  entirelj  the 
circumstance  of  his  favourite’s  amorous  disposition: 
and  yet,  what  he  represents  him  as  saying  to  Allucius, 
bears  so  strong  a  resemblance  to  his  answer,  recorded 
by  Polybius,  though  he  gives  it  a  different  turn,  to  ac¬ 
commodate  it  to  his  purpose,  that  we  cannot  doubt  his 
having  had  this  passage  in  his  eye:  “If  my  thoughts 
were  not  totally  employed  by  the  affairs  of  the  public, 
and  if  I  were  at  liberty  to  indulge  in  the  pleasurable 
pursuits  adapted  to  my  time  of  life,”f  &.c. 
That  Scipio,  with  all  his  perfections,  was  not  that 
mirror  of  chastity  which  Livy  is  desirous  of  represent¬ 
ing  him,  we  learn,  also,  from  an  anecdote  related  by 
Valerius  Maximus, J  who  highly  praises  the  amiable 
temper  and  patient  forbearance  of  his  wife  JEmilia, 
“  who,”  he  tells  us,  “  knew  of  his  attachment  to  a  fe¬ 
male  slave,  and  yet  concealed  the  fact,  that  there  might 
be  no  stain  upon  so  illustrious  a  character.” 
Such  are  the  principal  facts  alleged  to  prove  our 
*  Lib.  s.  t  it.  xxxvi.  50.  -  Lib.  vi.  7. 
VOL.  I. — d 

XXVI 

PREFACE. 

historian’s  neglect  of  veracity  in  bis  narration  ;  rigorous  j 
and,  it  may  be,  invidious  scrutiny,  has  noted  some  few 
more;  but  they  are  of  little  importance:  and,  as  it  is  not 
improbable,  so  it  is  not  unfair  to  suppose,  that  the  pau¬ 
city  of  cotemporary  historians  may  have  induced  those, 
who  were  also  predisposed,  to  believe  that  to  be  false, 
which  fuller  information  might  perhaps  have  proved  to 
be  true.  Why  may  we  not  believe  that  he  had  better 
opportunities  of  knowing  the  truth  than  the  Greek  his¬ 
torian.^  He  admits  Polybius  to  be  an  author  of  credit, 
and  yet  he  differs  from  him  without  scruple:  he  cannot, 
then,  surely,  be  thought  to  mean  more  than  that  he 
was  a  writer  of  integrity,  who  compiled  his  history 
with  fidelity,  according  to  the  best  information  he  was 
able  to  obtain:  that  he  did  not  wilfully  falsify  any  fact, 
rather  than  that  every  fact  he  relates  is  strictly  and  ab¬ 
solutely  true.  He  acknowledges  him  for  his  master, 
but  does  not  conceive  himself  bound  to  swear  to  his 
words. 
Besides,  it  is  but  doing  justice  to  our  author  to  ob¬ 
serve,  that  if,  in  some  few,  and  those  not  very  material 
instances,  he  may  have  deviated  from  the  truth,  if  he 
has  done  so,  it  is  never  with  an  ill-design;  if  he  palli¬ 
ates  a  fault,  or  suppresses  a  fact,  it  is  not  so  much  for 
the  purpose  of  lessening  the  reputation,  or  tarnishing 
the  glory  of  others,  whether  nations  or  individuals,  as 
to  aggrandize  the  character  of  his  own  nation.  He  al¬ 
lows  himself  in  a  practice  which  some  of  his  country¬ 
men  have,  since  his  time,  carried  to  a  much  greater, 
as  well  as  a  more  blameable  extent,  and  which  has  re¬ 
ceived  the  name  of  pious  fraud. 

I’REFACE. 

xxvU 
But,  whatever  may  be  the  case,  whether  our  author 
must  lie  under  the  reproach  of  soi'tening  facts  in  some 
instances,  or  even  of  suppressing  them  in  others,  yet 
will  his  genius  and  talents,  as  an  historian,  ever  be  re¬ 
spected.  He  cannot  be  denied  the  merit  of  having  fur¬ 
nished  us  with  a  perfect  model  of  historical  composi¬ 
tion,  in  the  purest  and  most  elegant  style;  more  re¬ 
markable  for  perspicuity  of  narration,  and  neatness  of 
expression,  than  for  depth  of  reasoning,  or  pomp  of 
diction.  Although  he  seldom  digresses,  and  but  rarely 
indulges  in  moral  observations  or  philosophical  reflec¬ 
tions,  yet  he  never  loses  sight  of  what  he  himself  lays 
down  in  his  preface  as  the  great  object  of  history,  the 
furnishing  “  clear  and  distinct  examples  of  every  line 
of  conduct;  that  we  may  select  for  ourselves,  and  for 
the  state  to  which  we  belong,  such  as  are  w  orthy  of 
imitation;  and  carefully  noting  such,  as,  being  disho¬ 
nourable  in  their  principles,  are  equally  so  in  their  ef¬ 
fects,  learn  to  avoid  them.” 

All  that  the  present  writer  feels  it  necessary  to  say, 
upon  delivering  to  the  public  a  new  translation  of  so 
esteemed  a  work  as  Livy’s  History,  is,  that  it  has  been 
the  employment,  and  amusement,  of  many  years,— a 
very  laborious,  but  not  unuseful,  occupation:  and  that, 
if  he  be  not  deceived  by  self-love,  and  the  partiality  of 
a  few  friends,  who  have  taken  the  trouble  of  looking 
into  the  work,  it  will  be  found  not  altogether  unworthy 
of  public  acceptance. 

XXVIH 

PREFACE. 

The  translator  had  intended  a  much  more  copious 
commentary,  than  that  which  now  accompanies  this 
work;  and,  in  that  view,  he  had  prepared  several  dis¬ 
sertations  upon  the  manners  and  customs  of  the  Ro¬ 
mans;  their  senate;  their  laws;  their  religious  rites; 
their  arts  of  war,  navigation,  and  commerce,  &c.  But 
he  acknowledges,  with  much  pleasure,  that  he  has 
since  found  his  labour,  upon  those  subjects,  rendered 
unnecessary  by  tlie  publication  of  Dr.  Adam’s  Roman 
Antiquities:  a  work  so  excellent  in  its  kind,  that  who¬ 
ever  has  the  instruction  of  youth  committed  to  his  care, 
will  do  them  injustice,  il'  he  omits  to  recommend  it  to 
their  perusal.  The  notes,  therefore,  which  are  added, 
and  which  the  translator  now  thinks  it  his  duty  to  make 
as  few,  and  as  short  as  possible,  are  such  only  as  were 
deemed  more  immediately  necessaiy  to  render  some 
passages  intelligible  to  the  mere  English  reader. 
It  hath  been  an  usual  practice,  in  prefaces  to  works 
of  this  kind,  for  the  authors  of  them  to  load  the  labours 
of  their  predecessors  with  abuse;  a  practice,  of  which 
the  present  translator  acknowledges  he  neither  sees  the 
necessity,  nor  the  utility.  For,  should  he  succeed  in 
disparaging  the  works  of  others  in  the  humble  walk  of 
translation;  should  he  be  able  to  prove  them  ever  so 
wretchedly  executed,  it  will  by  no  means  follow  from 
tlience,  tliat  his  is  better.  That  he  thinks  it  so,  is  clear 
fiom  his  presuming  to  publish  it.  But,  as  the  public 
has  an  undoubted  right  to  judge  for  itself,  and  will 
most  assuredly  exercise  that  right,  the  success  of  every 
work,  of  whatever  kind,  must  ultimately  depend  upon 
its  own  merit. 

PREFACE. 

XXIX 

To  the  public  judgment,  therefore,  he  submits  his 
labour;  knowing  that  every  endeavour  of  his,  except 
that  of  rendering  it  worthy  of  acceptance,  would  be 
useless;  and  that,  in  spite  of  his  utmost  exertions,  his 
book  will  stand  or  fall  by  its  own  merit  or  demerit, 
whichever  shall  be  found  to  preponderate.  The  public 
candour  he  has  no  reason  to  doubt;  and  he  awaits  its 
decision  with  tranquillity,  but  not  without  anxiety. 

(ONTENTS 
OF 
THK  FIRST  VOl.ITMF 

BOOK  . 1 
BOOK  II. . 100 
BOOK  III. . 203 
BOOK  lY. . 316 
BOOK  V. . .112 

THh 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

BOOK  I. 
Hie  arrival  oi  iEneas  in  Italy,  and  bis  achievemcnis  there,  the  reign  o: 
xYscaoius  in  Alba,  and  of  the  other  Sylvian  kings,  his  successors.  Birth 
of  Romulus  and  Remus.  Romulus  builds  Rome;  forms  the  senate:  di- 
vides  the  people  into  cunas.  His  wars.  He  offers  the  spoiia  opima  to 
Jupiter  Feretrius;  is  deified.  Numa  Pompilius  institutes  the  rights  oi 
religious  worship;  builds  a  temple  to  Janus;  rules  in  peace,  and  is  sue 
ceeded  by  TuHus  Hostilius.  His  war  with  the  Alban';;  combat  of  the 
Horatii  and  Curiatii.  The  Albans  removed  to  Rome.  Tullus  killed  by 
lightning.  Ancus  Martius  conquers  the  Ratines,  and  incorporates  them 
with  the  Romans;  enlarges  the  city,  and  the  bounds  of  his  dominions. 
Rucumo  arrives  at  Rome:  assumes  the  name  of  Tarquinius;  and,  on  the 
death  of  Ancus,  gains  possession  of  the  throne;  defeats  the  Ratines  and 
Sabines;  builds  a  wall  round  the  city,  and  makes  the  common  sewers: 
js  slain  by  the  sons  of  Ancus,  and  is  succeeded  by  Serrius  TulL'us.  He 
institutes  the  census;  divides  the  people  into  classes  and  centuries:  ex' 
tenus  the  pommrium;  is  murdered  by  Rucius  Tarquinius,  afterwards 
surnamed  Superbus.  He  seizes  the  throne,  wages  war  with  the  Vol- 
scians,  and,  with  their  spoils,  builds  a  temple  to  Jupiter  in  the  Capitol, 
in  consequence  of  his  son  Sextus  having  forcibly  violated  the  chnetH^^ 
of  Rucretia.  he  is  dethroned  and  banished  Consuls  elected. 
PREFACE. 
Whether,  in  tracing  the  series  of  the  Roman  Histo¬ 
ry,  from  the  foundation  of  the  city,  I  shall  employ  my  time 
to  good  purpose,  is  a  question  which  I  cannot  positively  de¬ 
termine;  nor,  were  it  possible,  would  I  venture  to  pronounce 
such  determination:  tor  I  am  aware  that  the  matter  is  of  high 
voE  I, —  B 

2 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

antiquity,  and  has  been  already  treated  by  many  others;  the 
latest  writers  always  supposing  themselves  capable,  either  of 
throwing  some  new  light  on  the  subject,  or,  by  the  superi¬ 
ority  of  their  talents  for  composition,  of  excelling  the  more 
inelegant  writers  who  preceded  them.  However  that  may  be, 
I  shall,  at  all  events,  derive  no  small  satisfaction  from  the 
reflection  that  my  best  endeavours  have  been  exerted  in 
transmitting  to  posterity  the  achievements  of  the  greatest 
people  in  the  world;  and  if,  amidst  such  a  multitude  of  wri¬ 
ters,  my  name  should  not  emerge  from  obscurity,  I  shall 
console  myself  by  attributing  it  to  the  eminent  merit  of  those 
who  stand  in  my  way  in  the  pursuit  of  fame.  It  may  be  far¬ 
ther  observed,  that  such  a  subject  must  require  a  work  of 
immense  extent,  as  our  researches  must  be  carried  back 
through  a  space  of  more  than  seven  hundred  years;  that  the 
state  has,  from  very  small  beginnings,  gradually  increased  to 
such  a  magnitude,  that  it  is  now  distressed  by  its  own  bulk; 
and  that  there  is  every  reason  to  apprehend  that  the  genera¬ 
lity  of  readers  will  receive  but  little  pleasure  from  the  ac¬ 
counts  of  its  first  origin;  or  of  the  times  immediately  suc¬ 
ceeding,  but  will  be  impatient  to  arrive  at  that  period,  in 
which  the  powers  of  this  overgrown  state  have  been  long 
employed  in  working  their  own  destruction.  On  the  other 
hand,  this  much  will  be  derived  from  my  labour,  that,  so 
long  at  least  as  I  shail  have  my  thoughts  totally  occupied  in 
investigating  the  transactions  of  such  distant  ages,  without 
being  embarrassed  by  any  of  those  unpleasing  considera¬ 
tions,  in  respect  of  later  days,  which,  though  they  might  not 
have  power  to  warp  a  writer's  mind  from  the  truth,  would 
yet  be  sufficient  to  create  uneasiness,  I  shall  withdraw  my¬ 
self  from  the  sight  cf  the  many  evils  to  which  our  eyes  have 
been  so  long  accustomed.  As  to  the  relations  which  have 
been  handed  down  of  events  prior  to  the  founding  of  the 
city,  or  to  the  circumstances  that  gave  occasion  to  its  being 
founded,  and  which  bear  the  semblance  rather  of  poetic  fic- 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

3 

lions,  than  of  authentic  records  of  histcHy-— these,  I  have  no 
intention  cither  to  maintain  or  refute.  Antiquity  is  always 
indulged  with  the  privilege  of  rendering  the  origin  of  cities 
more  venerable,  by  intermixing  divine  with  human  agency; 
and  if  any  nation  may  claim  the  privilege  of  being  allowed 
to  consider  its  original  as  sacred,  and  to  attribute  it  to  the 
operations  of  the  Gods,  surely  the  Roman  people,  who  rank 
so  high  in  military  fame,  may  well  expect,  that,  while  they 
choose  to  represent  Mars  as  their  own  parent,  and  that  of 
their  founder,  the  other  nations  of  the  world  may  acquiesce 
in  this,  with  the  same  deference  with  which  they  acknow¬ 
ledge  their  sovereignty.  But  what  degree  of  attention  or 
credit  may  be  given  to  these  and  such-like  matters  I  shall 
not  consider  as  very  material.  To  the  following  considera¬ 
tions,  I  wish  every  one  seriously  and  earnestly  to  attend;  by 
what  kind  of  men,  and  by  what  sort  of  conduct,  in  peace  and 
war,  the  empire  has  been  both  acquired  and  extetided;  then, 
as  discipline  gradually  declined,  let  him  follow  in  his  thoughts 
the  structure  of  ancient  morals,  at  first,  as  it  were,  leaning 
aside,  then  sinking  farther  and  farther,  then  beginning  to 
fall  precipitate,  until  he  arrives  at  the  present  times,  when 
our  vices  have  attained  to  such  a  height  of  enormity,  that 
we  can  no  longer  endure  either  the  burden  of  them,  or  the 
sharpness  of  the  necessary  remedies.  This  is  the  great  ad¬ 
vantage  to  be  derived  from  the  study  o4  history;  indeed  the 
only  one  which  can  make  it  answer  any  profitable  and  salu¬ 
tary  purpose:  for,  being  abundantly  furnished  with  clear  and 
distinct  examples  of  every  kind  of  conduct,  we  may  select 
for  ourselves,  and  for  the  state  to  which  we  belong,  such  as 
are  worthy  of  imitation;  and,  carefully  noting  such,  as  being 
dishonourable  in  their  principles,  are  equally  so  in  their  ef¬ 
fects,  learn  to  avoid  them.  Now,  either  partiality  to  the  sub¬ 
ject  of  my  intended  work  misleads  me,  or  there  never  was 
an)'  state  either  greater,  or  of  purer  morals,  or  richer  in  good 
examples,  than  this  of  Rome;  nor  was  there  ever  any  city 

4 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

into  which  avarice  and  luxury  made  their  entrance  so  late, 
or  where  poverty  and  frugality  were  so  highly  and  so  long 
held  in  honour;  men  contracting  their  desires  in  proportion 
to  die  narroMmess  of  their  circumstances.  Of  late  years,  in¬ 
deed,  opulence  has  introduced  a  greediness  for  gain,  and  the 
boundless  variety  of  dissolute  pleasures  has  created,  in  many^ 
a  passion  for  ruining  themselves,  and  all  around  them.  But 
let  us,  in  the  first  stage  at  least  of  this  undertaking,  avoid 
gloomy  reflections,  which,  when  perhaps  unavoidable,  will 
not,  even  then,  be  agreeable.  If  it  were  customary  with  us, 
as  it  is  with  poets,  we  would  more  willingly  begin  with  good 
omens,  and  vows,  and  prayers  to  the  gods  and  goddesses, 
that  they  would  propitiously  grant  success  to  our  endeavours, 
in  the  prosecution  of  so  arduous  a  task. 
BOOK  I. 
I.  It  has  been  handed  down  to  us,  as  a  certain  fact,  that 
the  Greeks,  w^hen  they  had  taken  Troy,  treated  the  Trojans 
with  the  utmost  severity;  with  the  exception,  however,  ol 
two  of  them,  iEneas  and  Antenor,  towards  whom  they  ex¬ 
ercised  none  of  the  rights  of  conquest.  This  lenity  they  owed, 
partly,  to  an  old  connection  of  hospitality,  and  partly,  to 
their  having  been,  all  along,  inclined  to  peace,  and  to  the 
restoration  of  Helen*  These  chiefs  experienced  afterwards 
great  varieties  of  fortune.  Antenor,  being  Joined  by  a  mul¬ 
titude  of  the  Henetians,  who  had  been  driven  out  of  Paph- 
lagonia  in  a  civil  war,  and  having  lost  their  king  Pylaemenes 
at  Troy,  were  at  a  loss  both  for  a  settlement  and  a  leader, 
came  to  the  innermost  bay  of  the  Adriatic  sea,  and  expelling 
the  Euganeans,  who  then  inhabited  the  tract  between  the 
Alps  and  the  sea,  settled  the  Trojans  and  Henetians  in  the 
possession  of  the  country.  The  place  where  they  first  land¬ 
ed  is  called  Troy,  and  from  thence  the  Trojan  canton  also 
has  its  name;  the  nation  in  general  were  called  Henetians. 
iEneas,  driven  from  home  by  the  same  calamity,  but  con- 

BOOK  L 

6 

ducted  by  the  fates  to  an  establishment  of  more  importance, 
came  first  to  Macedonia;  thence,  in  search  of  a  settlement, 
he  sailed  to  Sicily,  and  from  Sicily  proceeded  with  his  fleet 
to  the  country  of  the  Laurentians.*  Here  also,  to  the  spot 
where  they  landed,  was  given  the  name  of  Troy*  Here  the 
Trojans  disembarked;  and  as,  after  wandering  about  for  a 
great  length  of  time,  they  had  nothing  left,  beside  their  ships 
and  arms,  they  began  to  make  prey  of  whatever  they  found 
in  the  country*  On  this  king  Latinus,  and  the  Aborigines, 
who  were  then  in  possession  of  those  lands,  assembled  hasti¬ 
ly  from  the  city  and  country,  in  order  to  repel  the  violence 
of  the  strangers.  Of  what  followed,  there  are  two  different 
accounts.  Some  writers  say,  that  Latinus,  being  overcome 
in  battle,  contracted  an  alliance,  and  afterwards  an  affinity, 
with  iEneas;  others,  that  when  the  armies  were  drawn  up  in 
order  of  battle,  before  the  signal  was  given,  Latinus,  ad> 
vancing  in  the  front,  invited  the  leader  of  the  strangers  to  a 
conference;  then  inquired  who  they  were,  whence  they  came, 
what  had  induced  them  to  leave  their  home,  and  with  what 
design  they  had  landed  on  the  Laurentian  coast;  and  that, 
when  he  was  informed  that  the  leader  was  ^neas,  the  son 
of  Anchises  by  Venus,  and  his  followers  Trojans;  that  they 
had  made  their  escape  from  the  flames  of  their  native  city 
and  of  their  houses,  and  were  in  search  of  a  settlement,  and 
a  place  where  they  might  build  a  town;  being  struck  with 
admiration  of  that  renowned  people  and  their  chief,  and  of 
their  spirit,  prepared  alike  for  war  or  peace,  he  gave  him 
his  right  hand,  and  by  that  pledge  assured  him  of  his  future 
friendship.  A  league  was  then  struck  between  the  leaders, 
and  mutual  salutations  passed  between  the  armies.  Latinus 
entertained  iEneas  in  his  palace,  and  there,  in  the  presence 
of  his  household  gods,  added  a  domestic  alliance  to  their 
public  one,  giving  him  his  daughter  in  marriage.  This  event 

The  Trojans  were  in  number  about  six  hundred. 

6 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

fully  confirmed  the  hopes  of  the  Trojans,  that  here,  at  last, 
they  were  to  find  an  end  of  their  wanderings;  that  here  they 
wcaild  enjoy  a  fixed  and  permanent  settlement.  They  built 
a  town,  which  iEneas  called  Lavinium,  from  the  name  of  his 
wife.  In  a  short  time  after,  his  new  consort  bore  him  a  son, 
who  was  named  by  his  parents  Ascanius. 
II.  The  Aborigines,  in  conjunction  with  the  Trojans, 
soon  found  themselves  engaged  in  a  war.  Turn  us,  king  of 
the  Rutulians,  to  whom  Lavinia  had  been  affianced  before 
the  arrival  of  iEneas,  enraged  at  seeing  a  stranger  preferred 
to  him,  declared  war  against  both  vEneas  and  Latinus.  A 
battle  that  ensued  gave  neither  army  reason  to  rejoice.  Tlie 
Rutulians  were  defeated,  and  the  victorious  Aborigines  and 
Trojans  lost  their  leader  Latinus.  Whereupon  3'umus  and 
the  Rutulians,  diffident  of  their  strength,  had  recourse  to 
the  flourishing  state  of  the  Etrurians,  and  their  king  Mezen- 
tius,  who  held  his  court  at  Caere,  at  that  time  an  opulent  city. 
He  had  been,  from  the  beginning,  not  at  all  pleased  at  the 
foundation  of  the  new  city;  and  now  began  to  think  that  the 
Trojan  power  was  increasing  to  a  degree  inconsistent  with 
the  safety  of  the  neighbouring  states;  and  therefore,  without 
reluctance,  concluded  an  alliance,  and  joined  his  forces  with 
those  of  the  Rutulians.  iEneas,  with  the  view  of  conciliating 
the  affection  of  the  Aborigines,  that  he  might  be  the  better 
able  to  oppose  such  formidable  enemies,  gave  to  both  the 
nations  under  his  rule  the  name  of  La  tines,  that  all  should 
not  only  be  governed  by  the  same  laws,  but  have  one  com¬ 
mon  name.  From  thenceforth  the  Aborigines  yielded  not  to 
ihe  Trojans  in  zeal  and  fidelity  towards  their  king  iEneas, 
This  disposition  of  the  two  nations,  who  coalesced  daily 
with  greater  cordiality,  inspired  him  with  so  much  confi¬ 
dence,  that,  notwithstanding  Etruria  was  possessed  of  such 
great  power,  that  it  had  filled  with  the  fame  of  its  prowess 
not  only  the  land,  but  the  sea  also,  through  the  whole  length 
of  Italy,  from  the  Alps  to  the  Sicilian  Streight;  and  although 

BOOK  I. 

he  might  have  remained  within  his  fortifications,  secore  from 
any  attack  of  the  enemy,  yet  he  led  out  his  troops  to  the 
field*  The  battle  that  followed  was,  with  respect  to  the  La- 
tines,  their  second,  with  respect  to  iEaeas,  the  bst  of  his 
mortal  acts.  He,  by  whatever  appellation  the  laws  of  gods 
and  men  require  him  to  be  called,  is  deposited  on  the  hank 
of  the  river  Numicus.  The  people  gave  him  the  title  of  Ju¬ 
piter  Indiges.* 
II L  His  son  Ascanius  was  as  yet  too  young  to  assume  the 
governmentj  nevertheless  his  title  to  the  sovereignty  remain¬ 
ed  unimpeached,  until  he  arrived  at  maturity.  During  this 
interval,  and  under  the  regency  of  Lavinia,  a  woman  of  great 
capacity,  the  Latine  state,  and  the  united  subjects  of  the 
prince’s  father  and  grandfather,  continued  firm  in  their  al¬ 
legiance.  I  am  not  without  some  doubts  (for  who  can  affirm 
with  certainty  in  a  matter  of  such  antiquity?)  whether  this 
was  the  same  Ascanius  mentioned  above,  or  one  older  than 
him,  born  of  Creusa,  wife  to  JEneas,  before  the  destruction 
of  Troy,  and  who  accompanied  his  father  in  his  flight  from 
thence j  whom,  being  also  called  lulus,  the  Julian  family 
claim  as  the  founder  of  their  name.  This  Ascanius,  where¬ 
soever,  and  of  whatsoever  mother  born,  certainly  the  son  of 
jEneas,  finding  the  number  of  inhabitants  in  Lavinium  too 
great,  left  that  city,  then  in  a  flourishing  and  opulent  state, 
considering  the  circumstances  of  those  times,  to  his  mother, 
or  step-motber,  and  built  a  new  one  on  the  Alban  mount, 
which,  from  its  situation  being  stretched  along  the  hill,  was 
called  Alba  Longa. f  Between  the  building  of  Lavinium,  and 
the  transplanting  the  colony  to  Alba  Longa,  the  interval  was 
onl)'  about  thirty  years;  yet  so  rapidly  had  this  people  in¬ 
creased  in  power,  especially  after  the  defeat  of  the  Etruri- 
*  ladig'es  h  the  term  applied  to  deified  Iierocs,  otbemise  called  gods 
terrestrial. 
f  It  was  called  Alba,  from  a  white  sow  with  a  litter  of  thirty  young 
ones,  found  there  by  Aeneas. 

8^ 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

ans,  that,  not  even  on  the  death  of  ^Eneas,  nor  afterwards, 
during  the  regency  of  a  woman,  and  the  first  essays  of  a 
youthful  reign,  did  either  Mezentius  and  the  Etrurians,  or 
any  other  of  the  bordering  nations,  dare  to  attempt  hostili¬ 
ties  against  them.  A  peace  was  agreed  upon,  in  which  it  was 
stipulated  that  the  river  Albula,  now  called  the  Tiber,  should 
be  the  boundary  between  the  Etrurians  and  Latines.  ^ 
nius’s  son,  called  Sylvius,  from  his  having  by  some  accident 
been  bom  in  the  woods,  succeeded  him  in  the  kingdom.  He 
begat  iEncas  Sylvius,  who  afterwards  begat  Latinus  Sylvius. 
This  prince  planted  several  colonies,  who  have  obtained  the 
name  of  Ancient  Latines.  The  surname  of  Sylvius  was 
henceforward  given  to  all  those  who  reigned  at  Alba.  Of 
Latinus  was  born  Alba;  of  Alba,  Atys;  of  Atys,  Capys;  of 
Capys,  Capetus;  of  Capetus,  7'iberinus;  who,  being  drowned 
in  endeavouring  to  cross  the  river  Albula,  gave  to  that  river 
the  name  so  celebrated  among  his  posterity.  Agrippa,  son  of 
Tiberinus,  reigned  next;  after  Agrippa,  Romulus.  Sylvius 
received  the  kingdom  from  his  father,  and  being  struck  by 
lightning,  demised  it  to  Aventinus,  who,  being  buried  on 
that  hill  which  is  now  a  part  of  the  city  of  Rome,  gave  it  his 
name.  To  him  succeeded  Procas,  who  had  two  sons,  Numi- 
tor  and  Amulius.  To  Numitor,  as  being  the  first-born,  he 
bequeathed  the  ancient  kingdom  of  the  Sylvian  family;  but 
force  prevailed  over  both  the  will  of  their  father,  and  the 
respect  due  to  priority  of  birth.  Amulius  dethroned  his  bro- 
ther,  took  possession  of  the  kingdom,  and  adding  crime  to 
crime,  put  to  death  the  male  offspring  of  Numitor,  making 
his  daughter  Rhea  Sylvia  a  vestal,  under  the  specious  pre¬ 
tence  of  doing  her  honour,  but,  in  fact,  to  deprive  her  of  all 
hope  of  issue,  the  vestals  being  obliged  to  vow  perpetual 
virginity." 
*  For  an  account  of  tho  ^  eslal  vir^ins^  see  Dr.  Adam’s  Roman  Aatiqu!- 
Mo'S  p.  314, 

BOOK  I- 

9 

IV*  But  the  fates*  I  suppose,  demoded  the  founding  of 
this  great  city,  and  the  first  establishment  of  an  empire, 
which  is  now,  in  p^wer,  next  to  the,  immc^al  gods.  The 
vestal  being  deflowered  by  force,  brot^ht  forth  twins,  and 
declared  that  the  father  of  her  doubtful  offspring  was  Mars; 
either  because  she  really  thought  so,  or  in  hopes  of  extenua¬ 
ting  the  guilt  of  her  transgression  by  imputing  it  to  the  act 
of  a  deity.  But  neither  gods  nor  men  screened  her  or  her 
children  from  the  King’s  cruelty;  the  priestess  was  loaded 
•with  chains,  and  cast. into  prison,  and  the  children  were  or¬ 
dered  to  be  thrown  into  the  stream  of  the  riven  It  happen¬ 
ed  providentially  that  the  Tiber,  overflowing  its  banks,  form¬ 
ed  itself  into  s^gnant  pools  in  such  a  manner,  as  that  the 
regular  channel  was  every  where  inaccessible,  and  those  who 
carried  the  infants  supposed  that  they  would  be  drowned  in 
any  water,  however  still.  Wherefore,  as  if  thereby  fulfil¬ 
ling  the  King’s  order,  they  exposed  the  hoys  in  the  nearest 
pool,  where  now  stands  the  Ruminal  fig-tree,  which,  it  is 
said,  was  formerly  called  Romular.  Those  places  were  at 
that  time  wild  deserts.^  A  story  prevails  that  the  retiring 
flood  having  left  on  dry  ground  the  trough,  hitherto  floating, 
in  which  they  had  been  exposed,  a  thirsty  she- wolf  from  the 
neighbouring  mountains,  directed  her  course  to  die  cries  of 
the  children,  andj  stooping,  presented  her  dugs  to  the  in¬ 
fants,  showing  so  much  gentleness,  that  the  keeper  of  the 
King  -  herds  found  her  licking  the  buys  with  her  tongue; 
and  that  this  shepherd,  whose  name  was  Faustulus,  carried 
them  home  to  his  w  ife  Taurentia  to  be  nursed.  Some  there 
are  who  think  that  this  JCaurentia,  freun  her  having  been  a 
prostitute,  was,  by  the  shepherds,  called  Lupa;  and  to  this 
circumstance  they  ascribe  the  origin  of  this  fabulous  tale^ 
Thus  born,  and  thus  educated,  as  soon  as  years  supplied  them 
with  strength,  they  led  not  an  inactive  life  at  the  stables,  or 
among  the  cattle,  but  traversed  the  neighbouring  forests  in 
hunting.  Hence  acquiring  vigour,  both  of  body  and  mind. 
VOL.  I. — C. 

1© 

fllSTORY  OF  ROME. 
they  soon  began  not  only  to  withstand  the  wild  beasts,  but  to 
attack  robbers  loaded  with  booty.  The  spoil  thus  acquired 
they  divided  with  the  shepherds;  and,  in  company  with 
these,  the  number  t)f  their  young  associates  continually  in- 
creawng,  they  carried  on  both  their  business,  and  their  sports, 
V,  It  is  said,  that  even  at  that  early  period,  the  sports  of 
the  Lupercal,^  which  we  still  celebrate,  were  practised  on 
the  Palatine  hill,  and  that  this  was  called  Palatium,from  Pal- 
lanteum,  a  city  of  Arcadia,  and  afterwards  the  Palatine  hill; 
and  that  Evander,  who  was  of  that  tribe  of  Arcadians,  and  ^ 
had  been  many  years  before  in  possession  of  this  part  of 
the  country,  had  instituted  there  this  solemnity  brought  from 
Arcadia,  in  which  young  men  were  to  run  about  naked,  in 
sport  and  wamonness,  in  honour  of  L3xean  Pan,  whom  the 
Romans  afterwards  called  Inuus.  While  they  were  intent 
on  the  performance  of  these  sports,  the  time  of  their  cele¬ 
bration  being  generally  known,  the  robbers,  enraged  at  the 
loss  of  their  booty,  attacked  them  by  surprise,  having  placed 
themselves  in  ambush.  Romulus  making  a  vigorous  defence, 
extricated  himself;  but  they  took  Remus  prisoner,  delivered 
him  up  to  King  Amulius,  and  had  the  assurance  to  accuse 
them  both  of  criminal  misbehaviour.  The  principal  charge 
made  against  them  was,  that  they  had  made  violent  inroads 
on  the  lands  of  Numitor,  and,  with  a  band  of  youths  which 
they  had  collected ,  plundered  the  country  in  a  hostile  man¬ 
ner.  In  consequence  of  this,  Remus  was  given  up  to  ,  Nu¬ 
mitor  to  be  punished.  From  the  very  beginning,  Faustulus 
had  entertained  hopes,  that  the  children  whom  he  educated, 
would  prove  to  be  descended  of  the  royal  blood;  for  he  knew 
that  the  infants  of  Rhea  had  been  exposed  by  order  of  the 
King,  and  that  the  time  when  he  had  taken  them  up,  cor¬ 
responded  exactly  with  that  event;  but  he  had  resolved  to 
avoid  any  hasty  disclosure,  unless  some  favourable  conjunc- 

See  Adam,  p. 

BOOK  I, 

n 

turc  or  necessity  should  require  it.  The  necessity  happened 
first;  wherefore,  constrained  by  his  apprehensions,  he  ina- 
parted  the  affair  to  Romulus,!  It  happened  also  that  Numi- 
tor,  while  he  had  Remus  in  his  custody,  heard  that  the  bro- 
thers  were  twins;  and  when  he  combined  with  this  circum¬ 
stance  their  age,  and  their  turn  of  mind,  which  gave  no  in¬ 
dication  of  a  servile  condition,  he  was  struck  with  the  idea 
of  their  being  his  grandchildren;  and  all  his  inquiries  lead 
ing  to  the  same  conclusion,  he  was  upon  the  point  of  tic- 
kncwledging  Remus.  In  consequence,  a  plot  against  the 
King  was  concerted  between  all  the  parties.  Romulus,  not  go¬ 
ing  at  the  head  of  a  band  of  youths,  for  he  was  unequal  to 
an  open  attempt,  but  ordering  the  shepherds  to  come  at  a 
certain  hour,  by  different  roads,  to  the  palace,  forced  his  way 
to  the  King,  and  was  supported  by  Remus,  with  another  par¬ 
ty,  procured  from  the  house  of  Numitor.  Thus  they  put  the 
King  to  death. 
VI.  In  the  beginning  of  the  tumult,  Numitor,  calling 
out  that  the  city  was  assaulted  by  an  enemy,  and  the  palace 
attacked,  had  drawn  away  the  Alban  youth  to  the  citadel, 
on  pretence  of  securing  it  by  an  armed  garrison;  and,  in  a 
little  time  seeing  the  young  men,  after  perpetrating  the 
murder,  coming  towards  him,  with  expressions  of  joy,  he 
instantly  called  the  people  to  an  assembly,  laid  before  them 
the  iniquitous  behaviour  of  his  brother  towards  himself;  the 
birth  of  his  grandchildren,  how  they  were  begotten,  how  edu¬ 
cated,  how  discovered;  then  informed  them  of  the  death  of 
the  usurper,  and  that  he  had  himself  encouraged  the  design. 
The  youths  at  the  same  time  advancing  with  their  followers, 
through  the  midst  of  the  assembly,  saluted  their  grandfather 
as  King;  on  which  the  multitude,  testifying  their  assent  by 
universal  acclamations,  ratified  to  him  the  royal  title  and  au¬ 
thority.  When  Numitor  was  thus  reinstated  in  the  sove¬ 
reignty  at  Alba,  Romulus  and  Remus  were  seized  with  a 
desire  of  building  a  city  in  the  place  where  they  had  been 

12 

HISTORY  OP  ROME. 

exposed  and  educated.  There  were  great  numbers  of  Al¬ 
bans  and  Lattnes,  who  could  be  spared  for  the  purpose,  and 
these  were  joined  by  a  multitude  of  shepherds;  so  that,  all 
together,  they  formed  such  a  numerous  body,  as  gave  grounds 
to  hope  that  Alba  and  Lavinium  would  be  but  small,  in  com¬ 
parison  with  the  city  which  they  were  about  to  found. 
These  views  were  interrupted  by  an  evil,  hereditary  in  their 
family,  ambition  for  rule.  Hence  arose  a  shameful  contest; 
though  they  had  in  the  beginning  rested  their  dispute  on 
this  amicable  footing,  that,  as  they  were  twins,  and  conse¬ 
quently,  no  title  to  precedence  could  be  derived  from  priori¬ 
ty  of  birth,  the  gods,  who  were  guardians  of  the  place, 
should  choose  by  auguries,*  which  of  the  two  should  give  a 
name  to  the  new  city,  and  enjoy  the  government  of  it  when 
built.  Romulus  chose  the  Palatine,  Remus  the  Aventine 
mount,  as  their  consecrated  stands  to  wait  the  auguries. 
We  are  told  that  the  first  omen  appeared  to  Remus,  consist¬ 
ing  of  sik  vultures;  and,  that,  after  this  had  been  proclaim¬ 
ed,  twice  that  number  showed  themselves  to  Romulus;  on 
which  each  was  saluted  King  by  his  own  followers;  the 
former  claiming  the  kingdom  on  the  ground  of  the  priority  of 
time;  the  latter,  on  that  of  the  number  of  the  birds.  On 
their  meeting,  an  altercation  ensued,  then  blows;  and  their 
passions  being  inflamed  by  the  dispute,  the  affair  proceeded 
at  last  to  extremity,  and  murder  was  the  consequence.  Re¬ 
mus  fell  by  a  blow  received  in  the  tumult.  There  is  another 
account  more  generally  received,  that  Remus,  in  derision  of 
his  brother,  leaped  over  the  new  wall,  and  that  Romulus,  en¬ 
raged  thereat,  slew  him,  uttering  at  the  same  time  this  im¬ 
precation,  “  So  perish  every  one  that  shall  hereafter  leap 
over  my  wall.”  By  these  means  Romulus  came  into  the  sole 
B.  C,  possession  of  the  government,  and  the  city,  when  built, 
was  called  after  the  name  of  its  founder.  The  first  buil¬ 
dings  which  he  raised,  were  on  the  Palatine  hill,  where  he  him- 
*  For  an  account  of  augurs,  auspices  &c.  see  Adaiii>  p.  WO. 

BOOK  L 

13 

self  had  been  brought  up.  To  the  other  deities  he  perform¬ 
ed  worship,  according  to  the  mode  of  the  Albans,  but  to 
Hercules,  ‘according  to  that  of  the  Greeks,  as  instituted  by 
Evander. 
VII.  It  is  recorded  that  Hercules,  after  having  slain 
Geryon,  drove  away  his  cattle,  which  were  surprisingly 
beautiful;  and  that,  being  fatigued  with  travelling,  he  lay 
dowd,  near  the  river  Tiber,  in  a  grassy  place,  to  which  he 
had  swum  over,  driving  the  herd  before  him,  in  order  to 
refresh  the  cattle  with  rest  and  the  rich  pasture.  There, 
having  indulged  himself  in  meat  and  wine,  he  was  over¬ 
powered  by  sleep;  whereupon  a  shepherd,  who  dwelt  in  the 
neighbourhood,  named  Cacus,  of  great  strength  and  fierce¬ 
ness,  being  struck  with  the  beauty  of  the  cattle,  wished  to 
make  prey  of  some  of  them;  but  considering,  that  if  he 
should  drive  the  herd  before  him  into  his  cave,  their 
tracks  would  direct  the  owner’s  search,  he  dragged  the  cat¬ 
tle  backward  by  the  tails  into  the  cave,  picking  out  those 
that  were  the  most  remarkable  for  their  beauty.  Hercules 
awaking  at  the  dawn  of  day,  took  a  view  of  his  herd,  and 
missing  some  of  the  number,  went  directly  to  the  next  cave, 
to  examine  whether  the  footsteps  led  thither;  but  when  he 
observed  that  they  all  pointed  outward,  and  yet  did  not 
direct  to  any  other  quarter,  perplexed,  and  not  knowing 
how  to  act,  he  began  to  drive  forward  his  herd  from  that 
unlucky  place.  Some  of  the  cows,  as  they  were  driven  off, 
missing  those  that  were  left  behind,  began,  as  was  natural, 
to  low  after  them,  and  the  sound  being  returned  from  the 
cave,  by  those  that  were  shut  up  in  it,  brought  Hercules 
back.  Cacus,  endeavouring  by  force  to  prevent  his  ap¬ 
proach  to  the  cave,  and  invoking  in  vain  the  assistance  of 
the  shepherds,  received  a  blow  of  his  club,  which  put  an 
end  to  his  life.  At  that  time,  Evander,  a  native  of  Pelo¬ 
ponnesus,  who  had  removed  hither,  governed  that  part 
of  the ‘country,  rather  through  an  influence  acquired  by  his 

14 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

merit,  than  any  power  of  sovereignty  vested  in  him.  He 
was  highly  revered  on  account  of  his  having  introduced  the 
wonderful  knowledge  of  letters,  a  matter  quite  new  to  these 
men,  who  were  ignorant  of  all  the  arts;  and  still  more  so,  on 
account  of  the  supposed  divinity  of  his  mother  Carmenta, 
whose  prophetic  powers  had  been  an  object  of  admiration  to 
those  nations,  before  the  arrival  of  the  Sibyl  in  Italy. 
Evander  then,  being  alarmed  by  the  concourse  of  the 
shepherds,  hastened  to  the  spot,  where  they  were  assembled 
in  a  tumultuous  manner  about  the  stranger,  whom  they 
accused  as  undeniably  guilty  of  murder;  and  when  he  was 
informed  of  the  fact,  and  of  the  cause  of  it,  observing  the 
person  and  mien  of  the  hero,  filled  with  more  dignity  and 
majesty  than  belonged  to  a  human  being,  he  inquired  who 
he  was;  and  being  told  his  name,  that  of  his  father  and  his 
country,  he  addressed  him  in  these  words;  Hail, 
Hercules,  son  of  Jovel  my  mother,  the  infallible  inter¬ 
preter  of  the  gods,  foretold  to  me  that  you  were  destined 
to  increase  the  number  of  the  celestials,  and  that  an  altar 
would  he  dedicated  to  you  in  this  place,  which  a  nation,  here¬ 
after  the  most  powerful  in  the  world,  should  distinguish 
by  the  name  of  The  Greatest,"^  and  would  olFer  thereon 
sacrifices  to  your  honour.”  Hercules,  giving  his  right 
hand,  replied,  that,  “  he  embraced  the  omen,  and  would 
fulfil  the  decree  of  the  fates,  by  building  and  dedicating 
an  altar  in  the  place.”  There,  then,  for  the  first  time,  was 
performed  a  sacrifice  to  Hercules,  of  a  chosen  heifer  taken 
out  of  the  herd;  and  the  Potitii  and  Pinarii,  the  most  distin* 
guished  families  in  the  neighbourhood  at  the  time,  were 
invited  to  assist  in  the  ceremonies,  and  share  the  entertain¬ 
ment.  It  happened  that  the  Potitii  attended  in  time,  and 
the  entrails  were  served  up  to  them;  the  Pinarii,  arriving 
*Ara  Maxima:  it  stood  in  the  cattle  market,  where  it  remained  in  the 
time  of  Augustus?. 

BOOK.  I. 

15 

after  the  entrails  were  eaten,  came  in  for  the  rest  of  the 
feast;  hence  it  continued  a  rule,  as  long  as  the  Pinarian 
family  existed,  that  they  should  not  eat  of  the  entrails.  The 
Potitii,  instructed  by  Evander,  were  directors  of  that 
solemnity  for  many  ages,  until  the  solemn  office  of  the 
family  was  delegated  to  public  servants,  on  which  the  whole 
race  of  the  Potitii  became  extinct.  These  were  the  only 
foreign  rites  that  Romulus  then  adopted,  showing  thereby, 
from  the  beginning,  a  respect  for  immortality  obtained  by 
merit,  a  dignity  to  which  his  own  destiny  was  conducting 
him. 
VIII.  After  paying  due  worship  to  the  gods,  he  summon¬ 
ed  the  multitude  to  an  assembly;  and,  knowing  that  they 
could  never  be  brought  to  incorporate  as  one  people,  by 
any  other  means,  than  by  having  their  conduct  directed  by 
certain  rules,  he  gave  them  a  body  of  iaws;^  and  judging, 
that  if  he  added  to  the  dignity  of  his  own  carriage,  by  as¬ 
suming  the  ensigns  of  sovereignty,  it  would  help  to  procure 
respect  to  those  laws,  among  a  rude  uninformed  people,  he 
adopted  a  more  majestic  style  of  appearance,  both  with  re¬ 
gard  to  his  other  appointments,  and  particularly  in  being 
attended  by  twelve  lictors.  Some  think  that  he  was  led 
to  fix  on  this  number  by  that  of  the  birds  in  the  augury 
which  had  portended  the  kingdom  to  him:  I  am  rather  in¬ 
clined  to  be  of  their  opinion,  who  suppose  that  all  the  officers 
attendant  on  magistrates,  and  among  the  rest,  the  lictors,  as 
well  as  the  number  of  them,  were  borrowed  from  their 
neighbours,  the  Etrurians,  from  whom  the  curule  chair,  and 
the  gown  edged  with  purple,  were  taken;  and  that  the 
Etrurians,  used  that  number,  because  their  King  being  elec¬ 
ted  by  the  suffrages  of  twelve  states,  each  state  gave  him  one 
iictor.  Meanwhile  the  city  increased  in  buildings,  w^hich 
^  Without  doubt,  he  framed  the  government,  and  the  laws,  nearly  on 
the  model  of  lho%o  established  at  Alba. 

16 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

were  carried  on  to  an  extent  proportioned  rather  to  the  num¬ 
ber  of  inhabitants  they  hoped  for  in  future,  than  to  what 
they  had  at  the  time.*  But  that  its  size  might  not  increase 
beyond  its  strength,  in  order  to  augment  his  numbers,  he 
had  recourse  to  a  practice  common  among  founders  of  cities, 
who  used  to  feign  that  the  multitude  of  mean  and  obscure 
people,  thus  collected,  had  sprang  out  of  the  earllu  He 
opened  a  sanctuary,  in  the  place  where  the  inclosure  now  is, 
on  the  road  down  from  the  Capitol,  called  The  Pass  of  the 
Two  Groves.  Hither  fled,  from  the  neighbouring  states, 
crowds  of  all  sorts,  without  distinction;  whether  freemen  or 
slaves,  led  by  a  fondness  for  novelty;  and  this  it  was  that 
gave  solidity  to  the  growing  greatness  of  the  city.  Having 
reason  now  to  be  pretty  well  satisfied  with  his  strength,  he 
next  made  provision  that  this  strength  should  be  regulated 
by  wisdom;  and  for  that  purpose,  he  created  an  hundred 
senators, t  either  because  that  number  w^as  sufficient,  or 
because  there  were  no  more  than  an  hundred  citizens  who 
could  prove  their  descent  from  respectable  families.  They 
were  certainly  styled  Fathers  from  their  honourable  office, 
and  their  descendants  Patricians. 
IX.  The  Roman  state  had  now  attained  such  a  degree  of 
power,  that  it  was  a  match  in  arms  for  any  of  the  neigh¬ 
bouring  nations;  but,  from  the  small  number  of  its  women, 
its  greatness  was  not  likely  to  last  longer  than  one  age  of 
man,  as  they  had  neither  hopes  of  offspring  among  them¬ 
selves,  nor  had  yet  contracted  any  intermarriages  with  their 
neighbours.  Romulus,  therefore,  by  advice  of  the  senate, 
sent  ambassadors  round  to  all  the  adjoining  states,  soliciting 
their  alliance,  and  permission  for  his  new  subjects  to  marry 
*  About  3000  foot,  auil  300  horsemen. 
f  This  expression  must  be  understood  in  a  qualified  sense,  in  the  same  ' 
manner  as  when  a  magistrate,  presiding  at  an  election,  is  said  to  elect 
such  and  such  persons.  Romulus  nominated  one  seiiatoi;  each  tribe,  and 
each  curia,  chose  three;  and  thus  the  number  was  made  up. 

BOOK  I. 

17 

among  them:  he  Intimated  to  them,  that  chics,  like  every 
ddng  else,  rise  from  l6w  beginnings;  that,  in  time  those 
which  are  sapported  by  their  own  merit,  and  the  favour  of 
the  gtKis,  procure  to  themselves  great  power,  and  a  great 
ntoe:  and  that  he  had  full  assurance  both  that  the  gods  fa^ 
voured  the  founding  of  Rome,  and  tha  tthe  people  would  not 
be  deficient  in  merit.  Where^re,  as  men,  they  ought  to  show 
no  reluctance  to  mix  their  blood  and  race  with  men.”  In 
no  one  place  were  his  ambassadors  favourably  heard;  such 
contempt  of  them  did  people  entertain,  and,  at  the  same  time, 
such  apprehensions  of  danger  to  themselves  and  their  posteri- 
ty,  from  so  great  a  power  growing  up  in  the  midst  of  them.  By 
the  greater  part,  they  were  dismissed  with  the  question, 
‘‘  whether  they  had  opened  an  asylum  for  women  also,  for 
that  would  be  the  only  way  to" procure  suitable  matches  for 
them?”  This  was  highly  resented  by  the  Roman  youth,  in¬ 
somuch  that  the  business  appeared  evidently  to  point  to¬ 
wards  violence.  Romulus,  in  order  to  afford  them  a  con¬ 
venient  time  and  place  for  a  design  of  that  sort,  dissembling 
his  displeasure,  prepared,  with  that  intent,  to  celebrate  so¬ 
lemn  games  in  honour  of  the  equestrian  Neptune,*  to  which 
he  gave  the  name  of  Consualia.  He  then  ordered  the  intend¬ 
ed  celebration  to  be  proclaimed  among  the  neighbouring  na¬ 
tions,  while  his  people  exerted  themselves  in  making  the 
most  magnificent  preparations  that  their  knowledge  and  abi¬ 
lities  allowed,  in  order  to  engage  attention  and  raise  expec¬ 
tation.  Great  numbers  of  people  assembled,  induced,  in  some 
measure,  by  a  desire  of  seeing  the  new  city,  especially  those 
whose  countries  lay  nearest,  the  Cteninensians,  Crustumi- 
nians,  and  Antemnatians,  especially  the  whole  multitude  of 
*  So  called,  from  his  having'  produced  (he  first  horse  from  the  earth  bv  a 
stroke  of  his  trident.  Romulus  called  him  ^onsus,  the  god  of  counsel, 
as  having  suggested  the  scheme  of  seizing  the  women.  The  games,  which 
he  called  Ccmsoalta,  were  afterwards  termed  the  Roman,  or  (he  great 
games;  they  lasted,  at  firet,  one  day,  then  two,  three,  and  at  length,  nine 
days. 
VOL.  I. — D 

18 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

the  Sabtfies  came  with  their  wives  md  children.  They  were 
hospitably  invited  to  the  different  houses;  and  when  they 
viewed  the  situatiOT,  and  the  fortifications,  and  the  city 
crowded  with  houses,  they  were  astonished  at  the  rapid  in¬ 
crease  of  the  Roman  power.  When  the  show*  began,  and 
every  person’s  thoughts  and  eyes  were  attentively  engaged  on 
it,  then,  according  to  the  preconcerted  plan,  on  a  signal  being 
Y  4.  given,  the  Roman  youth  ran  different  ways  to  carry 
B.  C.  748.  Qff  young  women.  Some  thev  bore  away,  as  they 
happened  tomeet  with  them,  without  waiting  to  make  a  choice; 
but  others  of  extraordinary  beauty,  being  designed  for  the 
principal  senators,  were  conveyed  to  their  houses  by  plebeians 
employed  for  that  purpose.  It  is  said,  that  one  highly  distin¬ 
guished  above  the  rest  for  her  beauty,  was  carried  off  by  the 
party  of  one  Talassius,  and  that  in  answer  to  many  who 
eagerly  inquired  to  whom  they  were  hurrying  her,  they, 
every  now  and  then,  to  prevent  any  interruption  in  their 
course,  cried  out,  that  they  were  carrying  her  to  Talassius; 
this  circumstance  gave  rise  to  the  use  of  that  word  at  wed¬ 
dings.  The  terror  occasioned  by  this  outrage  put  an  end  to 
the  sports,  and  the  parents  of  the  young  women  retired  full 
of  grief,  inveighing  against  such  a  violation  of  the  laws  of 
hospitality,  and  appealing  to  the  god,  to  whose  solemn  festi¬ 
val  and  games  they  had  come,  relying  on  the  respect  due  to 
religion,  and  on  the  faith  of  nations.  Nor  did  the  women 
who  were  seized  entertain  better  hopes  with  regard  to  them¬ 
selves,  or  a  less  degree  of  indignation:  however  Romulus 
went  about  in  person,  and  told  them,  that  this  proceeding 
had  been  occasioned  by  the  haughtiness  of  their  parents, 
who  refused  to  allow  their  neighbours  to  marry  among  them; 
that,  notwithstanding  this,  they  should  be  united  to  his  peo¬ 
ple  in  wedlock  in  the  common  enjoyment  of  all  property,  and 
of  their  common  children;  a  bond  of  union  than  which  the 
human  heart  feels  none  more  endearing.  He  begged  of  them 
to  soften  their  resentment,  and  to  bestow  their  affections  on 

BOOK  L 

19 

those  men  on  whom  chance  had  bestowed  their  persons.  It 
often  happened,  he  said,  that  to  harsh  treatment  mutual  re¬ 
gard  had  succeeded,  and  they  would  6nd  their  husbands  be¬ 
have  the  better  on  this  very  account;  th5t  every  one  would 
exert  himself,  not  merely  in  performing  his  duty  as  a  hus¬ 
band,  but  to  make  up  to  them  for  the  loss  of  their  parents 
and  of  their  country/’  To  these  persuasions  was  added,  the 
soothing  behaviour  of  their  husbands  themselves,  who  urged, 
in  extenuation  of  the  violence  they  had  been  tempted  to  com¬ 
mit,  the  excess  of  passion,  and  the  force  of  love;  arguments, 
than  which  there  can  be  none  more  powerful  to  assuage  the 
irritation  of  the  female  mind. 
X.  The  women,  who  had  been  forcibly  carried  off,  soon 
became  reconciled  to  their  situation;  but  their  parents,  still 
more  than  at  first,  endeavoured  to  rouse  their  several  states 
to  revenge,  employing  both  complaints  and  tears,  and  wear¬ 
ing  the  dress  of  mourners.  Nor  did  they  confine  their  de¬ 
mands  of  vengeance  within  the  limits  of  their  own  states,  but 
made  joint  applications  from  all  quarters  to  Titus  Tati  us- 
king  of  the  Sabines,  the  embassies  being  addressed  to  him 
as  the  person  of  the  highest  renown  in  all  those  parts.  The 
people  Vfho  were  the  principal  sufferers  by  the  outrage,  were 
the  Caeninensians,  the  Crustuminians,  and  the  Antemnatians. 
To  them,  the  proceedings  of  Tatius  and  the  Sabine  nation 
appeared  too  dilatory;  wherefore  these  three  states,  uniting 
in  a  confederacy,  prepared  for  immediate  war.  Nor  did  even 
the  Crustuminians  and  Antemnatians  exert  activity  enough 
for  the  impatient  rage  of  the  Cseninensians.  This  state, 
therefore,  alone,  made  an  irruption  into  the  Roman  territo¬ 
ries;  but  while  they  carried  on  their  ravages  in  a  disorderly 
manner,  Romulus  met  them,  and,  without  much  difficulty, 
taught  them  that  rage  without  strength  avails  but  little.  H9 
routed  and  dispersed  their  army;  pursued  it  in  its  flight; 
slew  their  king  in  the  battle,  and  seized  his  spoils;  after 
which  he  made  himself  master  of  their  city  at  the  first  as- 

20 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

sault  From  thetjce  he  led  home  his  victorious  troops;  and 
being  not  only  capable  of  performing  splendid  actionsi^  but 
also  fond  of  displaying  those  actions  to  advantage,  he  march¬ 
ed  up  in  processiod  to  the  Capitol,  carrying  on  a  frame,  pro* 
perly  constructed  for  the  purpose,  the  spoils  of  the  enemy^s 
general  whom  he  had  slain;  and  there  laying  them  down  un¬ 
der  an  oak,  which  the  shepherds  accounted  sacred,  he,  at  the 
same  time,  while  he  offered  this  present,  marked  out  with 
his  eye  the  bounds  of  a  temple  for  Jupiter,  to  whom  he  gave 
anew  name,  saying,  “Jupiter  Feretrius,*  in  acknowledg¬ 
ment  of  the  victory  which  I  have  obtained,  I:,  Romulus  the 
king,  offer  to  thee  these  royal  arms,  and  dedicate  a  temple  to 
thee  on  that  spot  which  I  have  now  measured  out  in  my 
mind,  to  be  a  repository  for  those  grand  spoils,  which,  after 
my  example,  generals  in  future  times  shall  offer,  on  slaying 
the  kings  and  generals  of  their  enemies.”  This  was  the  ori¬ 
gin  of  that  temple  which  was  the  first  consecrated  in  Rome. 
Accordingly,  it  pleased  the  gods  so  to  order,  that  neither 
the  prediction  of  the  founder  of  the  temple,  intimating  that 
future  generals  should  carry  spoils  thither,  should  prove  er¬ 
roneous,  nor  that  the  honour  of  making  such  offerings  should 
be  rendered  common,  by  being  imparted  to  man}^  In  after 
times,  during  so  many  years,  and  so  many  wars,  there  have 
been  only  two  instances  of  the  grand  spoils  being  obtained; 
so  rare  was  the  attainment  of  that  high  honour. 
XX*  While  the  Romans  were  thus  employed,  the  army  of 
the  Antemnatians,  taking  advantage  of  the  opportunity  which 
the  country  being  left  without  troops  afforded  them,  made  an 
hostile  incursion  into  the  Roman  territories;  but  a  Roman 
♦  So  called,  from  the ferelrum.  or  frame,  supporting  the  spoils.  The  se¬ 
cond  gpolia  opima,  or  grand  spoils,  were  offered  by  Cornelius  Cossus,  who 
killed  Toiumnius,  king  of  the  Veientiaos;  and  the  third  by  Claudius  Mar- 
celluB,  who  killed  Viridomarus,  a  king  of  the  Gauls.  The  spoils,  called 
gpotia  opuna^  or  grand,  or  chief  spoils,  were  so  denominated  when  they 
were  taken  from  a  king  or  generai-in-chief,  commanding  an  army. 

BOOK  L 

21 

Icg^,^  hastily  kd  out,  surpmcd  ^cm,  while  they  straggled 
through  the  country.  They  were  routed  therefore  at  the  first 
<mset,  and  their  town  was  taken.  While  Romulus  exulted 
in  this  second  victory,  his  consort,  Hersilia,  teased  by  the 
intreaties  of  the  captured  women,  earnestly  petitioned  him 
diat  he  would  show  favour  to  their  parents,  and  admit  them 
into  the  number  of  his  citizens,  a  measure  which  could  not 
fail  of  forming  an  union  satisfactory  to  all  parties.  This  re¬ 
quest  was  easily  obtained.  He  then  marched  against  the  Crus- 
tuminians,  who  were  carrying  on  hostilities:  with  these  he 
had  still  less  trouble  than  with  the  Antemnatians,  because  they 
had  been  dispirited  by  the  defeats  of  their  allies.  Colonies 
were  sent  to  both  countries,  but  greater  numbers  were  found 
willing  to  give  in  their  names  for  Crustuminum,  on  account 
of  the  fertility  of  the  soil.  There  were  frequent  migrations 
also  from  those  places  to  Rome,  chiefly  of  the  parents  and  re- 
lations  of  the  ravished  women.  The  last  war,  on  this  y.  R.  5. 
occasion,  was  begun  by  the  Sabines;  and  it  was  by  B  *5^47, 
far  the  most  fomiidable,  for  none  of  their  operations  were  di* 
reeled  by  rage  or  passion,  nor  did  they  disclose  their  inten¬ 
tions  until  they  began  to  act.  They  employed  stratagem, 
too,  in  aid  of  prudence.  The  Roman  citadel  was  command¬ 
ed  by  Spur! us  Tarpeius*  His  maiden  daughter,  who  had 
accidentally  gone  without  the  fortifications  to  bring  water 
for  the  sacred  rites,  was  bribed  by  Tatius  with  gold  to  admit 
some  of  his  troops  into  the  citadel.  As  soon  as  they  gained 
admittance  they  put  her  to  death,  by  throwing  their  armour 
in  a  heap  upon  her,  either  because  they  wished  that  the  cita¬ 
del  should  rather  appear  to  have  been  taken  by  storm,  or  for 
the  sake  of  establishing  a  precedent  that  faith  was  not  to  be 
*  So  called  fmn  to  choose,  to  select.  The  legion  consisted,  at 
this  hme,  of  3,000  foot  and  300  horse.  ^  The  number  afterwards  was  gene« 
wJly  4,000  foot  and  300  horse,  and  sometimes  augmented  to  6,000  foot  and 
400  horse.  It  wa#  divided  into  10  cohorts,  30  companies,  and  60  cento* 
ries. 

22 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

kept  with  a  traitor.  The  story  is  told  in  another  manner; 
that,  as  the  Sabines  generally  carried  on  their  left  ariM 
bracelets  of  great  weight,  and  wore  rings  set  with  prcck>us 
stones,  which  made  a  great  show,  she  bargained  for  what 
they  wore  on  their  left  arms;  accordingly,  instead  of  the  pre¬ 
sents  of  gold  which  she  expected,  they  threw  their  shields 
upon  her.  Others  say,  that,  in  pursuance  of  their  agreement 
to  deliver  up  what  was  on  their  left  arms,  she  expressly  de¬ 
manded  their  shields;  and  this  seeming  to  be  done  with  a 
treacherous  intent,  she  was  put  to  death  by  means  of  the  very 
reward  which  she  required. 
XII.  The  Sabines  however  kept  possession  of  the  citadel; 
but  though,  on  the  following  day,  the  Roman  army,  in  order 
of  battle,  filled  the  whole  plain  between  the  Palatine  and 
Capitoline  hills,  yet  they  did  not  come  down  to  the  level 
ground;  until  the  Romans,  stimulated  by  rage  and  eagerness 
to  recover  the  citadel,  advanced  to  an  assault.  The  fore¬ 
most  champions  of  the  two  parties,  who  led  on  the  troops, 
were  Mettius  '"Curtius  on  the  side  of  the  Sabines,  and  Hos- 
tus  Hostilius  on  that  of  the  Romans.  The  latter,  in  the  front 
of  the  army,  by  his  spirit  and  intrepidity,  enabled  the  Ro¬ 
mans  to  support  the  fight,  in  spite  of  the  disadvantage  of  the 
ground;  but,  on*his  falling,  the  Roman  soldiers  quickly  gave 
way,  and  were  driven  back  to  the  old  gate  of  the  Palatium. 
Romulus  himself  being  forced  along  by  the  flying  crowd, 
raised  his  hands  toward  heaven,  and  said,  O  Jupiter!  by 
the  direction  of  thy  auspices,  I,  here  on  the  Palatine  hill, 
laid  the  first  foundation  of  my  city.  The  Sabines  are  already 
in  possession  of  our  citadel,  which  they  obtained  by  fraud; 
from  thence  they  now  make  their  way  hither,  in  arms,  and 
have  passed  the  middle  of  the  valley;  but  do  thou,  O  father 
of  gods  and  men!  from  hence  at  least  repel  the  enemy;  re¬ 
move  dismay  from  the  minds  of  the  Romans,  and  stop  t^ir 
shameful  flight.  I  vow  a  temple  here  to  thee,  Jupiter  Sta- 

BOOK  I. 

^3 
tor,*  as  a  testimony  to  posterity  of  the  city  being  preserv¬ 
ed  by  thy  immediate  aid.”  Having  prayed  thus,  as  if  he 
had  perceived  that  his  supplications  were  heard,  he  called 
out,  ‘‘  Here  Romans,  Jupiter,  supremely  good  and  great, 
orders  you  to  halt,  and  renew  the  fight.”  The  Romans,  as 
if  they  had  heard  a  voice  from  heaven,  halted,  and  Romulus 
himself  flew  forward  to  the  front.  On  the  side  of  the  Sa¬ 
bines,  Mettius  Curtius  had  run  down  first  from  the  citadel; 
had  driven  back  the  Romans,  in  disorder,  through  the  whole 
space  at  present  ocevrpied  by  the  Forum,  and  was  now  at  no 
great  distance  from  the  gate  of  the  Palatium,  crying  aloud, 
‘‘We  have  conquered  these  traitors  to  hospitality,  these 
cowards  in  war.  They  now  feel  that  it  is  one  thing  to 
ravish  virgins,  and  another,  far  diflferent,  to  fight  with  men.” 
While  he  was  vaunting  in  this  manner,  Romulus  attacked 
him  with  a  band  of  the  most  courageous  of  the  youths. 
Mettius  happened  at  that  time  to  fight  on  horseback,  and  on 
that  account  was  the  more  easily  repulsed;  he  soon  gave 
way,  and  was  pursued  by  the  Romans;  the  rest  of  the  Ro¬ 
man  troops  also,  animated  by  the  bravery  of  their  king,  put 
the  Sabines  to  the  route*  Mettius  was  plunged  into  a  lake, 
his  horse  taking  fright  at  the  noise  of  the  pursuers:  and  this 
circumstance  turned  the  attention  of  the  Sai>mes  to  the  dan¬ 
ger  in  which  they  saw  a  person  of  so  much  consequence  to 
them*  However,  his  friends  beckoning  and  calling  to  him, 
he  acquired  fresh  courage  from  the  affection  of  the  multi¬ 
tude,  and  accomplished  his  escape.  Both  parties  now  re¬ 
newed  the  engagement  in  the  plain  between  the  two  hills, 
but  the  advantage  was  on  the  side  of  the  Romans* 
Xlll.  At  this  crisis  the  Sabine  women,  whose  sufferings 
had  given  cause  to  the  war,  with  their  hair  dishevelled  and 
garments  tom,  their  natural  timidity  being  overcome  by  the 
sight  of  such  disastrous  scenes,  had  the  resolution  to  throw 

From  $tare.  to  halt. 

24 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

themseli^es  is  the  of  the  fl3?ing  wesq)mm  iind?  rashi^ 
across  between  the  armies,  separated  the  in^nsed  comba* 
tanis,  and  assuaged  their  fury;  beseeching^  <m  the  one  h^d 
their  parents,  on  the  other  their  husbai^s,  **  not  to  pollute 
themselves  with  the  impious  stain  of  the  blmid  of  father-in- 
law  and  son-in-law,  nor  bmnd  with  the  infamy  of  parricide 
their  offspring,  the  children  of  one,  and  grandchildren  of  the 
other  party.  If  ye  wish,  said  they,  to  destroy  the  affinity  and 
connection  formed  between  you  by  our  marriage,  turn  your 
rage  against  usJ  we  are  the  cause  of  the  war;  we  are  the  cause  of 
wounds  and  death  to  our  husbands  and  fathers*  It  is  better  for 
us  to  perish,  than  to  live  either  widowed  by  the  loss  of  one 
party  or  fatherless  by  that  of  the  other.’’  This  transaction 
powerfully  affected  both  the  multitude  and  fhe  leaders:  silence 
suddenly  ensued  and  a  suspension  of  the  fight.  The  command¬ 
ers  then  came  forward,  in  order  to  concert  measures  for  a  pa- 
Y  rt.  cification;  and  they  not  only  concluded  a  peace,  but 
B.G.745.  combined  the  two  nations  into  one,  associating  the 
two  sovereigns  in  the  government,  and  establishing  the  seat  of 
empire  at  Rome.  By  this  accession  the  number  of  citzens  was 
doubled;  and,  as  some  compliment  to  the  Sabines,  the  united 
people  were  called  Quirites,  from  the  town  of  Cures.  To  per¬ 
petuate  the  remembrance  of  that  battle,  the  place  where  his 
horse,  emerging  from  the  deep  of  the  lake,  first  brought  Curri- 
us  to  a  shallow,  was  called  the  Curtian  lake.*  This  happy  re-es¬ 
tablishment  of  peace,  after  a  war  so  distressing,  rendered  the 
Sabine  women  still  dearer  both  to  their  husbands  and  parents, 
and. above  all  to  Romulus  himself,  so  that,  nrhen  he  divided 
the  people  into  thirty  Curias ,f  he  gave  these  the  names  of 
*  This  name  it  retained  long  after  it  was  filled  up,  and  became  a  part  of 
the  Fornm. 
f  He  divided  the  city  into  three  tribes;  the  Kamneoses,  so  called  frema 
Romulus,  being  his  original  followers;  the  Titienses,  from  Titus  TaUus, 
composed  of  the  Sabines;  and  the  Luceres,  of  who  had  assembled  in 
the  Lucus,  orsanctuary^  or  afterwards  joined  the  iU)maas.  Each  tribe, 
he  divided  into  ten  curias,  or  wards.  Each  curia  had  its  own  priest,  cab 

4 

BOOK  I. 

25 

the  women.  JBut  as  the  number  of  the  women  was  undoubt¬ 
edly  greater  than  that  of  the  Curias,  whether  those  who  were 
to  give  their  names  to  them  were  selected  on  account  of  their 
age,  or  their  own  dignity,  or  that  of  their  husbands,  or  by 
lot  we  are  not  informed.  At  the  same  time  also,  three  cen¬ 
turies  of  knights  were  enrolled;  the  Ramnenses,  so  called 
from  Romulus;  the  Titienses,  from  Titus  Tati  us;  and  the  Lu- 
ceres,  the  reason  of  whose  name  and  origin  is  unknown. 
Thenceforward  the  two  kings  reigned  together,  not  only  with 
equal  power  but  with  concord. 
XIV.  Several  years  after,  some  relations  of  king  Tatius 
offered  violence  to  the  ambassadors  of  the  Laurentians;  for 
which  violation  of  the  law  of  nations,  the  latter  demanded 
satisfaction:  But  Tatius  paid  more  regard  to  the  interest  and 
Importunities  of  his  relations,  and  thereby  drew  upon  himself 
the  punishment  due  to  them.  For  he  was  slain  afterwards 
at  Lavinium,  in  a  tumult  raised  on  his  going  thither  to  an 
anniversary  sacrifice*  It  is  said,  that  Romulus  showed  less 
resentment  of  this  proceeding  than  became  him,  either  be¬ 
cause  there  had  been  no  sincere  cordiality  between  them, 
while  associated  in  the  government,  or  because  he  thought 
that  the  other  deserved  the  death  which  he  met.  He  avoid¬ 
ed  therefore  entering  into  a  war  oi}  the  occasion;  but  to 
make  some  atonement  for  the  ill  treatment  of  the  ambassa¬ 
dors,  and  the  murder  of  the  king,  the  league  between  the 
cities  of  Rome  and  Lavinium  was  renewed.  Thus,  beyond 
their  expectations,  the  Romans  enjoyed  peace  on  that  side; 
but  a  war  broke  out  from  another  quarter,  much  nearer  home, 
and  almost  at  their  gates.  The  Fidenatians,  looking  with 
jealousy  on  the  great  increase  of  power  in  so  near  a  neigh¬ 
bour,  determined  to  make  war  on  them  before  they  should 
led  curio,  and  its  own  place  of  worship,  where,  on  certain  stated  days, 
sacrifices  were  offered  to  particular  deities;  and  the  people  of  the  curia 
feasted  together.  The  centuries  of  knights  were  named  after  the  tribes 
out  of  which  they  were  taken- 
voi.  r. — E- 

26 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

arrive  at  that  degree  of  strength  which  it  was  pvident  they 
would  in  time  acquire,  and  sent  a  body  of  young  men  in 
arms,  who  laid  waste  the  whole  country  between  Fidense 
and  the  city.  Then,  turning  to  the  left  hand,  because  the 
Tiber  confined  them  on  the  right,  and  continuing  their  de¬ 
predations,  they  threw  the  country  people  into  the  utmost 
consternation,  and  the  sudden  alarm  spreading  from  the 
country  into  the  city,  made  known  what  had  happened.  Ro¬ 
mulus  instantly  led  out  his  forces;  for  a  w-ar  so  near  home 
admitted  no  delay.,  and  pitched  his  camp  at  the  distance  of 
a  mile  from  Fidenae.  Leaving  there  a  small  guard,  and 
marching  out  with  all  the  rest  of  his  troops,  he  ordered  a 
party  to  lie  in  ambush,  among  the  bushes  that  grew  there  in 
abundance;  then  advancing  with  the  other  more  numerous 
body  of  infantry,  and  all  the  cavalry,  by  riding  up  almost  to 
the  gates  and  offering  battle,  in  an  irregular  and  insulting 
manner,  he  drew  the  enemy  out  of  the  town,  as  he  wished- 
The  cavalry,  acting  in  this  manner,  answered  also  another 
purpose,  as  it  afforded  a  more  specious  pretext  for  the  re¬ 
treat,  which  he  was  to  counterfeit;  and  when  the  foot  too 
began  to  retire,  while  the  horse  seemed  irresolute,  whether 
to  fight  or  fly,  the  enemy  rushing  suddenly  out  of  the  gates 
in  crow^ds,  eager  to  pursue  and  press  on  the  Roman  army  in 
its  retreat,  were  drawn  to  the  place  of  the  ambuscade.  The 
Romans,  now  rising  suddenly,  attacked  their  line  in  flank; 
and  the  ensigns  of  those  who  had  been  left  to  guard  the 
camp,  advancing  at  the  same  time,  added  to  their  fears. 
Dismayed  at  so  many  dangers,  the  Fidenatians  fled,  before 
Romulus  and  the  horseman  with  him,  could  well  turn  to  pur¬ 
sue  them.  Thus  they,  who  had  lately  pursued  an  enemy, 
who  only  pretended  to  fly,  now  fled  themselves  in  earnest, 
with  much  greater  haste,  back  to  the  city:  but  they  could 
not  get  clear  of  the  enemy;  the  Romans  pressing  close  on 
their  rear,  rushed  into  the  city  along  with  them,  before  the 
gates  could  be  shut. 

BOOK  L 

27 

XV.  The  contagion  of  the  Fidenatian  war  infected  the 
Veientians.  Induced  by  the  relationship  subsisting  between 
them  and  the  Fidenatians,  (for  they  also  were  Etrurians,) 
and  urged  on  beside  by  their  dangerous  vicinity  of  situation, 
in  case  the  Roman  arms  were  to  be  turned  against  all  their 
neighbours,  made  an  incursion  into  the  Roman  territories, 
in  the  manner  of  a  predatory,  rather  than  of  a  regular,  war; 
and  thus,  without,  encamping  or  waiting  the  approach  of  the 
enemy army,  they  returned  to  Veii,  carrying  home  the 
plunder  collected  in  the  country.  On  the  other  side,  the 
Roman  commander,  not  finding  the  enemy  in  the  country, 
and  being  prepared  for,  and  determined  on,  a  decisive  action, 
crossed  over  the  Tiber.  The  Veientians,  hearing  that  he 
was  forming  a  camp,  and  that  he  intended  to  advance  to 
their  city,  marched  out  to  meet  him;  for  they  chose  rather 
to  engage  in  the  open  field,  than  to  remain  shut  up,  and  hght 
from  the  walls  and  houses.  There,  unassisted  by  any  strata¬ 
gem,  the  Roman  King,  through  the  mere  force  of  his  vete¬ 
ran  troops,  obtained  the  victory,  and  pursued  the  routed  ene¬ 
my  to  their  walls.  The  city  was  so  strong,  and  so  well  se¬ 
cured  both  by  art  and  by  natuie,  that  he  did  not  choose  to 
attempt  it,  but  led  home  his  troops,  and,  in  his  way,  ravaged 
the  enemy’s  country  for  the  sake  of  revenge  rather  than  of 
booty.  These  devastations  having  distressed  the  Veientians 
no  less  than  the  loss  of  the  battle,  they  sent  deputies  to 
Rome  to  sue  for  peace.  A  part  of  their  lands  was  taken 
from  them,  and  a  truce  granted  for  an  hundred  years. 
These  were  the  principal  transactions  in  peace  and  war,  dur¬ 
ing  the  reign  of  Romulus;  and  none  of  them  was  unsuitable 
to  the  belief  of  his  divine  origin,  or  to  the  rank  of  a  divini¬ 
ty,  which  after  his  death  he  was  supposed  to  have  obtained. 
This  may  be  said  of  the  spirit  which  he  show'ed  in  recover¬ 
ing  the  kingdom  for  his  grandfather,  as  well  as  of  his  wise 
conduct  in  founding  the  city,  and  establishing  its  power,  by 
the  arts  both  c>f  war  and  peace:  for,  by  the  strength  which  it 

28 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

acquired  under  his  management,  it  became  so  respectable, 
that,  during  forty  years  after,  it  enjoyed  profound  peace 
and  security.  He  stood,  however,  much  higher  in  the  fa* 
vour  of  the  people  than  he  did  in  that  of  the  senate;  and  was 
yet  more  beloved  by  his  army.  He  established  a  body  guard 
of  three  hundred  men,  whom  he  called  Celeres;’*^  and  these 
he  kept  constantly  about  his  person,  in  time  of  peace  as  well 
as  war. 
Y.  R-  S7.  XVI.  Such  were  his  achievements  in  his  mortal 
’  ‘  '  state.  One  day,  while  holding  an  assembly  in  the 
plain,  on  the  borders  of  the  lake  of  Capra,  for  the  purpose  of 
reviewing  his  army,  a  sudden  storm  arose,  accompanied  with 
violent  thunder  and  lightning;  the  king  was  enveloped  in  a 
thick  cloud,  which  hid  him  from  the  eyes  of  the  assembly,  and 
was  never  more  seen  upon  earth.  The  Roman  youth  were  at 
length  eased  of  their  apprehensions,  by  the  return  of  calm  and 
serene  weather,  after  such  a  turbulent  day;  but  when  they  saw 
the  royal  seat  empty,  though  they  readily  believed  the  sena¬ 
tors,  who  had  stood  nearest  to  him,  that  he  had  been  car¬ 
ried  up  on  high  by  the  storm,  yet  they  were  struck  with  such 
dread  at  being  thus  left  in  a  manner  fatherless,  that,  for  some 
time,  they  remained  in  mournful  silence.  At  last,  some  few 
setting  the  example,  the  whole  multitude  saluted  Romulus 
as  a  deity,  the  son  of  a  deity,  the  king  and  parent  of  the 
city  of  Rome;”  and  implored  his  favour,  with  prayers,  that 
he  would  be  pleased  always  propitiously  to  watch  over  the 
safety  of  his  own  offspring.”  Some,  I  believe,  even  at  that 
time,  harboured  silent  suspicions  that  the  king  had  been  tom 
in  pieces  by  the  hands  of  the  senators.  Such  a  report  was 
*  Or,  the  Swift,  if  we  suppose  them  to  derive  their  name  from  the  Latin 
word,  celer.  This  must  be  allowed  to  be  the  most  probable  origin  of  the 
appellation,  although  jt  must  be  admitted  to  be  hy  no  means  certain,  that 
they  were  not  so  called,  as  some  allege,  from  the  name  of  their  captain, 
Celer;  while  others  contend  that  they  were  so  called  from  the  Greek  word 
which  signiiicsa  horseman. 

BOOK  h 

29 

spread  abroad,  but  it  was  little  credited,  both  on  account  of 
the  high  admiration  entertained  of  the  man,  and  because  the 
general  consternation  ^caused  the  other  account  to  be  more 
universally  received.  It  is  farther  mentioned,  that  a  contri¬ 
vance  of  one  particular  man  procured  additional  credit  to 
this  representation  o#the  matter:  for  Proculus  Julius,  a  per¬ 
son  whose  testimony,  as  we  are  told,  deserved  respect  in 
any  case,  even  of  the  greatest  importance,  while  the  public 
were  full  of  grief  for  the  king,  and  of  displeasure  against  the 
Senators,  came  out  into  an  assembly  of  the  people,  and  said, 
Romans,  yesterday  at  the  dawn  of  day,  Romulus,  the  pa¬ 
rent  of  this  our  city,  descending  suddenly  from  heaven,  ap¬ 
peared  before  me;  and  wheti,  seized  with  horror,  I  stood  in 
a  worshipping  posture,  and  addressed  him  with  prayers,  that 
I  might  be  allowed  to  behold  him  without  being  guilty  of 
impiety,  Go,  said  he,  tell  the  Romans  that  it  is  the  wdll  of 
the  gods  that  my  Rome  should  be  the  metropolis  of  the 
world.  Let  them  therefore  cultivate  the  arts  of  war;  and  be 
assured,  and  hand  this  assurance  down  to  posterity,  that  no 
liuman  power  is  able  to  withstand  the  Roman  arms.  After 
these  words,  he  went  up,  and  vanished  from  my  sight.”  It 
was  wonderful  how  readily  the  story  was  credited  on  this 
man’s  word;  and  how  much  the  grief  of  the  people,  and  of 
the  army,  was  assuaged,  by  their  being  satisfied  of  his  im¬ 
mortality. 
XVII.  Meanwhile  the  minds  of  the  senators  were  agitat¬ 
ed  by  ambition  and  contention  for  the  vacant  throne.  Fac¬ 
tions  had  not  yet  taken  their  rise  from  the  interests  of  indi¬ 
viduals;  for,  among  a  new  people,  no  one  yet  possessed  any 
eminent  superiority  over  the  rest.  The  contest  lay  between 
the  different  bodies  of  which  the  state  was  composed:  those 
of  Sabine  descent  were  anxious  that  a  king  should  be  chosen 
from  among  them,  apprehensive  lest  they  might  lose  their 
claim  by  disuse,  there  having  been  no  king  of  their  race  since 
the  death  of  Tatius;  although,  by  the  terms  of  the  union. 

JO 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

they  were  entitled  to  equal  privileges.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  original  Romans  spurned  the  thought  of  a  foreigner  being 
placed  on  the  throne.  Notwithstanding  this  diversity  in  their 
views,  yet  all  concurred  in  wishing  for  a  king,  for  they  had 
not  yet  tasted  the  sweets  of  liberty.  The  senate  now  began 
to  fear,  lest  as  the  sentiments  of  manf  of  the  neighbouring 
states  were  very  unfriendly  towards  them,  some  foreign  pow¬ 
er  might  attack  them,  w’hile  the  state  was  destitute  of  a  go¬ 
vernment,  and  the  army  destitute  of  a  commander.  Every 
one  therefore  was  desirous  that  there  should  be  some  head, 
but  no  one  party  could  be  induced  to  give  way  to  another. 
In  this  difficulty,  the  senators  shared  the  government  among 
themselves;  forming,  out  of  their  number,  which  consisted 
of  an  hundred,  ten  decades,  with  one  president  in  each,  who 
were  to  have  the  direction  of  public  affairs.  Each  ten  go¬ 
verned  jointly;  the  president  alone  had  the  lictors  and  other 
badges  of  sovereignty.  The  time  of  each  holding  the  govern¬ 
ment  was  limited  to  five  days,  and  the  administration  went 
to  them  all  in  rotation.  In  this  manner  a  year  passed  with- 
y  gg  out  a  king;  and  that  interval,  from  this  circum- 
B.  €.714.  stance,  was  called  an  Interregnum;  which  term  is 
still  applied  to  similar  interruptions  of  the  regular  govern¬ 
ment.  By  this  time,  the  people  began  to  murmur,  alleging 
that  slavery  was  multiplied  on  them;  that  they  had  an  hun¬ 
dred  masters  set  over  them  instead  of  one;  and  it  became 
evident  that  they  would  no  longer  be  satisfied  without  a  king, 
nor  without  one  chosen  by  themselves.  The  senators,  per¬ 
ceiving  that  such  schemes  were  in  agitation,  judged  it  pru¬ 
dent  to  make  a  voluntary  ofter  of  what  they  cuuld  not  much 
longer  retain.  Yet  while  they  gratified  the  people  in  surren¬ 
dering  to  them  the  sovereign  power,  they  took  care  not  to 
give  up  a  larger  share  of  privilege  than  they  kept  in  their 
own  hands;  for  they  passed  a  decree,  that,  when  the  people 
should  elect  a  king,  that  election  should  not  be  valid,  unless 
the  senate  approved  their  choice.  And,  to  this  day,  the  same 

BOOK  I. 

31 

right  is  claimed  with  respect  to  the  enacting  of  laws,  and 
the  appointing  of  magistrates;  though  the  efficacy  of  it  has 
been  quite  taken  at  present,  before  the  people  begin  to 
vote,  the  senate  previously  declare  their  approbation  of  the 
proceedings  of  the  assembly,  and  that,  even  before  they  are 
yet  resolved  upon.  The  Interrex,  then,  having  called  an  as¬ 
sembly,  said,  ‘‘  Romans!  be  the  event  prosperous,  fortunate, 
and  happy;  elect  a  king;  the  fathers  have  thought  proper  to 
decree  that  it  should  be  so.  If  ye  choose  a  person  worthy  to 
be  esteemed  a  fit  successor  to  Romulus,  the  fathers  will  join 
their  approbation,”  This  proceeding  was  so  pleasing  to  the 
people,  that,  lest  they  might  appear  to  be  outdone  in  genero¬ 
sity,  they  voted,  and  ordered,  nothing  more  than  that  the 
senate  should  determine,  by  their  decree,  who  should  be  king 
of  Rome. 
XVIIL  There  tvas  at  that  time  a  person  named  Numa 
Pompilius,*  who  was  universally  celebrated  for  justice  and 
piety:  he  lived  at  Cures,  in  the  country  of  the  Sabines;  and 
was  as  eminently  skilled,  as  any  one  in  that  age  could  be,  in 
all  laws  human  and  divine;  he  was  supposed  to  have  been 
instructed  by  Pythagoras  of  Samos;  for  which  supposition 
there  is  no  other  foundation,  than  its  not  being  known  from 
what  other  quarter  he  derived  his  knowledge:  certain  it  is, 
that  more  than  an  hundred  years  after  this  period,  in  the 
reign  of  Servius  Tullius,  Pythagoras  assembled  the  youth 
of  the  remoter  parts  of  Italy,  about  Metapontum,  Heracla, 
and  Croton,  and  had  them  instructed  under  his  own  direc¬ 
tion.  From  places  so  remote,  even  if  he  had  lived  in  the 
time  of  Numa,  how  could  such  a  character  of  him  have 
reached  the  Sabines,  as  should  have  inspired  them  with  the 
desire  of  receiving  his  instructions?  In  what  common  lan¬ 
guage  could  they  have  communicated?  or  with  what  safety 
could  a  single  man  have  made  his  way  thither,  through  so 
*  He  5^as  the  son  of  a  Sabine  nobleman,  and  had  been  married  to  a 
daughter  of  king  Tatius,  but  was  now  a  widower. 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

many  nations  differing  in  their  language  and  manners?  I 
therefore  rather  believe,  that  ,  his  mind  was,  by  nature,  fur¬ 
nished  with  virtuous  dispositions,  and  that  the  instructions 
which  he  received  were,  not  so  much  in  foreign  learning,  as 
in  the  coarse  and  severe  discipline  of  the  Sabines,  than  whom 
no  race  of  men  were  less  corrupted  by  refinements.  On  hear¬ 
ing  the  name  of  Numa  Pompilius,  although  the  Roman  fathers 
saw  that  the  balance  of  power  would  incline  to  the  Sabines, 
if  a  king  were  chosen  from  among  them,  yet,  no  one  presum¬ 
ing  to  prefer  himself,  or  any  other  of  his  own  party,  or,  in 
short,  any  one  of  the  fathers,  or  citizens,  to  him,  they  all,  to  a 
man,  concurred  in  voting  that  the  kingdom  should  be  confer- 
y.  R.  Numa  Pompilius,  When  he  arrived,  in  conse- 
B,  C-  7i3.  quence  of  their  invitation,  he  ordered,  that,  as  Ro¬ 
mulus,  on  the  founding  of  the  city,  had  obtained  the  sove¬ 
reign  power  by  an  augury,  so  the  gods  should  be  consulted, 
iu  like  manner,  concerning  himself.  Accordingly,  being  con¬ 
ducted  into  the  citadel  by  an  augur,  to  which  profession  was 
annexed,  for  ever  after,  by  public  authority,  the  honour  of 
performing  that  solemn  office,  he  sat  down  on  a  stone  with 
his  face  turned  towards  the  South:  the  augur  took  his  seat  at 
his  left  hand,  with  his  head  covered,  .holding  in  his  right 
hand  a  crooked  wand  free  from  knots,  which  they  called 
lituus;  then,  taking  a  view  towards  the  city,  and  the  adjacent 
country,  after  offering  prayers  to  the  gods,  he  marked  out  the 
regions  of  the  sky  frow  East  to  West;  the  parts  towards  the 
South,  he  called  the  right,  those  towards  the  North,  the  left; 
and,  in  front  of  him,  he  set,  in  his  mind,  a  boundary  at  the 
greatest  distance  that  his  eye  could  reach*  Then,  shifting 
the  lituus  into  his  left  hand,  and  laying  his  right  on  Numa’s 
head,  he  prayed  in  this  manner: — Father  Jupiter,  if  it  is 
thy  will  that  this  Numa  Pompilius,  whose  head  I  hold,  should 
be  king  of  Rome,  display  to  us,  we  beseech  thee,  clear  to« 
kens  of  the  same,  within  those  limits  which  I  have  marked 
out.’’  He  then  named  the  particular  auspices,  which  he 

BOOK  I. 

33 

wished  should  be  sent;  and,  these  having  appeared,  Numa 
was  declared  king,  and  came  down  from  the  consecrated 
stand. 
XIX,  Being  thus  put  in  possession  of  the  kingdom,  and 
considering  that  the  city  was  but  of  short  standing,  and  had 
been  founded  by  means  of  violence  and  arms,  he  formed  a 
design  of  establishing  it  anew,  upon  principles  of  justice, 
laws,  and  morals;  and,  knowing  that  the  minds  of  the  peo¬ 
ple,  rendered  ferocious  by  a  military  life,  would  never  ac¬ 
commodate  themselves  to  the  practice  of  these,  during  the 
continuance  of  war,  he  resolved,  by  a  disuse  of  arms,  to 
mollify  the  fierceness  of  their  temper*  With  this  view,  he 
built  a  temple  to  Janus,*  near  the  foot  of  the  hill  Argiletum,f 
which  was  to  notify  a  state  either  of  war  or  of  peace:  when 
open,  it  denoted  that  the  state  was  engaged  in  war;  when 
shut,  that  there  was  peace  with  all  the  surrounding  nations. 
Since  the  reign  of  Numa,  it  has  been  shut  but  twice;  once, 
in  the  consulate  of  Titus  Manlius,  upon  the  conclusion  of 
the  first  Punic  war;  the  happiness  of  seeing  it  once  more 
shut,  the  gods  granted  to  our  own  times,  M^hen,  after  the 
battle  of  Actium,  the  emperor  Caesar  Augustus  established 
universal  peace,  on  land  and  sea*  This  temple  he  then  sl\ut; 
and  having,  by  treaties  and  alliances,  secured  the  friendship 
of  all  his  neighbours,  and  thereby  removed  all  apprehension 
of  danger  from  abroad,  he  made  it  his  first  aim,  lest  the 
dispositions  of  the  people,  which  had  hitherto  been  restrain- 
*  Janus  is  the  most  aocient  king*  io  Italy,  of  whom  any  knowledge  has 
been  handed  down  to  posterity;  he  was  the  first  who  introduced  civiiiza- 
lion,  and  the  useful  arts,  among  the  wild  inhabitants  of  that  country.  He 
is  represented  with  two  faces,  as  knowing  both  the  past  and  the  future; 
sometimes  with  four;  in  which  latter  form,  one  of  the  many  temples  dedi¬ 
cated  to  him  at  Ro^fe,  was  erected;  haring  four  equal  sides,  on  each  side 
one  door  and  three  windows;  the  four  door^  were  emblematical  of  the  sea¬ 
sons;  the  twelve  windows,  of  the  months;  and  the  whole,  of  the  year. 
f  A  small  hill,  to  the  east  of  the  Palatine. 
VOL.  r*— F. 

34 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

ed  by  fear  of  their  enemies,  and  by  military  discipline,  should, 
in  time  of  tranquillity,  grow  licentious,  to  inspire  them  with 
fear  of  the  gods;  a  principle  of  the  greatest  efficacy  with  the 
multitude,  in  that  rude  and  ignorant  age.  And  as  this  did 
not  seem  likely  to  make  much  impression  on  their  minds, 
without  the  aid  of  some  pretended  miracle,  he  made  them 
believe  that  he  had  nightly  meetings  with  the  goddess  Egeria, 
and  that,  by  her  direction,  he  instituted  the  sacred  rites, 
roost  acceptable  to  the  gods,  and  appointed  proper  priests 
for  each  of  the  deities.  His  first  undertaking  was  to  divide 
the  year  into  twelve  months,  according  to  the  course  of  the 
moon:  and  because  the  moon  does  not  make  up  the  number 
of  thirty  days  in  each  month,  and  consequently  there  are 
some  days  wanted  to  fill  up  the  complete  year,  formed  by  the 
revolution  of  the  sun,  he  managed  in  such  a  manner,  by  in¬ 
serting  intercidary  months,  that  every  twenty-fourth  year, 
the  space  of  all  the  intermediate  years  being  completed,  the 
days  coincided  with  the  sam^  position  of  the  sun  from 
whence  they  had  set  out.  He  also  appointed  days  of  busi¬ 
ness,  and  days  of  cessation  therefrom,  foreseeing  how  expe¬ 
dient  it  would  be  in  future,  that  there  should  be  times  where¬ 
in  no  business  could  be  brought  before  the  people. 
XX.  He  next  turned  his  thoughts  to  the  appointment  of 
priests,  though  he  performed  in  person  the  greatest  part  of 
the  sacred  rites,  especially  those  which  now  belong  to  the 
office  of  the  flamen  of  Jupiter;*  judging,  that  in  such  a  war¬ 
like  state,  the  greater  number  of  kings  would  resemble  Ro¬ 
mulus,  rather  than  Numa,  and  would  go  abroad  themselves 
to  war;  therefore,  lest  the  sacred  rites,  the  performance  of 
which  pertained  to  the  office  of  the  king,  should  be  neglect- 
*  Ft»r  a  full  account  of  the  duty  and  office  or  the  d^erent  flaraens,  see 
Dr.  Adam’s  Roman  Antiquities.  Also  for  those  of  the  vestal  virgins,  and 
the  salii,  mentioned  in  this  chapter,  see  the  same  learned  work,  which 
may  be  considered  as  a  perpetual  commentary  upon  the  Homan  histor^ns, 
lu  general,  and  Livv,  la  particular- 

BOOK  L 

sS 
ed,  he  created  a  flamen  bf  Jove,  who  was  to  attend  constant¬ 
ly  on  the  duties  of  that  priesthood,  and  decorated  him  with 
a  splendid  dress,  and  a  royal  curule  chair.  He  created  like¬ 
wise  two  other  fiamens;  one  of  Mars,  the  other  of  Quirinus. 
He  also  selected  virgins  for  the  service  of  Vesta,  an  ordet 
of  priesthood  derived  from  Alba,  and  therefore 
gonac  sort,  to  the  family  4f  the  founder  of  the  city.  For 
these  he  fixed  a  stipend,  to  be  paid  out  of  the  public  trea¬ 
sury,  that  they  might,  without  interruption,  attend  to  the 
business  of  the  temple;  and  by  enjoining  virginity,  and  other 
religious  observances,  gave  them  a  sanctity  of  character  that 
attracted  veneration.  He  elected  also  twelve  priests,  called 
salii,  for  Mars  Gradivus;  and  gave  them,  as  an  ornament  of 
distinction,  a  flowered  tunic,  and,  over  the  tunic,  a  brazen 
covering  for  the  breast.  He  ordered  these  to  carry  the  ce¬ 
lestial  armour,  called  Ancilia,  and  to  go  in  procession  through 
the  city,  singing  hymns,  with  leaping  and  solemn  dancing. 
He  then  chose,  out  of  the  senators,  a  pontiff,  named  Numa 
Marcius,  son  of  Marcus,  and  gave  him  a  written  aad  sealed 
copy  of  the  institutions  respecting  all  the  sacred  rites,  to¬ 
gether  with  directions  as  to  what  victims,  and.  on  what  days, 
and  in  what  temples,  each  should  be  performed;  and  out  of 
what  funds  the  expenses  of  them  should  be  defrayed.  He 
also  subjected  all  other  religious  performances,  whether  pub¬ 
lic  or  private,  to  the  determination  of  the  pontiff;  in  order 
that  there  should  be  an  authorized  person  to  whom  the  peo¬ 
ple  might,  on  every  occasion,  resort  for  instruction,  lest, 
through  their  neglect  of  the  rites  of  their  own  country,  or 
the  introduction  of  foreign  ones,  irregularities  might  take 
place  in  the  w^orship  of  the  gods.  The  same  pontiff  was  also 
to  determine  all  matters  relative,  not  only  to  the  invocation 
of  the  celestial  gods,  but  to  funeral  solemnities,  and  the  wor¬ 
ship  of  the  infernal  deities,  and  when  and  how  such  prodi¬ 
gies  as  appeared  either  by  lightning  or  any  other  pheenome- 
non,  should  be  attended  to  and  expiated.  For  the  purpose 

36 

HISTORY  .OF  ROME. 

of  obtaining  information  of  the  sentiments  of  the  deities, 
respecting  these  matters,  he  dedicated  an  altar,  on  the  Aven- 
tine,  to  Jupiter  Eliciusj*  and  consulted  the  god,  by  augu¬ 
ries,  concerning  the  prodigies  that  were  to  be  expiated. 
XXL  The  attention  of  the  whole  community  being  di¬ 
verted  from  violence  and  arms,^to  the  considering  and  ad¬ 
justing  of  these  matters,  necessarily  prevented  idleness; 
whilst  reverence  towards  the  gods,  with  the  thought  of  the 
deity  of  heaven  interfering  in  the  concerns  of  mankind,  fill« 
ed  their  breasts  with  such  a  degree  of  piety,  that  good  faith, 
and  regard  to  the  obligation  of  oaths,  operated  as  power¬ 
fully  on  their  minds,  as  the  dread  of  the  laws  and  of  pun¬ 
ishment.  And  while  the  people  formed  their  manners  after 
the  example  of  the  king,  as  the  most  perfect  model,  the 
neighbouring  powers,  who  had  formerly  looked  upon  Rome, 
not  as  a  city,  but  as  a  camp  pitched  in  the  midst  of  them, 
for  the  purpose  of  disturbing  the  general  peace,  were  brought 
to  entertain  such  respect  for  it,  as  to  deem  any  one  guilty  of 
impiety,  who  should  give  trouble  to  a  state  entirely  occupied 
in  the  worship  of  the  gods.  There  was  a  grove,  in  the  cen¬ 
tre  of  which,  from  out  of  a  dark  cave,  flowed  a  rivulet,  fed 

by  a  perpetual  spring;  thither  it  was  Numa’s  custom  fre¬ 
quently  to  repair  unattended,  to  meet,  as  he  pretended,  the 
goddess  Egeria.  He  therefore  dedicated  it  to  the  Muses, 
they  having  been,  he  alleged,  of  hqr  councils,  whom  he 
called  his  spouse.  To  Faith,  under  tlie  designation  of  Single 
Faith,  he  instituted  an  anniversary  festival;  in  the  celebra¬ 
tion  of  which,  he  ordered  the  flamens  to  be  carried  in  a  co¬ 
vered  chariot,  drawn  by  two  horses;  and,  while  employed  in 
the  worship  of  her,  to  have  their  hands  covered,  close  down 
to  the  fingers,  to  signify  that  Faith  was  to  be  carefully  pre¬ 
served,  and  that  even  its  seat,  in  the  right  hand,  was'sacred. 
He  appointed  many  other  sacrifices,  and  consecrated  the 

^  From  elicere,  to  solicit  informatioa. 

BOOK  L 

37 

places  where  they  were  to  be  pe|:formed,  which  the  priests 
call  Argenses.  But  the  greatest  of  all  his  works  was  the 
establishment  of  a  permanent  peace,  which  he  maintained 
through  the  whole  course  of  his  reign,  with  no  less  care  than 
he  employed  in  securing  his  own  authority.  Thus  two  kings 
in  succession,  by  different  methods,  one  by  warlike,  the  other 
by  peaceful  institutions,  contributed  to  the  aggrandizement 
of  the  state.  Romulus  reigned  thirty-seven  years,  Numa 
forty- three.  The  nation,  by  this  time,  became  possessed  not 
only  of  great  strength,  but  had  also  attained  to  a  competent 
knowledge  of  the  arts  both  of  war  and  peace. 
XXII.  On  the  death  of  Numa,  an  interregnum  y  R  82 
again  took  place.  After  some  time,  the  people  elected  C.  660. 
to  the  throne  Tullus  Hostilius,  grandson  to  that  Hostilius 
who  distinguished  himself  in  the  battle  with  the  Sabines,  at 
the  foot  of  the  citadel^  and  the  senate  gave  their  approba¬ 
tion.  He  was  not  only  of  a  temper  very  different  from  that 
of  the  late  king,  but  more  warlike  in  his  disposition  than 
even  Romulus  himself.  His  youth  and  vigour,  and  at  the 
same  time,  the  renown  of  his  grandfather,  stimulated  his  na¬ 
tive  courage.  Thinking,  therefore,  that  the  strength  of  the 
state  was  growing  languid,  through  inactivity,  he  sought  on 
all  sides  for  an  opportunity  of  stirring  up  a  war.  ft  happen¬ 
ed  that  some  Roman  and  Alban  peasants  committed  mutual 
depredations  on  each  other’s  lands:  at  this  time,  C.  Cluilius 
held  the  government  of  Alba,  Ambassadors  were  sent  from 
both  sides,  at  nearly  the  same  time,  to  demand  restitution. 
Tullus  gave  orders  to  his,  that  they  should  attend  to  nothing 
else,  until  they  executed  their  commission:  he  well  knew 
that  the  Alban  would  give  a  refusal,  and  then  war  might  be 
proclaimed,  without  incurring  the  charge  of  impiety.  The 
Albans  proceeded  with  less  despatch;  being  courteously  and 
liberally  entertained  by  Tullus  in  his  palace,  they  cheerfully 
enjoyed  the  pleasures  of  the  king’s  table.  Meanwhile,  the 
Romans  had  made  die  first  demand  ot  restitution,  and,  on 

38 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

the  Alban’s  refusal,  had  declared  war  to  conamence  on  the 
thirtieth  day  after,  and  returned  to  TuUus  with  an  account 
of  their  proceedings.  He  then  gave  the  ambassadors  an  op¬ 
portunity  of  proposing  the  business  of  their  ettibassy;  they, 
entirely  ignorant  of  what  had  passed,  spent  some  time,  at 
first,  in  mdcing  apologies;  that  it  was  very  disagreeable  to 
them  to  say  any  thing  that  would  not  be  pleasing  to  Tullus, 
but  that  they  were  compelled  by  their  instructions:  they 
came  to  demand  restitution,  and  if  that  were  not  granted, 
had  orders  to  declare  war.”  To  this  Tullus  answered;  Tell 
your  king,  that  the  king  of  Rome  appeals  to  the  gods,  to 
judge  which  of  the  two  states  first  dismissed,  with  a  refusal, 
the  ambassadors  of  the  other  demanding  restitution;  that, 
upon  that  state,  . they  may  inflict  all  the  calamiues  of  this 
war.” 
Y,  R.  S5.  XXIII.  This  answer  the  Albans  carried  home, 
■!>  ^  ft  ft  ^ 
and  both  parties  made  the  most  vigorous  prepara^ 
tions  fora  war,  which  might  almost  be  called  a  civil  war,  as  it 
was  to  be  waged,  in  some  manner,  between  parents  and  their 
children,  both  parties  deriving  their  descent  from  Troj^;  for 
Lavinium  owed  its  origin  to  Troy,  from  Lavinium  sprung 
Alba,  and,  from  the  race  of  the  Alb^n  kings,  the  Romans 
were  descended.  The  issue  of  the  war,  however,  was  such 
as  rendered  the  dispute  less  grievous  than  might  have  been 
apprehended;  for,  without  a  general  engagement,  and  with¬ 
out  any  farther  damage  than  the  demolition  of  the  bouses  of 
one  of  the  cities,  the  two  states  were  incorporated  into  one. 
The  Albans  first,  with  very  numerous  forces,  made  an  irrup¬ 
tion  into  the  Roman  territories;  and,  at  the  distance  of  no 
more  than  five  miles  from  the  city,  fortified  their  camp  with 
a  trench,  which,  from  the  name  of  their  leader,  was  after¬ 
wards  called  the  Ciuilian  Trench,  and  retained  the  name  for 
several  ages,  until  the  occasion  being  in  time  forgotten,  the 
name  too  fell  into  disuse.  In  this  camp,  Cluilius  the  Alban 
king  died,  on  which  the  Albans  created  Mettius  FufFetius 

BOOK  I. 

39 

their  dictator.  Tullus,  now,  impatient  for  action,  especially 
after  the  death  of  the  king,  assured  his  men  that  the  supreme 
power  of  the  gods,  which  had  already  begun  with  the  head, 
would  inflict,  upon  the  whole  body  of  the  Albans,  the  penal¬ 
ty  incurred  by  their  having  occasioned  this  impious  war;  and, 
inarching  past  the  enemy’s  camp  in  the  night,  he  advanced 
with  his  army  ready  for  action,  into  the  Alban  territories. 
This  procedure  drew  out  Mettius  from  the  camp  where  he 
lay;  he  led  his  troops,  by  the  shores t  road,  towards  the 
enemy,  sending  forward  an  ambassador  to  tell  Tuilus,  that 
it  was  highly  expedient  that  they  should  confer  together, 
before  they  came  to  an  engagement;  that,  if  he  would  giv'e 
him  a  meeting,  he  was  confident  that  what  he  had  to  pro¬ 
pose  to  his  consideration  would  appear  to  concern  the  inter¬ 
est  of  Rome,  no  less  than  that  of  Alba,”  Tuilus,  not  think¬ 
ing  it  proper  to  decline  the  proposal,  though  tie  saw  no  pro¬ 
bability  of  any  good  consequence  arising  from  it,  led  out  his 
troops  into  the  field;  the  Albans  likewise  marched  out  to 
meet  him.  When  both  parties  were  drawn  up  in  order  of 
battle,  the  leaders,  attended  by  a  few  of  the  principal  offi¬ 
cers,  advanced  into  the  middle  space,  where  the  Alban  be¬ 
gan  thus; — “  1  understood,  from  our  king  Cluilius,  that,  on 
our  part,  injuries  sustained,  and  a  refusal  of  satisfaction, 
when  demanded,  were  the  causes  of  the  present  war;  and  I 
doubt  not  that  you,  Tuilus,  allege,  on  your  part,  the  same 
grounds  of  quarrel:  but  if,  instead  of  plausible  professions, 
I  may  be  allowed  to  declare  the  truth,  it  is  a  thirst  for  do¬ 
minion  that  stimulates  two  nations,  connected  by  their  situa- 
tion,  and  by  consanguinity,  to  take  up  arms  against  each 
other.  Nor  do  I  examine  whether  the  measures  pursued  are 
justifiable  or  not;  the  determination  of  that  point  was  the  bu- 
siness  of  him  who  commenced  the  war;  for  my  part,  it  was 
for  the  purpose  of  carrying  it  on,  that  the  Albans  constitut¬ 
ed  me  their  leader.  Of  this,  however,  Tuilus,  I  wish  to  warn 
you;  what  a  formidable  power  the  Etrurians  possess,  both  in 

40 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

our  neighbourhood  and  more  especially  in  yours,  you,  as 
being  nearer  to  them,  know  better  than  we.  On  land,  they 
are  very  po%erful;  on  the  sea,  exceedingly  so.  Now  consi¬ 
der,  that,  when  you  shall  give  the  signal  for  battle,  they  will 
enjoy  the  sight  of  these  two  armies  engaged  as  they  would  a 
show,  and  will  not  fail  to  attack  both  the  victor  and  the  van¬ 
quished  together,  when  they  see  them  fatigued,  and  their 
strength  exhausted.  Wherefore,  since  we  are  not  content 
with  the  certain  enjoyment  of  liberty,  but  are  going  to  ha¬ 
zard  an  uncertain  cast  for  dominion  or  slavery,  let  us,  in  the 
name  of  the  gods,  pursue  some  method,  whereby,  without 
great  loss,  without  much  blood  of  either  nation,  it  may  be 
decided  which  shall  have  dominion  over  the  other.”  This 
proposal  was  not  un  pleasing  to  Tull  us,  though,  from  his  na¬ 
tural  disposition,  as  well  as  from  confidence  of  success,  he 
was  rather  inclined  to  violent  measures.  Both  of  them  then 
turning  their  thoughts  to  devise  some  plan,  they  adopted  one, 
for  which  accident  had  already  laid  the  foundation. 
XXIV.  It  happened,  that  in  each  of  the  armies,  there 
were  three  twin  brothers,  between  whom  there  was  no 
disparity,  in  point  of  age,  or  of  strength.  That  their  names 
were  Horatius  and  Curiatius,  we  have  sufficient  certainty, 
for  no  occurrence  of  antiquity  has  ever  been  more  univer¬ 
sally  noticed;  yet,  notwithstanding  that  the  fact  is  so  well 
ascertained,'  there  still  remains  a  doubt  respecting  the 
names,  to  which  nation  the  Horatii  belonged,  and  to  which 
the  Curiatii:  authors  are  divided  on  the  point;  finding,  how¬ 
ever,  that  the  greater  number  concur,  in  calling  the  Horatii, 
Romans,  I  am  inclined  to  follow  them.  To  these  three 
brothers,  on  each  side,  the  Kings  proposed,  that  they  should 
support  by  their  arms  the  honour  of  their  respective  coun- 
^es;  informing  them,  that  the  sovereignty  was  to  be  en¬ 
joyed  by  that  nation,  whose  champions  should  prove  vic¬ 
torious  in  the  combat.  No  reluctance  was  shown  on  their 
parts,  and  time  and  place  were  appointed.  Previous  to  the 

BOOK  1. 

41 

fight,  a  league  was  made  between,  the  Romans  and  Albans, 
on  these  conditions;  that,  whichever  of  the  two  nations 
should,  by  its  champions,  obtain  victory  in  the  combat,  that 
nation  should,  without  further  dispute,  possess  sovereign 
dominion  over  the  other.  J^^reaties  are  variously  formed, 
hut  the  mode  of  ratification  is  the  same  in  all.  The  fol¬ 
lowing  is  the  manner  in  which,  as  we  are  told,  they  pro¬ 
ceeded  on  that  occasion;  and  we  have  no  record  of  any  more 
ancient  treaty.  The  herald  addressed  the  king  in  these 
words:  “  Dost  thou,  O  king,  order  me  to  strike  a  league 
with  the  Pater  Patratus*  of  the  Alban  nation?”  Having 
received  the  king’s  order,  he  said,  O  king,  I  demand 
vervain  from  thee:”  the  king  answered,  Take  it  pure.” 
The  herald  brought  clean  stalks  of  that  herb  from  the  cita¬ 
del.  He  afterwards  asked  the  king  in  these  words;  Dost 
thou,  O  king,  constitute  me  the  royal  delegate  of  the  Ro¬ 
man  people,  the  Quirites;  including,  in  my  privileges,  my 
attendants  and  implements.”  The  king  replied,  Be  it 
without  detriment  to  me,  and  to  the  Roman  people,  the 
Qui rites,  I  do  constitute  thee.”  The  herald  was  Marcus 
Valerius,  and  he  made  Spun  us  Fusius  Pater  Patratus,  by 
touching  his  head  and  hair  with  the  vervain.  The  Pater  Patra¬ 
tus  is  appointed  ^‘‘ad  jusjurandum  patrandum,”  that  is,  to  ratify 
the  league;  and  this  he  does  in  a  great  many  words,  wh’  :h 
being  expressed  in  a  long  set  form,  I  may  be  excused  from 
repeating.  Then,  after  reciting  the  conditions,  he  said, 
“  Hear  thou,  O  Jupiter!  hear  thou,  Pater  Patratus  of  the 
Alban  nation:  hear,  ye  people  of  Alba:  as  those  conditions, 
from  first  to  last,  have  been  recited  openly  from  those  ta¬ 
blets,  or  that  wax,  without  fraud  or  deceit,  in  such  sense 
as  they  are  most  clearly  understood  here  this  day,  from 
those  conditions  the  Roman  people  will  not  first  depart: 
if  they  shall,  at  any  time,  first  depart  from  them,  under 
♦  The  duty  of  the  Paler  Patratus  was,  to  attend  the  making  of  the 
treaty,  and  to  ratify  it  by  oath. 
VOL.  I.— G. 

42 

HISTOmr  OF  ROME- 

authority  of  the  state,  through  any  fraud  or  deceit,  do  thou, 
O  Jupiter,  on  that  day,  strike  the  Roman  people,  in  like 
,  manner  as  I  shall  here,  this  day,  strike  this  swine;  and 
strike  them,  thou,  with  greater  severity,  in  proportion  as 
thy  power  and  ability  are  greater.”  -  So  saying,  he  struck 
down  the  swine  with  a  flint  stone.  The  Albans  likewise, 
by  their  dictator  and  their  priests,  repeated  their  form  of 
ratification  and  their 
XXV.  The  league  being  concluded,  the  three  brothers, 
on  each  side,  pursuant  to  the  agreement,  took  arms;  the 
friends  of  each  putting  them  in  mind  that  the  gods  of 
their  country,  their  eountry  itself,  the  whole  of  their  coun. 
trymen,  whether  at  heme  or  in  the  army,  rested  on  their 
prowess  the  decision  of  their  fate.”  Naturally  bold  and 
courageous,  and  highly  animated  besides  by  such  exhorta¬ 
tions,  they  advanced  into  the  midst  between  the  two  arqiies^. 
The  two  armies  sat  down  before  their  respective  camps, 
free  from  all  apprehensions  of  immediate  danger  to  them¬ 
selves,  but  not  from  deep  anxiety;  no  less  than  sovereign  pow¬ 
er  being  at  stake,  and  depending  on  the  bravery  and  success 
of  so  small  a  number.  With  all  the  eagerness  therefore  of 
anxious  suspense,  they  fixed  their  attention  on  an  exhibition, 
which  was  far  indeed  from  being  a  matter  of  mere  amuse¬ 
ment.  The  signal  being  given,  the  three  youths,  who  had 
been  drawn  up  on  each  side,  as  in  battle  array,  their  breasts 
animated  with  the  magnanimous  spirits  of  whole  armies, 
rushed  forward  to  the  fight,  intent  on  mutual  slaughter,  utter¬ 
ly  thoughtless  of  their  own  personal  peril,  and  reflecting, 
that,  on  the  issue  of  the  contest,  depende^he  future  fate 
and  fortune  of  their  respective  countries.  *  On  the  first  on¬ 
set,  as  soon  as  the  clash  of  their  arms,  and  the  glittering  of 
their  swords,  were  perceived,  the  spectators  shuddered  with 
excess  of  horror;  and  their  hopes  being,  as  yet,  equally  ba¬ 
lanced,  their  voice  was  suppressed,  and  even  their  breath 
was  suspended.  Afterwards,  in  the  progress  of  the  combat, 

BOOK  I. 

43 

during  which,  not  only  the  activity  of  the  young  men’s  limbs, 
and  the  rapid  motions  of  their  arms,  olFcnsive  and  defensive, 
were  exhibited  to  view,  the  three  Albans  were  Wvjunded,  and 
two  of  the  Romans  fell  lifeless  to  the  ground.  On  their  fall, 
the  Alban  army  set  up  a  shout  of  joy;  wftiie  the  Roman 
legions  were  almost  reduced  to  a.  state  of  despair,  by  the 
situation  of  their  champion,  who  was  now  surrounded  by 
the  three  Curiatii.  It  happened  that  he  was  unhurt;  so 
that,  though  singly,  he  was  by  no  means  a  match  for  them 
collectively,  yet  was  he  confident  of  success,  against  each 
taken  singly.^  In  order  therefore  to  avoid  their  joint  attack, 
he  betook  himself  to  flight,  judging  from  their  wounds  that 
they  would  pursue  him  with  different  degrees  of  speed,  He 
had  now  fled  some  way  from  the  place  where  they  had 
fought,  when,  looking  back,  he  perceived  that  there  were 
large  intervals  between  the  pursuers,  and  that  one  was  at  no 
great  distance  from  him;  he  therefore  turned  about,  with 
great  fury,  and  while  the  Alban  army  called  out  to  the 
Curiatii  to  succour  their  brother,  Horatius,  having  in  the 
mean  time  slain  his  antagonist,  proceeded  victorious  to  at¬ 
tack  the  second.  The  Romans  then  cheered  their  champion 
with  shouts  of  applause,  such  as  naturally  burst  forth  on 
occasions  of  unexpected  success:  on  his  part,  he  delayed 
not  to  put  an  end  to  the  combat;  for,  before  the  third  could 
come  up  to  the  relief  of  his  brother,  he  had  despatched  him. 
And  now,  they  were  brought  to  an  equality,  in  point  ot 
number,  only  one  on  each  side  surviving,  but  were  far  from 
an  equality  either  in  hopes  or  in  strength;  the  one,  unhurt, 
and  flushed  with  two  victories,  advanced  with  confidence  to 
the  third  contest;  the  other,  enfeebled  by  a  wound,  fatigued 
with  running,  and  dispirited,  besides,  by  the  fate  of  his 
brethren,  already  slain,  met  the  victorious  enemy.  What 
followed,  could  not  be  called  a  fight;  the  Roman,  exulting, 
cried  out,  Two  of  you  have  I  offered  to  the  shades  of  my 
brothers,  the  third  1  will  offer  to  the  cause  in  which  we  are 

44 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

engaged,  that  the  Roman  may  rule  over  the  Alban;’^  and, 
whilst  the  other  could  scarcely  support  the  weight  of  his 
armour,  he  plunged  his  sword  downward  into  his  throat;  then, 
as  he  lay  prostrate,  he  despoiled  him  of  his  arms.  The  Ro¬ 
mans  received^Horatius  with  triumphant  congratulations, 
and  a  degree  of  joy  proportioned  to  the  greatness  of  the 
danger  that  had  threatened  their  cause-  Both  parties  then 
applied  themselves  to  the  burying  of  their  dead,  with  very 
different  dispositions  of  mind;  the  one  being  elated  with  the 
acquisition  of  empire,  the  other  depressed  under  a  foreign 
jurisdiction.  The  sepulchres  still  remain,  in  the  several 
spots  where  the  combatants  fell;  those  of  the  two  Romans  in 
one  place  nearer  to  Alba,  those  of  the  three  Albans,  on  the 
side  next  to  Rome,  but,  in  different  places,  as  they  fought. 
XXV L  Before  the  armies  separated,  Mettius,  in  con¬ 
formity  to  the  terms  of  the  treaty,  desired  to  know  from 
Tullus  what  commands  he  would  give,  and  was  ordered  to 
keep  the  young  men  in  readiness,  under  arms,  as  he  intend¬ 
ed  to  employ  them  in  case  of  a  war  breaking  out  with  the 
Veientians.  The  two  parties  then  retired  to  their  respective 
homes.  Horatius  advanced  at  the  head  of  the  Romans,  bear¬ 
ing  in  triumph  the  spoils  of  the  three  brothers:  near  the  gate 
Capena  he  was  met  by  his  sister,  a  maiden  who  had  been  be¬ 
trothed  to  one  of  the  Curiatii:  observing  on  her  brother’s 
shoulder,  the  military  robe  of  her  lover,  made  by  her  own 
hands,  she  tore  her  hair,  and  with  loud  and  mournful  out¬ 
cries,  called  on  the  name  of  her  deceased  spouse.  His  sis¬ 
ter’s  lamentations,  in  the  midst  of  his  own  triumph,  and  of 
so  great  public  joy,  irritated  the  fierce  youth  to  such  a  degree, 
that  drawing  his  sword,  he  plunged  it  into  her  breast,  at  the 
same  time  upbraiding  her,  in  these  words,  Begone  to  thy 
spouse,  with  thy  unseasonable  love,  since  thou  couldst  forget 
what  is  due  to  the  memory  of  thy  deceased  brothers,  to  him 
who  still  survives,  and  to  thy  native  country:  so  perish  every 
daughter  of  Rome  that  shall  mourn  for  its  enemy.”  Both 

BOOK  I. 

45 

the  senate  and  people  were  shocked  at  the  horrid  deed;  but 
still,  in  their  opinion,  his  recent  merit  outweighed  its  guilt: 
he  was,  however,  instantly  carried  before  the  king  for  judg¬ 
ment.  The  king,  unwilling  to  take  on  himself  a  decision  of 
such  a  melancholy  nature,  and  evidently  disagreeable  to  the 
multitude,  or  to  inflict  the  consequent  punishment,  summon¬ 
ed  an  assembly  of  the  people,  and  then  said  I  appoint  two 
commissioners  to  pass  judgment  on  Horatius  for  murder, 
according  to  the  law.”  1  he  law  was  of  dreadful  import; 
Let  two  commissioners  pass  judgment  for  murder;  if  the 
accused  appeal  from  the  commissioners,  let  the  appeal  be 
tried^  if  their  sentence  be  confirmed,  cover  his  head,  hang 
him  by  a  rope  on  the  gallows,  let  him  be  scourged  either 
within  the  Pomserium  or  without  the  Pomserium.”  Cxhe 
two  commissioners  appointed  were  of  opinion,  that  accord¬ 
ing  to  that  law,  they  were  not  authorised  to  acquit  him; 
however  small  his  offence  might  be;  and,  after  they  had  found 
him  guilty,  one  of  them  pronounced  judgment  in  these  words, 
Publius  Horatius,  I  sentence  thee  to  punishment  as  a 
murderer;  go,  iictor,  bind  his  hands.  ^'^The  lictor  had  come 
up  to  him,  and  was  fixing  the  cord,  when  Horatius  by  the 
advice  of  Tullus,  who  wished  to  give  the  mildest  interpre¬ 
tation  to  the  law,  said,  “  I  appeal;”  so  the  trial  on  the  appeal, 
came  before  the  commons.  During  this  trial,  the  people  were 
very  deeply  affected,  especially  by  the  behaviour  of  Publius 
Horatius  the  father,  who  declared  that,  in  his  judgment,  his 
daughter  was  deservedly  put  to  death;  had  it  not  been  so,  he 
would,  by  his  own  authority  as  a  father,  have  inflicted  punish¬ 
ment  on  his  son.”  He  then  besought  them  that  they  would 
not  leave  him  childless,  whom  they  had  beheld,  but  a  few 
hours  ago  surrounded  by  a  progeny  of  uncommon  merit.”  Ut- 
tering  these  words,  the  old  man  embraced  the  youth,  and 
pointing  to  the  spoils  of  the  Curatii,  which  were  hung  up  in 
the  place  where  now  stands  the  Horatian  column;  O  my  fel¬ 
low  citizens,”  he  exclaimed,  ‘‘  can  you  bear  to  behold  him  la- 

46 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

den  with  chains,  and  condemned  to  ignominy,  stripes,  and  tor¬ 
ture,  whom,  but  just  now,  you  saw  covered  with  the  ornaments 
of  victory,  marching  in  triumph!  a  sight  so  horrid,  that 
scarcely  could  the  eyes  of  the  Albans  themselves  endure  it. 
Go,  lie  tor,  bind  the  arms,  which  but  now  wielded  those 
weapons  which  acquired  dominion  to  the  Roman  people:  cov¬ 
er  the  head  of  that  man  to  whom  your  city  owes  its  liberty: 
hang  him  upon  the  gallows:  scourge  him  within  the  Pomferi- 
um;  but  do  it  between  those  pillars,  to  v/hich  are  suspended 
the  trophies  of  his  victory:  scourge  him,  without  the  Pomae- 
rium,  but  do  it  between  the  tombs  of  the  Curiatii.  For  to  what 
place  can  ye  lead  this  youth,  where  the  monuments  of  his 
glory  would  not  redeem  him  from  the  ignominy  of  such  a 
punishment?’’  The  people  could  not  withstand  either  the 
tears  of  the  father,  or  the  intrepid  spirit  of  the  youth  him¬ 
self,  which  no  kind  of  danger  could  appal,  and  rather  out  of 
admiration  of  his  bravery,  than  regard  to  the  justice  of  his 
cause,  they  passed  a  sentence  of  acquittal.  Wherefore, 
that  some  expiation  might  be  made  for  the  act  of  manifest 
murder,  the  father  was  ordered  to  make  atonement  for  his 
son  at  the  public  expense.  After  performing  expiatory  sa¬ 
crifices,  which  continued  afterwards  to  be  celebrated  by  the 
Horatian  family,  he  laid  a  beam  across  the  street,  and,  cov¬ 
ering  the  young  man’s  head,  made  him  pass  as  it  were, 
under  the  yoke.  The  beam  remains  to  this  day,  being  con¬ 
stantly  kept  in  repair  at  the  expense  of  the  public,  and  is  cal¬ 
led  the  Sister’s  beam.  A  tomb  of  squared  stone  was  rais¬ 
ed  for  Horatia,  on  the  spot  where  she  felLj 
XXVII.  The  peace  with  Alba  was  not  of  long  continu¬ 
ance.  The  dissatisfaction  of  the  multitude,  on  account  of  the 
power  and  fortune  of  the  state  having  been  hazarded  on 
three  champions,  perverted  the  unsteady  mind  of  the  dicta¬ 
tor;  and  as  his  designs,  though  honourable,  had  not  been 
crowned  with  success,  he  endeavoured,  by  others  of  a  dif¬ 
ferent  kind,  to  recover  the  esteem  of  his  countrymen.  W^ith 

BOOK  L 

47 

this  view,  therefore,  as  formerly,  in  time  of  war,  he  had 
sought  peace,  so  now,  when  peace  was  established,  he  as  ar¬ 
dently  wished  fo**  war:  but,  perceiving  that  his  own  state 
possessed  more  courage  than  strength,  he  persuaded  other 
nations  to  make  war,  openly,  by  order  of  their  governments, 
reserving  to  his  own  people  the  part  of  effecting  th(  ir  pur¬ 
poses,  by  treachery,  under  the  mask  of  allies,  The  Fide- 
natians,  a  Homan  colony,  being  assured  of  the  concurrence 
of  the  Veientians,  and  receiving  from  the  Albans  a  positive 
engagement  to  desert  to  their  side,  were  prevailed  on  to 
take  arms  and  declare  war.  Fidense  having  thus  openly  re¬ 
volted,  Tullus,  after  summoning  Mettius  and  his  army  from 
Alba,  marched  against  the  enemy,  and  passing  the  Anio, 
pitched  his  camp  at  the  conflux  of  the  rivers*  Between  that 
place,  and  Fidenae,  the  Veientians  had  crossed  the  Tiber, 
and,  in  the  line  of  battle,  they  composed  the  right  wing  near 
the  river,  the  Fidenatians  being  posted  on  the  left  towards 
the  mountains.  Tullus  drew  up  his  own  men  facing  the  Vei¬ 
entians,  and  posted  the  Albans  opposite  to  the  troops  of  the 
Fidenatians.  The  Alban  had  not  more  resolution  than  fi- 
delit},  so  that,  not  daring  either  to  keep  his  ground,  or 
openly  to  desert,  he  filed  off*  slowly  towards  the  mountains. 
When  he  thought  he  had  proceeded  to  a  sufficient  distance, 
he  ordered  the  w'hole  line  to  halt,  and  being  still  irresolute, 
in  order  to  waste  time,  he  empluyed  himself  in  forming  the 
ranks:  his  scheme  was  to  join  his  forces  to  whichever  of  the 
parties  fortune  should  favour  with  victory.  At  first,  the 
Romans  who  stood  nearest  were  astonished  at  finding  their 
flank  left  uncovered,  by  the  departure  of  their  allies,  and  in 
a  short  time  a  horseman  at  full  speed  brought  an  account  to 
the  king  that  the  Albans  were  retreating,  Tullus,  in  this  peri¬ 
lous  juncture  vowed  to  institute  twelve  new  Salian  priests,  and 
also  to  build  temples  to  Paleness  and  Terror;  then,  rebuk* 
ing  the  horseman  with  a  loud  voice,  that  the  enemy  might 
hear,  he  ordered  him  to  return  to  the  fight,  telling  him,  that 

48 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

^  there  was  no  occasion  for  any  uneasiness;  that  it  was  by 
his  order  the  Alban  army  was  wheeling  round,  in  order  to 
fall  upon  the  unprotected  rear  of  the  Fidenatians,”  He  com¬ 
manded  him,  also,  to  order  the  cavalry  to  raise  their  spears 
aloft;  and,  this  being  performed,  intercepted,  from  a  great 
part  of  the  infantr}^,  the  view  of  the  Alban  army  retreating; 
while  those  who  did  see  them,  believing  what  the  king  had 
said,  fought  with  the  greater  spirit.  The  fright  was  now 
transferred  to  the  enemy,  for  they  had  heard  what  the  king 
had  spoken  aloud,  and  many  of  the  Fidenatians  understood 
the  Laiine  tongue,  as  having  been  intermixed  with  Romans 
in  the  colony.  Wherefore,  dreading  lest  the  Albans  might 
run  down  suddenly  from  the  hills,  and  cut  off  their  retreat 
to  the  town,  they  betook  themselves  to  flight.  Tullus  pres¬ 
sed  them  close,  and  after  routing  this  wing  composed  of  the 
Fidenatians,  turned  back  with  double  fury  against  the  Veien- 
tians.  now  disheartened  by  the  dismay  of  the  other  wing. 
Neither  could  they  withstand  his  attack,  and  the  river  inter¬ 
cepting  them  behind,  prevented  a  precipitate  flight.  As  soon 
as  they  reached  this,  in  their  retreat,  some,  shamefully  throw¬ 
ing  away  their  arms,  plunged  desperately  into  the  water, 
and  the  rest,  hesitating  on  the  bank,  irresolute  whether  to 
fight  or  fly,  were  overpowered  and  cut  off.  Never  before 
had  the  Romans  been  engaged  in  so  desperate  an  action. 
XXVIII.  When  all  was  over,  the  Alban  troops,  who  had 
been  spectators  of  the  engagement,  marched  down  into  the 
plain,  and  Mettius  congratulated  Tullus  on  his  victory  over 
the  enemy.  Tullus  answered  him,  without  showing  any 
sign  of  displeasure,  and  gave  orders  that  the  Albans  should, 
with  the  favour  of  fortune,  join  their  camp  with  that  of  the 
Romans,  and  appointed  a  sacrifice  of  purification  to  be  per¬ 
formed  next  day.  As  soon  as  it  was  light,  all  things  being 
prepared  in  the  usual  manner,  he  commanded  both  armies  to 
be  summoned  to  an  assembly.  The  heralds,  beginning  at  the 
outside,  summoned  the  Albans  first;  and  they,  struck  with 

49 

the  novelty  of  the  affair,  and  wishing  to  hear  the  Roman 
king  delivering  a  speech,  took  their  places  nearest  to  him:  the 
Roman  troops,  under  arms,  pursuant  to  directions  previous¬ 
ly  given,  formed  a  circle  round  them,  and  a  charge  was  giv¬ 
en  to  the  centurions  to  execute  without  delay  such  orders  as 
they  should  receive.  Then  Tullus  bcgan^  in  this  manner; 
If  ever,  Romans,  there  has  hitherto  occurred,  at  any  time, 
or  in  any  war,  an  occasion  that  called  on  you  to  return 
thanks,  first,  to  the  immortal  gods,  and,  next,  to  your  own 
valour,  it  was  the  battle  of  yesterday:  for  ye  had  to  strug¬ 
gle  not  only  with  your  enemies,  but,  what  is  a  more  difficult 
aud  dangerous  struggle,  with  the  treachery  and  perfidy  of 
your  allies:  for  I  will  now  undeceive  you;  it  was  not  by  my 
order  that  the  Albans  withdrew  to  the  mountains,  nor  was 
what  ye  heard  me  say,  the  issuing  of  orders,  but  a  strata¬ 
gem,  and  a  pretext  of  having  given  orders,  to  the  end  that 
while  ye  were  kept  in  ignorance  of  your  being  deserted,  your 
attention  might  not  be  drawn  away  from  the  fight;  and  that, 
at  the  same  time,  the  enemy,  believing  themselves  to  be  sur¬ 
rounded  on  the  rear,  might  be  struck  with  terror  and  dismay: 
but  the  guilt  which  I  am  exposing  to  you,  extends  not  to  all 
the  Albans:  they  followed  their  leader,  as  ye  would  have 
done,  had  I  ’  chosen  that  the  army  should  make  any  move¬ 
ment  from  the  ground  which  it  occupied.  Mj  ttius  there  was 
the  leader  of  that  march,  the  same  Mettius  was  the  schemer 
of  this  war.  ^Mettius  it  was  who  broke  the  league  between 
the  Romans  and  Albans.  May  others  dare  to  commit  like 
crimes,  if  I  do  not  now  make  him  a  conspicuous  example  to 
all  mankind.’^  On  this  the  centurions  in  arms  gathered  rountl 
Mettius,  and  the  king  proceeded  in  his  discourse:  Albans,  -- 
be  the  measure  prosperous,  fortunate,  and  happy  to  the  Ro¬ 
man  people,  to  me,  and  to  you;  it  is  my  intention  to  remove 
the  entire  people  of  Alba  to  Rome,  to  give  to  the  commons 
the  privileges  of  citizens,  and  to  enrol  the  principal  inhabi¬ 
tants  among  the  fathers,  to  form  of  the  whole  one  city,  one 
VOL,  I. — 

13293 

$0 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

republic.  As  the  state  of  Alba,  from  being  one  people,  was 
heretofore  divided  into  two,  so  let  these  be  now  re* united.” 
On  hearing  this,  the  Alban  youth  who  were  unarmed,  and 
surrounded  by  armed  troops,  however  different  their  senti¬ 
ments  were,  yet,  being  ail  restrained  by  the  same  apprehen¬ 
sions,  kept  a  profound  silence.  TuUus  then  said,  Mettius 
FufFetius,  if  you  were  capable  of  learning  to  preserve  faith, 
and  a  regard  to  treaties,  I  should  suffer  you  to  live,  and  sup¬ 
ply  you  with  instructions;  but  your  disposition  is  incurable: 
let  your  punishment,  then,  teach  mankind  to  consider  those 
things  as  sacred,  which  you  have  dared  to  violate.  As, 
therefore,  you  lately  kept  your  mind  divided  between  the 
interest  of  the  Fidenatians  and  of  the  Romans,  so  shall  you 
now  have  your  body  divided  and  torn  in  pieces.”  Then  two 
chariots  being  brought,  each  drawn  fay  four  horses,  he  tied 
Mettius,  extended  at  full  length,  to  the  carriages  of  them, 
and  the  horses  being  driven  violently  in  different  directions, 
bore  away  on  each  carriage  part  of  his  mangled  body,  with 
the  limbs  which  were  fastened  by  the  cords.  The  eyes  of 
all  were  turned  with  horror  from  this  shocking  spectacle. 
This  was  the  first,  and  the  last,  instance  among  the  Romans, 
of  any  punishment  inflicted  without  regard  to  the  laws  of 
humanity*  In  every  other  case,  we  may  justly  boast,  that 
no  nation  in  the  world  has  shown  greater  mildness, 
y  XXiX.  During  these  proceedings,  the  cavalry 
B.  C.  666.  had  been  sent  forward  to  Alba,  to  remove  the  mul¬ 
titude  to  Rome.  The  legions  were  now  led  thither,  to  de¬ 
molish  tbte  city.  As  soon  as  they  entered  the  gates,  there 
ensued  not  a  tumult,  or  panic,  as  is  usual  in  cities  taken  by 
storm,  where  the  gates  being  burst  open,  or  the  walls  level¬ 
led  by  the  ram,  or  the  citadel  being  taken  by  force,  the  sbmits 
of  the  enemy,  and  the  troops  running  furiously  through  the 
city,  throw  all  into  confusion  with  fire  and  sword;  but 
gloomy  silence,  and  dumb  sorrow,  so  stupified  the  inhabi¬ 
tants,  that,  nut  knowing  in  their  distraction  what  to  leave 

St 

mOK  L 
behind  or  what  to  carry  with  them,  and  incapable  of  form¬ 
ing  any  plan,  they  stood  at  their  doors,  making  inquiries  of 
each  other,  or  wandered  through  their  own  houses,  which 
they  were  now  to  see  for  the  last  time.  But  now,  when  the 
horsemen,  with  shouts,  urged  them  to  depart,  and  the  crash 
of  the  houses,  which  the  troops  were  demolishing  in  the  out¬ 
er  parts  of  the  city,  assailed  their  ears,  and  the  dust,  raised 
in  distant  places,  bad  filled  all  parts,  enveloping  them  as 
with  a  cloudy  each  of  them  hastily  snatching  up  whatever  he 
could,  and  leaving  behind  his  guardian  deity,  his  household 
gods,  and  the  hous^  wherein  he  had  been  born  and  educa¬ 
ted,  they  began  their  departure,  and  soon  filled  the  roads 
with  one  continued  troop  of  emigrants, //The  sight  of  each 
other  continually  renewed  their  tears,  through  the  mutual 
commiseration  which  it  excited  in  every  breast.  Their  ears 
were  assailed  with  bitter  lamentations,  especially  from  the 
women,  as  they  passed  the  temples  which  they  had  been 
used  to  revere,  now  filled  with  armed  soldiers,  and  reflected 
that  they  were  leaving  their  gods,  as  it  were,  in  captivity. 
When  the  Albans  had  evacuated  the  city,  the  Romans  le¬ 
velled  to  the  ground  ail  the  buildings  in  every  part  of  it,  both 
public  and  private,  and  in  one  hour  ruined  and  destroyed  the 
work  of  four  hundred  years,  during  which  Alba  had  stood. 
The  temples  of  the  gods,  however,  they  left  untouched,  for 
so  the  king  had  commanded. 
XXX.  Meanwhile  from  this  destruction  of  Alba,  Rome 
received  a  considerable  augmentation.  The  number  of  citi¬ 
zens  was  doubled.  The  Caelian  mount  was  added  to  the  city; 
and,  in  order  to  induce  others  to  fix  their  habitations  there, 
Tullus  chose  that  situation  for  his.  palace,  where,  from 
thenceforth,  he  resided.  The  persons  of  chief  note  among 
the  Albans,  the  Tulii,  Serviiii,  Quintii,  Geganii,  Curiatii, 
Cicelii,  he  enrolled  among  the  senators,  that  this  part  of  the 
state  also  might  receive  an  addition:  and,  as  a  consecrated 
place  of  meeting  for  this  body^,  thus  augmented,  he  built  a 

S2 

HISTORY  Ot^ME 

senate-house  which  retained  the  name  of  Hostilia,  even  wfcii- 
in  the  memory  of  our  fathers.  And,  that  every  order  in  the 
state  might  receive  an  accession  of  strength  from  this  new 
people,  he  chose  from  among  the  Albans  ten  troops  of  horse- 
mem  From  among  them  also  he  drew  recruits,  with  which 
he  both  filled  up  the  old,  and  formed  some  new,  legions. 
Encouraged  by  this  formidable  state  of  his  forces,  he  de- 
Y.  R.  100.  war  against  the  Sabines,  a  nation  the  most 
B,  C.  652.  powerful  of  that  age,  next  to  the  Etrurians,  both  in 
point  of  numbers,  and  of  skill  in  arms.  Injuries  had  been  offer¬ 
ed  on  both  sides,  and  satisfaction  demanded  in  vain,  Tullus 
complained  that  some  Roman  traders  had  been  seized  in  an 
open  fair  at  the  temple  of  Feronia.  The  Sabines,  that  prior  to 
this,  some  of  their  people  had  fled  into  the  asylum,  and  were 
detained  at  Rome.  These  were  the  reasons  assigned  for  the 
war.  The  Sabines,  reflecting  that  a  great  part  of  their  original 
strength  had  been  fixed  at  Rome  by  Tatius,  and  that  the  Ro* 
man  power  had  been  also  lately  increased,  by  the  accession  of 
the  people  of  Alba,  took  care,  on  their  part,  to  look  round 
for  foreign  aid.  Etruria  lay  in  their  neighbourhood,  and  the 
state  of  the  Etrurians  nearest  to  them  was  that  of  the  Veien- 
tians.  From  among  these  they  procured  a  number  of  volun¬ 
teers,  who  were  induced  to  take  part  against  the  Romans, 
principally  by  the  resentment  which  they  still  retained  on 
account  of  their  former  quarrels.  Several  also  of  the  popu¬ 
lace,  who  were  indigent  and  unprovided  of  a  settlement, 
were  allured  by  pay.  From  the  government  they  received  no 
assistance,  and  the  Veientians,  for  it  was  less  surprising  in 
others,  adhered  to  the  terms  of  the  truce  stipulated  with 
Romulu^Wigorous  preparations  being  made  on  both  sides, 
and  it  bflng  evident,  that,  whichever  party  should  first  com¬ 
mence  hostilities,  would  have  considerably  the  advantage, 
Tullus  seized  the  opportunity  of  making  an  incursion  into  the 
lands  of  the  Sabines.  A  furious  battle  ensued  at  the  wood  cal¬ 
led  Malitiosa,  in  which  the  Romans  obtained  the  victory.  For 

BOOK  I- 

50 

this,  they  were  indebted  not  only  to  the  firm  strength  of 
their  infantry,  but  chiefly  to  the  cavalry,  which  had  been 
lately  augmented:  since,  by  a  sudden  charge  of  this  body, 
the  ranks  of  the  Sabines  were  thrown  into  such  disorder, 
that  they  were  neither  able  to  continue  the  fight,  nor  to  make 
good  their  retreat,  without  great  slaughter* 
XXXI.  After  the  defeat  of  the  Sabines,  the  government 
of  Tullus,  and  the  Roman  state  in  general,  possessed  a  large 
degree  of  power  and  of  fame.  At  this  time  an  account  was 
brought  to  the  king  and  the  senate  that  a  shower  of  stones 
had  fallen  on  the  Alban  mount.  This  appearing  scarcely 
credible,  and  some  persons  being  sent  to  examine  into  the 
prodigy,  there  fell  from  the  air  in  their  sight,  a  vast  quan¬ 
tity  of  stones,  like  a  storm  of  hail.  They  imagined  also  that 
they  heard  a  loud  voice  from  the  grove  on  the  summit  of 
the  hill,  ordering,  that  the  Albans  should  perform  religious 
rites  according  to  the  practice  of  their  native  country.  These 
the  Albans  had  entirely  neglected,  as  if,  with  their  country 
they  had  also  abandoned  its  deities,  and  had  adopted  the 
Roman  practice,  or  perhaps,  incensed  against  fortune,  had 
renounced  the  worship  of  the  gods.  On  account  of  the  same 
prodigy  the  Romans  also  instituted  for  themselves,  by  or¬ 
der  of  government,  a  festival  of  nine  days^  either  in  obedience 
to  a  voice  from  heaven,  uttered  on  the  Alban  mount,  for 
that  likewise  is  mentioned,  or  by  direction  of  the  aruspices. 
Be  this  as  it  may,  it  is  certain,  that,  whenever  an  account 
was  received  of  a  similar  phenomenon,  a  festival  for  nine 
days  was  celebrated.  In  a  short  time  after,  the  country  was 
afflicted  with  a  pestilence;  and  though  this  necessarily  ren¬ 
dered  men  averse  to  military  service,  yet  the  king,  in  him¬ 
self  fond  of  war,  and  persuaded  that  young  men  enjoyed 
better  health  while  employed  abroad,  than  when  loitering  at 
home,  gave  them  no  rest  from  arms,  until  he  was  seized  by 
a  tedious  disorder.  Then,  together  with  the  strength  of  his 
body,  the  fierceness  of  his  spirit  was  reduced  to  such  a  de- 

54 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

gree,  that  he,  who,  lately,  thought  nothing  less  becotning  a 
king,  than  to  busy  his  thoughts  in  matters  of  religion,  be¬ 
came,  at  once,  a  slave  to  every  kind  of  superstitiem,  in  cases 
either  of  great  or  of  trifling  import,  and  even  filled  the  minds 
of  the  people  also  with  superstitious  notions*  The  generality, 
comparing  the  present  state  of  their  afiaris  with  that  which  they 
had  enjoyed  under  Numa,  became  possessed  of  an  opinion, 
that  the  only  prospect  left  them,  of  being  relieved  from  the 
sickness,  was,  in  obtaining  pardon  and  favour  from  the  gods. 
It  is  said,  that  the  king  himself,  turning  over  the  commen* 
taries  of  Numa,  and  discovering  therein  that  certain  sacrifi* 
ces,  of  a  secret  and  solemn  nature,  had  been  performed  to 
Jupiter  Elicius,  shut  himself  up,  and  set  about  the  perfor¬ 
mance  of  this  solemnity;  but,  not  having  undertaken,  or  con¬ 
ducted,  the  rites  in  due  form,  he  not  only  failed  of  obtaining 
any  notification  from  the  gods,  but,  through  the  resentment 
of  Jupiter,  for  being  addressed  in  an  improper  manner,  was 
struck  with  lightning,  and  reduced  to  ashes,  together  with 
his  house.  Tullus  reigned  thirty-two  years,  highly  renowned 
for  his  military  achievements. 
Y.  R.  114  XXXI 1.  On  the  death  of  Tullus,  the  direction  of 
B.  C.  6S8,  affairs  according  to  the  mode  adopted  from  the  be¬ 
ginning,  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  senate;  they  nominated 
an  interrex,  who  presided  at  the  election,  when  the  people  cre¬ 
ated  Ancus^  Marcias  king,  and  the  senate  approved  of  their 
choice.  Ancus  Marcius  was  the  grandson  of  Numa  Pompilius, 
by  his  daughter.  As  soon  as  he  was  in  possession  of  the  throne, 
reflecting  on  the  glory  which  his  grandfather  had  acquired, 
and  considering  that  the  late  reign,  though  highly  honour¬ 
able  in  other  respects,  yet,  in  one  particular,  had  been  very 
deficient,  the  affairs  of  religion  having  been  either  quite  ne¬ 
glected,  or  improperly  managed,  he  judged  it  to  be  a  matter 
of  the  utmost  consequence,  to  provide  that  the  public  wor¬ 
ship,  should  be  performed  in  the  manner  instituted  by  Numa, 
and  ordered  the  pontiff  to  make  a  transcript  of  every  particu- 

BOOK  L 

55 

lar  rite,  from  die  comtnentartes  of  that  king,  on  white  tables, 
and  to  expose  it  to  the  view  of  the  people.  From  these  pro¬ 
ceedings,  not  only  his  subjects,  whose  wishes  tended  to  peace, 
but  the  neighbouring  states  also,  conceived  hopes  that  the  king 
would  conform  himself  to  the  manners  and  institutions  of  his 
grandfather.  In  consequence  of  which,  the  Lattnes,  with  whom 
a  treaty  had  been  concluded  in  the  reign  of  Tullus,  assumed 
new  courage,  and  made  an  incursion  into  the  Roman  territo¬ 
ries;  and,  when  the  Romans  demanded  satisfaction,  returned 
a  haughty  answer,  imagining  the  Roman  king  so  averse  to 
action,  i.hat  he  would  spend  his  reign  among  the  chapels  and 
altars.  The  genius  of  Ancus  was  of  a  middle  kind,  parta¬ 
king  both  of  that  of  Numa  and  of  Romulus.  He  was  sensi¬ 
ble,  not  only  that  peace  had  been  more  necessary  in  the  reign 
of  his  grandfather,  to  a  people  who  were  but  lately  incorporat¬ 
ed  and  still  uncivilized,  but  also,  that  the  tranquillity,  which 
had  obtained  at  that  time,  could  not  now  be  preserved,  with¬ 
out  a  tame  submission  to  injuries;  that  they  were  making 
trial  of  his  patience,  and  wtmld  soon  come  to  despise  it;  in 
short,  that  the  times  required  a  king  like  Tullus,  rather 
than  one  like  Numa,  However,  being  desirous,  that,  as  Nu¬ 
ma  had  instituted  the  religious  rites  to  be  observed  in  time 
of  peace,  so  the  ceremonies,  to  be  observed  in  war,  should 
have  himself  for  their  founder,  and  that  wars  should  not  on¬ 
ly  be  waged,  but  be  proclaimed  likewise,  according  to  a  cer¬ 
tain  established  mode,  he  borrowed  from  the  ancient  race  of 
the  jEquicolae,  that  form  of  demanding  satisfaction  which  is 
still  used  by  the  heralds.  The  ambassador,  when  he  comes 
to  the  fronti^s  of  the  state,  from  whom  satisfaction  is  de¬ 
manded,  having  his  head  covered  with  a  fillet  of  wool,  says, 
O  Jupiter,  hear  me!  hear,  ye  frontiers,”  (naming  the  state 
to  which  they  belong)  let  justice  hear;  I  am  a  public  mes¬ 
senger  of  the  Roman  people.  I  come,  an  ambassador  duly 
authorised,  according  to  the  forms  of  justice  and  religion; 
let  my  words  therefore  meet  with  credit.”  He  then  makes 

56 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

his  demands^  and  afterwards  appeals  to  Jupiter:  If  I  de¬ 
mand  that  those  persons,  and  those  effects,  should  be  given 
up  to  me,  the  messenger  of  the  Roman  people,  contrary  to 
justice  and  the  law  of  nations,  then  suffer  me  not  to  enjoy 
my  native  country,”  These  words  he  repeats  when  he  pass¬ 
es  over  the  boundaries;  the  same,  to  the  first  person  that  he 
meets,  again,  when  he  enters  the  gate;  and  lastly,  when  he 
enters  the  Forum,  only  making  the  necessary  change  of  a 
few  words,  in  the  form  of  the  declaration  and  of  the  oath.  If 
the  persons  whom  he  demands  are  not  given  up,  then,  on 
on  the  expiration  of  thirty  three  days,  that  being  the  num¬ 
ber  enjoined  by  the  rule,  he  declares  war  in  this  manner:  O 
Jupiter,  hear  me!  and  thou,  Juno,  Quirinus,  and  all  ye  gods 
of  heaven,  and  ye  of  the  earth,  and  yc  of  the  infernal  regions, 
hear,  I  call  you  to  witness,  that  that  people,”  naming  them, 
whoever  they  are,  are  unjust,  and  do  not  perform  what 
equity  requires.  But  concerning  those  affairs  we  will  consult 
the  elders  in  our  own  country,  by  what  means  we  may  ob¬ 
tain  our  right.”  After  this,  the  messenger  returned  to  Rome, 
in  order  that  the  opinion  of  the  government  might  be  taken. 
The  king  immediately  consulted  the  senate,  nearly  in  these 
words;  “  Concerning  those  matters,  controversies,  and  argu¬ 
ments  which  were  agitated  between  the  Pater  Patratus  of  the 
Roman  people,  the  Quirites,  and  the  Pater  Patratus  of  the  an¬ 
cient  Latines,  and  the  ancient  Latine  people,  which  matters 
ought  to  have  been  granted,  performed,  and  discharged;  but 
which  they  have  neither  granted,  performed,  nor  discharged, 
declare,”  said  he,  to  the  person  whose  vote  he  first  asked, 
what  is  your  opinion.”  The  other  then  said,  I  am  of 
opinion,  that  the  performance  of  them  ought  to  be  exacted  in 
just  and  regular  war,  wherefore  I  consent  to  and  vote  for  it.” 
The  rest  were  then  asked  in  order,  and  the  majority  of  those 
present  being  of  the  same  opinion,  a  v<^  passed  for  war.  It 
was  a  customary  practice  for  the  herald  to  carry  a  spear 
pointed  with  steel,  or  burnt  at  the  point  and  dipped  in  blood, 

BOOK  I. 

57 

to  the  frontiers,  and  there,  in  the  presence  of  at  least  three 
grown-up  persons,  to  say,  Forasmuch  as  the  states  of  the 
ancient  Latines,  and  the  ancient  Latine  people,  have  acted 
against  and  behaved  unjustly  towards  the  Roman  people 
the  Quirites,  forasmuch  as  the  Roman  people  the  Quirites 
have  ordered  that  there  should  be  war  with  the  ancient 
Latines,  and  the  senate  of  the  Roman  people  the  Quirites 
have  given  their  opinion,  consented,  and  voted  that  war 
should  be  made  with  the  ancient  Latines;  therefore  I,  and 
the  Roman  people,  do  declare  and  make  war  against  the 
states  of  the  ancient  Latines,  and  the  ancient  Latine  people;’^ 
and  saying  this,  he  threw  the  spear  within  their  boundaries.  In 
this  manner  was  satisfaction  demanded  from  the  Latines, 
at  that  time,  and  war  declared;  succeeding  generations 
adopted  the  same  method, 
XXXI 1 1.  Ancus,  having  committed  the  care  of  religious 
affairs  to  the  flamens  and  other  priests,  assembled  a  new 
army,  set  out  to  the  war,  and  took  Poiitorium,  a  city  of  the 
Latines,  by  storm.  Then,  pursuing  the  practice  of  former 
kings,  who  had  augmented  the  power  of  the  Roman  state, 
by  receiving  enemies  into  the  number  of  their  citizens,  he 
removed  the  whole  multitude  to  Rome;  and,  as  the  original 
Romans  entirely  occupied  the  ground  round  the  Palalium, 
the  Sabines  the  Capitol  with  the  citadel,  and  the  Albans  the 
Cttilian  Mount,  the  Aventine  was  assigned  to  this  body  of 
new  citizens;  and  in  a  little  time  after,  on  the  reduction  of 
Tellense  and  Ficana,  an  additional  number  of  inhabitants 
were  settled  in  the  same  place. ^M^li tori um  was  soon  after 
attacked,  a  second  time,  by  the  Roman  forces,  the  ancient 
Latines  having  taken  possession  of  it,  when  left  without  in¬ 
habitants;  and  this  induced  the  Romans  to  demolish  that 
city,  that  it  might  not  again  serve  as  a  receptacle  for  the 
enemy.  At  length,  the  whole  force  of  the  Larine  war  was 
collected  ahoat  Mcdullia,  and  the  contest  was  carried  on 
there  with  various  success;  for  the  city  was  not  only  well 
VOL.  I,— I. 

58 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

defended  by  works,  and  secured  by  a  strong  garrison,  but 
the  army  of  the  Latines,  having  pitched  their  camp  in  the 
open  country,  fought  the  Romans  several  times  in  close  en¬ 
gagement.  At  last,  Ancus,  making  a  vigorous  effort  with 
all  his  force,  first  defeated  them  in  the  field,  and  then  made 
himself  master  of  the  city,  from  whence  he  returned,  with 
immense  booty,  to  Rome.  On  this  occasion  too,  many 
thousands  of  the  Latines,  being  admitted  into  the  number 
of  citizens,  had  ground  allotted  to  them  near  the  temple  of 
Murcia,  in  order  to  unite  the  Aventine  to  the  Palatine  hill. 
The  Janiculum  also  was  taken  in,  not  for  want  of  room,  but 
to  prevent  its  serving,  at  any  time,  as  a  place  of  strength  to 
an  enemy;  and  it  was  determined  that  this  should  be  joined 
to  the  city,  not  only  by  a  wall,  but  likewise,  for  the  conveni¬ 
ence  of  passage,  by  a  wooden  bridge,  which  was  then  first 
built  over  the  Tiber.  I'he  Quiritian  trench  also,  no  incon¬ 
siderable  defence  to  those  parts,  which,  from  their  low  situ¬ 
ation,  are  of  easy  access,  is  a  work  of  king  Ancus.  In  conse¬ 
quence  of  these  vast  accessions  to  the  state,  and  the  numbers 
of  people  becoming  so  very  large,  many,  disreganling  the 
distinctions  between  right  and  wrong,  committed  varic»us 
crimes,  and  escaped  discoxery.  In  order  to  suppress  by 
terror  the  boldness  which  the  vicious  assumed  from  hence, 
and  which  gained  ground  continually,  a  prison  was  built  in 
the  middle  of  the  city,  adjoining  the  Forum:  and  not  only 
the  city,  but  the  territory  also  and  boundaries  of  the  state, 
were  extended  by  this  king.  The  Meesian  forset  was  taken 
away  from  the  Veientians,  the  Roman  dominion  extended 
as  far  as  the  sea,  and  the  city  of  Ostia  built  at  the  mouth  of 
the  Tiber,  near  which,  salt-pits  were  formed;  and  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  the  glorious  success  obtained  in  war,  the  tempk  of 
Jupiter  Feretrius  was  enlarged. 
Y  R.  121.  XXXIV.  During  the  reign  of  Ancus,  a  person 
B.  c  631.  named  Lucumo,  of  an  enterprising  spirit,  and  pos¬ 
sessed  of  great  wealth,  came  and  settled  at  Rome,  led  princh 

BOOK  I. 

59 

pally  by  ambition,  and  hopes  of  attaining  higher  honours  than 
he  could  expect  at  Tarquinii,  where  also  he  was  considered  as 
an  alien.  He  was  the  son  of  Demaratus  a  Corinthian,  who, 
having  left  his  native  country,  in  consequence  of  some  intestine 
commotions,  happened  to  fix  his  residence  at  Tarquinii,  and 
marrying  there,  had  two  sons.  I'heir  names  were  Lucumo  and 
Aruns.  Lucumo  survived  his  father,  and  inherited  all  his 
property.  Aruns  died  before  the  father,  leaving  a  wife 
pregnant.  The  father  did  not  long  survive  his  son,  and  not 
knowing  that  his  daughter-in-law  was  with  child,  he  died, 
without  taking  any  notice  of  a  grandson  in  his  will,  so  that 
the  boy,  who  was  born  after  his  grandfather’s  decease,  not 
being  entitled  to  any  share  of  his  property,  was  called,  from 
the  poverty  of  his  situation,  Egerius.  Lucumo,  on  the  other 
hand,  becoming  sole  heir,  was,  by  his  riches,  inspired  with 
elevated  notions;  and  these  were  much  increased  by  his 
marriage  with  Tanaquil,  a  woman  of  the  highest  distinction, 
who  could  not  endure,  with  patience,  that  the  rank  of  the 
man  whom  she  had  married,  should  remain  inferior  to  that 
of  the  family  which  gave  her  birth.  As  the  Etrurians  look¬ 
ed  with  contempt  on  Lucumo,  the  descendant  of  a  foreign 
exile,  she  could  not  support  the  indignity,  but,  disregarding 
her  natural  attachment  to  her  country,  in  comparison  with 
the  pleasure  of  seeing  her  husband  raised  to  an  honourable 
rank,  formed  the  design  of  removing  from  Tarquinii.  Rome 
appeared  best  suited  to  her  purpose.  In  a  new  state,  where 
all  nobility  was  of  late  date,  and  acquired  by  merit,  she 
thought  there  would  be  room  fo,r  a  man  of  spirit  and  indus¬ 
try.  She  considered  that  Tati  us,  a  Sabine,  had  enjoyed  the 
throne;  that  Numa  had  been  called  to  the  crown  from  Cures; 
and  that  Ancus  was  of  a  Sabine  family  by  his  father,  and 
could  show  only  tne  single  image  of  Numa  to  entitle  him  to 
nobility.  It  was  not  difficult  to  persuade  her  husband,  who 
was  ambitious  of  honours,  and  iiad  no  natural  attachment  to 
Tarquinii,  except  through  his  mother,  to  enter  into  her  dc* 

60 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

signs.  Wherefore,  carrying  their  effects  along  with  them, 
they  set  out  together  for  Rome.  They  happened  to  come 
through  the  Janiculum;  there,  as  he  sat  in  the  chariot  with 
his  wife,  an  eagle,  suspending  herself  on  her  wings,  stooped 
gently,  and  took  off  his  cap,  and,  after  hovering  for  some 
time  over  the  chariot,  with  loud  screams,  replaced  it  in  its 
proper  position  on  his  head,  as  if  she  had  been  sent  by  some 
deity  to  perform  that  office;  and  then,  flying  up  into  the  air, 
disappeared.  It  is  said,  that  this  augury  was  received  with 
great  joy  by  Tanaquil,who  was  well  skilled  in  celestial  pro¬ 
digies,  as  the  Etrurians  generally  are.  Embracing  her  hus¬ 
band,  she  desired  him  to  cherish  hopes  of  high  and  magnifi* 
cent  fortune,  for  that  such  a  bird,  from  such  a  quarter  of  the 
heaven,  the  messenger  of  such  a  deity,  portended  no  less; 
that  it  had  exhibited  the  omen  on  the  most  elevated  part  of 
the  human  body,  and  had  lifted  up  the  ornament,  placed  on 
the  head  of  man,  in  order  to  replace  it  on  the  same  part,  bv 
direction  of  the  gods.  Full  of  these  thoughts  and  expecta¬ 
tions,  they  advanced  into  the  city,  and  having  purchased  a 
house  there,  they  gave  out  his  name  as  Lucius  Tarquinius. 
The  circumstance  of  his  being  a  stranger,  and  his  wealth, 
soon  attracted  the  general  notice  of  the  Romans;  nor  was 
he  wanting,  on  his  part,  in  aiding  the  efforts  of  fortune  in  his 
favour;  he  conciliated  the  friendship  of  all,  to  the  utmost  of 
his  power,  by  his  courteous  address,  hospitable  entertain¬ 
ments,  and  generous  acts;  at  last  his  character  reached  even 
the  palace.  Having  thus  procured  an  introduction  there,  he 
soon  improved  it  to  such  a  degree,  by  his  politeness  and 
dexterity  in  paying  his  court,  that  he  was  admitted  to  the 
privileges  of  familiar  friendship,  and  was  consulted  in  all  af¬ 
fairs  both  public  and  private,  foreign  and  domestic,  and  hav¬ 
ing  acquitted  himself  to  satisfaction  in  all,  was  at  length,  by 
the  king’s  will,  appointed  guardian  to  his  children.  Ancus 
reigned  twenty*  four  years,  equal  in  renown,  and  in  the  arts 
both  of  peace  and  war,  to  any  of  the  former  kings. 

BOOK  L 

61 

XXXV.  The  sons  of  Ancus  had  now  nearly  reached  the 
age  of  manhood;  for  which  reason  Tarquinius  the  more 
earnestly  pressed,  that  an  assembly  might  be  convened  as 
speedily  as  possible  for  the  election  of  a  king.  ^  The  procla* 
mation  for  this  purpose  being  issued,  when  the  time  ap¬ 
proached,  he  sent  the  youths  to  a  distance,  on  a  hunting 
party.  He  is  said  to  have  afforded  the  first  instance  of 
making  way  to  the  crown,  by  paying  court  to  the  people, 
and  to  have  made  a  speech,  composed  for  the  purpose  of 
gaining  the  affections  of  the  populace;  telling  them,  that^^‘  It 
was  no  new  favour  which  he  solicited;  if  that  were  the  case, 
people  might  indeed  be  displeased  and  surprized;  that  he 
was  not  the  first  foreigner,  but  the  third,  who  aimed  at  the 
government  of  Rome; — t!iat  Tati  us,  from  being  not  only  a 
foreigner,  but  even  an  enemy,  was  made  king,  and  Numa, 
entirely  unacquainted  with  the  city,  and  not  proposing  him¬ 
self  as  a  candidate,  had  been,  from  their  own  choice,  invited 
to  accept  the  crown: — ^that  he,  as  soon  as  he  became  his  own 
master,  had  removed  to  Rome,  with  his  wife  and  all  his  sub¬ 
stance: — that  he  had  spent  the  most  active  part  of  his  life  at 
Rome: — that  both  in  civil  and  military  employments  he  had 
learned  the  Roman  laws  and  Roman  customs,  under  such  a 
master  as  ought  to  be  wished  for,  king  Ancus  himself: — that 
in  duty  and  obedience  to  the  king,  he  had  vied  with  all  men; 
in  kindness  towards  others,  with  the  king  himself.”  As  these 
assertions  were  no  more  than  the  truth*  the  people  unanimous¬ 
ly  consented  that  he  should  be  elected  king.  And  this  was  the 
reason  that  this  man,  of  extraordinary  merit  in  other  y  r 
respects,  retained,  through  the  whole  course  of  his  B*  C.  614* 
reign,  the  same  affectation  of  popularity  which  he  had  used 
in  suing  for  the  crown.  For  the  purpose  of  strengthening 
his  own  authority,  as  well  as  of  increasing  the  power  of  the 
commonwealth,  he  added  an  hundred  to  the  number  of 
the  senate,  who  afterwards  were  entitled,  ‘‘  minorum  genti¬ 
um,”  i.  e.  of  the  younger  families,  and  necessarily  constitu- 

6^ 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

ted  a  party  in  favour  of  the  Icings  by  whose  kindness  they 
had  been  brought  into  the  senate.  His  first  war  was  with 
the  Latines^  from  whom  he  took  the  city  Appiolae  by  storm; 
and  having  brought  from  thence  a  greater  quantity  of  booty 
than  had  been  expected,  from  a  war  of  so  little  consequence, 
he  exhibited  games  in  a  more  expensive  and  splendid  man* 
ner  than  any  of  the  former  kings.  On  that  occasion,  the 
ground  was  first  marked  out  for  the  circus,  which  is  now 
called  maximus’^  (the  principal),  in  which  certain  divi¬ 
sions  were  set  apart  for  the  senators  and  knights,  where  each 
were  to  build  seats  for  themselves,  which  were  called  Fori 
(benches.)  They  remained,  during  the  exhibition,  on  these 
seats,  supported  by  pieces  of  timber,  twelve  feet  high  from 
the  ground:  the  games  consisted  of  horse-races,  and  the  per¬ 
formances  of  wrestlers,  collected  mostly  fn^m  Etruria;  and 
from  that  time  continued  to  be  celebrated  annually,  being 
termed  the  Roman,  and,  sometimes,  the  great  games.  By 
the  same  king,  lots  for  building  were  assigned  to  private  per¬ 
sons,  round  the  Forum,  where  porticoes  and  shops  were 
erected. 
XXXVI.  He  intended  also  to  have  surrounded  the  city 
with  a  stone  wall;  but  a  war  with  the  Sabines  interrupted  his 
designs.  And  so  suddenly  did  this  break  out,  that  the  ene¬ 
my  passed  the  Anio,  before  the  Roman  troops  could  march 
out  to  meet  them,  and  stop  their  progress.  This  produced 
a  great  alarm  at  Rome,  and,  in  the  first  engagement,  the 
victory  remained  undecided,  after  great  slaughter  on  both 
sides.  The  enemy  afterwards  having  retired  to  their  camp, 
and  allowed  the  Romans  time  to  prepare  for  the  war  anew, 
Tarquinius,  observing  that  the  principal  defect  of  his  army 
was  the  want  of  cavalry,  resolved  to  add  other  centuries  to 
the  Ramnenses,  Titienses,  and  Luceres,  instituted  by  Romu¬ 
lus,  and  to  have  them  distinguished  by  his  own  name.  As 
Romulus,  when  he  first  formed  this  institution,  had  made 
use  of  augury,  Accius  N^evius,  a  celebrated  augur  at  that 

BOOK  L 

63 

time^  insisted  that  no  alteration  or  addition  could  be  made 
to  it,  without  the  sanction  of  the  birds.  The  king  was 
highly  displeased  at  this,  and,  in  ridicule  of  the  art  said,  as 
we  are  told,  “  Come,  you  diviner,  discover,  by  your  augury, 
whether  what  I  am  now  thinking  of  can  be  accomplished.’^ 
The  other  having  tried  the  matter  according  to  the  rules  of 
augury,  and  declared  that  it  could  be  accomplished,  ‘‘  Well,” 
said  he,  what  I  was  thinking  of  was,  whether  you  could  cut 
a  whetstone  in  two  with  a  razor.  Take  these,  then,  ’^nd 
perform  what  your  birds  portend  to  be  practicable.”  On 
which,  as  the  story  goes,  he,  without  any  difficulty,  cut  the 
whetstone.'  There  was  a  statue  of  Accius,  with  a  fillet  on 
his  head,  in  Ihe  place  where  the  transaction  happened,  in  the 
Comitium^  or  place  of  assembly,  just  on  the  steps,  at  the 
left  hand  side  of  the  senate-house.  It  is  also  said,  that  the 
whetstone  was  fixed  in  the  same  place,  there  to  remain,  as 
a  monument  of  this  nxlracle,  to  posterity.  This  is  certain, 
that  the  respect  paid  to  augurie^:,  and  the  office  of  augurs, 
rose  so  high,  that,  from  that  time  forth,  no  business  either 
of  war  or  peace  was  undertaken  without  consulting  the 
birds:  meetings  of  the  people,  embodying  of  armies,  the 
most  important  concerns  of  the  state,  were  postponed  when 
the  birds  did  not  allow  them.  Nor  did  Tarquinius  then 
make  any  change  in  the  number  of  the  centuries  of  the 
knights  but  doubled  the  number  in  each,  so  that  there  were 
one  thousand  eight  hundred  men  in  the  three  centuries^  The 
additional  men  were  onlv  distinguished  by  the  appellation 
of  the  younger,  prefixed  to  the  original  names  of  their  cen^ 
turies;  and  these  at  present,  for  they  have  been  since  doub¬ 
led,  are  called  the  Six  Centuries. 
XXXVIL  Having  augmented  this  part  of  his  army,  he 
came  to  a  second  engagement  with  the  Sabines.  And  here, 
*  The  Comitium  was  a  part  of  the  Roman  Fonim,  where,  in  early  times, 
assemblies  of  the  people  were  held;_,and  the  assembfies  of  the  Curitv 
always 

64 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

besides  that  the  Roman  army  had  an  addition  of  strength, 
a  stratagem  also  was  made  use  of,  which  the  enemy,  with 
all  their  vigilance,  could  not  elude.  A  number  of  men  were 
sent  to  throw  a  great  quantity  of  timber,  which  lay  on  the 
bank  of  the  Anio,  into  the  river,  after  setting  it  on  fire;  and 
the  wind  being  favourable,  the  blazing  timber,  most  of  which 
was  placed  on  rafts,  being  driven  against  the  piers,  where  it 
stuck  fast,  burned  down  the  bridge.  This  event  not  only 
struck  terror  into  the  Sabines  during  the  fight,  but  prevented 
their  retreating  when  they  betook  themselves  to  flight,  so 
that  great  numbers  who  had  escaped  the  enemy,  perished 
in  the  river:  and  their  arms  being  known  at  the  city,  as  they 
floated  in  the  Tiber,  gave  certain  assurance  of  the  victory, 
sooner  almost  than  any,  messenger  could  arrive.  In  that 
battle  the  cavalry  gained  extraordinary  honour.  ‘We  are 
told,  that  being  posted  on  both  wings,  when  the  line  of  their 
infantry  which  formed  the  centre  was  obliged  to  give  ground, 
they  made  so  furious  a  charge  on  the  flanks  of  the  enemy, 
that  they  not  only  checked  the  Sabine  legions,  who  were 
vigorously  pressing  the  troops  which  gave  way,  but  quickly 
put  them  to  the  rout.  The  Sabines  fled  precipitately  toward 
the  mountains,  which  but  few  of  them  reached.  The  great¬ 
est  part,  as  has  been  mentioned,  were  driven  by  the  cavalry 
into  the  river.  Tarquinius,  judging  it  proper  to  pursue  the 
enemy  closely,  before  they  should  recover  from  their  dis¬ 
may,  as  soon  as  he  had  sent  off  the  booty  and  prisoners  to 
Rome,  and  burned  the  spoils,  collected  together  in  a  great 
heap,  according  to  a  vow  which  he  had  made  to  Vulcan, 
proceeded  to  lead  his  army  forward  into  the  Sabine  territo¬ 
ries-  On  the  other  hand,  the  Sabines,  though  they  had  met 
with  a  defeat,  and  had  no  reason  to  hope  that  they  should  be 
able  to  retrieve  it,  yet,  their  circumstances  not  allowing  time 
for  deliberation,  advanced  to  meet  him,  with  such  troops  as 
they  had  hastily  levied;  and  being  routed  a  second  time,  and 
reduced  almost  to  ruin,  they  sued  for  peace. 

BOOK  L 

65 

XXXVIII,  CoUatia,  and  all  the  land  around  that  city, 
was  taken  from  the  Sabines,  and  Egerius,  son  to  the  king’s 
brother,  was  left  there  with  a^garriscm.,  This  was  the  man- 
ner,  as  I  understand,  in  which  the  people  of  Collatia  came 
under  the  dominion  of  the  Romans,  and  this  was  the  form 
of  the  surrender.  The  king  asked,  “  Are  ye  ambassadors 
and  deputies  on  behalf  of  the  people  of  Collatia,  to  surren¬ 
der  yourselves,  and  the  people  of  Collatia?”  ‘‘  We  are.” — 
Are  the  people  of  Collatia  in  their  own  disposal?”  They 
are.”— Do  ye  surrender  yourselves  and  the  people  of  Col¬ 
latia,  together  with  your  city,  lands,  waters,  boundaries, 
temples,  utensils,  all  property  both  sacred  and  common, 
under  my  dominion,  and  that  of  the  Roman  people?”  We 
do  surrender  them.” — Well,  I  receive  them.”  The  Sabine 
war  being  thus  concluded,  Tarquinius  returned  in  triumph 
to  Ron^.*  Soon  after  this,  he  made  war  on  the  ancient 
Latifies,  during  which  there  happened  no  general  engage¬ 
ment.  By  leading  about  his  army  to  the  several  towns,  he 
reduced  the  whole  Latlne  race  to  subjection.  Corniculum, 
old  Ficulnea,  Cameria,  Crustumerium,  Ameriola,  Medullla, 
Nomentum,  all  these,  which  either  belonged  to  the  ancient 
Latines,  or  had  revolted  to  them,  were  taken,  and  soon 
after  peace  was  re* established.  yvHe  then  applied  himself  to 
works  of  peace,  with  a  degree  of  spirit,  which  even  exceeded 
the  efforts  that  he  had  made  in  war;  so  that  the  people  en¬ 
joyed  little  more  rest  at  home  than  they  had  during  the 
campaigns:  for  he  set  about  surrounding  with  a  wall  of  stone, 
those  parts  of  the  city  which  he  had  not  already  fortified; 
which  work  had  been  interrupted,  at  the  beginning,  by  the 
war  of  the  Sabines.  The  lower  parts  of  the  city  about  the 
Forum,  and  the  other  hollows  that  lay  between  the  hills, 
from  whence  it  was  difficult  to  discharge  the  water,  by  rea- 
*  This  is  the  first  instance  oi  a  reg*uiar  triumph  mentioned  in  the  Ro¬ 
man  History;  the  invention  of  which  ceremony  is,  by  some,  ascribed  to 
Tarquinius.  For  a  full  account  of  the  Roman  trium]jh,  see  Dr.  Adam. 
VOL.  I. - K. 

66 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

son  of  therr  situation,  he  drained,  by  means  of  sewers  drawn 
on  a  slope  down  to  the  Tiber.  He  also  marked  oat,  and 
laid  the  foundatinns  for  inclosing,  a  ?ourt  round  the  temple 
of  Jupiter,  in  the  Capitol,  which  he  had  vowed  during  the 
Sabine  war,  his  mind  already  presaging  the  future  magnifi¬ 
cence  of  the  place. 
XXXIX.  About  that  time  a  prodigy  was  seen  in  the 
palace,  wonderful,  both  in  the  appearance  and  in  the  event. 
They  relate  that,  whilst  a  boy,  whose  name  was  Servius 
Tullius,  lay  asleep,  his  head  blazed  with  fire,  in  the  sight  of 
many  people;  that,  by  the  loud  cries  of  astonishment,  occa¬ 
sioned  by  such  a  miraculous  appearance,  the  king  and  queen 
were  alarmed;  and  that  when  some  of  the  servant^  brought 
water  to  extinguish  it,  the  queen  prevented  them;  and, 
having  quieted  the  uproar,  forbad  the  boy  to  be  disturbed 
until  he  aw  >ke  of  his  own  accord.  In  a  short  time#  on  his 
awaking  the  flame  disappear^^d.  Then  Tanaquil,  calling 
her  husband  aside,  to  a  private  place,  said  to  him,  “  Do  y^^ti 
see  this  boy,  whom  we  educate  in  such  an  humole  stvle?  Be 
assured  that  he  will  hereafter  prove  a  light  to  dispel  a  gloom 
which  v^iil  lie  heav\  on  our  affairs,  and  will  be  the  support 
of  our  palace  in  distresj>.  Let  us  therefore,  with  every  de¬ 
gree  of  attention  that  we  c;iu  bestow,  nourish  this  plant, 
which  is,  hereafter,  to  become  the  greatest  ornament  to  our 
family,  and  our  slate. From  that  time  they  treated  the 
boy  as  if  he  were  their  own  child,  and  bad  him  instructed  in 
all  those  liberal  arts,  by  which  the  mind  is  qualified  to  sup¬ 
port  high  rank  with  dignity.  1  hat  is  easily  brought  to  pass 
which  is  pleasing  to  the  gods.  The  youth  proved  to  be  of 
a  disposition  truly  royal,  »o  that  when  Tarquinius  came  to 
look  tor  a  son-in-law,  there  was  not  one  among  the  Roman 
youth  who  could  be  set  in  competition  with  him,  in  any  kind 
ot  merit;  and  to  him  Farquinius  betrothed  his  daughter. 
This  extraordinary  lionour  conferred  on  him,  whatever  might 
be  the  reason  for  it,  will  not  let  us  believe  that  he  was  born 

BOOK  1.  gj. 
of  a  slave,  and  had  himself  been  a  slave  in  his  childhood.  I 
am  rather  inclined  to  be  of  their  opinion,  who  say,  that,  when 
ormculuna  was  taken,  the  wife  of  Servius  Tullius,  the  prin- 
cipal  man  in  that  city,  being  pregnant  when  her  husband 
was  slam,  and  being  known  among  the  rest  of  the  prisoners, 
and,  on  account  of  her  high  rank,  exempted  from  servitude 
y  t  e  Roman  queen,  was  delivered  of  a  son  at  Rome,  in 
the  house  of  Tarquinius  Priscus;  that,  in  consequence  of 
such  kind  treatment,  an  intimacy  grew  between  the  ladies, 
and^  that  the  boy  also  being  brought  up  in  the  house,  from’ 
his  infancy,  was  highly  beloved  and  respected;  and  that  the 
circumstance  of  his  mother  having  fallen  into  the  enemy’s 
hands,  on  the  taking  of  her  native  city,  gave  rise  to  the  opi¬ 
nion  of  his  being  born  of  a  slave. 
XL.  About  the  thirty-eighth  year  of  the  reign  of  Tar- 
quinius,  Servius  Tullius  stood  in  the  highest  degree  of  esti¬ 
mation,  not  only  with  the  king,  but  with  the  senate  and  the 
commons.  At  this  time,  the  two  sons  of  Ancus,  although 
they  had  before  this  always  considered  it  as  the  highest  in- 
digqity,  that  they  should  be  expelled  from  the  throne  of  their 
father,  by  the  perfidy  of  their  guardian,  and  that  the  sove¬ 
reignty  of  Rome  should  be  enjoyed  by  a  stranger,  whose 
family,  so  far  from  being  natives  of  the  city,  were  not 
even  natives  of  Italy,  yet  now  felt  their  indignation  rise  to  a 
higher  pitch  of  violence,  at  the  probability  that  the  crown 
was  not  to  revert  to  them  even  after  Tarquinius,  but  was  to 
continue  to  sink  one  step  after  another,  until  it  fell  on  the 
head  of  a  slave:  so  that,  within  the  space  of  a  little  more 
than  an  hundred  years  from  the  time  when  Romulus,  de¬ 
scended  from  a  deity,  and  himself  a  deity,  had,  during  his 
abode  on  earth,  held  the  government,  a  slave,  the  son  of  a 
slave,  should  now  get  possession  of  it.  They  looked  on  it 
as  a  disgrace  to  the  Roman  name  in  general,  and  particular¬ 
ly  to  their  own  house,  if,  while  there  was  male  issue  of  king 
Ancus  surviving,  the  government  of  Rome  should  be  pros- 

68 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

tituted  not  only  to  strangers,  but  to  slaves*  "fliey  deter¬ 
mined,  therefore,  to  prevent  this  dishonour  by  the  sv/ord« 
But  resentment  for  the  injury  which  they  had  suffered  stimU” 
lated  them  strongly  to  attack  Tarquinius  himself,  rather 
than  Servius,  and  also  the  consideration  that  the  king,  if  he 
survived, '  would  be  able  to  take  severer  vengeance  for  any 
murder  committed  than  a  private  person  could;  and  that,  be* 
sides,  were  Servius  put  to  death,  it  was  to  be  expected  that 
whatever  other  son-in-law  he  might  choose,  would  be  made 
heir  of  the  kingdom.  For, these  reasons,  they  formed  a  plot 
against  the  king  himself;  for  the  execution  of  which,  two  of 
the  most  undaunted  of  the  shepherds  were  chosen,  who, 
armed  with  the  iron  tools  of  husbandmen,  which  they  were 
used  to  carry,  pretended  a  quarrel  in  the  porch  of  the  palace, 
and  attracted,  by  their  outrageous  behaviour,  the  attention 
of  air  the  king’s  attendants:  then  both  appealing  to  the  king^ 
and  their  clamour  having  reached  the  palace,  they  were  cal¬ 
led  in  and  brought  before  him.  At  first  they  both  bawled 
aloud,  and  each  furiously  abused  the  other,  until,  being  re¬ 
buked  by  a  lictor,  and  ordered  to  speak  in  their  turns,  they 
desisted  from  railing.  Then,  as  they  had  concerted,  one 
began  to  explain  the  affair;  and  while  the  king,  attentive  to 
him,  was  turned  quite  to  that  side,  the  other,  raising  up  his 
axe,  struck  it  into  his  head,  and  leaving  the  weapon  in  the 
wound  they  both  rushed  out  of  the  house. 
XLI.  Whilst  the  persons  present  raised  up  Tarquinius 
who  scarcely  retained  any  signs  of  life,  the  lictors  seized  the 
assassins,  who  were  endeavouring  to  escape.  An  uproar  im¬ 
mediately  ensued,  and  the  people  ran  together  in  crowds, 
surprised,  and  eager  to  be  informed  of  what  had  happened. 
Tanaquil,  daring  this  tumult,  turned  out  every  person  from 
the  palace,  and  ordered  the  doors  to  be  shut,  and  at  the  same 
time  appeared  to  be  very  busy  in  procuring  such  things  as 
were  necessary  for  the  dressing  of  the  wound,  as  if  there  were 
reason  to  hope;  nor  did  she  neglect  to  provide  other  means  of 

BOOK  I. 

69 
safety,  in  case  her  hopes  should  fail.  Sending  instantly  for  Ser- 
vius,  and  showing  him  her  husband  just  expiring,  she  laid 
hold  of  his  righthand,  besought  him  that  he  would  not  suffer 
the  death  of  his  father-in-law  to  pass  unrevenged,  nor  his  mo¬ 
ther-in-law  to  be  exposed  to  the  insults  of  their  enemies.  “Ser- 
vius,”  said  she,  “  if  you  act  as  a  man,  the  kingdom  is  yours 
and  not  theirs,  who,  by  the  hands  of  .others,  have  perpetra¬ 
ted  the  basest  of  crimes.  Call  forth  your  best  exertions, 
and  follow  the  guidance  of  the  gods,  who  formerly,  by  the 
divine  fire  which  they  spread  around  your  head,  gave  an  evi¬ 
dent  indication  that  it  would  afterwards  be  crowned  with 
glory.  Now  let  that  heavenly  flame  rouse  you.  Now  awake 
to  real  glory.  We,  though  foreigners,  have  reigned  before 
you.  Consider  your  present  situation,  not  of  what  family 
you  are  sprung.  If  the  suddenness  of  this  event  deprives 
you  of  tjie  power  of  forming  plans  of  your  own,  then  fpilow 
mine.  |When  the  clamour  and  violence  of  the  populace 
could  hardly  be  withstood,  Tanaquil  addressed  them  from 
the  upper  part  of  the  palace,  through  the  windows  facing  the 
new  street;  for  the  king  resided  near  the  temple  of  Jupiter  Sta-  ^ 
tor.  She  desired  them  ‘‘not  to  be  disheartened:’’  told  them,  that^ 
^‘the  king  had  been  stunned  by  a  sudden  blow;  that  the  weap» 
on  had  not  sunk  deep  into  his  body;  that  he  had  come  to 
himself  again;  that  when  the  blood  was  wiped  off,  the  wound 
had  been  examined,  and  all  appearances  were  favourable; 
that  she  hoped  he  might  be  able  to  show  himself  to  them 
again  in  a  few  days;  and  that,  m  the  mean  time,  he  com¬ 
manded  the  people  to  obey  the  orders  of  Servius  Tullius; 
that  he  would  administer  justice,  and  supply  the  king’s  place 
in  other  departments.”  Servius  came  forth  in  the  robe  of 
state,  attended  by  the  lictors,  and  seating  himself  on  the 
king’s  throne,  adjudged  some  causes,. and,  concerning  others, 
pretended  that  he  would  consult  the  king.  Thus,  though 
Tarquinius  had  already  expired,  his  death  was  concealed  for 
several  days;  while  Servius,  under  the  appearance  of  sup- 

re  HISTORY  OF  ROME. 
plying  the  place  of  another,  sti^engthened  his  own  interest^r 
Then,  at  length,  the  truth  being  made  public,  and  loud  la° 
mentations  raised  in  the  palace,  Servius,  supported  by  a  strong 
guard,  with  the  approbation  of  the  senate,  took  possession  of 
the  kingdom,  being  the  first  who  attained  the  sovereignty 
without  the  orders  of  the  people.  The  sons  of  Aneus,  as 
Y  R  116  found  that  the  instruments  of  their  vil- 
B.  C.  576.  lainy  were  seized;  and  understood  that  the  king 
was  alive,  and,  that  the  interest  of  Servius  was  so  strong, 
had  gone  into  exile  to  Sues«a  Pometia. 
XL  11.  And  now  Servius  laboured  to  confirm  his  authority, 
not  only  by  schemes  of  a  public,  but  by  others  of  a  private 
nature.  And  lest  the  sons  of  Tarquinius  should  entertain 
the  same  sentiments  of  resentment  against  him,  which  had 
animated  the  sons  of  Ancus  against  Tarquinius,  he  joined 
his  two  daughters  in  marriage  to  the  young  prjnc^  the  Tar- 
quinii,  Lucius  and  Aruns.  But  by  no  human  devices  could 
he  break  through  the  unalterable  decrees  of  fate,  or  prevent 
envy  of  the  sbvereign  power  from  raising  discord  and  ani¬ 
mosity,  even  among  those  of  his  own  family.  Very  season¬ 
ably  for  preserving  stability  to  the  present  establishment,  war 
was  undertaken  against  the  Veientians,  the  truce  with  them 
having  expired,  and  against  the  other  Etrurians.  In  that 
war,  both  the  valour  and  the  good  fortune  of  Tullius  were 
very  conspicuous:  and,  after  vanquishing  a  powerful  army  of 
the  enemy,  he  returned  to  Rome,  no  longer  considering  his 
authority  as  precarious,  whether  it  were  to  depend  on  the 
disposition  of  the  patricians  towards  himself;  or  on  that  of 
the  commons.  He  then  entered  on  an  improvement  in  civil 
polity  of  the  utmost  importance,  intending,  that,  as  Numa 
had  been  the  founder  of  such  institutions  as  related  to  the 
worship  of  the"  gods,  so  posterity  should  celebrate  Servius, 
as  the  author  of  every  distinction  between  the  members  of 
the  state;  and  of  that  subordination  of  ranks,  by  means  of 
which,  the  limits  between  the  several  degrees,  of  dignity  and 

BOOK  I. 

n 

fortune  are  exactly  ascertained.  For  he  instituted  the  Cen- 
sus,  an  ordinance  of  the  most  salutary  consequence,  in  an 
empire  that  was  to  rise  to  such  a  pitch  of  greatness;  y,  R.  197. 
according  to  which  the  several  services  requisite  in 
war  and  peace  were  to  be  discharged,  not  by  every  person 
indiscriminately,  as  formerly,  but  according  to  the  proportion 
of  their  several  properties.  He  then,  accc«:ding  to  the  Cen¬ 
sus,  formed  the  plan  of  the  Classes  and  Centuries,  and  the 
arrangement  which  subsists  at  present,  calculated  to  preserve 
regularity  and  propriety  in  all  transactions  either  of  peace  or 
war. 
XL  1 11.  Of  those  w^ho  possessed  a  hundred  thousand  asses^"^ 
or  more,  he  formed  eighty  Centuries,  forty  elder,  and  the 
same  number  of  younger. f  The  collective  body  of  these 
was  denominated  the  first  cl  iss.  The  business  of  the  elder 
was  to  guard  the  city;  that  of  the  younger,  to  carry  on  war 
a^oad.  The  arms  which  they  were  ordered  to  provide, 
were  a  helmet,  shield,  greaves,  coat  of  mail,  all  of  brass — 
these  for  the  defence  of  the  body:  their  weapons  of  offence 
were  a  spear  and  a  sword.  To  this  class  were  added  two 
Centuries  of  artificers,  who  were  to  serve  without  arms;  the 
service  allotted  to  them  was  to  attend  the  machines  in  war. 
The  fortune  fixed  for  the  second  class,  was  from  a  hundred 
down  to  seventh-five  thousand  aasesr^  of  these,  elder  and 
younger,  were  formed  twenty  centuries:  the  arms  for  these 
were,  a  buckler,  instead  of  a  shield,  and  all  the  rest,  except 
the  coat  of  mail,  the  same  with  the  former.  The  fortune  of 
the  third  class  he  fixed  at  fifty  thousand  asses:^  the  number 
of  Centuries  was  the  same,  and  these  regulated  by  the  same 
distinctions  of  age;  nor  was  any  difference  made  in  their 
arms,  only  the  greaves  were  taken  from  them.  In  the  fourth 
♦ 
^  322/.  18s.  4d*  according  to  Dr.  Arbutbnot’s  calculation. 
f  Tbe  elder,  consisted  of  those  who  had  attained  to  fort\-six  years  of 
age;  tbe  younger,  from  seventeen  to  forty -six. 
t  242/.  3s.  9d.  ^  161/.  9s.  2d. 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

T2 
class  the  fortune  was  twenty-five  thousand  asses:^  the  same 
number  of  Centuries  were  formed:  their  arms  were  different; 
they  were  allowed  none  but  a  spear  and  a  buckler.  The  fifth 
class  was  larger;  it  contained  thirty  Centuries:  these  carried 
slings  and  stones,  which  they  were  to  throw.  Among  these, 
the  extraordinaries,  trumpeters,  and  fifers,  were  distributed 
into  three  Centuries.  This  class  was  rated  at  eleven  thou¬ 
sand  asses,'\  The  rest  of  the  populace  were  comprehended 
under  an  estimate  lower  than  this,  and  of  them  was  formed 
one  Century,  exempted  from  military  service.  The  foot 
forces  being  thus  distinguished  and  armed,  he  enrolled  twelve 
Centuries  of  horsemen  from  among  the  principal  persons  of 
the  state.  He  formed  likewise  six  other  Centuries,  out  of 
the  three  instituted  by  Romulus,  preserving  still  the  original 
names  under  which  they  had  been  incorporated.  Ten  thou¬ 
sand  asses\  were  given  these  out  of  the  public  funds,  to  pur¬ 
chase  horses;  and  certain  widows  were  appointed,  who^vvere 
to  pay  them  annually  two  thousand  assea^  each,  towards  the 
maintenance  of  their  horses.  In  all  these  instances,  the  bur- 
^  then  was  taken  off  from  the  poor,  and  laid  on  the  rich.  To 
make  the  latter  some  amends,  additional  honours  were  con¬ 
ferred  on  them.  For  henceforth  suffrages  were  given,  not 
according  to  the  mode  established  by  Romulus,  and  retained 
by  the  other  kings,  man  by  man  promiscuously,  with  equal 
weight,  and  equal  privileges;  but  degrees  of  precedency  were 
established  in  such  a  manner,  that  while  no  one  appeared  to 
be  excluded  from  giving  his  suffrage,  still  the  whole  power 
was  lodged  in  the  chiefs  of  the  state;  the  knights  being  first 
called,  then  the  eighty  Centuries  of  the  higher  class.  If 
there  was  a  difference  of  opinion  among  these,  which  seldom 
happened,  then  the  Centuries  of  the  second  class  were  to  be 
called;  and  scarcely  ever  did  an  instance  occur  of  their  dc- 

*  80/.  14s.  7d. 
i  3^/,  5s.  lOd. 

f  35/.  lOs.  5d. 
^  6/.  9s.  2d. 

BOOK  I. 

73 

scending  bfeyond  this,  so  as  to  come  to  the  lowest  classes. 
Nor  ought  it  to  be  wondered  at,  that  the  arrangemc^bt,  which 
subsists  at  present,  after  the  tribes  had  been  increased  to 
thirty-five,  and  the  number  of  them  almost  doubled,  does 
not  agree  in  the  number  of  Centuries  ydunger  and  elder, 
with  the  amount  of  those  instituted  by  Servius  Tullius:  for 
the  city  being  laid  out  into  four  divisions,  according  to  the 
several  quarters  and  hill^the  parts  that  were  inhabited,) 
tht^c  were  what  he  called  Tribes,  I  suppose  from  the  tribute; 
for  the  mode  of  the  peojde’s  paying  their  shares  of  this,  in 
an  equal  proportion  to  their  rated  property,  took  its  rise  also 
from  him:  nor  had  these  tribes  any  relation  to  the  number 
and  distribution  of  thfe  Centuries, 
XLIV.  When  the  Census  was  completed,  which  he  had 
expedited  by  the  terrors  of  a  law  passed  concerning  such  as 
should  neglect  to  attend  it,  with  denunciations  of  confine¬ 
ment  and  death,  he  issued  a  proclamation,  that  ail  citizens  of 
Rome,  horse  and  foot,  should  assemble  in  the  Campus  Mar- 
tius  at  the  dawn  of  day,  each  in  his  respective  Century;  and 
having  there  drawn  up  the  whole  army  in  order,  he  perform¬ 
ed  the  lustration  or  purification  of  it,  by  the  ceremonies  and 
sacrifices  called  Saovetauriiia.*  This  was  called  the  closing 
of  the  lustrum,  because  it  was  the  conclusion  of  the  Census. 
In  that  survey  eighty  thousand  citizens  are  said  to  have  been 
rated.  Fabius  Pictor,  the  most  ancient  of  our  writers,  adds, 
that  this  was  the  number  of  those  who  were  able  to*"  bear 
arms.  c[To  accommodate  so  great  a  multitude,  it  was  found 
necessary  to  enlarge  the  city  in  proportion:  he  added  to  it, 
therefore,  two  hills,  the  Qairinal  and  Viminal,  and  imme¬ 
diately  adjoining  the  latter  extended  the  limits  of  the  Es- 
quiliee,  and  there  fixed  his  own  residence,  in  order  to  bring 
the  place  into  repute.  He  surrounded  the  city  with  a  ram- 
♦  So  called  frenn  the  victims,  sus^  ovu^  taurus^  a  swine,  a  sheep,  and 
bull;  which,  after  beiog;  three  times  led  round  the  army,  were  otfered  in 
sacrifice  to  Mars,  See  Adam, 
VOL.  I.— L, 

74 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

part,  trenches^  and  a  wall,  and  thus  extended  the  PonKmum* 
Those  w^  consider  merely  the  etymolog)^  of  the  word,  ex- 
^in  Pomoerium,  as  denoting  a  space  on  the  outside  of  die 
waU,  Postpicerium:  but  it  is  rather  a  space  on  each  side  of 
the  wall,  which  the  Etrurians,  formerly,  on  the  founding  of 
cities,  consecrated  with  the  ceremonies  used  by  augurs,  in 
the  direction  wherein  they  intended  the  wall  should  run,  of 
a  certain  breadth  on  both  sides  it;  with  the  intention  that, 
on  the  inside,  no  buildings  should^  be  erected  close  to 
walls,  though  now  they  are,  in  many  places,  joined  to  them; 
and  also  that,  on  the  outside,  a  certain  space  of  ground 
should  lie  open  and  unoccupied.  This  space,  which  it  was 
unlawful  either  to  inhabit  or  to  tiU,  the  Romans  called  Po- 
lacerium,  not  because  it  was  on  the  outside  of  the  wall,  any 
more  than  because  the  wall  was  on  the  outside  of  it:  and 
always,  on  occasion  of  an  addition  being  made  to  the  city, 
as  far  as  they  intended  that  the  walls  should  advance  out¬ 
ward,  so  far  these  sacred  limits  were  extended. 
XEV.  Having  increased  the  power  of  the  state  by  this 
enlargement  of  the  city,  and  made  every  internal  regulation 
that  appeared  best  adapted  to  the  exigences  both  of  war  and 
peace,  the  king,  who  wished  that  the  acquisition  of  power 
should  not  always  depend  on  the  mere  force  of  arms,  laid  a 
scheme  for  extending  his  dominion,  by  the  wisdom  of  his 
ccunsels,  and  raising,  at  the  same  time,  a  conspicuous  orna¬ 
ment  ^  the  city.  The  temple  of  Diana  at  Ephesus  was  at 
that  time  universally  celebrated,  and  it  was  commonly  be¬ 
lieved,  that  it  had  been  built  by  a  general  contribution  from 
the  several  states  of  Asia:  Servius,  in  conversation  with  the 
chief  men  of  the  Latines,  with  whom  he  had  taken  pains  to 
form  connections  of  hospitality  and  fiiendship,  both  in  his 
public  and  private  capacity,  used  frequently  in  the  strongest 
terms,  to  recommend  concord  and  a  social  union  between 
their  several  gods;  and  by  often  repeating  the  same  senti¬ 
ments,  prevailed  so  far  at  last,  that  the  Latine  states  agreed 

BOOK  I. 

75 

to  build,  tn  cotjjunction  with  the  Roman  people,  a  temple  to 
Diana  at  Rome.  This  was  an  acknowledgment  that  Rome 
was  the  sovereign  head  of  both  nations,  a  point  which  had 
been  so  often  disputed  in  arms.  But  though  the  Latines, 
finding  all  their  efforts  in  war  ineffectual,  seemed  now  to  have 
thrown  aside  all  concern  with  regard  to  that  matter,  yet 
among  the  Sabines  one  particular  person  did  not  neglect  an 
opportunity,  which  seemed  to  be  thrown  in  his  way  by  for¬ 
tune,  of  recovering  independence,  by  the  execution  of  a 
scheme  which  he  planned  himself.  It  is  related,  that  this 
person,  the  head  of  a  family,  had  a  heifer  calf  of  extraordi¬ 
nary  size  and  beauty  produced  by  one  of  his  cows:  her  horns, 
which  remained  for  many  ages  fixed  in  the  porch  of  the  tem¬ 
ple  of  Diana,  were  a  monument  of  this  wonder.  The  matter 
was  considered  in  tftfe  li^t  of  a  prodigy,  as  it  deserv’^ed,  and 
the  soothsayers  declared,  that  sovereignty  would  reside  in 
that  state  whose  subject  should  sacrifice  this  heifer  to  Diana; 
and  this  prediction  had  reached  the  ears  of  the  priest  who 
had  the  charge  of  Diana’s  temple.  The  Sabine,  as  soon  as  he 
had  fixed  on  a  proper  day  for  the  sacrifice,  drove  the  heifer 
to  Rome,  brought  her  to  the  temple  of  Diana,  and  placed 
her  before  the  altar;  the  priest,  suspecting  the  truth,  from 
the  size  of  the  victim,  of  which  he  had  heard  so  much,  and 
l^membering  the  prediction,  addresses  the  Sabine  thus: 
“  Stranger,  what  are  you  preparing  to  do?  To  perform  sa¬ 
crifice  to  Diana  without  the  necessary  purification?  Why  do 
you  not  first  dip  yourself  in  a  running  stream?  The  Tiber 
flows  along  in  the  bottom  of  that  vale.”  The  stranger,  struck 
with  the  scruple,  and  anxious  to  have  every  thing  performed 
in  due  order,  that  the  event  might  answer  to  the  prodigy, 
went  down  from  the  temple  to  the  Tiber.  In  the  mean  time 
the  Roman  sacrificed  the  heifer  to  Diana,  a  circumstance 
which  gave  great  pleasure  to  the  king,  and  to  the  whole  state. 
XL  VI.  Servius,  though  long  possession  had  now  render¬ 
ed  his  title  to  the  crown  indisputable,  ytt  having  heard  that 

HISTORY  OP  ROME. 

re 
young  Tarquinius  sometimes  threw  out  insinuations,  that  he 
held  the  government  without  the  order  of  the  people,^  first 
ingratiated  himself  with  the  commons,  by  making  a  general 
distribution  among  them  of  the  lands  taken  from  the  enemy; 
and  then  ventured  to  propose  the  question  to  he  people, 
whether  they  chose  and  ordered  that  he  should  be  king?” 
Whereupon  he  was  declared  king,  with  greater  unanimity 
than  had  ever  before  appeared  on  any  similar  occasion.  But 
the  event  did  not  lessen  the  hopes,  which  Tarquinius  had 
conceived,  of  being  able  to  seat  himself  on  the  throne;  on  the 
contrary,  having  observed  that  the  proceedings,  relative  to 
the  lands  for  the  commons,  were  highly  disagreeable  to  the 
patricians,  he  embraced,  the  more  eagerly,  the  opportunity 
which  this  afforded  him,  of  arraigning  the  conduct  of  Servi- 
us  before  them,  and  of  increasing<lhis#wn  influence  in  the 
senate.  This  young  man  was  naturally  of  a  fiery  temper,  and 
his  restless  spirit  was  continually  stimulated  at  home  by  his 
wife  TuUia:  and  the  palace  at  Rome  was  destined  to  exhi¬ 
bit  a  scene  of  tragical  villainy;  so  that,^  disgusted  at  kings, 
the  people  might  become  more  ripe  for  the  asserting  of  their 
liberty,  and  that  a  reign,  founded  in  wickedness,  should  prove 
the  last.  Whether  this  Lucius  Tarquinius  was  the  son  or 
grandson  of  Tarquinius  Priscus,  is  not  clear;  following,  how¬ 
ever,  the  authority  of  the  greater  number,  I  have  chosen  tq 
call  him  his  son.  He  had  a  brother  Aruns  Tarquinius,  a 
youth  of  a  mild  disposition:  to  these  two,  as  has  already  been 
mentioned,  were  married  the  two  Tullias,  the  king’s  daugh¬ 
ters,  who  were  also  of  widely  different  tempers.  It  happen¬ 
ed,  luckily,  that  the  two  violent  dispositions  were  not  unit¬ 
ed  in  wedlock,  owing,  I  presume,  to  the  good  fortune  of  the 
Roman  people,  that  the  reign  of  Servius  being  lengthened, 
the  manners  of  the  people  might  be  fully  formed.  The 
haughty  Tullia  was  highly  chagrined,  at  finding  in  her  hus¬ 
band  no  princifde  either  of  ambition  or  enterprise^  she  turn¬ 
ed,  therefore,  her  whole  regard  towards  the  other  Tarquini- 

BOOK  I. 

77 

xis;  him  she  admired,  him  she  called  a  man,  and  a  true  de¬ 
scendant  of  the  royal  blood;  her  sister  she  despised,  who, 
having  got  a  man  for  her  husband,  showed  nothing  of  that 
spirit  of  enterprise  which  became  a  woman.  Similarity  of 
disposition  quickly  produced  an  intimacy  between  them,  as 
is  generally  the  case;  evil  is  fittest  to  consort  with  its  like. 
But  it  was  the  woman  who  set  on  foot  the  scene,  of  univer¬ 
sal  confusion  which  followed.  In  the  many  private  conver¬ 
sations  which  she  used  to  hold  with  her  sister’s  husband, 
she  refrained  not  from  throwing  out  the  most  violent  re¬ 
proaches  against  her  own,  to  his  brother,  and  against  her 
sister,  to  that  sister’s  husband;  affirming,  that  it  were  better 
that  both  he  and  she  were  unmarried,  than  to  be  so  unsuita¬ 
bly  matched;  that,  through  the  stupidity  of  others,  they  were 
condemned  to  a  life  of  inactivity.  If  the  gods  had  granted 
her  such  a  husband,  as  she  deserved,  quickly  would  be  seen 
in  her  own  house,  that  crown  which  was  now  upon  her  fa¬ 
ther’s  bead.”  She  soon  inspired  the  young  man  with  notions 
as  desperate  as  her  own.  Aruns  Tarquinius,  and  the  young¬ 
er  TuUia,  dying  almost  immediately  after,  and  thus  leaving 
room  in  their  families  for  new  nuptials,  they  were  joined  in 
matrimony,  Servius  rather  not  obstructing,  than  approving 
of,  the  match. 
XLVII.  From  that  time  forward,  Tullius,  now  in  an  ad¬ 
vanced  age,  found  himself  daily  exposed  to  new  disquietudes, 
and  his  authority  to  new  dangers;  for  Tullia  now  prepared 
to  proceed  from  one  wickedness  to  another,  and  never  ceas- 
^ed,  either  night  or  day,  teasing  her  husband  not  to  let  the 
parricides  which  they  had  committed,  pass  without  effect. 
She  wanted  not,”  she  said,  a  person,  who  should  give 
her  the  name  of  a  wife,  or  with  whom  she  might,  in  silence, 
submit  to  bondage;  what  she  desired  was,  one  who  would 
consider  himself  as  worthy  of  the  throne;  who  would  re¬ 
member  that  he  was  the  son  of  Tarquinius  Priscus;  who 
would  prefer  the  present  possession,  to  distant  hopes,  of  a 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

ys 
kingdom.  If  ytm  be  such  a  man  as  I  took  you  for,  w*hen  I 
married  you,  I  address  you  by  the  titles  of  my  hu^and,  and 
my  king:  if  not,  my  condition  is  now  chmtged  so  far  fm*  the 
worse,  that  in  you,  togedier  with  poverty  of  spkit,  I  find 
villiuiiy  united.  Why  not  proceed  in  the  business?  You  are 
nc^  obliged  to  set  out  from  Corinth  or  Tarquinii,  as  your 
father  was,  to  struggle  for  foreign  kingdoms.  The  gods  of 
your  family,  and  those  of  your  native  country",  and  your  fa¬ 
ther’s  image,  and  the  royal  palace  in  which  you  reside,  and 
the  royal  throne  in  that  palace,  and  the  name  of  Tarqu  nius, 
these  constitute  you,  and  call  you  king.  Or,  if  you  have  not 
a  spirit  daring  enough  for  such  an  enterprise,  why  deceive 
the  nation?  Why  assume  the  figure  of  a  youth  of  royal  blood? 
Get  you  hence  to  Tarquinii,  or  to  Corinth.  Sink  back  again 
into  the  original  obscurity  of  your  race;  fitter  to  be  compared 
with  your  brother,  than  with  your  father.”  With  these,  and 
other  such  reproaches  and  incentives,  she  spurred  on  the 
young  man;  nor  could  she  herself,  with  any  degree  of  pa¬ 
tience,  endure  the  reflection,  that  Tanaquil,  a  foreign  wo¬ 
man,  had  by  her  spirited  exertions  acquired  such  conse¬ 
quence,  as  to  be  able  to  dispose  of  the  kingdom  twice  suc¬ 
cessively;  first,  to  her  husband,  and  next,  to  her  son-in-law; 
while  she,  sprung  from  royal  blood,  was  to  have  no  influ¬ 
ence  in  bestowing  it,  or  taking  it  awuyi  Tarquinius,  hurried 
on  by  the  phrenzy  infused  into  him  by  this  woman,  went 
round  among  the  patricians,  particularly  those  of  the  young¬ 
er  families,  and  solicited  their  interest^^put  them  in  mind  of 
his  father’s  kindness  to  them,  and  demanded  a  requital  of  itj^ 
enticed  the  young  men  by  presents;  and  endeavoured  to  in¬ 
crease  his  consequence  on  every  occasion,  both  by  magnifi¬ 
cent  promises  on  his  part,  and  by  heavy  charges  of  miscon¬ 
duct  against  the  king.  At  length,  judging  the  season  ripe  for 
the  accomplishment  of  his  purpose,  he  rushed  suddenly  into 
the  Forum,  attended  by  a  band  of  armed  men,  and,  while  all 
were  struck  moticmless  with  terror,  proceeded  through  it, 

BOOK  I. 

n 

and  then  seating  himself  on  the  kiag^s^  the  s«aate- 
houae^  ordered  the  senators  to  be  summoned  by  a  herald,  to 
attend  their  king  Tarqainius^iThey  ^emblcd  instantly,  some 
having  been  prepared  before  for  the  occasion,  others  dread'* 
ing  ill  consequences  to  themselves  in  case  they  did  not  lU- 
tend;j^for  they  were  filled  with  amazement  atthe  novelty  amd 
strangeness  of  the  proceeding,  and  thought  the  case  of  Ser- 
vius  utterly  desperate*  5  Then  Tarquinius,  beginning  his  in¬ 
vectives  with  reflections  on  die  king’s  immediate  ancestor, 
represented  him  its  a  slave,  son  of  a  slave,  who,  after 
the  uBUmely  death  of  his  parent,  without  an  interregnum 
being  appointed  as  usuaL  without  an  election  being  held,  had 
taken  possession  of  the  throne^  not  in  consequence  of  a  vote 
of  the  people,  or  of  the  approbation  of  the  senate,  but  as  the 
gift  of  a  woman* ^  Being  thus  descended,  and  thus  created 
king,  ever  favouring  the  lowest  class  of  people,  to  which  he 
himself  belonged,  he  had,  through  an  antipathy  to  the  ho¬ 
nourable  descent  erf  others,  taken  away  the  lands  from  the 
chief  men  in  the  state/  and  distributed  them  amcmg  the  very 
meanest.  All  the  burthens  which  heretofore  had  been  borne 
in  common,  he  had  thrown  on  those  of  highest  rank.  He  had 
instituted  the  Census,  in  order  that  the  fortunes  of  the  more 
wealdiy  might  be  more  conspicuously  exposed  to  envy,  and 
become  a  ready  fund,  out  of  which  he  could,  when  he  chose, 
give  bribes  to  the  most  needy,” 
XL VII I.  In  the  midst  of  this  harangue,  Servius,  having 
been  alarmed  by  an  account  of  the  disturbance,  entered,  and 
immediately,  from  the  porch  of  the  senate- house,  called  out 
with  a  loud  voice,  **  What  is  the  matter  here,  Tarquinius? 
How  dare  you  presume,  while  I  am  alive,  to  convene  the 
senate,  or  to  sit  on  my  throne?”  To  this  die  other,  in  a  de¬ 
termined  tone,  replied,  That  the  seat  which  he  occupied 
was  the  seat  of  his  own  fafiber;  diat,  as  the  king’s  son,  he 
was  much  better  entitled  to  inherit  the  throne  than  a  slave; 
and  that  he  (hettim}  li^d  fcweea  suffered  long  cnoagh  to  in- 

8»  HISTORY  OF  ROME. 
svAt  his  master  ilMi^arbitraty  insolence.”  A  clamorous  dis¬ 
pute  immediately  be^n  between  the  partizans  of  each;  the 
people  ran  togedier  iu  crowds  into  the  senate^house^  and  it 
becaitic  evident,  that  the  possession  of  the  throne  depended 
cmihe  issue  ctf  Ais  contest.  On  this^  Tarquinius,  compelled 
nowjby  necessity,  to  proceed  to  the  last  ejttremity,  having 
greatly  the  advantage-iu  point  of  age  and  strength,  caught 
Serous  by  the  middle,  and  carrying  him  out  of  the  sena^ 
,  thitsw  him  from  the  top  to  the  bottom  of  the  stairs, 
and  then  t^tumed  to  keep  Ae  senators  togeAer.  The  k^g’s 
officers  mid  attendimts  fied  immedhittly.  He  himself,  bemg 
desperately  hart,  attempted,  with  the  royal  r^nue,  who 
were  terrified  almost  to  death,  to  retire  to  his  house,  and  had 
arrived  at  the  head  of  the  Cyprian  street,  when  he  was  slain 
by  some,  who  had  been* sent  thiAer  for  that  purpose  by  Tar- 
quimus,  and  had  overtaken  him  in  his  flight.  It  is  believed, 
other  instances  of  her  rrickedness  rendering  it  credible,  that' 
this  was  done  by  the  advice  of  Tullia.  It  is  certain,  there 
is  sufficient  proof  of  the  fisict,  that  she  drove  into  the  Forum 
in  her  chariot;  and  without  being  abashed  at  such  a  mul¬ 
titude  of  men,  called  out  her  husband  from  the  senate-house,  ^ 
and  was  the  first  who  saluted  him  king.  ^  She  was  then  or¬ 
dered  by  him,  to  withdraw  from  such  a  tumult;  and  when, 
in  her  return  home,  she  aftived  at  the  head  erf  the  Cyprian 
street,  where  the  enclosure  etf  Diana  lately  stood,  as  the 
chariot  turned  to  the  right  towards  the  Virbian  hill,  in  order 
to  drive  up  to  the  Esquilian  mount,  the  person  who  drbve 
the  horses,  struck  with  horror,  stopped  and  drew  in  tfeeWfns 
and  showed  his  mistt^s  the  murdered  Servius  lying  uti  the 
ground.  Her  behaviour  on  this  octSision  is  representtrf  as 
inhuman  and  shocking;  arrf  Ae  place  bears  testimony  to  it, 
being  thence  called  the  Wiefeed  street, wAerc  Tullia,  devest¬ 
ed  of  all  feeling,  agitated  by  Ae  furies,  Ae  avengers  of  ber 
sister  and  husband,  is  said  to  have  Adveti  het  Chariot  over 
her  faAer’a  corpse,  and  to  ^rrie|i  hCr  bloody  vehi- 

BOOK  r. 

8i 

cle,  pan  of  the  body  and  the  blood  of  that  parent,  with  which 
she  herself  was  also  sprinkled  and  stained,  'to  the  household 
gods  of  her  and  her  husband’s  family,  through  whose  re¬ 
sentment  followed,  shortly  after,  a  train  of  events  suited  to 
the  iniquitous  commencement  of  this  reign.  Servius  Tullius 
reigned  forty-four  years,  during  which  his  conduct  was  such, 
that  even  a  good  and  moderate  successor  would  have  found 
it  difficult  to  support  a  competition  with  him.  This  circum¬ 
stance  also  still  farther  enhanced  his  fame,  that,  together  with 
him  perished  all  regular  and  legal  government.  Mild  and 
moderate  as  his  administration  was,  yet,  because  the  govern¬ 
ment  was  lodged  in  the  hands  of  a  single  person,  some  au¬ 
thors  tell  us,  he  intended  to  have  resigned  it,  had  not  the 
wickedness  of  his  family  broken  off  the  designs  ^vhich  he 
meditated,  for  establishing  the  liberty  of  his  country. 
XLIX*  Thus  began  the  reign  of  Lucius  Tarqui-  y  ^  22^ 
nius,  who,  from  his  subsequent  behaviour,  acquired  C.  532. 
the  surname  of  the  Proud;  for  this  unworthy  son-in  law  pro¬ 
hibited  the  burial  of  the  king,  alleging  that  Romulus  like¬ 
wise  had  remained  unburied.  The  principal  senators,  whom 
he  suspected  of  favouring  the  interest  of  Servius,  he  put  to 
death;  and  soon  becoming  apprehensive,  that  the  precedent  of 
acquiring  the  crown  by  wicked  means,  might  be  adopted, 
from  his  own  practice,  against  himself,  he  kept  an  armed 
band  about  him,  for  the  security  of  his  person;  for  he  had  no 
kind  of  title  to  the  crown,  but  that  of  force,  holding  it  nei¬ 
ther  by  the  order  of  the  people,  nor  with  the  approbation  of 
the  senate.  And  besides  this,  as  he,  could  place  no  reliance 
on  the  affection  of  his  subjects,  he  was  obliged  to  raise,  in 
their  fears,  a  fence  to  his  authority.  In  order  to  diffuse  these 
the  more  extensively,  he  took  entirely  into  his  own  hands, 
the  cognizance  of  capital  offences,  which  he  determined 
without  consulting  with  any  person  whatever;  so  that  he 
could  put  to  death,  banish,  or  impose  fines,  not  only  on  those 
whom  he  suspected  or  disliked,  but  on  persons^  with  respect 

82 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

to  whom,  he  could  have  no  other  view,  than  that  of  plunder- 
Having,  by  these  means,  diminished  the  number  of  the  se¬ 
nate,  against  whom  his  proceedings  were  chiefly  levelled,  he 
determined  not  to  fill  up  the  vacancies;  hoping  that  the 
smallness  of  their  number  would  expose  that  body  to  the 
greater  contempt;  and  that  they  would  show  the  less  resent¬ 
ment,  at  their  not  being  consulted  on  any  business:  for  he 
was  the  first  of  the  kings  who  discontinued  the  practice  of 
his  predecessors,  of  consulting  the  senate  upon  every  occa¬ 
sion.  In  the  administration  of  public  affairs,  he  advised 
with  none  but  his  own  private  family.  War,  peace,  treaties, 
alliances,  he  of  himself,  with  such  advisers  as  he  chose,  de¬ 
clared,  contracted,  and  dissolved,  without  any  order,  either 
of  the  people,  or  of  the  senate.  He  took  particular  pains  to 
attach  the  nation  of  the  Latines  to  his  interest,  availing  him¬ 
self  of  foreign  aid,  the  more  effectually  to  ensure  his  safety 
at  home:  and  he  formed  with  their  chiefs,  not  only  connec¬ 
tions  of  hospitality,  but  affinities:  to  Octavius  Mamilius  of 
Ttisculum  he  gave  his  daughter  in  marriage.  Mamilius 
was  of  the  most  illustrious  family,  by  far,  of  any  among  the 
Latines,  being  descended,  if  we  may  give  credit  to  fame, 
from  Ulysses  and  the  goddess  Circe.  By  this  match  he  en¬ 
gaged  the  support  of  his  numerous  friends  and  relations. 
L.  Tarquinius  now  possessed  great  influence  among  the 
Latine  chiefs,  when  he  issued  orders,  that  they  should  as¬ 
semble  on  a  certain  day,  at  the  grove  of  Ferentina,  saying, 
that  he  wished  to  confer  with  them  on  some  matters  of  com¬ 
mon  concern.  I'hey  accordingly  met  in  great  numbers,  at 
the  dawn  of  day:  Tarquinius  himself  observed  indeed  the 
day,  but  did  not  come  until  a  little  before  sun-set.  Mean¬ 
while,  many  topics  were  discussed,  and  various  opinions  ut¬ 
tered  in  the  assembly.  Tumus  Herdonius,  of  Aricia,  in¬ 
veighed  violently  against  Tarquinius,  for  not  attending.  “  It 
was  no  wonder,”  he  said,  that  the  surname  of  proud  had 
been  bestowed  on  him  at  Rome;”  for,  at  diis  time,  they  ge- 

BOOK  h 

85 

nerally  gave  him  that  appellation,  though  only  in  private 
discourse*  “  Could  any  instance  be  given  oi  greater  pride, 
than  his  trifling  thus  with  the  whole  nation  of  the  Latines? 
After  their  chiefs  had  been  brought  together  by  his  sum- 
mons,«  at  so  great  a  distance  from  home,  the  very  person 
who  called  the  meeting  did  not  attend.  He  was  certainly 
making  trial  of  their  patience,  intending,  if  they  submitted 
to  the  yoke,  to  crush  them,  when  they  could  not  resist.  For 
who  did  not  see  plainly,  that  he  was  aiming  at  sovereignty 
over  the  Latines?  and  if  his  owm  countrymen  had  reason  to 
be  pleased  at  having  entrusted  him  with  that  power;  or  if, 
in  reality,  it  had  been  entrusted  to  him,  and  not  forcibly 
seized  on  through  parricide,  then  the  Latines  ought  also  to 
entrust  him  with  it*  But  no:  not  even  in  that  case,  because 
he  was  a  foreigner.  Yet,  if  the  Romans  repined  at  his  go¬ 
vernment,  exposed  as  they  were  to  murders,  banishment,  and 
confiscations  without  end,  what  better  prospect  could  the 
Latines  entertain?  If  they  listened  to  him,  they  would  de¬ 
part  each  to  his  own^home,  and  would  pay  no  more  regard 
to  the  day  of  assembly,  than  was  shown  by  the  person  who 
appointed  it,”  Whilst  this  man,  who  was  naturally  sedi¬ 
tious  and  turbulent,  and  who  had  by  these  means  acquired 
some  degree  of  power  at  home,  was  thus  haranguing  the 
people,  Tarquinius  came  into  the  assembly.  This  put  an 
end  to  his  discourse.  Every  one  turned  away  from  him  to 
salute  Tarquinius,  who,  being  advised  by  his  friends  to  make 
an  apology  for  having  come  at  that  time  of  the  day,  when 
silence  was  made,  told  them,  that  he  had  been  chosen  ar¬ 
biter  between  a  father  and  son,  and  had  been  detained  by 
the  pains  which  he  was  obliged  to  take  to  bring  about  a  re¬ 
conciliation;  and  that,  as  that  business  had  consumed  the 
day,  he  would,  on  the  morrow,  lay  before  them  what  he  had 
to  propose,”  Even  this,  we  are  told,  was  not  suffered  by 
Turnus  to  pass  without  notice;  for  he  observed,  that  there 
could  be  no  controvfersy  shorter  than  one  between  a  father 

84 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

and  son,  which  might  be  despatched  in  a  few  words;  if  the 
son  did  not  submit  to  his  father,  he  should  take  the  ill  con¬ 
sequences.” 
LI.  Uttering  these  reflections  against  the  Roman  king, 
the  Arician  withdrew  from  the  assembly;  and  Tarquinius, 
who  was  more  incensed  at  his  behaviour  than  he  appeared  to 
be,  began  immediately  to  contrive  schemes  for  the  destruc¬ 
tion  of  Turnus,  in  order  to  strike  the  same  terror  into  the 
Latines,  by  which  he  had  depressed  the  spirits  of  his  sub¬ 
jects  at  home.  And  as  he  could  not,  of  his  own  mere  au¬ 
thority,  openly  put  him  to  death,  he  eifected,  by  a  false  ac¬ 
cusation,  the  ruin  of  an  innocent  man.  By  means  of  some 
Aricians,  of  the  opposite  faction,  he  bribed  a  servant  of  Tur¬ 
nus  to  suffer  a  large  quantity  of  swords  to  be  privately  con¬ 
veyed  into  his  lodging:  this  part  of  his  scheme  being  com¬ 
pleted,  during  the  course  of  that  same  night,  Tarquinius,  a 
little  before  day,  called  together  about  him  the  chiefs  of  the 
Latines,  as  if  he  had  been  alarmed  by  some  extraordinary 
occurrence,  and  told  them,  that  “  his  delay  yesterday,  as  if 
it  were  the  effect  of  the  particular  care  of  the  gods,  had  been 
the  means  of  preserving  him  and  them  from  destruction: — 
that  he  had  received  information,  that  a  plan  had  been  laid 
by  Turnus  to  murder  him  and  the  Latine  chiefs,  in  order 
that  he  might  enjoy  alone  the  government  of  the  Latines:—* 
that  he  intended  to  have  fallen  upon  them  yesterday,  in  the 
assembly,  but  the  business  was  deferred,  because  the  person 
who  called  the  meeting,  and  who  was  his  principal  object, 
was  not  there;  this  was  the  reason  of  all  that  abuse  thrown 
on  him  for  being  absent;  because,  by  that  absence,  he  had 
frustrated  his  design: — that  he  had  no  doubt,  but,  if  the  in¬ 
telligence  was  true,  he  would,  early  next  morning,  when  the 
assembly  met,  come  thither  in  arms,  and  attended  by  an 
armed  force-  He  was  told,  that  a  vast  number  of  swords 
had  been  carried  to  his  house;  whether  that  were  false  or 
not,  might  be  instantly  known,  and  he  requested  that  they 

BOOK  I. 

85 

would  go  with  him  directly  to  Tumus.’’  They  saw  some 
grounds  of  suspicion  in  the  violent  temper  of  Tumus;  his 
discourse  the  day  before,  and  the  delay  of  Tarquinius;  and 
it  seemed  not  impossible  that  the  massacre  might  have  been 
deferred  on  that  account.  They  went,  therefore,  with  minds 
inclined  to  believe  the  report,  but  at  the  same  time  determi¬ 
ned,  unless  the  swords  were  discovered,  to  consider  all  the 
rest  as  groundless.  When  they  came  to  the  spot,  guards 
were  placed  round  Turnus,  who  was  roused  from  sleep;  and 
the  servants,  who,  out  of  affection  to  their  master,  prepared 
to  use  force,  being  secured,  the  swords,  which  had  been  con-' 
cealed,  were  drawn  out  from  every  part  of  the  lodging,  and 
then  the  affair  appeared  manifest.  Turnus  was  loaded  with 
chains,  and  a  great  tumult  ensuing,  an  assembly  of  the  Latines 
was  immediately  summoned-  There,  on  the  swords  being 
placed  in  the  midst  of  them,  to  such  a  pitch  of  fury  were 
they  raised,  that,  not  allowing  him  to  make  a  defence,  and 
using  an  extraordinary  method  of  execution,  they  threw  him 
into  the  reservoir  of  the  water  of  Ferentina,  where  a  hurdle 
being  placed  over  him,  and  a  heap  of  stones  cast  on  that,  he 
was  drowned. 
LI  I.  Tarquinius,  having  then  re-assembled  the  Latines, 
and  highly  commended  them,  for  having  inflicted  on  Tur¬ 
nus,  as  one  convicted  of  parricide,  the  punishment  which  he 
had  merited  by  his  attempt  to  overturn  the  government, 
spoke  to  this  purpose:  “  That  he  might,  without  doubt,  take 
upon  himself  to  act,  in  virtue  of  a  right  long  since  establish¬ 
ed,  because  all  the  Latines,  deriving  their  origin  from  Alba, 
were  comprehended  in  that  treaty,  by  which,  under  Tullus, 
the  whole  Alban  nation,  together  with  their  colonies,  were 
subjected  to  the  dominion  of  the  Romans.  However,  for 
the  sake  pf  the  general  advantage  of  all  parties,  he  rather 
wished,  that  that  treaty  should  be  renewed,  and  that  the 
Latines  should,  as  partners,  enjoy  the  good  fortune  of  the 
Roman  people,  than  live  always  under  the  apprehension  or 

86 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

endurance  of  the  demolition  of  their  cities,  and  the  devasta** 
tion  of  their  lands,  to  which  they  had,  during  the  reign  of 
Ancus,  first,  and  afterwards,  in  that  of  his  father,  been  con¬ 
tinually  exposed.”  He  found  no  difficulty  in  persuading  the 
Latines,  though  in  that  treaty  the  advantage  lay  on  the  side 
of  the  Romans;  they  saw,  too,  that  the  chiefs  of  the  Latine 
nation,  in  their  behaviour  and  sentiments,  concurred#  with 
the  king;  and  Turnus  was  a  recent  instance  of  the  danger  to 
be  apprehended  by  any  one  who  should  attempt  opposition. 
The  treaty  was  therefore  renewed,  and  orders  were  given  to 
the  young  men  of  the  Latines,  that  they  should  on  a  certain 
tiav,  according  to  the  treaty,  attend  in  a  body  under  arms, 
at  the  grove  of  Ferentina.  And  when,  in  obedience  to  the 
edict  of  the  Roman  king,  they  had  assembled  there,  from 
all  the  several  states,  in  order  that  they  should  not  have  a 
general  of  their  own,  nor  a  separate  command,  or  their  own 
colours,  he  mixed  the  Romans  and  Latines  together  in  com¬ 
panies,  by  dividing  every  company  into  two  parts,  and  then, 
forming  two  of  these  divisions,  one  of  each  nation,  into  one 
company,  and  having  by  this  means  doubled  the  number  of 
the  companies,  he  appointed  centurions  to  command  them. 
LIIL  Iniquitous  as  he  was,  in  his  conduct  as  king,  his 
behaviour,  at  the  head  of  an  army,  was  not  equally  repre¬ 
hensible:  in  that  capacity,  indeed,  he  would  have  equalled 
his  predecessors,  had  not  his  degeneracy,  in  other  particu¬ 
lars,  detracted  from  the  merit  which,  in  that  line,  he  pos¬ 
sessed.  He  began  the  war  against  the  Volscians,  which  last¬ 
ed  for  more  than  two  hundred  years  after  his  death,  and  took 
Suessa  Pometia  from  them  by  storm;  from  the  sale  of  the 
plunder  of  which  place,  having  amassed  silver  and  gold  to 
the  value  of  forty  talents, ♦  he  conceived  a  design  of  erect¬ 
ing  a  temple  to  Jupiter,  of  such  grandeur  as  should  be  wor¬ 
thy  of  the  king  of  gods  and  men,  worthy  of  the  Roman  em- 

♦7,760/. 

BOOK  I.  87 
l>irc,  and  of  the  dignity  of  the  place  itself;  for  the  building 
of  this  tempifct  he  set  apart  the  0i#ney  which  arose  from  the 
spoils.  He  was  soon  after  engaged  in  a  war,  which  gave  him 
employment  longer  than  he  expected,  during  which,  having 
in  vain  attempted,  by  storm,  to  make  himself  master  of  Gabii, 
a  town  in  his  neighbourhood,  and  seeing  no  reason  to  hope 
for  success  from  a  blockade,  after  he  had  been  repulsed  from 
the  walls,  he  at  length  resolved  to  pursue  the  attack,  not  in 
a  rfiethod  becoming  a  Homan,  but  by  fraud  and  stratagem. 
Accordingly,  whilst  he  pretended  to  have  laid  aside  all 
thoughts  of  proceeding  in  the  war,  and  to  have  his  attention 
entirely  engaged  in  lading  the  foundation  of  the  temple,  and 
the  construction  of  other  works  in  the  city,  his  son  Sextus, 
the  youngest  of  three,  pursuant  to  a  plan  concerted,  fled  as 
a  deserter  to  Gabii,  making  grievous  complaints  of  his  fa¬ 
ther’s  intolerable  severity  towards  him,  saying,  that,  he 
now  made  his  own  family  feel  the  effects  of  his  pride,  which 
hitherto  had  fallen  only  on  strangers,  and  was  uneasy  at 
seeing  a  number  even  of  his  own  children  about  him,  so  that 
he  intended  to  cause  the  same  desolation  in  his  own  house, 
which  he  had  already  caused  in  the  senate  house,  and  not 
to  suffer  any  of  his  offspring,  or  any  heir  of  the  kingdom,  to 
remain:  that  he  himself  had,  with  difficulty,  made  his  es¬ 
cape  from  the  sword  of  his  father,  and  could  in  no  place 
consider  Jiirnself  safe,  except  among  the  foes  of  Lucius  Tar- 
quinius.  f  hat  the  war  against  them,  which  was  pretended 
to  be  laid  aside,  was  not  at  an  end;  but,  on  the  first  oppor¬ 
tunity,  when  he  found  them  oflP  their  guard,  he  would  cer¬ 
tainly  attack  them.  For  his  part,  if,  among  them,  suppli¬ 
ants  could  find  no  refuge,  he  uould  traverse  every  part  of 
Latium,  and  if  rejected  there,  would  apply  to  the  Volscians, 
the  iEquans,  and  the  Hernicians,  nor  rest,  until  he  found 
some  who  were  disposed  to  afford  protection  to  children, 
from  the  cruel  and  unnatural  severity  of  fathers.  Perhaps, 
too,  he  should  meet  with  those  who  might  be  inspired  with 

88 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

ardour  to  take  arms,  and  wage  war,  against  the  proudest  of 
kings,  and  the  most  overbearing  of  nations.”  The  Gabians, 
supposing  that,  if  they  did  not  show  some  regard  to  him,  he 
would  go  from  them,  full  of  resentment,  to  some  other  place, 
received  him  with  every  mark  of  kindness j  told  him,  ‘‘  he 
ought  not  to  be  surprised,  that  his  father’s  behaviour  to¬ 
wards  his  children  now,  was  no  better  than  what  he  had  for¬ 
merly  shown  towards  his  subjects  and  allies;  that  if  other 
o^ects  could  not  be  found,  he  would  at  last  vent  his  rage  on 
himself:  assured  him,  that  his  coming  was  ver>’  acceptable 
to  them,  and  that  they  expected,  in  a  short  time,  to  see  the 
seat  of  war  transferred,  with  his  assistance,  from  the  gates 
of  Gabii,  to  the  walls  of  Rome.” 
LIV.  He  was  immediately  admitted  to  a  share  in  their 
public  councils;  and  on  these  occasions,  while  he  declared, 
that  in  other  affairs,  he  would  be  guided  by  the  opinion  of 
the  Gabian  elders,  who  had  better  knowledge  of  those  mat¬ 
ters  than  he  could  have,  he  took  every  opportunity  of  recom¬ 
mending  war,  in  respect  of  which  he  assumed  to  himself  a 
superior  degree  of  judgment,  because  he  was  well  acquaint- 
ed  with  the  resources  of  both  nations,  and  knew  how  utterly 
detestable  to  his  subjects  the  king’s  pride  had  become,  which 
even  his  own  children  could  not  endure.  Whilst  he  thus,  by 
degrees,  worked  up  the  minds  of  the  Gabian  chiefs  to  a  re¬ 
newal  of  the  war,  he  used  to  go  out  himself,  with  the  bold¬ 
est  of  the  youth,  on  expeditions  and  plundering  parties;  and, 
as  all  his  words  and  actions  were  framed  to  the  purpose  of 
carrying  on  the  deceit,  their  ill-grounded  confidence  in  him 
increased  to  such  a  degree,  that  at  length  he  was  chosen 
commander-in-chief  of  the  army.  In  this  capacity,  he  fought 
several  slight  engagements  with  the  Romans,  in  which  he 
generally  got  the  advantage:  so  that  the  Gabians,  from  the 
highest  to  the  lowest,  began  to  consider  Sextus  Tarquinius 
as  a  leader  sent  to  them  by  the  favour  of  the  gods.  Among 
the  soldiers  particularly,  from  his  readiness  to  expose  him- 

BOOK  h 

89 

self  to  danger  and  fatigue,  and  likewise  from  the  liberal  dis¬ 
tribution  of  the  spoil,  he  was  so  highly  bdoved,  that  Tar- 
quinius  was  not  more  absolute  at  Rome,  than  Sextus  was  at 
Gabii.  Finding  himself,  therefore,  secure  of  a  support  suffi¬ 
cient  to  carry  him  through  any  enterprise,  he  sent  one  of  his 
attendants  to  his  father  at  Rome,  to  inquire  in  what  manner 
he  would  choose  that  he  should  proceed,  since  the  gods  had 
granted  to  him  the  entire  disposal  of  every  thing  at  Gabii:  to 
this  messenger,  no  answer  was  given  in  words,  I  suppose 
because  he  did  not  seem  fit  to  be  trusted.  The  king,  seem¬ 
ingly  employed  in  deep  deliberation,  walked  out  into  a  gar¬ 
den  adjoining  the  palace,  followed  by  the  messenger,  and 
walking  there  in  silence,  as  we  are  told,  struck  off  with  his 
cane  the  heads  of  the  tallest  poppies.  The  messenger,  weary 
of  repealing  the  question  and  waiting  for  an  answer,  return¬ 
ed  to  Gabii  without  having  accomplished  his  business,  as  he 
thought;  told  what  he  himself  had  said,  and  what  he  had 
seen;  that  the  king,  either  through  anger  or  dislike,  or  the 
pride  natural  to  his  disposition,  had  not  uttered  a  word. 
Sextus,  readily  comprehending  his  father’s  meaning,  and 
what  conduct  he  recommended  by  those  silent  intimations, 
cut  off  all  the  principal  men  of  the  state;  some  by  prosecu¬ 
tions  before  the  people;  others,  who,  being  generally  odious, 
could  be  attacked  with  greater  safety,  he  put  to  death  of  his 
own  authority;  many  were  cxeci|fed  openly;  several,  agaipst 
whom  accusations  would  appear  less  plausible,  were  private¬ 
ly  murdered;  some  who  chose  to  fly  were  not  prevented, 
others  were  forced  into  banishment;  and  the  effects  of  the 
absentees,  as  well  as  of  those  who  had  suffered  death,  were 
distributed  in  largesses  among  the  people:  by  these  means, 
all  sense  of  the  public  calamity  was  so  entirely  drowne<i  in 
the  sweets  of  bribery,  plunder,  and  private  profit,  that,  at 
length,  the  Gabian  state,  stripped  of  its  counsellors  and  sup¬ 
porters,  was  delivered  over,  without  a  struggle,  into  the 
hands  of  the  Roman  king. 
VOL,  I,' — N 

90 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

LV.  Tarquinius,  having  thus  acquired  possession  of  Ga^ 
bii,  concluded  a  peace  with  the  nation  of  the  iEquans,  renew- 
ed  the  treaty  with  the  Etrurians,  and  then  turned  his  thoughts 
to  the  internal  business  of  the  chv:  among  which,  the  object 
of  his  principal  concern  was  to  leave  the  temple  of  Jupiter 
on  the  Tarpeian  mount  a  monument  of  his  reign  and  of  his 
name,  to  testify,  that  of  two  Tarquinii  both  of  whom  reign¬ 
ed,  the  father  had  vowed,  and  the  son  completed  it.  And  in 
order  that  the  ground  tnighi  be  clear  from  the  interference 
of  any  of  the  other  gods,  and  the  temple  to  be  erected  there¬ 
on,  be  appropriated  wholly  to  Jupiter,  he  determined  to  can¬ 
cel  the  inauguration  of  the  temples  and  chapels,  several  of 
which  had  been  vowed,  first  by  Tati  us  during  the  very  heat 
of  the  battle  against  Romulus,  and  afterwards  consecrated 
there.  It  is  related,  that,  during  the  preparations  for  found¬ 
ing  this  structure,  the  gods  exerted  their  divine  power,  to 
exhibit  indications  of  the  stability  of  this  great  empire;  for, 
w^hilst  the  birds  admitted  the  cancelling  the  inaugurations  of 
all  the  other  chapels,  they  did  not  give  the  signs  of  approba¬ 
tion,  in  the  case  of  the  temple  of  Terminus;  and  that  omen, 
and  that  augury,  were  deemed  to  import  that  the  residence 
of  Terminus  must  not  be  changed;  and  his  being  the  only 
one  of  the  gods  who  would  not  submit  to  be  called  forth 
from  the  boundaries  consecrated  to  him,  denoted  that  all 
things  there  were  to  stand  |^m  and  immoveable.  After  they 
had  received  this  presage  of  its  perpetual  duration,  there  fol¬ 
lowed  another  prodigy,  portending  the  greatness  of  the  em¬ 
pire:  a  human  head,  with  the  face  entire,  is  said  to  have  ap¬ 
peared  to  those  who  were  opening  the  foundation  of  the 
temple;  which  appearance  denoted,  without  the  help  of  any 
far-fetched  allusion,  that  this  would  be  the  metropolis  of 
the  empire,  and  the  head  of  the  world.  Such  was  the  inter¬ 
pretation  given  of  it  by  the  soothsayers,  both  those  who 
were  in  the  city,  and  others  whom  they  sent  for  from  Etru¬ 
ria,  to  hold  a  consultation  on  the  subject*  This  encouraged 

BOOK  I. 

91 

the  king  to  enlarge  the  expense^  so  that  the  spoils  of  Pometia, 
which,  according  to  his  first  design,  were  to  have  computed 
the  edifice,  were  scarce!)  sufficient  for  the  foundations*  For 
this  reason,  besides  his  being  the  more  ancient  writer,  1 
should  rather  believe  Fabius,  that  these  amounted  to  no 
more  than  forty  talents,*  than  Piso,  who  writes,  that  forty 
thousand  pounds ‘weight  of  silverf  were  set  apart  for  that 
purpose;  a  sum  of  money,  that  could  not  be  expected  out  of 
the  spoil  of  any  one  city  in  that  age,  and  which  must  have 
been  more  than  sufficient  for  laying  the  foundations  even  of 
the  most  magnificent  of  our  modern  structures.  Intent  on 
finishing  the  temple,  he  sent  for  workmen  from  all  parts  of 
Etruria,  and  converted  to  that  use,  not  only  the  public  mo^ 
ney,  but  the  public  labour;  and  although  this,  which  was  in 
itself  no  small  hardship,  was  added  to  the  toils  of  military 
service,  yet  the  people  murmured  the  less,  when  they  con¬ 
sidered  that  they  were  employing  their  hands  in  erecting 
temples  to  the  gods.  They  were  afterwards  obliged  to  toil 
at  other  works,  which,  though  they  made  less  show,  were 
attended  with  greater  difficulty;  the  erecting  seats  in  the 
Circus,  and  conducting  under  ground  the  principal  sewer, 
the  receptacle  of  all  the  filth  of  the  city;  tw^o  works,  to  w^hich 
the  magnificence  of  modern  times  can  scarcely  produce  any 
thing  equal.  After  the  people  had  been  fatigued  by  these 
labours,  the  king,  considering  so  great  a  multitude  as  a  bur¬ 
then  to  the  city,  where  there  was  not  employment  for  them, 
and  wishing  at  the  same  time  to  extend  the  frontiers  of  his 
dominions,  by  means  of  colonies,  sent  a  number  of  colonists 
to  Signia  and  Circeii,  to  serve  as  barriers  to  the  city,  against 
an  enemy,  both  by  land  and  sea. 
LVI.  While  he  was  thus  employed,  a  dreadful  prodigy 
appeared  to  him;  a  snake,  sliding  out  of  a  wooden  pillar, 
terrified  the  beholders,  and  made  them  fly  into  the  palace. 

7,750/. 

f  129,160/. 

92 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

This  not  only  struck  the  king  himself  with  sadden  terror,  but 
filled  his  breast  with  anxious  apprehensions:  so  that,  whereas 
in  the  case  of  public  prodigies,  the  Etrurian  soothsayers  only 
were  applied  to,  being  thoroughh  frightened  at  this  domes¬ 
tic  apparition,  as  it  were,  he  resolved  to  send  to  Delphi,  the 
most  celebrated  oracle  in  the  world;  and  judging  it  unsafe 
to  entrust  the  answers  which  should  be  given  to  indifferent 
persons,  he  sent  his  two  sons  into  Greece,  through  lands  lit¬ 
tle  known  at  that  time,  and  seas  still  more  so.  Titus  and 
Aruns  set  out,  and,  as  a  companion,  was  sent  with  them, 
Lucius  Junius  Brutus,  son  to  Tarquinia,  the  king’s  sister,  a 
young  mrtn  of  a  capacity  widely  different  from  the  appear¬ 
ance  which  he  had  put  on.  Having  heard  that  the  principal 
men  in  the  state,  and  among  the  rest,  his  brother,  had  been 
put  to  death  by  his  uncle,  he  resolved  that  the  king  should 
find  nothing  to  dread,  either  from  his  manners  or  his  means, 
and  to  seek  security  in  contempt.  He  took  care,  therefore, 
to  fashion  his  behaviour  to  the  semblance  of  foolishness, 
submitting  himself  and  his  fortune  to  the  pleasure  and  rapa¬ 
city  of  the  king.  Nor  did  he  show  any  dislike  to  the  sur¬ 
name  of  Brutuss,  content  that,  under  the  cover  of  that  appel¬ 
lation,  the  genius  which  was  to  be  the  delivereriof  the  Roman 
people,  should  lie  concealed,  and  wait  the  proper  season  for 
exerti^on.  He  was,  at  this  time,  carried  to  Delphi  by  the 
Tarquinii,  rather  as  a  subject  of  sport  than  as  a  companion; 
and  is  said  to  have  brought  as  an  offering  to  Apollo,  a  golden 
wand,  inclosed  in  a  staff  of  cornel*  wood,  hollowed  for  that 
purpose,  an  emblem  figurative  of  the  state  of  his  own  ca¬ 
pacity.  When  they  arrived  there,  and  executed  th«dr  father’s 
‘commission,  the  young  men  felt  a  wish  to  inquire  to  which 
of  them  the  kingdom  of  Rome  was  to  belong;  and  we  are 
told  that  these  words  were  uttered  from  the  bottom  of  the 
cave.  “  Young  men,  which  ever  of  you  shall  first  kiss  your 
mother,  he  shall  possess  the  sovereign  power  at  Rome.” 
The  Tarquinii  ordered  that  tais  matter  should  be  kept  secret 

BOOK  L 

93 

with  the  utmost  care;  that  Sextus^  who  had  been  left  behind 
at  Rome,  might  remain  ignorant  of  the  answer,  so  as  to  have 
no  chance  for  the  kingdom.  They  themselves  had  recourse 
to  lots  to  determine  which  of  them  should  first  kiss  their 
mother  on  their  return  to  Rome:  Brutus  judged  that  the  ex¬ 
pression  of  Apollo  had  another  meaning,  and  as  if  he  had 
accidentally  stumbled  and  fallen,  he  touched  the  earth  with 
his  lips,  considering  that  she  was  the  common  mother  of  all 
mankind.  On  their  return  from  thence  to  Rome,  they  found 
vigorous  preparations  going  on  for  a  war  against  the  Rutu- 
lians. 
LVII.  Ardea  was  a  city  belonging  to  the  Rutulians,  a 
nation,  considering  the  part  of  the  world  and  the  age,  re¬ 
markably  opulent;  and  this  very  circumstance  gave  occasion 
to  the  war;  for  the  Roman  king  was  earnestly  desirous,  bojli 
of  procuring  money  for  himself,  his  treasury  being  exiiausted 
by  the  magnificence  of  his  public  works,  and  also  of  recon¬ 
ciling,  by  means  of  the  spoils,  the  minds  of  his  subjects,  who 
were  highly  dissatisfied  with  his  government:  for,  besides 
other  instances  of  his  pride,  they  thought  themselves  ill- 
treated  by  being  engaged,  for  such  a  length  of  time,  in  the 
employments  of  handicrafts,  and  in  labour  fit  for  slaves.  An 
attempt  was  made  to  take  Ardea  by  storm,  and  that  not 
succeeding,  he  adopted  the  plan  of  distressing  the  enemy  by 
a  blockade,  and  works  erected  round  them.  In  this  fixed 
post,  as  is  generally  the  case  when  the  operations  of  war  arc 
rather  tedious  than  vigorous,  leave  of  absence  was  readily 
granted,  and  to  the  principal  officers,  more  readily  than  to 
the  soldiers;  the  young  men  of  the  royal  family  in  particular, 
frequently  passed  their  leisure  time  in  feasting  and  enter¬ 
tainments.  It  happened  that  while  these  were  drinking  to¬ 
gether,  at  the  quarters  of  Sextus  Tarquinius,  where  Collati- 
nus  Tarquinius,  the  son  of  Egerius,  also  supped,  mention 
was  made  of  their  wives;  each  extolled  his  own  to  the  skies; 
on  this  a  dispute  arising,  Collatinus  told  them,  that  there 

94 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

was  no  need  of  words;  it  could  easily  be  known,  in  a  few 
hours,  how  much  his  Lucretia  excelled  the  rest:  we  are 
young  and  strong;  let  us  mount  our  horses,  and  inspect  in 
person  the  behaviour  of  our  wives;  that  must  be  the  most 
unexceptionable  proof  which  meets  our  eyes,  on  the  unex¬ 
pected  arrival  of  the  husband.”  They  were  heated  with 
wine:  “  Agreed,”  was  the  word;  at  full  speed  they  fly  to 
Rome.  Having  arrived  there  at  the  first  dusk  of  the  evening, 
they  proceeded  thence  to  Collatia,  where  they  found  Lucre¬ 
tia,  not  like  the  king’s  daughters-in-law,  whom  they  had  seen 
spending  their  time  in  luxurious  entertainments  among  those 
of  their  own  rank,  but  busily  employed  with  her  wool,  though 
at  that  late  hour,  and  sitting  in  the  middle  of  the  house,  with 
her  maids  at  work  around  her:  the  honour  of  superiority 
among  the  ladies  mentioned  in  the  dispute,  was  of  course 
acknowledged  to  belong  to  Lucretia.  Her  husband,  on  his 
arrival,  and  the  Tarquinii,  were  kindly  received;  and  the 
husband,  exulting  in  his  victory,  gave  the  royal  youths  a 
friendly  invitation.  There,  Sextus  Tarquinius,  instigated  by 
brutal  lust,  formed  a  design  of  violating  Lucretia’s  chastit) 
by  force,  both  her  beauty  and  her  approved  modesty  serving 
as  incentives;  after  this  youthful  frolic  of  the  night,  they 
returned  to  the  camp. 
LVlIl,  A  few  days  after,  Sextus  Tarquinius,  without  the 
knowledge  of  Collatinus,  went  to  Collatia,  with  only  a  single 
attendant:  he  was  kindly  received  by  the  family,  who  sus¬ 
pected  not  his  design,  and,  after  supper,  conducted  to  the 
chamber  where  guests  were  lodged.  Then,  burning  with 
desire,  as  soon  as  he  thought  that  every  thing  was  safe,  and 
the  family  all  at  rest,  he  came  with  his  sword  drawn  to  Lu¬ 
cretia,  where  she  lay  asleep,  and,  holding  her  down,  with  his 
left  hand  pressed  on  her  breast,  said,  Lucretia  be  silent:  I 
am  Sextus  Tarquinius;  my  sword  is  in  m\  hand,  if  you  utter 
a  word,  you  die.”  Terrified  at  being  thus  disturbed  from 
sleep,  ishe  saw  no  assistance  near,  and  immediate  death 

BOOK  I. 

95 

threatening  her.  Tarquinius  then  acknowledged  his  passion, 
intreated,  mixed  threats  with  in  treaties,  and  used  every  ar¬ 
gument  likely  to  have  effect  on  a  woman’s  mind;  but  finding 
her  inflexible,  and  not  to  be  moved,  even  by  the  fear  of 
death,  he  added  to  that  fear,  the  dread  of  dishonour,  telling 
her  that,  after  killing  her,  he  would  murder  a  slave,  and  lay 
him  naked  by  her  side,  that  she  might  be  said  to  have  been 
slain  in  base  adultery.  The  shocking  apprehensions,  convey¬ 
ed  by  this  menace,  overpowering  htr  resolution  in  defending 
her  chastity,  his  lust  became  victorious;  and  Tarquinius  de¬ 
parted,  applauding  himself  for  this  triumph  over  a  lady’s 
honour.  But  Lucretia,  plunged  by  such  a  disaster  into  the 
deepest  distress,  despatched  a  messenger  to  Rome  to  her  fa¬ 
ther,  with  orders  to  proceed  to  Ardea  to  her  husband,  and 
to  desire  them  to  come  to  her,  each  with  one  faithful  friend; 
to  tell  them,  that  there  was  a  necessity  for  their  doing  so, 
and  speedily;  for  that  a  dreadful  affair  had  happened.  Spu- 
rius  Lucretius  came  with  Publius  Valerius,  the  son  of  Vole- 
sus;  Collatinus  with  Lucius  Junius  Brutus,  in  company  with 
whom  he  chanced  to  be  returning  to  Rome,  when  he  was 
met  by  his  wife’s  messenger.  They  found  Lucretia  sitting 
in  her  chamber,  melancholy  and  dejected:  on  the  arrival  of 
her  friends,  she  burst  into  tears,  and  on  her  husband’s  ask¬ 
ing,  Is  all  well?”  “  Far  from  it,”  said  she,  for  how  can 
it  be  well  with  a  woman  who  has  lost  her  chastity?  Colla¬ 
tinus,  the  impression  of  another  man  is  in  your  bed;  yet  my 
person  only  has  been  violated,  my  mind  is  guiltless,  as  my 
death  will  testify.  But  give  me  your  right  hands  and  pledge 
your  honour,  that  the  adulterer  shall  not  escape  unpunished. 
He  is  Sextus  Tarquinius,  who,  under  the  appearance  of  a 
guest,  disguising  an  enemy,  obtained  here,  last  night,  by 
armed  violence,  a  triumph  deadly  to  me,  and  to  himself  also, 
if  ye  be  men,”  They  all  pledged  their  honour,  one  after 
another,  and  endeavoured  to  comfort  her  distracted  mind, 
acquitting  her  of  blame,  as  under  the  compulsion  of  force, 

96 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

and  charging  it  on  the  violent  perpetrator  of  the  crime,  told 
her,  that  ‘‘  the  mind  alone  was  capable  of  sinning,  not  the 
body,  and  that  where  there  was  no  such  intention,  there  could 
be  no  guilt,”  ‘‘  It  is  your  concern,”  said  she,  to  consider 
what  is  due  to  him;  as  to  me,  though  I  acquit  myself  of  the 
guilt,  I  cannot  dispense  with  the  penalty,  nor  shall  any  wo¬ 
man  ever  plead  the  example  of  Lucretia,  for  surviving  her 
chastity.”  Thus  saying,  she”  plunged  into  her  heart  a  knife, 
which  she  had  concealed  under  her  garment,  and  falling  for¬ 
ward  on  the  wound,  dropped  lifeless.  The  husband  and 
father  shrieked  aloud« 
LIX.  But  Brutus,  while  they  were  overpowered  by  grief, 
drawing  the  knife  from  the  wound  of  Lucretia,  and  holding 
it  out  reeking  with  blood,  before  him,  said,  ‘‘  By  this  blood, 
most  chaste  until  injured  by  royal  insolence,  I  swear,  and 
call  yoUi  O  ye  gods,  to  witness,  that  I  will  prosecute  to  de¬ 
struction,  by  sword,  fire,  and  every  forcible  means  in  my 
power,  both  Lucius  Tarquinius  the  Proud,  and  his  impious 
wife,  together  with  their  entire  race,  and  never  will  suffer 
one  of  them,  nor  any  other  person  whatsoever,  to  be  king  in 
Rome.”  He  then  delivered  the  knife  to  Collatinus,  after¬ 
wards  to  Lucretius,  and  Valerius,  who  were  filled  with 
amazement,  as  at  a  prodigy,  and  at  a  loss  to  account  foi  this 
unusual  elevation  of  sentiment  in  the  mind  of  Brutus.  How¬ 
ever  they  took  the  oath  as  directed,  and  converting  their 
grief  into  rage,  followed  Brutus,  who  put  himself  at  their 
head,  and  called  on  them  to  proceed,  instantly  to  abolish 
kingly  power.  They  brought  out  the  body  of  Lucretia  from 
the  house,  conveyed  it  to  the  Forum,  and  assembled  the 
people,  who  came  together  quickly,  in  astonishment,  as  may 
be  supposed,  at  a  deed  so  atrocious  and  unheard  of.  Every 
one  exclaimed  with  vehemence  against  the  villainy  and  vio¬ 
lence  of  the  prince:  they  were  deeply  affected  by  the  grief  of 
her  father,  and  also  by  the  discourse  of  Brutus,  who  rebuk¬ 
ed  their  tears  and  ineffectual  complaints,  and  advised  them, 

BOOK  I. 

97 

as  became  men,  as  became  Romans,  to  take  up  arms  against 
those  who  had  dared  to  treat  them  as  enemies.  The  most 
spirited  among  the  youth  offered  themselves  with  their  arms, 
and  the  rest  followed  their  example.  On  which,  leaving  half 
their  number  at  the  gates  to  defend  Collatia,  and  fixing  guards 
to  prevent  any  intelligence  of  the  commotion  being  carried 
to  the  princes,  the  rest,  with  Brutus  at  their  head,  marched 
to  Rome.  When  they  arrived  there,  the  sight  of  such  an 
armed  multitiKle  spread  terror  and  confusion  wherever  they 
came:  but,  in  a  little  time,  when  people  observed  the  princi- 
pal  men  of  the  state  marching  at  their  head,  they  concluded, 
that  whatever  the  matter  was,  there  must  be  good  reason  for 
it.  Nor  did  the  heinousness  of  the  affair  raise  less  violent 
emotions  in  the  minds  of  the  people  at  Rome,  than  it  had  at 
Collatia:  so  that,  from  all  parts  of  the  city,  they  hurried  into 
the  Forum;  where,  as  soon  as  the  party  arrived,  a  crier  sum¬ 
moned  the  people  to  attend  the  tribune  of  the  Celeres,  which 
office  happened  at  that  time  to  be  held  by  Brutus.  He  there 
made  a  speech,  no  way  consonant  to  that  low  degree  of  sen¬ 
sibility  and  capacity,  which,  until  that  day,  he  ad  counter¬ 
feited;  recounting  the  violence  and  lust  of  Sextus  Tarquinius, 
the  shocking  violation  of  Lucretia’s  chastity,  and  her  lament¬ 
able  death;  the  misfortune  of  Tricipitinus,  in  being  left  child¬ 
less,  who  must  feel  the  cause  of  his  daughter’s  death  as  a 
greater  injury  and  cruelty,  than  her  death  itself:  to  these  re¬ 
presentations  he  added  the  pride  of  the  king  himself,  the 
miseries  and  toils  of  the  commons,  buried  under  ground  to 
cleanse  sinks  and  sewers,  saying,  that  the  citizens  of  Rome, 
the  conquerors  of  all  the  neighbouring  nations,  were,  from 
warriors,  reduced  to  labourers  and  stone-cutters;”  mentioned 
the  barbarous  murder  of  king  Servius  Tullius,  his  abomi¬ 
nable  daughter  driving  in  her  carriage  over  the  body  of  her 
father,  and  invoked  the  gods  to  avenge  the  cause  of  parents. 
By  descanting  on  these  and  other,  I  suppose,  more  forcible 
topics,  which  the  heinousness  of  present  injuries  suggests  at 
VOL.  I. - O. 

98 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

the  time,  but  v.  hich  it  is  difficult  for  writers  to  repeat,  he  in¬ 
flamed  the  rage  of  the  multitude  to  such  a  degree,  that  they 
were  easily  persuaded  to  deprive  the  king  of  his  government 
and  to  pass  an  order  for  the  banishment  of  Lucius  Tarqui* 
nius,  his  wife,  and  children:  Brutus  himself,  having  collect¬ 
ed  and  armed  such  of  the  young  men  as  voluntarily  gave  in 
their  names,  set  out  for  the  camp  at  Ardea,  in  order  to  ex¬ 
cite  the  troops  there  to  take  part  against  the  king.  The  com* 
mand  in  the  city  he  left  to  Lucretius,  who  had  some  time 
before  been  appointed  by  the  king  to  the  office  of  praefect  of 
the  city,’^  During  this  tumult  Tullia  fled  from  her  house; 
both  men  and  women,  wherever  she  passed,  imprecating 
curses  on  her  head,  and  invoking  the  furies,  the  avengers  of 
parents. 
LX.  News  of  these  proceedings  having  reached  the  camp, 
and  the  king,  alarmed  at  such  extraordinary  events,  having 
begun  his  march  towards  Rome,  to  suppress  the  commotions, 
Brutus,  informed  of  his  approach,  turned  into  another  road, 
in  order  to  avoid  a  meeting,  and  very  nearly  at  the  same 
time,  by  different  roads,  Brutus  arrived  at  Ardea,  and  Tar- 
quinius  at  Rome.  Tarquinius  found  the  gates  shut  against 
him,  and  an  order  of  banishment  pronounced.  The  deli¬ 
verer  of  the  city  was  received  in  the  camp  with  joy,  and  the 
king’s  sons  were  driven  thence  with  disgrace.  Two  of  these 
followed  their  father,  and  went  into  exile  at  Csere,  among 
the  Etrurians-  Sextus  Tarquinius  having  retired  to  Gabii, 
as  if  to  his  own  dominions,  was  slain  by  some  persons,  who 
were  glad  of  an  opportunity  of  gratifying  old  animosities, 
which  he  had  excited  there  by  his  rapine  and  murders.  Lu* 
cius  Tarquinius  Superbus  reigned  twenty-five  years.  The 
government  of  kings  continued,  from  the  building  of  the 
*  The  praefect  of  the  city  was,  in  these  times,  a  magistrate  extraordi¬ 
nary,  appointed  to  administer  justice,  and  transact  other  necessary  busi¬ 
ness,  in  the  absence  of  the  king,  or  consul 

BOOK  L 

99 

city  to  the  establishment  of  its  liberty,  two  hundred  and 
forty-four  years.  After  that,  in  an  assembly  of  the  Centu¬ 
ries,  held  by  the  prsefect  of  the  city,  were  elected,  conform¬ 
ably  to  a  plan  found  in  the  commentaries  of  Servius  Tullius, 
two  magistrates,  called  Consuls.  These  were,  Lucius 
Junius  Brutua,  and  Lucius  Tarquinius  Colla-  y  r.  245 
tinus, 

THE 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

BOOK  II. 
Hrutus  bmd<  the  people^  by  an  oath,  never  to  restore  the  kingly  go¬ 
vernment;  obliges  Tarquinius  Collatinus,  on  account  of  his  relationship 
to  the  Tarquioii,  to  resign  t’tie  consulship,  and  retire  from  the  city, 
puts  to  death  his  own  sons,  together  with  some  other  young  men  of 
rank,  for  a  conspiracy  in  favour  of  the  Tarquinii;  falls  in  battle  against 
the  Veientians  and  Tarquinians,  togeUier  with  his  antagonist  Aruns,  son 
of  Superbtis.  War  'with  Porsena.  Exploits  of  Horatius  Codes, 
Mutius  ScGfvola,  and  Cloelia.  The  Claudian  tribe  formed,  and  the 
number  of  the  tribes  increased  to  twenty-one.  The  Latines,  attempt¬ 
ing  to  restore  Tarquinius,  are  defeated  by  Aulus  Postumius,  dictator. 
TliC  commons,  on  account  of  the  great  numbers  confined  for  debt,  se¬ 
cede  to  the  sacred  mount;  are  appeased,  and  brought  back,  by  the 
prudence  of  Menenius  Agrippa.  Five  tribunes  of  the  commons  crea¬ 
ted.  Banishment  and  subsequent  conduct  of  Cams  Marcius  Coriola- 
nuft-  First  proposal  of  an  Agrarian  law.  Spurius  Cassius,  aspiring  to 
regal  power,  put  to  death.  Oppia,  a  vestal  virgin,  convicted  of  incest, 
buried  alive*  The  Fabian  family  undertake  the  Veienlian  war,  and 
arc  all  cut  off,  except  one  boy-  Wars  with  the  Volscians,  .Slquans,  and 
Veienuans,  Dissensions  between  the  Patricians  and  Plebeians. 
y.  R.  245.  Henceforward  I  am  to  treat  of  the  affairs^ 
B-  C.  607.  civil  and  military,  of  a  free  people,  for  such  the 
llomans  were  now  become;  of  annual  magistrates  and  the  au¬ 
thority  of  the  laws  exalted  above  that  of  men.  What  greatly 
enhanced  the  public  joy  on  having  attained  to  this  state  of 
freedom,  was,  the  haughty  insolence  of  the  late  king:  foz 

BOOK  IL 

101 

the  former  kings  governed  in  such  a  manner,  that  all  of  them, 
in  succession,  might  deservedly  be  reckoned  as  founders  of 
the  several  parts  at  least,  of  the  city,  which  they  added  to  it, 
to  accommodate  the  great  numbers  of  inhabitants,  whom 
they  themselves  introduced.  Nor  can  it  be  doubted,  that 
the  same  Brutus,  who  justly  merited  so  great  glory,  for  ha* 
ving  expelled  that  haughty  king,  would  have  hurt  the  public 
interest  most  materially,  had  he,  through  an  over  hasty  zeal 
for  liberty,  wrested  the  government  from  any  one  of  the  for* 
mer  princes.  For  what  must  have  been  the  consequence,  if 
that  rabble  of  shepherds  and  vagabonds,  fugitives  from  their 
own  countries,  having,  under  the  sanction  of  an  inviolable 
asylum,  obtained  liberty,  or  at  least  impunity;  and  uncon¬ 
trolled  by  dread  of  kingly  power,  had  once  been  set  in  com¬ 
motion  by  tribuniuan  storms,  and  had,  in  a  city,  where  they 
were  strangers,  engaged  in  contests  with  the  Patricians,  be¬ 
fore  the  pledges  of  wives  and  children,  and  an  alfection  for 
the  soil  itself,  which  in  length  of  time  is  acquired  from  habit, 
had  united  their  minds  in  social  concord?  The  state,  as  yet 
but  a  tender  shoot,  had,  in  that  case,  •been  torn  to  pieces  by 
discord;  whereas  the  tranquil  moderation  of  the  then  govern¬ 
ment  cherished  it,  and,  by  due  nourishment,  brought  it  for¬ 
ward  to  such  a  condition,  that  its  powers  being  ripened,  it 
was  capable  of  producing  the  glorious  fruit  of  liberty.  The 
origin  of  liberty  is  to  be  dated  from  that  period,  rather  on 
account  of  the  consular  government  being  limited  to  one 
year,  than  of  any  diminution  made  of  the  power  which  had 
been  possessed  by  the  kings.  The  first  consuls  enjoyed  all 
their  privileges,  and  all  their  ensigns  of  authority;  in  this 
respect,  only,  care  was  taken,  not  to  double  the  objects  of 
terror  by  giving  the  fasces  to  both  the  consuls,  Brutus,  with 
the  consent  of  his  colleague,  was  first  honoured  with  the  fas¬ 
ces,  and  the  zeal  which  he  had  shown  as  the  champion  of 
liberty  in  rescuing  it  from  oppression,  was  not  greater  than 
that  which  he  afterwards  displayed  in  the  character  of  its 

102 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R,  245. 

guardian.  First  of  all,  while  the  people  were  in  raptures  at 
their  new  acquisition  of  freedom,  lest  they  might  afterwards 
be  perverted  by  the  importunities  or  presents  of  the  princes, 
he  bound  them  by  an  oath,  that  they  would  never  suflPer  any 
man  to  assume  the  authority  of  king  at  Rome.  Next,  in 
order  that  the  fullness  of  their  body  might  give  the  greater 
weight  to  the  senate,  he  filled  up  the  number  of  the  senators, 
which  had  been  diminished  by  the  king’s  murders,  to  the 
amount  of  three  hundred,  electing  into  that  body  the  princi- 
pal  men  of  equestrian  rankj  and  hence  the  practice  is  said  to 
have  taken  its  rise  of  summoning  to  the  senate  those  who 
are  fathers,  and  those  who  are  conscript! ;  for  they  called 
those  who  were  elected  into  this  new  senate  conscripti.  This 
had  a  wonderful  effect  towards  producing  concord  in  the  state, 
and  in  attaching  the  affection  of  the  commons  to  the  patricians, 
11.  People  then  turned  their  attention  to  matters  of  reli* 
gion;  and  because  some  public  religious  rites  had  been  usual¬ 
ly  performed  by  the  kings  in  person,  in  order  that  there 
should  be  no  want  of  one  on  any  occasion,  they  appointed  a 
king  of  the  sacrifices.  This  office  they  made  subject  to  the 
jurisdiction  of  the  pontiff,  fearing  lest  honour,  being  joined 
to  the  title,  might  in  some  shape  be  injurious  to  liberty, 
which  was  then  the  first  object  of  their  concern:  I  know  not 
whether  they  did  not  carry  to  excess  their  great  anxiety  to 
raise  bulwarks  to  it,  on  all  sides,  even  in  points  of  the  most 
trivial  consequence^  for  the  name  of  one  of  the  consuls, 
though  there  was  no  other  cause  of  dislike,  became  a  subject 
of  jealousy  to  the  people.  It  was  alleged,  that  the  Tar- 
quinii  had  been  too  long  accustomed  to  the  possession  of  sove¬ 
reign  power;  Priscus  first  began;  next  indeed  reigned  Servi- 
us  Tullius,  yet  though  that  interruption  occurred,  Tarquini- 
us  Superbus  never  lost  sight  of  the  crown,  so  as  to  consider 
it  the  right  of  another;  but,  by  violent  and  flagitious  means, 
reclaimed  it,  as  the  inheritance  of  his  family.  Now,  that 
Superbus  had  been  expelled,  the  government  was  in  the 

BOOK  II. 

103 

B.  C,  50r.] 
hands  of  Collatinus;  the  Tarquinii  knew  not  how  to  live  in  a 
private  station;  the  very  name  itself  was  displeasing,  and 
dangerous  to  liberty.”  These  discourses  were  at  first,  gra¬ 
dually  circulated  through  every  part  of  the  city,  for  the 
purpose  of  trying  the  disposition  of  the  people.  After  the 
suspicions  of  the  commons  had,  by  these  suggestions,  been 
sufficiently  excited,  Brutus  called  them  together:  when  they 
were  assembled,  after  first  reciting  the  oath  which  the  peo¬ 
ple  had  taken,  that  they  would  never  suffer  a  king  at  Rome, 
or  any  thing  else  that  might  be  dangerous  to  liberty;”  he 
told  them,  that  they  must  support  this  resolution  with  their 
utmost  power;  and  that  no  circumstance,  of  any  tendency 
that  way,  ought  to  be  overlooked;  that  from  his  regard  to 
the  person  alluded  to,  he  mentioned  the  matter  unwillingly; 
nor  would  he  have  mentioned  it  at  all,  did  not  his  affection 
for  the  commonwealth  outweigh  all  other  considerations. 
The  Roman  people  did  not  think  that  they  had  recovered 
entire  freedom;  the  regal  family,  the  regal  name  remained, 
not  only  in  the  city,  but  in  the  government:  this  was  a  cir¬ 
cumstance,  not  merely  unpropitious,  but  dangerous  to  liber¬ 
ty.  Do  you,  Lucius  Tarquinius,  of  your  own  accord,  re¬ 
move  from  us  this  apprehension;  we  remember,  we  acknow¬ 
ledge  that  you  expelled  the  princes:  complete  your  kindness: 
carry  hence  their  name.  Your  countrymen,  on  my  recom¬ 
mendation,  will  not  only  give  you  up  your  property,  but  if 
you  have  occasion  for  more,  will  make  liberal  additions  to 
it.  Depart  in  friendship.  Deliver  the  state  from  this,  it 
may  be  groundless,  apprehension;  but  the  opinion  is  deeply 
rooted  in  their  minds,  that,  only  with  the  race  of  the  Tar- 
quinii,  will  kingly  power  depart  hence.”  Astonishment  at 
this  extraordinary  and  unexpected  affair  at  first  deprived  ihe 
consul  of  all  power  of  utterance;  and  when  he  afterwards  be¬ 
gan  to  speak,  the  principal  men  of  the  state  gathered  round 
him,  and  with  earnest  importunity  urged  the  same  request. 
Others  affected  him  less;  but  when  Spurius  Lucretius,  his 

i04 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  245. 

superior  in  age,  and  dignity  of  character,  and  bis  father-in- 
law  besides,  began  to  try  every  method  of  persuasion,  using 
by  turns,  arguments  and  entreaties,  that  he  would  suffer  him¬ 
self  to  be  overcome  by  the  general  sense  of  his  countrymen, 
the  consul,  fearing  lest  hereafter,  when  he  should  have  re¬ 
turned  to  a  private  station,  the  same  measures  might  be  used 
against  him,  with  the  addition  perhaps  of  confiscation  of  his 
property,  and  other  marks  of  ignominy,  resigned  the  office 
of  ccmsul,  and  removing  all  his  effects  to  Lavinium,  with¬ 
drew  from  the  territories  of  the  state.  Brutus  in  pursuance 
of  a  decree  of  the  senate,  *  proposed  to  the  people,  that  all 
who  were  of  the  Tarquinian- family  should  be  banished;  and 
in  an  assembly  of  the  Centuries,  he  elected  for  his  colleague, 
Publius  Valerius,  who  had  been  bis  assistant  in  expelling  the 
royal  family. 
III.  No  person  now  doubted  but  war  would  be  immedi¬ 
ately  commenced  by  the  Tarquinii:  that  event,  however, 
did  not  take  place  so  soon  as  was  expected.  But,  what  they 
entertained  no  apprehension  of,  liberty  was  very  near  being 
lost,  by  secret  machinations  and  treachery.  There  were, 
among  the  Romans,  several  young  men  of  no  inconsiderable 
families,  who,  during  the  reign  of  the  king,  had  indulged 
their  pleasures  too  freely;  and  being  of  the  same  age,  and 
constant  companions  of  the  younger  Tarquinii,  had  been 
accustomed  to  live  in  a  princely  style:  the  privileges  of  aU 
ranks  being  now  reduced  to  one  level,  these  grew  uneasy  at 
the  restraint  hereby  laid  on  their  irregularities,  and  complain¬ 
ed  heavily  among  themselves,  that  the  liberty  of  others  had 
imposed  slavery  on  them.  ‘‘  A  king  was  a  human  being; 
from  him  might  a  request  be  obtained,  whether  right  or 
wrong;  with  him  there  was  room  for  favour,  and  for  acts  of 
kindness;  he  could  be  angry,  and  he  could  forgive;  he  knew 
a  distinction  between  a  friend  and  an  enemy.  But  the  law 
was  a  deaf  inexorable  being,  calculated  rather  for  the  safety 
and  adv^antage  of  the  poor,  than  of  the  rich;  and  admitted  of 

BOOK  IL 

105 

B.  C.  50r.] 
no  relaxation  or  indulgence,  if  its  bounds  were  transgressed* 
Men  being  liable  to  so  many  mistakes,  to  have  no  other 
security  but  innocence  is  a  hazardous  situation.’^  While 
their  minds  were  in  this  discontented  state,  ambassadors  ar¬ 
rived  from  the  Tarquinii,  who,  without  any  mention  of  their 
restoration,  demanded  only  their  effects:  the  senate,  having 
granted  them  an  audience,  continued  their  deliberations  on 
the  subject  for  several  days,  being  apprehensive  that  a  re¬ 
fusal  to  give  them  up,  would  afford  a  plausible  reason  for  a 
war,  and  the  giving  them  up,  a  fund  in  aid  of  it.  Mean¬ 
while  the  ambassadors  were  busily  employed  in  schemes  of 
another  nature:  whilst  they  openly  demanded  the  effects, 
they  were  secretly  forming  a  plan  for  recovering  the  throne, 
and  addressing  themselves  to  the  young  nobles,  seemingly 
on  the  business  which  they  were  supposed  to  have  in  charge, 
they  made  trial  of  their  dispositions.  To  those  who  lent  an 
ear  to  their  suggestions,  they  delivered  letters  from  the 
Tarquinii,  and  concerted  measures  with  them  for  receiving 
those  princes  privately  into  the  city  by  night. 
IV.  The  business  was  first  intrusted  to  the  brothers  of  the 
name  of  Vitellii,  and  those  of  the  name  of  Aquillii;  a  sister 
of  the  Vitellii  had  been  married  to  the  consul  Brutus,  and 
there  were  two  sons  born  of  that  marriage,  now  grown  up, 
Titus  and  Tiberius;  these  were  led  in,  by  their  uncles,  to 
take  part  in  the  design;  and  several  others  of  the  young  no¬ 
bility  were  drawn  into  the  conspiracy,  whose  names,  at  this 
distance  of  time,  are  unknown.  In  the  meanwhile,  the  opi¬ 
nion  of  those,  who  advised  the  giving  up  of  the  property, 
having  prevailed  in  the  senate,  this  afforded  the  ambassadors 
a  pretext  for  remaining  in  the  city,  because  they  had  been 
allowed  time  by  the  consuls  to  procure  carriages  for  the 
conveyance  of  the  effects  of  the  princes;  all  which  time  they 
spent  in  consultations  with  the  conspirators,  and  had,  by 
pressing  instances,  prevailed  upon  them  to  send  letters  for 
the  Tarquinii;  for  without  these,  how  could  they  be  so 
VOL^  I. — P, 

106 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  245. 

fully  assured,  as  an  affair  of  that  high  importance  required, 
that  the  report  of  the  ambassadors  was  not  groundless?’^ 
These  letters,  given  as  a  pledge  of  their  sincerity,  proved 
the  means  of  detecting  the  plot:  for  the  day  before  that  on 
which  they  were  to  return  to  the  Tarquinii,  the  ambassadors 
happening  to  sup  with  the  Vitellii,  and  the  conspirators 
hav  ing  here  in  private  had  much  conversation,  as  was  natu¬ 
ral,  on  the  subject  of  their  new  enterprise,  their  discourse 
was  overheard  by  one  of  the  slaves  who  had,  before  this,  dis¬ 
covered  that  such  a  design  was  in  agitation,  but  waited  for 
this  opportunity,  until  the  letters  should  be  given  to  the  am¬ 
bassadors;  because  these,  being  seized,  would  furnish  full 
proof  of  the  transaction.  As  soon  as  he  found  that  they 
were  delivered,  he  made  a  discovery  of  the  affair  to  the  con¬ 
suls.  The  consuls,  setting  out  Iromhome  directly,  and  appre¬ 
hending  the  ambassadors  and  conspirators  in  the  fact,  effv.ctu- 
alh’  crushed  the  affair  without  any  tumult;  taking  particular 
care,  with  fegard  to  the  letters,  that  they  should  not  escape 
them.  They  instand\  threw  the  traitors  into  chains,  but  hesi¬ 
tated  for  some  time  with  regard  to  proceeding  against  the 
ambassadors;  and  though,  by  their  behaviour,  they  had  de¬ 
served  to  be  treated  as  enemies,  yet  regard  to  the  law  of 
nations  prevailed. 
V.  With  respect  to  the  effects  of  the  princes,  which  they 
had  before  ordered  to  be  restored,  the  business  was  now  laid 
before  the  senate  for  re-consideration;  and  they,  actuated 
entirely  by  resentment,  decreed,  that  they  should  not  be  re¬ 
stored,  but  converted  to  the  use  of  the  state.  They  were, 
therefore,  given  up  to  the  commons  as  plunder,  with  the 
intent,  that  these,  after  such  an  act  of  violence  against  the 
princes,  as  the  seizing  of  their  effects,  might  for  ever  lose  all 
liope  of  reconciliation  with  them.  The  land  of  the  Tarquinii, 
which  lay  between  the  city  and  the  Tiber,  being  consecrated 
to  the  god  of  war,  has,  from  that  time,  been  called  the  Field 
of  Mars.  It  happened,  that  there  was  then  on  that  ground 

BOOK  IL 

107 

B.  C.  SOT.} 
a  crop  of  com,  ripe  for  the  sickle,  and  because  it  would  be 
an  impiety  to  make  use  of  this  produce  of  the  field,  a  great 
number  of  men  were  sent  in  at  once,  who,  having  cut  it  down, 
carried  it  in  baskets,  and  threw  it,  grain  and  straw  together, 
into  the  Tiber,  whose  waters  were  low  at  that  time,  as  is 
generally  the  case  in  the  middle  of  summer.  The  heaps  of 
corn  then  being  frequently  stopped  for  a  while  in  the  shal¬ 
lows,  and  having  contracted  a  covering  of  mud,  sunk,  and, 
remained  fixed,  and  by  these  means,  with  the  afflux  of  other 
materials  which  the  stream  is  apt  to  carry  down,  an  island^ 
was  gradually  formed.  I  suppose  that  mounds  were  after¬ 
wards  added,  and  assistance  given  by  art,  to  raise  the  surface 
to  its  present  height,  and  give  it  sufficient  firmness  to  sup¬ 
port  temples  and  porticoes.  After  the  people  had  made 
plunder  of  the  effects  of  the  princes,  the  traitors  were  con¬ 
demned  and  executed.  And  the  execution  was  the  more 
remarkable  on  this  account,  that  his  office  of  consul  imposed 
on  a  father  the  severe  duty  of  inflicting  punishment  on  his 
own  sons;  and  that  he,  who  ought  not  to  have  been  present 
as  a  spectator,  was  yet  the  very  person  whom  fortune  pitched 
on  to  exact  the  penalty  of  their  offence.  The  youths,  all  of 
the  first  distinction,  stood  tied  to  stakes,  but  the  sons  of  the 
consul  entirely  engaged  the  eyes  of  the  spectators,  as  if  the 
others  were  persons  unknown;  and  people  felt  compassion^ 
not  only  for  their  punishment,  but  even  for  the  crime  by 
which  they  had  brought  it  on  themselves:  to  think  that 
“  they  could,  during  that  year  particularly,  have  been  induced 
to  entertain  a  design  of  betraying  their  country,  just  deliver- 
cd  from  tyranny,  their  father  its  deliverer,  the  consulsh  p^ 
which  had  commenced  in  the  Junian  family,  the  patricians, 
commons,  in  a  word,  whatever  Rome  held  in  highest  vene¬ 
ration,  into  the  hands  of  one  who  was  formerly  a  tyrannical 
king,  now  an  enraged  exile.’’  The  consuls  mounted  their 
*  Between  the  Janie ulnm  and  the  city.  It  was  afterwards  called  the 
Holy  Island,  from  the  number  of  temples  built  upon  it. 

108 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  245. 
throne,  and  the  lictors  were  sent  to  inflict  the  punishment: 
after  stripping  the  criminals  naked,  they  beat  them  with 
rods,  and  beheaded  them;  whilst,  through  the  whole  process 
of  the  affair,  the  looks  and  countenance  of  Brutus  afforded  an 
extraordinary  spectacle,  the  feelings  of  the  father  often  strug¬ 
gling  with  the  character  of  the  magistrate  enforcing  the  exe¬ 
cution  of  the  laws.  Justice  done  to  the  offenders,  in  or¬ 
der  to  exhibit  a  striking  example  for  the  prevention  of  crimes, 
in  their  treatment  of  the  several  parties,  they  gave,  as  a  re¬ 
ward  to  the  discoverer  of  the  treason,  a  sum  of  money  out 
of  the  treasury,  his  freedom,  and  the  rights  of  a  citizen. 
This  man  is  said  to  be  the  first  who  was  made  free  by  the 
Vindicta.*  Some  think  that  the  term  Vindicta’’  was  taken 
from  him,  his  name  having  been  Vindicius:  after  him,  it  ob¬ 
tained,  as  a  rule,  that  whoever  was  made  free  in  that  m^an- 
ner,  should  be  considered  and  admitted  a  citizen. 
VI.  Tarquinius,  on  being  informed  of  these  transactions, 
became  inflamed,  not  only  with  grief  for  the  disappointment 
of  such  promising  hopes,  but  with  hatred  and  resentment; 
and  finding  every  pass  shut  against  secret  plots,  determined 
to  have  recourse  to  open  war;  and  to  that  end,  he  w'ent 
round  to  all  the  cities  of  Etruria,  in  the  character  of  a  sup¬ 
pliant,  addressing  himself  particularly  to  the  people  of  Veii 
and  Tarquinii,  intreating  them,  not  to  suffer  him,  who  was 
sprung  from  themselves,  and  of  the  same  blood;  who  was 
lately  possessed  of  so  great  a  kingdom,  now  exiled  and  in 
want,  to  perish  before  their  eyes,  together  with  the  young 
men  his  sons.  Others  had  been  invited  from  foreign  coun- 
^  The  viiiilicta  was  a  rod,  or  wand,  with  which  the  consul,  in  early 
times,  afterwards  the  cit^-pnetor,  struck  the  slave  presented  to  him  for 
enfranchisement,  the  owner  having  previously  given  him  a  slight  blow, 
and  let  him  go  out  of  his  hands.  The  preetor  then  gave  the  rod  to  a  lictor, 
who  likewise  struck  the  person  manumitted.  He  was  then  registered  as 
a  freeman,  and  assumed  the  cap,  the  symbol  of  liberty,  with  much  cere¬ 
mony,  inlhc  temple  of  Feronia. 

BOOK  11. 

109 

B.  C.  507.] 
tries  to  Rome,  to  fill  the  throne;  but  he,  when  in  possession 
of  the  government,  and  while  he  was  employing  his  arms  in 
extending  the  limits  of  the  Roman  empire,  was  expelled  by 
a  villainous  conspiracy  of  men  who  were  most  closely  con¬ 
nected  with  him;  who,  because  no  one  of  their  number  was 
qualified  to  hold  the  reins  of  government,  had  forcibly  shared 
the  several  parts  of  it  among  them,  and  had  given  up  his 
property  to  he  plundered  by  the  populace,  to  the  intent  that 
all  might  be  equally  guilty.  He  only  wished  to  be  restored 
to  his  own  country  and  crown,  and  to  be  avenged  on  his 
ungrateful  subjects.  He  besought  them  to  support  and  assist 
him,  and  at  the  same  time,  to  take  revenge  for  the  injuries 
which  they  themselves  had  sustained  of  old,  for  their  legions 
so  often  slaughtered,  and  their  lands  taken  from  them.’’ 
These  arguments  had  the  desired  effect  on  the  Veientians, 
every  one  of  whom  earnestly,  and  with  menaces,  declared 
that  they  ought  now  at  least,  with  a  Roman  at  their  head,  to 
efface  the  memory  of  their  disgraces,  and  recover,  by  arms, 
what  they  had  lost.  The  people  of  Tarquinii  were  moved 
by  his  name,  and  his  relation  to  themselves:  they  thought  it 
redounded  to  their  honour,  that  their  countrymen  should 
reign  at  Rome.  Thus  two  armies  of  two  states  followed 
Tarquinius  to  demand  his  restoration,  and  prosecute  war 
against  the  Romans.  When  they  advanced  into  the  Roman 
territories,  the  consuls  marched  out  to  meet  the  enemy. 
Valerius  led  the  infantry,  in  order  of  battle;  Brutus,  with  the 
cavalry,  marched  at  some  distance  before  them,  in  order  to 
procure  intelligence.  In  like  manner,  the  vanguard  of  the 
enemy  was  composed  of  cavalry,  under  the  command  of 
Aruns  Tarquinius,  the  king’s  son;  the  king  himself  followed 
with  the  legions.  Aruns,  perceiving  at  a  distance,  by  the 
lictors,  that  a  consul  was  there,  and  afterwards,  on  a  nearer 
approach,  plainly  distinguishing  Brutus  by  his  face,  became 
inflamed  with  rage,  and  cried  out,  ‘‘  That  is  the  man  who 
has  driven  us  as  exiles  from  our  country ;  see  how  he  marches 

11# 

HISTORY  OF  ROMK. 

[Y.  R. 

in  state,  decorated  with  our  ensigns:  ye  gods,  avengers  of 
kings,  assist  me!”  He  then  spurred  on  his  horse,  and  drove 
furiously  against  the  consul.  Brutus  perceived  that  the  at¬ 
tack  was  meant  for  him;  and  as  it  was  at  that  time  reckoned 
not  improper  for  generals  themselves  to  engage  in  fight,  he 
eagerly  offered  himself  to  the  combat;  and  they  advanced 
against  each  other  with  such  furious  animosity,  neither  think- 
ingf  of  guarding  his  own  person,  but  solely  intent  on  wound¬ 
ing  his  enemy,  that,  in  the  violence  of  the  conflict,  each  of 
them  received  his  antagonist’s  spear  in  his  body,  through 
his  buckler,  and  being  entangled  together  by  the  two  spears, 
they  both  fell  lifeless  from  their  horses.  At  the  same  time, 
the  rest  of  the  cavalry  began  to  engage,  and  were  shortly  af¬ 
ter  joined  by  the  infantry:  a  battle  then  ensued,  in  which 
victory  seemed  alternately  to  incline  to  either  party,  the 
advantages  being  nearly  equal:  for  the  right  wings  of  both 
armies  got  the  better,  and  the  left  were  worsted,  length 
the  Veientians,  accustomed  to  be  vanquished  by  the  Roman 
troops,  were  routed  and  dispersed:  the  Tarquinians,  a  new 
enemy,  not  only  kept  their  ground,  but  even,  on  their  side, 
made  the  Romans  give  way. 
VIL  Though  such  was  the  issue  of  the  battle,  yet  so  great 
terror  took  possession  of  Tarquinius  and  the  Etrurians,  that, 
giving  up  the  enterprise  as  impracticable,  both  armies,  the 
Veientian  and  the  Tarquinian,  retired  by  night  to  their  re¬ 
spective  countries.  To  the  accounts  of  this  battle,  writers 
have  added  miracles;  that,  during  the  silence  of  the  follow¬ 
ing  night,  a  loud  voice  was  uttered  from  the  Arsian  wood, 
which  was  believed  to  be  the  voice  of  Sylvanus,  in  these 
words:  ‘‘  The  number  of  the  Etrurians  who  fell  in  the  en¬ 
gagement  was  the  greater  by  one.  The  Romans  have  the 
victory.”  The  Romans  certainly  departed  from  the  field  as 
conquerors,  the  Etrurians  as  vanquished:  for  when  day  ap¬ 
peared,  and  not  one  of  the  enemy  was  to  be  seen,  the  consul, 
Publiud  Valerius,  collected  the  spoils,  and  returned  in  tri- 

BOOK  11. 

B.  C.  507.] 

Ill 

umph  to  Rome.  He  celebrated  the  funeral  of  his  colleague 
with  the  utmost  degree  of  magnificence  which  those  times 
could  afford;  but  a  much  higher  mark  of  honour  to  the  de- 
ceaaed<»  was  the  grief  expressed  by  the  public,  singularly  re¬ 
markable  in  this  particular,  that  the  matrons  mourned  for 
him  as  for  a  parent,  during  a  whole  year,  in  gratitude  for 
his  vigorous  exertions  in  avenging  the  cause  of  violated 
chastity.  In  a  little  time,  the  consul  who  survived,  so  change¬ 
able  are  the  minds  of  the  populace,  from  having  enjoyed  a 
high  degree  of  popularity,  became  an  object  not  onlv  of 
jealousy,  but  of  suspicion,  attended  with  a  charge  of  an 
atrocious  nature;  it  was  given  out  that  he  aspired  at  the 
sovereignty,  because  he  had  not  substituted  a  colleague  in 
the  room  of  Brutus;  and  besides,  was  building  a  house  on 
the  summit  of  Mount  Velia,  which,  in  such  a  lofty  and 
strong  situation,  would  be  an  impregnable  fortress.  The  con- 
sul’s  mind  was  deeply  affected  with  concern  and  indignation, 
at  finding  that  such  reports  were  circulated  and  believed;  he 
therefore  summoned  the  people  to  an  assembly,  and,  order¬ 
ing  the  fasces  to  be  lowered,*  mounted  the  rostrum.  It  was 
a  sight  highly  pleasing  to  the  multitude,  to  find  the  ensigns 
of  sovereignty  lowered  to  them,  and  an  acknowledgment  thus 
openly  given,  that  the  majesty  and  power  of  the  people  were 
superior  to  those  of  the  consul.  Attention  being  ordered, 
the  consul  extolled  the  good  fortune  of  his  colleague,  who, 
after  having  accomplished  the  deliverance  of  his  country, 
and  being  raised  to  the  highest  post  of  honour,  met  with 
death  while  fighting  in  defence  of  the  republic,  when  his 
glory  had  arrived  at  full  maturity,  without  having  excited 
jealousy;  whereas  he  himself,  surviving  his  glory,  was  be¬ 
come  an  object  of  calumny;  and  from  the  character  of  de¬ 
liverer  of  his  country,  had  sunk  to  a  level  with  the  AquiUii 

*  At  the  same  time,  he  look  the  axes  out  of  the  fasces,  and  they  were 
never,  afterwards,  carried  in  ihe  fasces  of  the  consuls  within  the  city. 

112 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y,  R*  345. 

and  VitelHi.  Will  no  degree  of  merit  then,”  said  he,  ever 
gain  your  confidence,  so  far  as  to  be  secure  from  the  attacks 
of  suspicion?  Could  I  have  the  least  apprehension  that  I,  the 
bitterest  enemy  to  kings,  should  undergo  the  charge  of  aim¬ 
ing  at  kingly  power?  Supposing  that  I  dwelt  in  the  very 
citadel,  and  in  the  Capitol,  could  I  believe  that  I  was  an  ob¬ 
ject  of  terror  to  my  countrymen?  Does  my  reputation  among 
you  depend  on  so  mere  a  trifle?  Is  my  title  to  your  confi¬ 
dence  so  slightly  founded,  that  it  is  more  to  be  considered 
where  I  am,  than  what  I  am?  Citizens,  the  house  of  Publius 
Valerius  shall  be  no  obstruction  to  your  freedom;  the  Velian 
mount  shall  be  secure  to  you:  I  will  not  only  bring  down 
my  house  to  the  plain,  but  will  fix  it  under  the  hill,  that  your 
dwellings  may  overlook  that  of  your  suspected  countryman. 
Let  those  build  on  the  Velian  mount  to  whom  ye  can  better 
intrust  your  liberty  than  to  Publius  Valerius.”  Immediately 
all  the  materials  were  brought  down  from  the  Velian  mount, 
and  the  house  was  built  at  the  foot  of  the  hill,  where  the 
temple  of  victory  mow  stands. 
VIII.  Some  laws  were  then  proposed  by  the  consul, 
which  not  only  cleared  him  frbm  all  suspicion  of  a  design  to 
possess  himself  of  regal  power,  but  whose  tendency  was  so 
contrary  thereto,  that  they  even  rendered  him  popular, 
and  from  thence  he  acquired  the  surname  of  Publicola.  Such 
particularly,  was  that  concerning  an  appeal  to  the  people 
against  the  decrees  of  the  magistrates,  and  that  which  de¬ 
voted  both  the  person  and  goods  of  any  who  should  form 
a  design  of  assuming  regal  power.  These  laws  were  highly 
acceptable  to  the  populace,  and  having  effected  the  ratifi¬ 
cation  of  them,  while  alone  in  office,  in  order  that  the  credit 
of  them  might  be  entirely  his  own,  he  then  held  an  assembly 
for  the  election  of  a  new  colleague.  The  consul  elected  was 
Spurius  Lucretius,  who,  being  far  advanced  in  years,  and 
too  feeble  to  support  the  duties  of  his  office,  died  in  a  few 
days  after.  AI arcus  Horatius  Pulvillus  was  substituted  in 

BOOK  II. 

113 

B.  c.  sor.] 
the  room  of  Lucretius.  In  some  old  writers  I  find  no  men¬ 
tion  of  Lucretius  as  consul;  they  place  Horatius  as  imme¬ 
diate  successor  to  Brutus:  I  suppose  he  was  not  taken  no¬ 
tice  of,  because  his  consulate  was  not  signalized  by  any  im¬ 
portant  transaction.  The  temple  of  Jupiter  in  the  Capitol 
had  not  yet  been  dedicated;  the  consuls  Valerius  and  Hora¬ 
tius  cast  lots  which  should  perform  the  dedication,  and  it 
fell  to  Horatius.  Publicola  set  out  to  conduct  the  war 
against  the  Veientians.  The  friends  of  Valerius  showed 
more  displeasure,  than  the  occasion  merited,  at  the  dedica- 
tion^of  a  temple  so  celebrated  being  given  to  Horatius.  Hav¬ 
ing  endeavoured,  by  every  means,  to  prevent  its  taking  place, 
and  all  their  attempts  having  failed  of  success,  when  the 
consul  had  already  laid  his  hand  on  the  door-post,  and 
was  employed  in  offering  prayers  to  the  gods,  they  hastily 
addressed  him  with  the  shocking  intelligence,  that  his  son 
was  dead,  and  insisted  that  his  family  being  thus  defiled,  he 
could  not  dedicate  the  temple.  Whether  he  doubted  the 
truth  of  the  intelligence,  or  whether  it  was  owing  to  great 
firmness  of  mind,  we  are  not  informed  with  certainty,  nor 
is  it  easy  to  conjecture;  but  he  was  no  farther  diverted  from 
the  business  he  was  engaged  in,  by  that  information,  than 
just  to  give  orders  that  the  body  should  be  buried;  and,  still 
holding  the  post,  he  finished  his  prayer,  and  dedicated  the 
temple.  Such  were  the  transactions  at  home  and  abroad, 
which  occurred  daring  the  first  year  after  the  expulsion  of 
the  royal  family.  I’he  next  consuls  appointed  y  2^^ 
were,  Publius  Valerius,  a  second  time,  and  Titus  C.  506 
Lucretius. 
IX.  Meanwhile,  the  Tarquinii  had  carried  their  com¬ 
plaints  to  Lars  Porsena,  king  of  Clusium;  and  there,  mixing 
admonitions  with  intreaties,  they  at  one  time  besought  him 
that  he  would  not  suffer  those,  who  derived  their  origin  from 
Etruria,  and  were  of  the  same  blood  and  name,  to  spend 
their  lives  in  poverty  and  exile;  then  warned  him  not  to 
VOL.  I. - Q 

114 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  246. 

let  tfiis  new  practice  of  dethroning  kings  proceed  without 
chastisement;  adding,  that  liberty  had  in  itself  sufficient 
sweets  iCo  allure  others  to  follow  the  example,  unless 
kings  would  show  the  same  degree  of  vigour,  in  support 
of  kingly  power,  which  the  people  exerted  to  wrest  it 
from  them:  the  highest  ranks  would  be  reduced  to  a  le¬ 
vel  with  the  lowest:  there  would  be  no  dignity,  no  pre-emi¬ 
nence  among  the  several  members  of  society:  there  would 
soon  be  an  end  of  regal  authority,  which  among  gods  and 
men  had  heretofore  been  held  in  the  highest  degree  of  es¬ 
timation,”  Porsena,  considering  it  as  highly  conducive  to 
the  honour  of  Etruria,  that  there  should  be  a  king  at  Rome, 
and  also  that  that  king  should  be  of  Etrurian  race,  led 
an  army  to  Rome,  determined  to  support  his  pretensions 
by  force  of  arms.  Never  on  any  former  occasion  were  the 
senate  struck  with  such  terror,  so  powerful  was  the  state  of 
Clusium  at  that  time,  and  so  great  the  name  of  Porsena: 
nor  were  they  in  dread  of  their  enemies  only,  but  also  of 
their  own  countrymen;  lest  the  Roman  populace,  over¬ 
come  by  their  fears,  might  admit  the  kings  into  the  city, 
and  for  the  sake  of  peace,  submit  to  slavery.  The  senate, 
therefore,  at  this  season  practised  many  coifciliatory  mea¬ 
sures  toward  the  commons:  their  first  care  was  applied  to 
the  markets,  and  people  were  sent,  some  to  the  Volscians^ 
Others  to  Cum«,  to  purchase  com;  the  privilege  also  of  sell¬ 
ing  salt,  because  the  price  had  been  raised  to  an  extravagant 
height,  was  taken  out  of  the  hands  of  private  persons,  and 
placed  entirely  under  the  management  of  government;  the 
commons  were  also  exempted  from  port  duties  and  taxes, 
that  the  public  expenses  might  fall  upon  the  rich,  who  were 
equal  to  the  burthen,  the  poor  paying  tax  sufficient  if  they 
educated  their  children.  This  indulgent  care  preserved  such 
harmony  in  the  state,  even  during  the  people’s  severe  sitfer- 
ings  afterwards,  from  siege  and  famine,  that  the  name  of 
king  was  abhorred  by  all;  nor  did  any  single  person,  in  after 

BOOK  II. 

115 

B.  C.  506.] 
times,  ever  acquire  such  a  high  degree  of  popularity  by  art* 
fui  intrigues,  as  the  whole  senate  then  obtained  by  their  wise 
administration, 
X.  As  the  enemy  drew  nigh,  every  one  removed  hastily 
from  the  country  into  the  city,  on  every  side  of  which  strong 
guards  were  posted.  Some  parts  seemed  well  secured  by 
the  walls,  others  by  the  Tiber  running  close  to  them.  The 
Sublician  bridge  was  very  near  affording  the  enemy  an  en¬ 
trance,  had  it  not  been  for  one  man,  Horatius  Codes:  no 
other  bulwark  had  the  fortune  of  Rome  on  that  day.  He 
happened  to  be  posted  on  guard  at  the  bridge,  and  when  he 
saw  the  J  aniculum  taken  by  a  sudden  assault,  and  the  enemy 
pouring  down  from  thence  in  full  speed,  his  countrymen  in 
disorder  and  confusion  no  longer  attempting  opposition,  but 
quitting  their  ranks,  he  caught  hold  of  every  one  that  he 
could,  and,  appealing  to  gods  and  men,  assured  them  that 
it  was  in  vain  that  they  fled,  after  deserting  the  post  which 
could  protect  them;  that  if  they  passed  the  bridge,  and  left 
it  behind  them,  they  would  soon  see  greater  numbers  of  the 
enemy  in  the  Palatium  and  the  Capitol  than  in  the  Janicu* 
lum;  wherefore  he  advised  and  warned  them  to  break  down 
the  bridge,  by  their  swords,  fire,  or  any  other  effectual  means, 
while  he  should  sustain  the  attack  of  the  enemy,  as  long-as 
it  was  possible  for  one  person  to  withstand  them.”  He  then 
advanced  to  the  first  entrance  of  t^ie  bridge,  and  being  easily 
distinguished  from  those  who  showed  their  backs  in  retreat¬ 
ing  from  the  fight,  by  his  facing  to  the  front,  with  his  arms 
prepared  for  action,  he  astonished  the  enemy  by  such  won¬ 
derful  intrepidity.  Shame  however  prevailed  on  two  to  re* 
main  with  him,  Spurius  Lartius  and  Titus  Herminius,  both 
of  them  men  of  distinguished  families  and  characters:  with 
their  assistance  he,  for  a  time,  supported  the  first  storm, 
and  the  most  furious  part  of  the  fight.  Even  these  he  sent 
back,  when  the  bridge  was  nearly  destroyed,  and  those  who 
were  employed  in  breaking  it  down  called  upon  them  to  re* 

116 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  246. 
tire;  then  darting  fierce  naenacing  looks  at  each  of  the  leaders 
of  the  Etrurians,  he  sometimes  challenged  them  singly, 
sometimes  upbraided  them  altogether,  as  slaves  of  haughty 
kings,  who,  incapable  of  relishing  liberty  themselves,  had 
come  to  wrest  it  from  others.  For  a  considerable  time  they 
hesitated,  looking  about  for  some  other  to  begin  the  combat: 
shame  at  length  put  their  troops  in  motion,  and,  setting  up  a 
shout,  they  poured  their  javelins  from  all  sides  against  their 
single  opponent;  all  which,  having  stuck  in  the  shield  with 
which  he  guarded  himself,  and  he  still  persisting  with  the 
same  undaunted  resolution,  and  with  haughty  strides,  to  keep 
possession  of  his  post,  they  had  now  resolved,  by  making  a 
violent  push,  to  force  him  from  it,  when  the  crash  of  the 
falling  bridge,  and  at  the  same  time  a  shout  raised  by  the 
Romans,  for  joy  at  having  completed  their  purpose,  filled 
them  with  sudden  dismay,  and  stopped  them  from  proceed- 
ing  in  the  attempt.  Then  Codes  said,  “  Holy  father,  Tibe- 
rinus,  I  beseech  thee  to  receive  these  arms,  and  this  thy 
soldier,  into  thy  propitious  stream.”  With  these  words, 
armed  as  he  was,  he  leaped  down  into  the  Tiber,  and  through 
showers  of  darts  which  fell  around  him,  swam  safe  across  to 
his  friends,  having  exhibited  a  degree  of  intrepidity  which,  in 
after  times,  was  more  generally  celebrated  than  believed. 
The  state  showed  a  grateful  sense  of  such  high  desert;  a 
statue  was  erected  to  him  in  the  Comitium,  with  a  grant  of 
land  as  large  as  he  could  plough  completely  in  one  day.  The 
zeal  of  private  persons  too  was  conspicuous,  amidst  the 
honours  conferred  on  him  by  the  public;  for,  great  as  the 
scarcity  then  was,  every  one  contributed  something  to  him, 
in  proportion  to  the  stock  of  their  family,  abridging  them- 
selve^i  of  their  own  proper  support. 
XI.  Porsena,  disappointed  of  success  in  this  first  effort, 
changed  his  plan  from  an  assault  to  a  blockade;  and,  leaving 
a  force  sufficient  to  secure  the  Janiculum,  encamped  his  main 
body  in  the  plain  along  the  bank  of  the  Tiber,  at  the  same 

BOOK  IL 

117 

B.  C.  506.] 
time  collecting  ships  from  all  quarters^  at  once  to  guard  the 
passage,  that  no  corn  should  be  conveyed  to  Rome,  and  to 
enable  his  troops  to  cross  over  the  river  in  different  places, 
as  occasion  offered,  to  lay  waste  the  country.  In  a  short 
time  he  extended  his  depredations  so  successfully,  through 
every  part  of  the  Roman  territories,  that  people  were  obliged 
to  convey  their  effects  into  the  city,  as  also  their  cattle,  which 
no  one  would  venture  to  drive  without  the  gates.  The  Etru¬ 
rians  were  permitted  to  act  in  this  uncontrolled  manner,  not 
so  much  through  fear,  as  design;  for  Valerius  the  consul, 
intent  on  gaining  an  opportunity  of  making  an  unexpected 
attack  on  a  large  number  of  them,  at  a  time  when  they  were 
unprepared,  overlooked  trifling  advantages,  reserving  his 
force  for  a  severe  revenge  on  a  more  important  occasion. 
With  this  view,  in  order  to  allure  the  plunderers,  he  gave 
orders  to  his  men  to  drive  out  some  cattle  through  the  Es- 
quiline  gate,  which  was  at  the  opposite  side  from  the  enemy; 
judging  that  these  would  soon  get  information  of  it,  because, 
during  the  blockade  and  the  scarcity  of  provisions,  many  of 
the  slaves  turned  traitors  and  deserted.  Accordingly  they 
were  informed  of  it  by  a  deserter,  and  passed  over  the  river 
in  much  greater  numbers  than  usual,  in  hopes  of  getting  pos¬ 
session  of  the  entire  booty.  Publius  Valerius  then  ordered 
Titus  Herminius,  with  a  small  body  of  men,  to  lie  concealed 
near  the  two-mile  stone  on  the  Gabian  road;  Spurius  Lar- 
tius,  with  a  body  of  light  armed  troops,  to  stand  at  the  Col- 
line  gate  until  the  enemy  should  pass  by,  and  then  to  take 
post  in  their  rear,  so  as  to  cut  off  their  retreat  to  the  river;  the 
other  consul,  Titus  Lucretius,  with  some  companies  of  foot, 
marched  out  of  the  Nsevian  gate;  Valerius  himself  led  down 
his  chosen  cohorts  from  the  Coelian  mount,  and  these  were 
the  first  who  were  observed  by  the  enemy.  Herminius,  as 
as  soon  as  he  found  that  the  alarm  was  taken,  rushed  out 
from  his  ambush,  to  take  his  share  in  the  fray,  and  while  the 
Etrurians  were  busied  in  forming  an  opposition  to  Valerius, 

118 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[ Y.  R,  248. 

fell  upon  their  rear;  the  shout  was  returned,  both  from  the 
right  and  from  the  left;  from  the  Colline  gate  on  one  hand, 
and  the  Neevian  on  the  other.  The  plunderers  being  thus 
surrounded,  destitute  of  strength  to  make  head  against  their 
adversaries, and  shut  out  from  all  possibility  of  a  retreat,  were 
cut  to  pieces.  Afler  this  the  Etrurians  confined  their  ravages 
to  narrower  limits. 
XII,  The  siege  continued  notwithstanding,  and  provisions 
becoming  exceeding!)^  scarce  and  dear,  Porsena  entertained 
hopes,  that,  by  remaining  quiet  in  his  present  position,  he 
should  become  master  of  the  city;  when  Caius*Mucius,  a 
noble  youth,  filled  with  indignation  on  reflecting  that  the 
Roman  people,  while  they  were  in  bondage  under  their  kings, 
were  never  in  any  war  besieged  by  any  enemy,  and  that  the 
same  people,  now  in  a  state  of  freedom,  were  held  besieged 
by  those  very  Etrurians  whose  armies  they  had  often  routed, 
resolved,  therefore,  by  some  great  and  daring  effort,  to  re¬ 
move  such  reproach.  At  first  he  designed  to  make  his  way 
into  the  enemy’s  camp,  without  communicating  his  intention; 
but  afterwards,  dreading  lest,  if  he  should  go  without  the 
order  of  the  consuls,  and  the  knowledge  of  any,  he  might  be 
apprehended  by  the  Roman  guards,  and  brought  back  as  a 
deserter,  an  imputation  for  which  the  present  circumstances 
of  the  city  would  aflPord  plausible  grounds,  he  applied  to  the 
senate,  and  told  them,  Fathers,  I  intend  to  cross  the  Tiber, 
and  to  enter,  if  I  can,  the  enemy’s  camp,  not  to  seek  for 
plunder,  or  to  revenge  their  depredations  in  kind;  the  blow 
which  I  meditate,  with  the  aid  of  the  gods,  is  of  more  im¬ 
portance.”  The  senate  gave  their  approbation,  and  he  set 
out  with  a  sword  concealed  under  his  garment.  When  he 
came  into  the  camp,  he  took  his  place  close  to  the  king’s  tri¬ 
bunal,  where  a  very  great  crowd  was  assembled.  It  happened 
that,  at  this  time,  the  soldiers  were  receiving  their  pay,  and 
a  secretary,  sitting  beside  the  king,  and  dressed  nearly  in 
the  same  manner,  acted  a  principal  part  in  the  business, 

BOOK  IL 

119 

B.  C.  506.] 
and  to  him  the  soldiers  generally  addressed  themselves. 
Mucius^  not  daring  to  inquire  which  was  Porsena,  lest  his 
not  knowing  the  king  should  discover  whkt  he  was,  fortune 
blindly  directing  the  stroke  where  it  was  not  intended,  slew 
the  secretary  instead  of  the  king.  Then  endeavouring  to 
make  his  escape  through  a  passage,  which  with  his  bloody 
weapon  he  cleared  for  himself  among  the  dismayed  crowd, 
a  concourse  of  the  soldiers  being  attracted  by  the  noise,  he 
was  seized  by  the  king’s  life-guards,  and  dragged  back. 
Standing  there  single,  among  a  crowd  of  enemies,  before  the 
king’s  tribunal,  even  in  this  situation,  in  the  midst  of  for¬ 
tune’s  severest  threats,  showing  himself  more  capable  of  in¬ 
spiring  terror  than  of  feeling  it,  be  spoke  to  this  effect:  I  am 
a  Roman  citizen;  my  name  is  Caius  Macius.  As  an  enemy, 
I  intended  to  have  slain  an  enemy,  nor  is  my  resolution  less 
firmly  prepared  to  suffer  death  than  to  inflict  it.  It  is  the 
part  of  a  Roman  both  to  act  and  to  suffer  with  fortitude;  not 
am  I  the  only  one  who  has  harboured  such  designs  against 
you.  There  is  a  long  list,  after  me,  of  candidates  for  the 
same  glorious  distinction.  Prepare,  therefore,  if  you  choose, 
for  a  contest  of  this  sort,  wherein  you  must  every  hour  en¬ 
gage  at  the  hazard  of  \  our  life,  and  have  the  enemy  and  the 
sword  continually  in  the  porch  of  your  pavilion;  this  is  the 
kind  of  war  in  which  we,  Roman  youths,  engage  against  you; 
fear  not  an  army  in  the  field,  nor  in  battle;  the  affair  will  rest 
between  your  single  person,  and  each  of  us,  separately.”  The 
king,  inflamed  with  rage,  and,  at  the  same  time,  terrified  at 
the  danger,  ordered  fires  to  be  kindled  round  him,  threaten¬ 
ing  him  with  severe  punishment  unless  he  instantly  explained 
what  those  plots  were,  with  which  he  threatened  him  in  those 
ambiguous  expressions:  Behold,”  sard  Mucius,  and  per¬ 
ceive  what  little  account  is  made  of  the  body,  by  those  who 
have  in  view  the  attainment  of  great  glory;”  and  thrusting 
his  right  hand  into  a  chafing-dish  of  coals  which  had  been 
kindled  for  the  purpose  of  a  sacrifice,  held  it  there  to  bum, 

120 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  246. 

as  if  he  were  void  of  all  sense  of  feeling:  on  which  the  king, 
thunderstruck  in  a  manner  by  such  astonishing  behaviour, 
leaped  from  his  seat,  ordered  the  youth  to  be  removed  from 
the  altars,  and  said  to  him,  Retire  in  safety,  for  the  treat- 
moQt  which  you  intended  for  me,  was  mild  in  comparison  of 
that  which  you  have  practised  on  yourself.  I  should  wish 
increase  and  success  to  your  bravery,  if  that  bravery  were 
exerted  on  the  side  of  my  own  country.  However,  I  dis¬ 
miss  you  untouched  and  unhurt;  and  discharge  you  from  the 
penalties,  which,  by  the  laws  of  war,  I  might  inflict.”  Mucius 
then,  as  if  to  make  a  return  for  this  act  of  favour,  told  him, 
Since  I  find  you  disposed  to  honour  bravery,  that  you  may 
obtain  from  me  by  kindness  what  you  could  not  by  threats, 
know  that  three  hundred  of  us,  the  principal  youths  in  Rome, 
have  bound  ourselves  to  each  other  by  an  oath,  to  attack 
you  in  this  manner;  my  lot  happened  to  be  first;  the  others 
will  be  with  you,  each  in  his  turn,  according  as  the  lot  shall 
set  him  foremost,  until  fortune  shall  afford  an  opportunity 
of  succeeding  against  you.” 
Xill.  Mucius,  who  afterwards  got  the  surname  of  Scse- 
vola,  or  the  left  handed,  from  the  loss  of  his  right  hand, 
being  thus  dismissed,  was  followed  to  Rome  by  ambassa¬ 
dors  from  Porsena.  The  king  had  been  so  deeply  affected 
by  the  danger  to  w'hich  he  had  been  exposed,  in  the  first  at¬ 
tempt,  from  which  nothing  had  protected  him  but  the  mis¬ 
take  of  the  assailant;  and  by  the  consideration  that  he  was  to 
undergo  the  same  hazard,  as  many  times  as  the  number  of 
the  other  conspirators  amounted  to,  that  he  thought  proper, 
of  his  own  accord,  to  offer  terms  of  accommodation  to  the 
Romans.  During  the  negotiation,  mention  was  made,  t»  no 
purpose,  of  the  restoration  of  the  Tarquinian  family  to  the 
throne;  and  this  proposal  he  made,  rather  because  he  had  not 
been  able  to  refuse  it  to  the  Tarquinii,  than  from  entertain¬ 
ing  the  slightest  expectation  of  its  being  accepted  by  the  Ro¬ 
mans.  He  carried  the  point,  respecting  the  giving  up  of  the 

BOOK  II 

B.  C.  507.] 

lands  taken  from  the  Veientian^,  and  compelled  the  Romans 
to  submit  to  give  hostages,  if  they  wished  to  see  his  forces 
withdrawn  from  the  Janiculum.  Peace  being  concluded  on 
these  terms,  Porsena  withdrew  his  troops  from  the  Janicu- 
lum,  and  retired  out  of  the  Roman  territories.  To  Caius 
Mucius,  as  a  reward  of  his  valour,  the  senate  gave  a  tract  of 
ground  on  the  other  side  of  the  Tiber,  which  was  afterwards 
called  the^  Mucian  meadows;  and,  such  honour  being  paid  to 
courage,  excited  even  the  other  sex  to  merit  public  distinc¬ 
tions.  A  young  lady  called  Cloelia,  one  of  the  hostages,  (the 
camp  of  the  Etrurians  happening  to  be  pitched  at  a  small 
distance  from  the  banks  of  the  Tiber,)  evaded  the  vigilance 
of  the  guards,  and,  at  the  head  of  a  band  of  her  companions, 
swam  across  the  Tiber,  through  a  shower  of  darts  discharged 
at  them  by  the  enemy,  and  restored  them  all,  in  safety,  to 
their  freinds  at  Rome.  When  the  king  was  informed  of  this, 
being  at  first  highly  incensed,  he  sent  envoys  to  Rome,  to 
insist  on  the  restoration  of  the  hostage  Cloelia;  as  to  the  rest, 
he  showed  little  concern.  But  his  anger,  in  a  little  time, 
being  converted  into  admiration,  he  spoke  of  her  exploit  as 
superior  to  those  of  Codes  and  jMucius;  and  declared  that 
as,  in  case  the  hostage  should  not  be  given  up,  he  would  con¬ 
sider  the  treaty  as  broken  off;  so,  if  she  should  be  surren¬ 
dered,  he  would  send  her  back  to  her  friends  in  safety.  Both 
parties  behaved  with  honour;  the  Romans,  on  their  side,  re¬ 
turned  the  pledge  of  peace,  agreeably  to  the  treaty,  and  with 
the  Etrurian  king  merit  found,  not.  security  only,  but  ho¬ 
nours.  After  bestowing  high  compliments  on  the  lady,  he 
told  her  that  he  made  her  a  present  of  half  of  the  hostages, 
with  full  liberty  to  choose  such  as  she  liked.  When  they 
were  all  drawn  out  before  her,  she  is  said  to  have  chosen  the 
ver}  young  boys,  which  was  not  only  consonant  to  maiden 
delicacy,  but,  in  the  universal  opinion  of  the  hostages  them¬ 
selves,  highly  reasonable,  that  those  who  were  of  such  an 
age  as  was  most  liable  to  injury,  should  in  preference,  be 
VOL.  I. — R 

122 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  247, 

delivered  out  of  the  hands  <of  enemies.  Peace  being  thus 
re-established,  the  Romans  rewarded  this  instance  of  intre¬ 
pidity,  so  uncommon  in  the  female  sex,  with  a  mark  of  ho¬ 
nour  as  uncommon,  an  equestrian  statue.  This  was  erected 
at  the  head  of  the  sacred  street. 
XIV.  Very  inconsistent  with  this  peaceful  manner,  in 
which  the  Etrurian  king  retired  from  the  city,  is  the  practice 
handed  down  from  early  times,  and  continued,  among  other 
customary  usages,  even  in  our  own  days,  of  proclaiming  at 
public  sales,  that  they  are  selling  the  goods  of  king  Porsena; 
which  custom  must  necessarily  either  have  taken  its  rise 
originally,  during  the  war,  or  it  must  be  derived  from  a 
milder  source  than  seems  to  belong  |o  the  expression,  which 
intimates  that  the  goods  for  sale  were  taken  from  an  enemy. 
Of  the  several  accounts  which  have  been  given,  this  seems 
to  be  the  nearest  to  truth:  that  Porsena,  on  retiring  from 
the  Janiculum,  made  a  present  to  the  Ropians  of  his  camp, 
which  was  plentifully  stored  with  provisions  coUected  from 
the  neighbouring  fertile  lands  of  Etruria,  the  city  at  that 
time  labouring  under  a  scarcity,  in  consequence  of  the 
long  siege;  and  lest  the  populace,  if  permitted,  might  seize 
on  them,  as  the  spoil  of  an  enemy,  they  were  set  up  to 
sale,  and  called  the  goods  of  Porsena;  the  appellation  deno¬ 
ting  rather  gratitude  for  the  gift,  than  an  auction  of  the  king’s 
property,  which,  besides,  never  came  into  the  power  of  the 
Romans.  After  he  had  put  an  end  to  the  war  with  Rome, 
Porsena,  that  he  might  not  appear  to  have  led  bis  troops  in¬ 
to  those  countries  to  no  purpose,  sent  his  son  Aruns,  with 
half  of  his  forces,  to  lay  siege  to  Aricia:  the  unexpectedness 
of  the  attack  struck  the  Aricians  at  first  with  dismay;  but  af¬ 
terwards  having  collected  aid,  both  from  the  Latine  states 
and  from  Cumse,  they  assumed  such  confidence,  as  to  ven¬ 
ture  an  engagement  in  the  field.  At  the  beginning  of  the 
battle,  the  Etrurians  rushed  on  so  furiously,  that  at  the  very 
first  onset  they  put  the  Aricians  to  the  rout:  the  cohorts  from 

BOOK  IL 

V2o 

B.  C.  506.] 

Cumae,  opposing  art  to  force,  moved  a  little  to  one^ide;  and 
when  the  enemy,  in  the  impetuosity  of  their  career,  had  pas¬ 
sed  them,  faced  about,  and  attacked  their  rear.  By  these 
means  the  Etrurians,  after  having  almost  gained  the  victory, 
were  surrounded  and  cut  to  pieces:  a  very  small  part  of  them, 
their  general  being  lost,  and  no  place  of  safety  nearer,  made 
the  best  of  their  way  to  Rome,  without  arms,  and  in  their 
circumstances  and  appearance  merely  like  suppliants;  there 
they  were  kindly  received,  and  provided  with  lodgings: 
when  their  wounds  were  cured,  some  of  them  returned  home, 
and  gave  an  account  of  the  hospitality  and  kindness  which 
they  had  experienced.  A  great  number  remained  at  Rome, 
induced  by  the  regard  which  they  had  contracted  for  their 
hosts  and  for  the  city :  they  had  ground  allotted  to  them  for 
building  houses,  which  was  afterwards  called  the  Tuscan 
street. 
XV.  The  next  elected  consuls  were  Publius  Lu-y.  tt  24*. 
505 
cretius,  and  Publius  Valerius  Publicola  a  third  time. 
During  this  year,  ambassadors  came  from  Porsena,  lor  the 
last  time,  about  restoring  Tarquinius  to  the  throne.  The 
answer  given  to  them  was,  that  the  senate  would  send  am¬ 
bassadors  to  the  king;  and  accordingly,  without  delay,  a  de¬ 
putation.  consisting  of  the  persons  of  the  highest  dignity 
among  the  senators,  was  sent  with  orders  to  acquaint  him, 
that  it  was  not  because  their  answer  might  not  have  been 
given  in  these  few  words,  that  the  kings  would  not  be  admit¬ 
ted,  that  they  had  chosen  to  send  a  select  number  of  their  liody 
to  him,  rather  than  to  give  the  answer  to  his  ambassadors  at 
Rome,  but  in  order  that  an  end  might  be  put  for  ever  to  all 
mention  of  that  business;  and  that  the  intercourse  of  mutual 
kindness,  at  present  subsisting  between  them,  might  not  be 
disturbed  by  the  uneasiness  which  must  arise  to  both  par¬ 
ties,  if  he  were  to  request  what  would  be  destructive  of 
the  liberty  of  the  Roman  people;  and  the  Romans,  unless 
they  chose  to  comply  at  the  expense  of  their  own  ruin. 

J24 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R. 

must  give  a  refusal  to  a  {)erson,  to  whom  they  would  wish 
to  refuse  nothing:  that  the  Roman  people  were  not  under 
regal  government,  but  in  a  state  of  freedom,  and  were  fully 
determined  to  open  their  gates  to  declared  enemies,  rather 
than  to  kings:  that  this  was  the  fixed  resolution  of  every  one 
of  them;  that  the  liberty  of  the  city,  and  the  city  itself,  should 
have  the  same  period  of  existence;  and,  therefore,  to  intreat 
him  that,  if  he  wished  the  safety  of  Rome,  he  would  allow  it 
to  continue  in  its  present  state.”  The  king,  convinced  of 
the  impropriety  of  interfering  any  farther,  replied,  Since 
this  is  your  fixed  and  unalterable  resolution,  1  will  neither 
teaze  you  by  a  repetition  of  fruitless  applications  on  the  same 
subject,  nor  will  I  disappoint  the  Tarquinii,  by  giving  hopes 
of  assistance,  which  they  must  not  expect  from  me.  Let 
them,  whether  they  look  for  war  or  for  quiet,  seek  some 
other  residence  in  their  exile,  that  there  may  subsist  no  cause 
of  jealousy,  to  disturb,  henceforward,  the  good  understand¬ 
ing,  which  I  wish  to  maintain  between  you  and  me.”  To 
these  expressions  he  added  acts  still  more  friendly;  the  hos¬ 
tages,  which  remained  in  his  possession,  he  restored,  and 
gave  back  the  Veientian  land,  of  which  the  Romans  had  been 
deprived  by  the  treaty  at  the  Janiculum.  Tarquinius,  find¬ 
ing  all  hopes  of  his  restoration  cut  off,  retired  for  refuge  to 
I'usculum,  to  his  father-in-law,  Mamilius  Octavius.  Thus 
peace  and  confidence  were  firmly  established  between  the 
Romans  and  Porsena. 
y  2^0  XVI.  The  next  consuls  were  Marcus  Valerius  and 
B.  c.  Publius  Postumius.  During  this  year,  war  was  carried 
on,  with  success,  against  the  Sabines,  and  the  consuls  had  the 
honour  of  a  triumph.  The  Sabines,  afterwards,  preparing  for  a 
renewal  of  hostilities  in  a  more  formidable  manner;  to  oppose 
them,  and,  at  the  same  time,  to  guard  against  any  sudden 
danger  which  might  arise  from  the  side*  of  Tusculum,  where, 
though  war  was  not  openly  declared,  there  was  reason  to  ap¬ 
prehend  that  it  was  intended,  Publius  Valerius,  a  fourth  time^ 

BOOK  II 

125 

B  C.  503.] 
and  Titus  Lucretius,  a  second  time,  were  chosen 
suls.  A  tumult  which  arose  among  the  Sabines,  be-  C.  502. 
tween  the  advocates  for  peace  and  those  for  war,  was  the  means 
of  transferring  a  considerable  part  of  their  strength  to  the  side 
of  the  Romans.  For  Atta  Clausus,  called  afterwards  at  Rome 
Appius  Claudius,  being  zealous  in  favour  of  peaceful  mea¬ 
sures,  but  overpowered  by  the  turbulent  promoters  of  war, 
and  unable  to  make  head  against  their  faction,  withdrew  from 
Regillum  to  Rome,  accompanied  by  a  numerous  body  of  ad¬ 
herents,*  1  hese  were  admitted  to  the  rights  of  citizens, 
and  had  land  assigned  them  beyond  the  Anio.  They  have 
been  called  the  old  Claudian  tribe,  to  distinguish  them  from 
the  new  members,  who,  coming  from  the  same  part  of  the 
country,  were  afterwards  added  to  that  tribe.  Appius  was 
elected  into  the  senate,  and  soon  acquired  a  reputation  among 
the  most  eminent.  The  consuls,  in  prosecution  of  the  war, 
marched  their  army  into  the  Sabine  territories,  and,  after 
reducing  the  power  of  the  enemy,  by  wasting  their  lands, 
and  after %vards  in  battle,  to  such  a  degree,  that  there  was 
no  room  to  apprehend  a  renewal  of  hostilities  in  that  quarter 
for  a  long  time  to  come,  returned  in  triumph  to  Rome.  In 
the  ensuing  year,  when  Agrippa  Menenius  and  y 
Publius  Postumius  were  consuls,  died  Publius 
Valerius,  a  man  I'niversally  allowed  to  have  excelled  all 
others,  in  superior  talents  both  for  war  and  peace,  full  of 
glory,  but  in  such  slender  circumstances,  that  he  left  not 
sufficient  to  defray  the  charges  of  his  funeral.  He  was  buried 
at  the  expense  of  the  public,  and  the  matrons  went  into 
mourning  for  him,  as  they  had  done  for  Bratus.  During 
the  same  year,  two  of  the  Latine  colonies,  Pometia  and  Cora 
revolted  to  the  Auruncians,  and  war  was  undertaken  against 
that  people;  a  very  numerous  ariny,  with  which  they  boldly 
attempted  to  oppose  the  consuls,  who  were  entering  their 
*  ^ot  less  than  five  tiiousand  familiei'  accompanied  him 

120 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

[Y.  R.  252, 

borders,  was  entirely  routed,  and  the  Auruncians  compelled 
to  make  their  last  stand  at  Pometia:  nor  was  the  carnage 
less  after  the  battle  was  over,  than  during  its  continuance  j 
there  were  greater  numbers  slain  than  taken,  and  those  who 
were  made  prisoners,  were  in  general  put  to  death;  nay,  in 
the  violence  of  their  rage,  which  ought  to  be  confined  to  foes 
in  arms,  the  enemy  spared  not  even  the  hostages,  three  hun¬ 
dred  of  whom  had  been  formerly  put  into  their  hands.  Dur¬ 
ing  this  year  also  there  was  a  triumph  at  Rome. 
Y  U  ^  52  succeeding  consuls,  Opiter  Virgi- 
B.  C.  500,  nius  and  Spurius  Cassius,  attacked  Pometia,  at 
first  by  storm,  afterwards  by  regular  approaches.*  The 
Auruncians,  actuated  rather  by  implacable  hatred,  than  by 
any  hope  of  success,  and  without  waiting  for  a  favourable 
opportunity,  resolved  to  assail  them;  and,  sallying  out,  armed 
Orig.  deinde  vineis,  aliisque  operibus.  The  great  difficulty  of  trans- 
IsUion  consists  in  the  impossibility  of  finding  corresponding  terms.  The 
modern  art  of  war  difiers,  so  entirely,  from  the  ancient,  owing  to  the  va¬ 
rious  improvements  that  have  been  ininxloced  into  that  destructive 
science,  during  a  period  of  more  than  two  thousand  years,  and  principally 
to  the  invention  of  gunpowder,  that  the  ancient  modes  of  attack  and  de¬ 
fence,  as  well  as  the  various  military  machines,  are  not  only  now  disused, 
but  even  no  equivalent  terms  can,  in  any  of  the  modern  languages,  be 
found  for  them.  Thus,  in  the  above  passage,  wherein  the  translator  has 
taken  the  liberty,  rather  of  describing  the  operation,  than  translating  the 
original,  the  word  mnea  occurs;  this,  as  Vegetius  informs  us,  was  a  ma¬ 
chine  constructed  of  timbers,  strongly  framed  together,  mounted  on 
wheels  and  covered  with  hurdles,  over  which  was  put  a  quantity  of  earth; 
the  assailants,  thus  protected  against  the  missile  weapons  of  the  enemy, 
moved  forward  the  machine;  and,  under  cover  of  it,  endeavoured  to  beat 
down,  or  undermine,  the  walls.  The  translator  here  begs  leave,  once  for 
all,  to  observe,  that  he  will  often  take  the  liberty  he  has  done  in  this  place, 
of  dropping  terms,  which  cannot  be  translated;  and  which,  if  left  untrans¬ 
lated  in  the  text,  could  convey  no  idea  whatever  to  the  English  reader: 
endeavouring  however,  he  hopes  not  unsuccessfully,  by  a  short  description, 
er  slight  circumlocution,  to  make  his  author’s  meaning  sufficiently  intel 
ligible. 

BOOK  IL 

127 

B.  C.  500.] 
with  fire  and  sword,  they  filled  every  place  with  slaughter 
and  conflagration;  and,  besides  burning  the  machines,  and 
killing  and  wounding  great  numbers  of  their  enemies,  were 
very  near  killing  one  of  the  consuls,  (which  of  them,  wri¬ 
ters  do  not  inform  us,)  who  was  grievously  wounded,  and 
thrown  from  his  horse.  The  troops,  thus  foiled  in  their  en 
terprize,  returned  to  Rome,  leaving  the  consul,  whose  re¬ 
covery  was  doubtful,  together  with  a  great  number  of  wound¬ 
ed.  After  a  short  interval,  just  sufficient  for  the  curing  of 
their  wounds,  and  recruiting  the  army,’  the  Romans  renew¬ 
ed  their  operations  against  Pometia,  with  redoubled  fury 
and  augmented  strength;  and  when  they  had  a-new  completed 
their  military  works,  the  soldiers  being  just  on  the  point  of 
scaling  the  walls,  the  garrison  capitulated.  However,  although 
the  city  had  surrendered,  the  chiefs  of  the  Auruncians  were 
from  all  parts  dragged  to  execution,  with  the  same  degree 
of  cruelty,  as  if  it  had  been  taken  by  assault:  the  other  mem¬ 
bers  of  the  colony  were  sold  by  auction:  the  town  was  de¬ 
molished,  and  the  land  set  up  to  sale.  The  consuls  obtained 
a  triumph,  rather  in  consideration  of  their  having  gratified 
the  people’s  resentment  by  severe  revenge,  than  of  the  mag¬ 
nitude  of  the  war  which  they  had  brought  to  a  conclusion, 
XVIII.  The  following  \ear  the  consuls  were  ^  25^^ 
Postumus  Cominius  and  Titus  Lartius;  when  b.  C.  499. 
some  Sabine  youths  having,  through  wantonness,  used  vio- 
lence  to  certain  courtezaas  at  Rome,  during  the  celebration 
of  the  public  games,  and  a  mob  assembling,  a  scuffle  ensued, 
which  might  almost  be  called  a  battle;  and,  from  this  trifling 
cause,  matters  seemed  to  have  taken  a  tendency  towards  a 
renewal  of  hostilities.  Besides  the  apprehension  of  a  war 
with  the  Sabines,  there  was  another  affair  which  created 
much  uneasiness:  undoubted  intelligence  was  received,  that 
thirty  states  had  already  formed  a  conspiracy,  at  the  instiga¬ 
tion  of  Octavius  Mamilius.  While  Rome  remained  in  this 
perplexity,  looking  forward  with  anxioxis  apprehension  to 

I2d 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y,  R.  25;?. 

the  issue  of  such  a  perilous  conjuncture,  mention  was  made, 
for  the  first  time,  of  creating  a  dictator.*  But  in  what  >ear) 
or  who  the  consuls  were,  who  could  not  be  confided  in,  be¬ 
cause  they  were  of  the  Tarquinian  faction,  for  that  also  is 
related,  or  who  was  the  first  person  created  dictator,  we 
have  no  certain  information.  In  the  most  ancient  writers, 
however,  I  find  it  asserted,  that  the  first  dictator  was  1  itus 
Lartius,  and  that  Spurius  Cassius  was  appointed  master  of 
the  horse.  They  chose  men  of  consular  dignity,  as  ordered 
by  the  law  enacted  ^onceming  the  creating  of  a  dictator. 
For  this  reason,  I  am  the  more  induced  to  believe,  that  Lar¬ 
tius,  who  was  of  consular  dignity,  and  not  Manius  Valerius? 
son  of  Marcus,  and  grandson  of  Volesus,  who  had  not  yet 
been  consul,  was  placed  over  the  consuls,  as  their  director 
and  master,  as,  even  if  it  had  been  thought  proper,  that  the 
dictator  should  be  chosen  out  of  that  family,  they  would  the 
rather  have  elected  the  father,  Marcus  Valerius,  a  man  of 
approved  merit,  and  of  consular  dignity.  On  this  first  es* 
tablishment  of  a  dictator  at  Rome,  the  populace,  seeing  the 
axes  carried  before  him,  were  struck  with  such  terror,  as 
made  them  more  submissive  to  rule;  for  they  could  not  now, 
as  under  consuls  who  were  equal  in  authority  hope  for  pro¬ 
tection,  from  one  of  them,  against  the  other;  but  prompt 
obedience  was  required  of  them,  and  in  no  case  was  there 
any  appeal.  Even  the  Sabines  were  alarmed  at  the  appoint¬ 
ment  of  a  dictator  by  the  Romans,  the  more  so,  because 
they  supposed  that  he  had  been  named  to  act  against  them; 
*  The  dictator  was  an  officer  endued  with  absolute  authority  over  all 
orders mnd  bodies  of  men  whatever;  and  from  whom  there  was,  in  the  ear¬ 
ly  times  of  the  republic,  no  appeal.  He  could  not  hold  the  office  lon¬ 
ger  than  six  months,  nor  go  out  of  Italy,  nvr  could  he  march  on  horse¬ 
back  without  leave  previously  obtained  from  the  people.  It  became  the 
practice,  that  one  of  the  consuls,  m  the  night,  within  the  territory  of  the 
republic,  named  the  dictator;  and  it  was  required  that  the  nomination 
should  be  confirmed  by  auspice^ 

B.  C.  499,3 

BOOK  11. 

129 

they  therefore  sent  ambassadors  to  treat  of  an  accommoda* 
tion;  who,  requesting  of  the  dictator  and  senate,  that  they 
would  pardon  the  misconduct  of  thoughtless  young  men, 
were  answered,  that  pardon  might  be  granted  to  young  men, 
but  not  to  the  old,  who  made  it  their  constant  practice  to 
kindle  one  war  after  another.  However,  a  negociation  was 
entered  into  for  an  adjustment  of  affairs,  and  it  would  have 
been  concluded,  if  the  Sabines  had  been  willing  to  reimburse 
the  costs  expended  on  the  war,  for  that  was  the  condition  re¬ 
quired.  War  was  proclaimed,  but  still  a  suspension  of  hos¬ 
tilities  continued  during  the  remainder  of  the  year. 
XIX.  The -consuls  of  the  next  year  were  Servius  ^  ^  2S4 
Sulpicius,  and  Manias  Tullius.  Nothing  worth  B.  C.498. 
mention  occurred.  Then  succeeded  Titus  ^butius  and  Caius 
Vetusius.  In  their  consulate,  Fiden®  was  besieged,  Crustu- 
meria-taken,  Pnenesie  revolted  from  the  Latines  to  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  and  a  Latine  war,  the  seeds  of  which  had,  for  several 
years  past,  been  growing  to  maturity,  could  not  now  be^ 
choaked.  Aldus  Postumius  dictator,  and  Titus  i£butius 
master  of  the  horse,  marching  out  a  numerous  ^  ^ 
army  of  cavalry  and  infantry,  met  the  forces  of  the  B.  C.  497. 
enemy  at  the  lake  Rcgillus,  in  the  territory  dP  Tusculum; 
and,  as  it  was  known  that  the  Tarquinii  were  in  the  army 
of  the  Latines,  the  rage  of  the  Romans  could  not^be  re¬ 
strained,  but  they  insisted  on  engaging  instantly;  for  this 
reason,  too,  the  battle  was  unusually  obstinate  and  bloody; 
for  the  generals  not  only  performed  the  duty  of  directing 
every  thing,  but,  exposing  their  own  persons,  mixed  with 
the  combatants,  and  shared  the  fight;  and  scarcely  one  of  the 
principal  officers  of  either  army  left  the  field  without  being 
wounded,  except  the  Roman  dictator.  As  Postumius  was 
encouraging  and  marshalling  his  men  in  the  first  line, 
Tarquinius  Superbus,  though  now  enfeebled  by  age, 
spurred  on  his  horse  furiously  against  him;  but  receiving 
a  blow,  was  quickly  surrounded  by  his  own  men,  and  car- 
VOL.  I.— S. 

lao 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  255. 

md  off  to  a  place  of  safety.  On  the  other  wing,  iEhutius, 
the  mas^r  of  horse,  made  an  attack  on  Octavius  Mami* 
lios;  nor  was  his  approach  unobserved  by  the  TUsculan  ge¬ 
neral^  who  advanced  in  full  career  to  meet  him,  and  each 
aiming  his  spear  at  his  antagonist,  they  encountered  with 
such  violence,  that  the  arip  of  iEbutius  was  pierced  through, 
and  Mamilius  received  a  wound  in  his  breast;  the  latter  was 
received  by  the  Latioes  in  their  second  line;  While  jEbutius, 
disabled  by  the  wound  in  his  arm  from  wielding  a  weapon, 
retired  from  the  fight.  The  Latine  general,  not  in  the  least 
dispirited  by  his  wound,  continued  his  vigorous  exertions; 
and  perceiving  his  men  begin  to  give  ground,  sent  for  a  co¬ 
hort  of  Roman  exiles,  commanded  by  Lucius  the  son  of 
Tarquinius;  these,  fighting  under  the  impulse  of  keen  re¬ 
sentment,  on  account  of  their  having  been  deprived  of 
their  property,  and  of  their  country,  kept  tlu:  battle  for  somt 
time  in  suspense. 
XX.  The  Romans  were  now  on  erne  side  giving  way,  when 
Marcus  Valerius,  brother  of  Publicoia,  observing  young 
Tarquinius,  with  ostentatious  fierceness,  exhibiting  his  prow¬ 
ess  in  the  front  of  the  exiles,  and  inflamed  with  a  desire  of 
supporting  the  glory  of  his  house,  and  that  those  who  en¬ 
joyed  the  honour  of  having  expelled  the  royal  family,  might 
also  be  signalized  by  their  destruction,  set  spurs  to  his  horse, 
and,  with  his  javelin  presented,  made  towards  Tarqmnius; 
Tarquinius  avoided  this  violent  adversary,  by  retiring  into 
the  body  of  his  men,  and  Valerius  rashly  pushing  forward 
into  the  line  of  the  exiles, V as  attacked,  and  run  through, 
by  some  person  on  one  side  of  him,  and  as  the  horse’s  speed 
was  in  no  degree  checked  by  the  wound  of  the  rider,  the  ex¬ 
piring  Roman  sunk  to  the  earth,  his  arms  falling  over  his 
body.  Postumius  the  dictator,  seeing  a  man  of  such  rank 
slain,  the  exiles  advancing  to  the  charge  with  fierce  impe¬ 
tuosity,  his  own  men  disheartened  and  giving  way,  iss^d 
orders  to  his  cohort,  a  chosen  bmid  which  he  kept  about  his 

BOOK  ll. 

131 

B.  C  497.3 
person  as  a^ard,  that  they  should  treat  as  an  enemyt  every 
man  of  t|iejr  own  army  whom  they  should  see  reUre^ng. 
Meeting  danger  thus  on  both  sidcs^  the  Romsms,  who  were 
flying,  faced  about  against  the  enemy,  and  renewed  the  fight; 
the  dictator’s,  cohort  then,  for  the  first  time,  engaged  in  bat- 
tk;  and,  with  fresh  strength  and  spirits,  falling  on  the  exiles 
who  were  exhausted  with  fatigue,  made  great  slaughter  of 
them.  On  this  occasion  another  combat  between  two  gene¬ 
ral  officers  took  place;  the  Latine  general,  on  seeing  the  co¬ 
hort  of  exiles  almost  surrounded  by  the  Roman  dictator, 
ordered  several  companies  from  the  reserve  to  follow  him 
instantly  to  the  front;  Titus  Herminius,  a  lieutenant-general, 
observing  these  as  they  marched  up,  and,  among  them,  know¬ 
ing  Mamilius,  who  was  distinguished  by  his  dress  and  arms, 
encountered  him  with  a  strength  so  much  superior  to  what 
had  been  shown  a  little  before,  by  the  master  of  the  horse, 
that  with  one  blow  he  slew  Mamilius,  driving  the  spear 
through  his  side.  Thus  was  he  victorious;  but  having  re¬ 
ceived  a  wound  from  a  javelin,  while  he  was  stripping  the 
armour  from  his  adversary’s  body,  he  was  carried  off  to  the 
camp,  and  expired  during  the  first  dressing  of  it.  The  dic¬ 
tator  then  flew  to  the  cavalry,  entreating  them,  as  the  infan¬ 
try  were  now  fatigued,  to  dismount  and  support  the  engage¬ 
ment:  they  obeyed  his  orders,  leaped  from  their  horses,  flew 
forward  to  the  van,  and  covering  themselves  with  their  tar¬ 
gets,  took  post  as  the  front  line:  this  instantly  revived  the 
courage  of  the  infantry,  who  saw  the  young  men  of  the  first 
distinction  foregoing  every  advantage  in  their  manner  of 
fighting,  and  taking  an  equal  share  of  the  danger.  By  these 
means,  the  Latine s  were  at  length  overpowered,  their  troops 
were  beaten  from  their  ground,,  and  began  to  retreat:  the 
horses  were  then  brought  up  to  the  cavalry,  in  order  that 
they  might  pursue  the  enemy,  and  the  line  of  infantry  fol¬ 
lowed.  At  this  juncture,  the  dictator,  omitting  no  means  of 
engaging  the  aid  both  of  gods  and  men,  is  said  to  have  vowed 

132 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

[Y.  R.  259. 

u  temple  to  Castor;  and  to  have  proclaimed  rewards  to  the 
first,  and  tq  the  second  of  the  soldiers  who  shoul4  enter  the 
enemy’s  camp;  and  so  great  was  the  ardour  of  the  Rmnans, 
that  they  never  remitted  the  impetuosity  of  the  charge,  by 
which  they  had  broken  the  enemy’s  line,  until  they  made 
themselves  masters  of  the  camp.  Such  was  the  engagement 
at  the  lake  Regill  us.  The  dictator  and  master  of  the  horse, 
on  their  return  to  the  city,  were  honoured  with  a  triumph. 
Y.  R.  256.  XXL  During  the  three  ensuing  years,  there  was 
B.  C.  496.  neither  war,  nor  yet  a  security  of  lasting  peace. 
The  ccmsuls  were,  Quintus  Cialius  and  Titus  Lartius:  then 
Y.  R.  257.  Aulus  Sempronius  and  Marcus  Minutius,  in  whose 
B.  C.  495.  consulate  the  temple  of  Saturn  was  dedicated,  and 
the  festival  called  Saturnalia  instituted.  After  them,  Aulus 
Y.  R.  258.  Postumius  and  Titus  Virginias  were  made  con- 
B.  C.  494.  s^]s^  I  gjij  asserted  by  some  writers,  that  the 
battle  at  the  lake  Regillus  was  not  fought  until  this  year, 
and  that  Aulus  Postumius,  because  the  fidelity  of  his  col¬ 
league  was  doubtful,  abdicated  the  consulships  and  was  then 
made  dictator.  Such  perplexing  mistakes^  with  regard  to 
dates,  occur  from  the  magistrates  being  ranged  in  different 
order,  by  different  writers,  that  it  is  impossible,  at  this  dis¬ 
tance  of  time,  when  not  only  the  facts,  but  the  authors  who 
relate  them,  are  involved  in  the  obscurity  of  antiquity,  to 
trace  out  a  regular  series  of  the  consuls  as  they  succeeded 
each  other,  or  of  the  transactions  as  they  occurred  in  each 
Y.  R.  259.  particular  year,  Appius  Claudius  and  Publius  Ser- 
B.  C.  493-  were  next  appointed  to  the  consulship.  This 
year  was  rendered  remarkable  by  the  news  of  Tarquinius’s 
death;  he  died  at  Cumee,  whither,  on  the  reduction  of  the 
power  of  the  Latines,  he  had  retired  for  refuge,  to  the  tyrant 
Aristodemus.  By  this  news,  both  the  patricians  and  the 
commons  were  highly  elated;  but  the  former  sufiFered  their 
exultation  on  the  occasion  to  carry  them  to  unwarrantalde 
lengths;  and  the  latter,  who,  until  that  time,  had  been  treated 

BOOK  II. 

133 

B.  C.  493.3 
with  the  utmost  deference,  beg;an  to  feel  themselves  exposed 
to  insulin  from  the  nobility.  During  the  same  year,  the 
colony  of  Signia,  which  Tarquinius  had  founded  in  his  reign, 
was  re-established,  by  filling  up  its  number  of  colonists.  The 
tribes  of  Rome  were  increased  to  the  number  of  twenty-one. 
The  temple  of  Mercury  was  dedicated  on  the  ides  of  May. 
XXI L  During  these  proceedings  against  the  Latines,  it 
could  hardly  be  said  that  there  was  either  war  or  peace  with 
the  nation  of  the  Volscians:  for,  on  the  one  hand,  these  had 
got  troops  in  readiness,  which  they  would  have  sent  to  the 
assistance  of  the  Latines,  if  the  Roman  dictator  had  not 
been  so  quk^k  in  his  measures;  and,  on  the  other,  the  Roman 
had  used  this  expedition,  in  order  that  he  might  not  be  oblig¬ 
ed  to  contend  against  the  united  forces  of  the  Latines  and 
Volscians.  In  resentment  of  this  behaviour,  the  consuls  led 
the  legions  into  the  Volscian  territory:  the  Volscians,  who 
had  no  apprehensions  of  punishment,  for  a  design  which  had 
not  been  put  in  execution,  were  confounded  at  this  unexpect¬ 
ed  proceeding,  insomuch  that,  laying  aside  all  thoughts  of 
opposition,  they  gave  three  hundred  hostages,  the  children 
of  the  principal  persons  at  Cora  and  Pometia;  in  consequence 
whereof,  the  legions  were  withdrawn  from  thence,  without 
having  come  to  an  engagement*  However,  in  a  short  time 
after,  the  Volscians  being  delivered  from  their  fears,  resum¬ 
ed  their  former  disposition,  renewed  secretly  their  prepara¬ 
tions  for  war,  and  prevailed  on  the  Hernicians  to  join  them; 
they  also  sent  ambassadors  through  every  part  of  Latium, 
to  stir  up  that  people  to  arms.  But  the  Latines  w'ere  so 
deeply  affected  by  their  recent  disaster,  at  the  lake  Regiilus, 
and  so  highly  incensed  at  any  persons  attempting  to  persuade 
them  to  engage  in  a  war,  that  they  even  offered  violence  to 
the  ambassadors:  seizing  the  Volscians,  they  conducted  them 
to  Rome,  and  there  delivered  them  to  the  consuls,  with  in¬ 
formation,  that  the  Volscians  and  Hernicians  were  preparing 
to  make  war  on  the  Romans.  The  affair  being  laid  before 

ia4  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  259. 
the  senate,  the  eondact  of  the  Latines  so  acceptable  to 
the  senators,  that  they  res&^red  to  ^etn  six  thot^^d  of  the 
prisoners,  and  madfe  an  wder,  besides,  that  the  new  magis* 
trates  shoutd  proceed  in  the  business  relative  to  an  alliance, 
a  point  which  had  been  almost  absolutely  reitised  them.  The 
Latines  then  h%hly  applauded  themselves  for  the  part  which 
tJiey  had  acted,  and  the  friends  of  peaceful  measures  were 
held  in  high  estimation:  they  sent  to  the  capitol  a  golden 
crown,  as  a  present  to  Jupiter,  and,  together  with  the  ambas¬ 
sadors,  and  the  present,  came  a  great  multitude  of  attend¬ 
ants,  consisting  of  the  prisoners  who  had  been  sent  back  to 
their  friends.  These  proceeded  to  the  several  houses  of  the 
persons,  with  whom  each  of  them  had  been  in  servitude,  re¬ 
turned  thanks  for  their  generous  behaviour  and  treatment  of 
them,  during  the  time  of  their  calamity,  and  formed  mutual 
connexions  of  hospitality.  Never,  at  any  former  time,  was 
the  Latine  nation  more  closely  united  to  the  Roman  govem- 
ment^  by  ties  both  of  a  public  and  private  nature. 
XXI 1 1,  But,  besides  being  immediately  threatened  with 
a  Volscian  war,  the  state  itself  was  torn  in  pieces  by  intes¬ 
tine  animosities;^' between  the  parti cians  and  commons,  on 
account  principally  of  persons  confined  for  debt:*  these 
complained  loudly,  that  after  fighting  abroad  for  freedom 
and  empire,  they  were  made  prisoners  and  oppressed  by 
their  countrymen  at  home,  and  that  the  liberty  of  the  com¬ 
mons  was  more  secure  in  war  than  in  peace,  amongst  their 
foes  than  ^amongst  their  own  countrymen.  This  spirit  of 
•  If  a  debtor  did  not  discharge  his  debt,  within  thirty  days  after  it  was 
demanded,  he  was  summoned  before  ftie  pnelor,  who  gave  him  up  into  the 
hands  of  the  creditor.  lie  was  kept  in  chains  by  him  for  sixty  days;  and 
then,  on  three  successive  market  days,  was  brought  to  the  praetor’s  tribu¬ 
nal,  where  a  crier  proclaimed  the  debt,  and  sometimes,  wealthy  persons 
redeemed  the  poor,  by  discharging  their  debts;  but,  if  that  did  not  happen, 
the  creditor,  after  the  third  market  day,  had  a  rigJit  to  sell  him,  or  keep 
him  a  slave  in  his  own  house-  This  slavery  was  afterwards  changed  into 
imprisonment. 

BOOK  11. 

U5 

'B.  C.  493,] 
discontent,  of  itself  mcreasing  daily,  was  kindkd  into  a  flame, 
by  the  extraordinary  sufferings  of  one  man.  A  pei^on  far 
advanced  in  years,  whose  appearance  denoted  severe  dis¬ 
tress,  threw  himself  into  the  Forum;  his  garb  was  squalid, 
gmd  the  figure  of  his  |>erson  still  more  shocking,  pale  and 
emaciated  to  the  last  degree;  besides,  a  long  beard  and  hair 
had  given  his  countenance  a  savage  appearances  wretched 
as  was  the  plight  in  which  he  appeared,  he  was  known  not¬ 
withstanding;  several  declared,  that  be  had  been  centurion 
ki  the  army,  and,  filled  with  compassion  for  bim,’mentioned 
publicly  many  ott^r  distinctions,  which  he  had  obtained  in 
the  service;  he  himself  exhibited  scars  on  his  breast,  as  testi¬ 
monies  of  his  honours^le  behaviour  in  several  actions.  To 
those  who  inquired  the  cause  of  that  wretched  condition, 
both  of  his  person  and  apparel,  (a  crowd  meantime  having 
assembled  round  him,  which  resembled,  in  some  degree,  an 
assembly  of  the  people,)  he  answered,  that  while  he  served 
in  the  army  during  the  Sabine  war,  having  not  only  lost  the 
produce  of  his  farm  by  the  depredations  of  the  enemy,  but 
his  house  being  burnt,  all  his  goods  plundered^  his  cattle 
driven  off,  and  a  tax  being  imposed  at  a  time  so  distressing 
to  him,  he  was  obliged  to  run  in  debt;  that  this  debt,  aggrava¬ 
ted  by  usury,  had  consumed,  first,  his  farm,  which  he  had 
inherited  from  his  father  and  frandfather;  then,  the  remain¬ 
der  of  his  substance;  and  lastly,  like  a  pesulence,  had  reached 
his  person:,that  he  had  been  dragged  by  a  creditor  not  into 
servitude,  but  into  a  house  of  correction,  or  rather  a  place 
of  execution.’’  He  then  showed  liis  back  disfigured  with 
the  marks  of  fresh  stripes;  on  this  sight,  after  such  a  rela¬ 
tion,  a  great  uproar  arose ;  and  the  tumult  was  no  longer 
confined  to  the  Forum,  but  spread  through  every  part  of  the 
city;  those  who  were  then  in  confinement,  and  those  who  had 
been  released  from  it,  forced  their  way  into  the  public  street; 
and  implored  the  prometion  of  their  fellow -citizens:  there 
was  no  spot  which  did  not  afford  a  voluntary  associate  to 

136 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  2S9 

add  to  the  insii^ectioa;  from  all  quarters  they  ran  in  bodiesy 
through  every  street,  \vith  great  clamour,^  into  the  Forum. 
The  situation  of  the  senators  who  happened  to  be  there*  at 
that  time,  and  who  fell  in  the  way  of  this  mob,  became 
highly  perilous,  for  they  would  certainly  have  jn*oceeded  to 
violence,  had  not  the  consuls,  Publius  Servilius  and  Appios 
Claudius,  hastily  interposed  their  authority.  To  them  the 
multitude  turned  their  applications;  showed  idieir  chains, 
and  other  marks  of  wretchedness;  said^  this  was  what  they 
had  deserved;  and  reminding  them  of  their  fomer  serviced 
in  war,  and  in  .various  engag^ents,  insisted,  with  menaces 
rather  than  supplications,  that  they  shotdd  isuMs^nbk  tl^  sen* 
ate;  t\ity  then  placed  themselves  tmmd  the  sena^faemse, 
that  theywnaight  act  as  witnesses,  and  directors  of  the  coun* 
cils  of  government-  A  very  small  number  of  the  senators, 
whom  chance  threw  in  the  way,  and  these  against  their  will, 
attended  the  consuls:  fear  kept  rest  at  a  distance;  so 
that  nothing  could  be  done  by  r^mon  of  the  thinness  of  the 
meeting.  The«  populace  then  conceived  an  opinion,  that  there 
was  a  design  to  elude  their  demands  by  delay;  thsU  the  ab* 
sence  of  certain  of  the  senators  was  occasiemed,  not  by 
chance,  nor  by  fear,  but  by  their  wishes  to  dbstruct  the  busi¬ 
ness;  that  the  consuls  themselves  showed  a  backwardness, 
and  that  their  miseries  were  manifestly  made  a  matter  of 
mockery.  The  affair  had  now  neaiiy  arrived  at  such  a  state, 
that  even  the  majesty  of  the  consuls,  it  was  feared,  might 
be  insufficient  to  restrain  the  rage  of  the  people.  At  length 
the  senators,  beginning  to  doubt,  whether  they  should  incur 
the  greater  danger,  by  absenting  themselves,  or  by  attending, 
came  to  the  senate;  and  when,  after  all  this  delay,  a  proper 
number  had  assembled,  not  only  the  senators,  but  even  the 
consub  themselves,  differed  widely  in  opinion.  Appius,  a 
man  of  a  violent  temper,  thought  that  the  riot  ought  to  be 
quelled  by  the  weight  of  the  considar  authority,  and  that 
when  one  or  two  were  taken  into  custody,  the  rest  would  be 

BOOK  II. 

137 

.  C.  493.3 

quiet:  Servilius,  more  inclined  to  gentle  remedies,  maintain- 
ed  that,  as  the  people’s  spirits  were  already  wound  up  to 
such  a  pitch  of  ill-humour,  it  would  be  both  the  safer  and 
^the  easier  method,  to  bend,  than  to  break  them.  To  add  to 
these  perplexities,  they  were  threatened  with  still  greater 
peril  from  another  quarter. 
XXIV.  Some  Latine  horsemen  arrived,  in  the  utmost 
haste,  with  the  alarming  intelligence,  that  the  Volscians,  in 
hostile  array,  were  coming  to  attack  the  city;  which  news,  so 
entirely  opposite  were  the  views  of  the  parties  into  which 
the  state  was  split,  affected  the  patricians  and  the  commons 
in  a  Very  different  manner.  The  commons  exulted  with  joy; 
said  the  gods  were  coming  to  take  vengeance  for  the  ty¬ 
ranny  of  the  patricians,  and  encouraged  each  other  in  the 
resolution  not  to  enrol  themselves;  saying,  it  was  better 
"  thai  all  should  perish  togetaer,  th^n  that  they  should  be  the 
onlv  victims;  let  the  patrYclans  serve  as  soldiers;  let  the 
patricians  take  arms,  that  those  who  reap  the  ady^antages  of 
war,  may  also  undergo  its  severities  and  hazards.”  On  the 
other  hand,  the  senate,  dejected  and  confounded  on  finding 
themselves  thus  encompassed  by  dangers,  from  tlieir  country*- 
men  on  one  side,  and  from  the  enemy  on  the  other,  besought 
the  consul  Servilius,  whose  temper  was  adapted  to  concili¬ 
ate  the  regard  of  the  people,  that  he  would  find  means  to 
extricate  the  commonwealth  from  the  dreadful  apprehen¬ 
sions  with  which  it  was  beset.  Whereupon  the  consul,  dis¬ 
missing  the  senate,  went  forth  to  the  assembly  of  the  people; 
there  he  assured  them,  that  the  senators  were  solicitous 
that  care  should  be  taken  of  the  interest  of  the  commons; 
but  that  their  fears  for  the  safety  of  the  commonwealth,  in 
general,  had  interrupted  their  deliberations,  concerning  that 
part  of  the  state,  which,  though  it  must  be  allowed  to  be 
the  largest,  was  still  but  a  part;  nor  could  they,  while  the 
enemy  was  just  at  the  gates,  allow  any  bi^^iness  to  take 
place  of  the  necessary  provisions  for  the  war,  nor,  even  it 
VOL.  i, — T. 

138 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y,  R,  259.^ 

they  were  allowed  a  little  respite,  would  it  be  either  for  the 
honour  of  the  commons,  to  have  refused  to  take  arms  in 
defence  of  their  country,  unless  on  condition  of  first  receiving 
hire  for  it;  nor  could  it  fail  of  injuring  the  reputation  of  the 
senators  themselves,  if  they  should  appear  to  have  now  ap¬ 
plied  their  attention  to  the  good  of  their  countrymen,  through 
fear,  rather  than  afterwards  through  inclination He  gave 
proof  of  his  sincerity  in  this  discourse,  by  an  edict,  where¬ 
by  he  ordained,  that  no  person  should  hold  any  Roman 
citizen  in  bonds  or  confinement,  so  as  to  prevent  his  giving 
in  his  name  to  the  consuls;  'that  no  person  should  take  pos¬ 
session,  or  make  sale,  of  the  goods  of  a  soldier,  while  upon 
service;  nor  detain  ill  custody  either  his  children  or  grand¬ 
children.”  On  the  publication  of  this  edict,  such  debtors 
under  arrest,  as  were  present,  instantly  gave  in  their  names, 
and  crowds  of  others,  iu  every  part  of  the  city,  rushing  out 
of  their  confinement,  when, the  creditors  h^  no  longer  a  right 
to  detain  them,  fsin  together  to  the  Forun^,  to  take  the  mili¬ 
tary  oath:  these  composed  a  large  body  of  troops,  and  none, 
during  the  Volscian  war,  displayed  a  greater  share  of  brave¬ 
ry  and  activity.  The  consul  led  out  his  army  against  the 
enemy,  and  pitched  his  camp  at  a  small  distance  from 
theirs. 
XXV.  The  following  night,  the  Volscians,  expecting 
great  advantages  from  the  dissensions  of  the  Romans,  ap¬ 
proached  their  camp,  in  hopes  that,  in  the  surrounding  dark¬ 
ness,  some  might  desert  or  betray  their  posts.  They  were, 
however,  perceived  by  the  sentinels;  the  troops  were  called 
up,  and,  the  signal  being  given,  they  ran  to  arms;  and  by 
these  means  frustrated  the  attempt  of  the  Volscians:  the  re¬ 
mainder  of  the  night  was  dedicated  to  repose  by  both  par¬ 
ties.  Next  day,  at  the  first  dawn,  the  Volscians,  having  fill¬ 
ed  up  the  trenches,  assaulted  the  rampart,  and  were  pro¬ 
ceeding  to  demolish  the  fortifications  on  every  side,  when 
the  consul,  having  delayed  for  some  time  in  order  to  try  the 

BOOK  11. 

143 

W.  c]  492  .-J 
ry  occasion,  at  random,  and  without  a  plan.  The  consuls, 
considering*this  as  a  very  dangerous  proceeding,  which  it 
really  was,  proposed  it  to  the  consideration  of  the  senate, 
hut  were  not  allowed,  after  proposing  it,  to  takr  the  votes 
regularly,  a  great  tumult  arising  on  the  mention  of  it  among 
the  senators,  who  exclaimed,  and  expressed  the  highest  in. 
dignation  at  the  consuls  attempting  to  throw  on  that  body  the 
odium  of  an  affair  which  ought  to  have  been  quelled  by  the 
consular  authority.  They  told  them,  that  if  there  really 
had  been  magistrates  in  the  commonwealth,  there  would 
have  been  no  council  at  Rome,  but, the  public  one.  At  pre- 
sent  the  government  was  divided, and  dispersed  into  a  thou¬ 
sand  senate  houses,  and  assemblies,  some  meetings  being 
held  on  the  Esquiline  mount,  others  on  the  A\  enlinc.  That 
they  had  no  doubt,  but  one  man,  such  as  Appius  Claudius, 
would  have  dispersed  those  meetings  in  a  moment’s  time.’' 
The  consuls,  on  receiving  this  rebuke,  asked  the  senate,  what 
then  they  would  have  them  do?  for  they  were  resolved,  they 
said,  to  act  with  all  the  activity  and  vigour  which  the  senate 
might  recommend.  A  decree  then  passed,  that  they  should 
enfoi:ce  the  levies  with  the  utmost  strictness;  for  that  the 
commons  were  grown  insolent  through  want  ol  employment. 
Dismissing  the  senate  the  consuls  mounted  the  tribunal,  and 
cited  the  younger  citizens  by  their  name.  No  answer  being 
made,  the  multitude  which  stood  round,  like  a  general  assem¬ 
bly,  declared,  that  the  commons  could  be  no  longer  deceiv¬ 
ed;  and  that  not  a.  single  soldier  should  be  raised,  until  the 
public  engagements  were  fulfilled.  That  every  man  must 
have  his  liberty  restored,  before  arms  were  put  into  his 
hands,  that  the  people  might  be  convinced  they  were  to  fight 
for  their  country  and  fellow-citizens,  not  for  their  masters.” 
The  consuls  saw  clearly  enough  what  the  senate  expected 
from  them;  but  of  those  who  spoke  with  the  greatest  vehe¬ 
mence  within  the  w^alls  of  the  seiagte- house,  not  one  was  pre¬ 
sent  to  stand  the  brunt  of  the  contests,  and  even’  thing 

344 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y  R.  260. 

threatened  a  desperate  one  with  the  commons.  It  was  re¬ 
solved,  therefore,  before  they  should  proceed  to  extremities, 
to  consult, the  senate  again;  the  consequence  of  which  was, 
that  all  the  younger  senators  rushed  up  hastily  to  the  seats 
of  the  consuls,  desiring  them  to  abdicate  the  consulship,  and 
lay  down  a  command  which  they  wanted  spirit  to  support. 
XXIX.  Having  made  suiHcient  trial  of  the  dispositions  of 
both  sides,  the  consuls  at  length  spoke  out:  “  Conscript  fa¬ 
thers,  lest  ye  should  hereafter  say  that  ye  were  not  forewarn¬ 
ed,  know  that  a  dangerous  sedition  is  ready  to  break  out. 
We  demand  that  those  who  are  the  most  forward  to  cen¬ 
sure  us  for  inactivity,  may  assist  us  by  their  presence,  while 
we  hold  the  levy.  We  will  proceed  in  the  business  in  such 
a  manner  as  shall  be  approved  by  the  most  strenuous  advo¬ 
cates  for  vigorous  measures,  since  such  is  your  pleasure,” 
They  then  went  back  to  the  tribunal,  and  ordered,  purposely, 
one  of  those,  who  were  within  view,  to  be  cited:  finding  that 
he  stood  mute,  and  that  a  number  of  people  had  formed  in 
a  circle  round  him,  to  prevent  any  force  being  used,  the  con¬ 
suls  sent  a  lictor  to  him,  who  being  driven  back,  those  of  the 
senators  who  attended  the  consuls,  exclaiming  against  the  in¬ 
solence  of  such  behaviour,  flew  down  from  the  tribunal  to 
assist  the  lictor.  The  populace  then,  quitting  the  lictof^  to 
whom  they  had  offered  no  other  opposition  than  >hat:'  of  hin¬ 
dering  him  from  making  the  seizure,  directed  their  force 
against  the  senators;  but  the  consuls  interposing  quickly,  put 
an  end  to  the  scuffle,  in  which  as  neither  stones  nor  weapons 
had  been  used,  there  was  more  clamour  and  rage  than  mis¬ 
chief.  The  senate  called  tumultuously  together,  proceeded 
in  a  manner  still  more  tumultuous;  those  who  had  been  beat¬ 
en,  demanding  an  inquiry  into  the  affair;  and  the  most  vio¬ 
lent  of  them  endeavouring  to  carry  their  point  by  clamour 
and  noise,  rather  than  by  vote.  At  length,  when  their  r^ge 
had  somewhat  subsided,  the  consuls,  reproaching  them  with 
being  equally  disorderly  in  the  senate-house  as  in  the  Forum, 

BOOKIL 

145 

B.  C.492.] 
began  to  collect  the  votes.  There  were  three  different  opi¬ 
nions;  Publius  Virginius  thought  that  “  the  case  did  not  ex¬ 
tend  to  the  whole  body  of  the  commons,  and  that  those  only 
were  .to  be  considered,  who,  relying  on  the  promises  of  the 
consul  Publius  Servilius,  had  served  in  the  Volscian,  Au- 
runcian,  and  Sabine  wars:”  Titus  Largius  was  of  opinion^ 
that  the  present  juncture  required  something  more  than 
the  making  a  return  for  services  performed;  that  the  whole 
body  of  the  commons  were  overwhelmed  with  debt,  nor 
could  the  progress  of  the  evil  be  stopped,  unless  the  advan¬ 
tages  of  the  whole  were  attended  to.  On  the  contrary,  if 
distinctions  were  made,  this  would  add  fuel  to  the  dissen¬ 
sions,  instead  of  extinguishing  them.”  Appius  Claudius, 
whose  temper  naturally  harsh,  was  roused  to  a  degree  of  fe¬ 
rocity  by  his  hatred  to  the  commons  on  the  one  hand,  and 
the  applause  of  the  patricians  on  the  other,  affirmed  that  “  all 
these  dirturbances  were  excited,  not  by  the  people’s  suffer¬ 
ings,  but  their  licentiousness;  and  that  the  commons  were  ac¬ 
tuated  by  a  spirit  of  wantonness,  rather  than  by  resentment 
of  injuries:  this  was  the  consequence  of  giving  them  a  right 
to  appeal;  for  all  that  a  consul  could  do,  was  to  threaten,  he 
could  not  command,  when  people  are  allowed  to  appeal  to 
those  who  have  been  accomplices  in  their  transgressions. 
Come,  said  he,  let  us  create  a  dictator,  from  whom  there  is 
no  appeal:  this  madness,  which  has  set  the  whole  state  in  a 
flame,  will  quickly  sink  into  silence.  Let  me  then  see,  who 
will  strike  a  lictor,  when  he  know^  that  the  very  person 
whose  dignity  he  insults,  has  the  sole  and  entire  disposal  of 
his  person  and  of  his  life.” 
XXX.  To  many,  the  expedient  recommended  by  Appius 
appeared  too  rough  and  violent,  and  justly  so;  on  the  other 
hand,  the  propositions  ol  Virginius  and  Largius  were  consi¬ 
dered  as  tending  to  establish  a  bad  precedent;  particularly  that 
of  Largius,  which  was  utterly  subversive  of  all  credit.  The 
advice  of  Virginius  was  deemed  to  be  the  farthest  from 
VOL.  T. - IT. 

146 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[V.  R.  260. 

excess  on  either  side,  and  a  just  medium  between  the  other 
two.  But,  through  the  spirit  of  faction,  and  men’s  regard 
to  their  private  interests,  (things  which  ever  did  and  ever 
will  impede  the  public  councils,)  Appius  prevailed,  and  was 
himself  very  near  being  created  ♦dictator;  which  proceeding, 
beyond  any  other,  would  have  highly  disgusted  the  com¬ 
mons,  at  a  very  critical  juncture,  when  the  Volscians,  the 
^quans,  and  the  Sabines,  happened  to  be  all  in  arms  at  the 
same  time.  But  the  consuls  and  the  elder  part  of  the  senate 
took  care  that  a  command,  in  itself  uncontrolable,  should  be 
intrusted  to  a  person  of  a  mild  disposition;  and  accordingly 
they  chose  for  dictator  Manius  Valerius,  son  of  Volesus. 
Although  the  commons  saw  that  the  dictator  was  created  in 
opposition  to  them,  yet,  as  by  his  brother’s  law,  they  enjoyed 
the  privilege  of  appeal,  they  dreaded  nothing  harsh  or  over¬ 
bearing  from  that  family.  Their  hopes  were  farther  encou¬ 
raged  by  an  edict  which  the  dictator  published,  of  the  same 
tenor  in  general  with  the  edict  of  the  consul  Servilius;  but 
as  they  thought  that  they  had  now  securer  grounds  .of  con¬ 
fidence,  both  in  the  man  himself,  and  in  the  power  with 
which  he  was  invested,  they  desisted  fronv  the  contest,  and 
gave  in  their  names.  Ten  legions  were  completed,  a  force 
greater  than  had  ever  been  raised  before;  of  these,  three 
were  assigned  to  each  of  the  consuls,  the  other  four  were 
commanded  by  the  dictator.  War  could  now  be  no  longer 
deferred:  the  ^quans  had  invaded  the  territories  of  the  La- 
tines;  and  these  by  their  ambassadors  petitioned  the  senate, 
that  they  would  either  send  troops  to  protect  them,  or  per¬ 
mit  them  to  take  arms  themselves,  to  defend  their  frontiers. 
It  was  judged  the  safer  method  to  defend  the  Latines  with¬ 
out  their  own  assistance,  than  to  allow  them  to  handle  arms 
again:  the  consul  Vetusius  was  therefore  sent  thither,  w^ho 
put  an  end  to  the  depredations.  The  .tEquans  retired  from 
the  plains,  and  provided  for  their  safety  on  the  tops  of  the 
mountains,  relying  more  on  the  situation  than  on  their  arms- 

BOOK  IL 

147 

B.  C.  492.] 
The  other  consul  who  marched  against  the  Volscians,  not 
choosing  that  his  time  should  be  wasted  in  like  manner, 
used  every  means,  particularly  by  ravaging  the  country,  in 
order  to  provoke  the  enemy  to  approach  nearer,  and  to  ha¬ 
zard  an  engagement*  They  were  drawn  up  in  order  of  bat¬ 
tle  in  a  plain  between  the  two  camps,  eac^  party  before  their 
own  rampart.  The  Volscians  had  considerably  the  advan¬ 
tage  in  point  of  numbers;  they  therefore  advanced  to  the 
fight,  in  a  careless  manner,  as  if  despising  the  enemy.  The 
Roman  consul  did  not  suffer  his  troops  to  move,  nor  to  re¬ 
turn  the  shout,  but  ordered  them  to  stand  with  their  jave¬ 
lins  fixed  in  the  ground,  and  as  soon  as  the  enemy  should 
come  within  reach,  then  to  exert  at  once  their  utmost  efforts, 
and  decide  the  affair  with  their  swords.  The  Volscians,  fa¬ 
tigued  with  running  and  shouting,  rushed  upon  the  Romans, 
whom  they  believed  to  be  benumbed  with  fear;  but  when  they 
found  a  vigorous  resistance,  and  the  swords  glittering  before 
their  eyes,  struck  with  consternation,  just  as  if  they  had  fal¬ 
len  into  an  ambuscade,  they  turned  their  backs:  nor  had  they 
strength  left  to  enable  them  to  make  their  escape,  having 
exhausted  it  by  advancing  to  the  battle  in  full  speed.  The 
Romans,  on  the  other  hand,  having  stood  quiet  during  the 
first  part  of  the  engagement,  had  their  vigour  fresh,  and  ea¬ 
sily  overtaking  the  wearied  fugitives,  took  their  camp  by  as¬ 
sault,  and  pursuing  them,  as  they  fled  from  thence  to  Veli- 
trse,  the  victors  and  the  vanquished  composing,  as  it  were, 
but  one  body,  rushed  into  the  city  together.  People  of 
every  kind  were  put  to  the  sword,  without  distinction,  and 
there  was  more  blood  spilt  than  even  in  the  fight:  a  small 
number  only,  who  threw  down  their  arms,  obtained  quarter. 
XXX L  While  these  things  passed  in  the  country  of  the 
Volscians,  the  Sabines,  who  were  by  far  the  most  formida¬ 
ble  enemy,  were  routed,  put  to  flight,  and  beaten  out  of 
their  camp  by  the  dictator.  He  had  at  first,  by  a  charge  of 
his  cavalry,  thrown  the  centre  of  the  enemy’s  line  into  dis> 

14B 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.260, 

order;  which,  while  they  extended  their  wings  too  far,  had 
not  been  sufficiently  strengthened  by  a  proper  depth  of  hies. 
Before  they  could  recover  from  this .  confusion,  the  infantry 
fell  upon  them,  and  continued  their  attack,  without  inter¬ 
mission,  until  they  made  themselves  masters  of  their  camp, 
and  put  a  conclusion  to  the  war.  Since  the  battle  at  the 
lake  Regillus,  there  had  not  been  obtained  in  those  times,  a 
more  glorious  victory  than  this:  the  dictator  entered  the  city 
in  triumph,  and  besides  the  accustomed  honours,  there  was 
a  place  in  the  circus  assigned  to  him  and  his  p<isterity,  for  a 
seat,  and  a  curule  chair  fixed  in  it.  From  the  vanquished 
Volscians  the  lands  of  the  district  of  Velitrce  were  taken, 
for  which  inhabitants  were  sent  from  the  city,  and  a  colony 
established  there.  Soon  after  this,  a  battle  was  fought  with 
the  iEquans,  against  the  inclination  indeed  of  the  consul, 
who  considered  the  disadvantage  of  the  ground  which  the 
troops  had  to  traverse;  but  the  soldiers,  accusing  him  of  pro¬ 
tracting  the  business,  in  order  that  the  dictator  might  go  out 
of  office  before  they  should  return  to  the  citv,  and  so  his 
promises  fall  to  the  ground  without  effect,  as  had  those  of 
the  former  consul,  they  at  length  prevailed  on  him  to  march 
up  his  arniy,  at  all  hazards,  against  the  steep  of  the  moun¬ 
tain.  Rash  as  this  undertaking  was,  yet,  through  the  cow¬ 
ardice  of  the  enemy,  it  was  crowned  with  success;  for,  be¬ 
fore  a  weapon  could  be  thrown,  struck  with  amazement  at 
the  boldness  of  the  Romans,  they  abandoned  their  camp, 
which  they  had  fixed  in  a  very  strong  position,  and  ran  down 
precipitately  into  the  vallies,  on  the  opposite  side:  there  the 
Romans  gained  a  bloodless  victory,  and  abundance  of  booty. 
Though  their  arms  were  thus  attended  with  success,  in  three 
different  quarters,  neither  patricians  nor  commons  were  free 
from  anxiety  respecting  the  issue  of  their  domestic  affairs. 
With  such  powerfi^l  influence,  and  with  such  art  also,  had 
the  lenders  of  money  concerted  their  measures,  that  they 
were  able  to  disappoint  not  only  the  commons,  but  even  the 

BOOK  IL 

149 

B.  C.  492.] 
dictator  himself:  for  Valerius,  on  the  return  of  the  consul 
Vetusius,  took  care  that  the  first  business  which  came  before 
the  senate  should  be  that  of  the  people,  who  had  returned  home 
victorious;  and  proposed  the  question,  what  did  they  think 
proper  to  be  done  with  respect  to  the  persons  confined  for 
debt?  and  when  they  refused  to  take  the  matter  into  consi¬ 
deration,  he  said,  My  endeavours  to  restore  ctmeord  are, 
I  see,  displeasing  to  you:  believe  me  when  I  solemnly  de¬ 
clare,  that  the  time  will  shortly  come  when  you  will  wish, 
that  the  commons  of  Rome  had  just  such  patrons  as  I  am: 
as  to  myself,  I  will  neither  be  the  means  of  farther  disap> 
pointments  to  the  hopes  of  my  countrymen,  nor  will  I  hold 
the  office  of  dictator  without  effect.  ‘Intestine  discord  and 
foreign  wars  made  it  necessary  for  the  commonw  ealth  to  have 
such  a  magistrate:  peace  has  been  procured  abroad,  at  home 
it  is  not  suffered  to  take  place:  it  is  my  determination  then, 
in  time  of  sedition,  to  appear  in  the  character  of  a  private 
citizen,  rather  than  that  of  dictator.”  Theq^  withdrawing 
from  the  senate-house,  he  abdicted  the  dictatorship.  The 
case  appeared  to  the  commons,  as  if  he  had  resigned  his  of¬ 
fice  out  of  resentment  of  the  treatment  shown  to  them,  and 
therefore,  as  if  he  had  fulfilled  his  engagements,  it  not  hav¬ 
ing  been  his  fault  that  they  were  not  fulfilled,  they  attended 
him,  as  he  retired  to  his  house,  with  approbation  and  ap¬ 
plause. 
XXXIL  The  senate  were  then  seized  with  apprehensions, 
that  if  the  citizens  should  be  discharged  from  the  army,  their 
secret  cabals  and  conspiracies  would  be  renewed;  wherefore, 
supposing  that,  though  the  le  vy  was  made  by  the  dictator, 
yet  as  the  soldiers  had  sworn  obedience  to  the  consuls,  they 
^were  still  bound  by  that  oath,  they  ordered  the  legions,  un¬ 
der  the  pretext  of  hostilities  being  renewed  by  the  iEquans, 
to  be  led  out  of  the  city:  which  step  served  only  to  hasten 
the  breaking  out  of  the  sedition.  It  is  said  that  the  plebeians, 
at  first,  entertained  thoughts  of  putting  the  consuls  to  death, 

150 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  260. 
in  order  that  they  might  be  thereby  discharged  from  the 
oath;  but  being  afterwards  informed  that  no  religious  obli¬ 
gation  could  be  dissolved  by  an  act  of  wickedness,  they,  by 
the  advice  of  a  person  called  Sicinus,  retired  without  waiting 
for  orders  from  the  consuls,  to  the  sacred  mount,  beyond 
the  river  Anio,  about  three  miles  from  the  city.  This  account 
is  more  generally  credited  than  that  given  by  Piso,  who  says, 
the  secession  was  made  to  the  Aventine.  In  this  place,  with¬ 
out  any  commander,  having  fortified  their  camp  with  a  ram¬ 
part  and  trench,  they  remained  quiet  for  several  days,  taking 
nothing  from  any  one  but  necessary  subsistence,  neither  re¬ 
ceiving  nor  giving  offence.  Great  was  the  consternation  in  the 
city;  all  was  fearful  suspense  and  mutual  apprehension:  the 
plebeians,  who  were  left  behind  by  their  brethren,  dreaded 
the  violence  of  the  patricians;  the  patricians  dreaded  the  ple¬ 
beians  who  remained  in  the  city,  not  knowing  whether  they 
ought  to  wish  for  their  stay,  or  for  their  departure:  but 
how  long  cOiild  it  be  supposed  that  the  multitude  which 
had  seceded  would  remain  inactive?  And  what  would  be  the 
consequence,  if,  in  the  mean  time,  a  foreign  war  should  break 
out?  No  glimpse  of  hqpe  could  they  see  left,  except  in  con¬ 
cord  between  the  citizens,  which  must  be  re-established  in 
the  state  on  any  terms,  whether  fair  or  unfair.’’  They  de¬ 
termined,  therefore,  to  send  as  ambassador  to  the  plebeians, 
Menenius  Agrippa,  a  man  of  eloquence,  and  acceptable  to 
the  commons,  because  he  had  been  originally  one  of  their 
body.  He,  being  admitted  into  the  camp,  is  said  to  have  re¬ 
lated  to  them  the  following  fable,  delivered  in  antiquated 
language,  and  an  uncouth  style: — At  a  time  when  the  mem¬ 
bers  of  the  human  body  did  not,  as  at  present,  all  unite  in 
one  plan,  but  ^ach-member  had  its  own  scheme,  and  its  own 
language;  the  other  parts  were  provoked  at  seeing' that  the 
fruits  of  all  their  care,  of  all  their  toil  and  service,  were  ap¬ 
plied  to  the  use  of  the  belly;  and  that  the  belly  meanwhile 
remained  at  its  ease,  and  did  nothing  but  enjoy  the  pleasure 

BOOK  IL 

151 

B.  C,  492.] 
provided  for  it:  on  this  they  conspired  together,  that  the 
hand  should  not  bring  food  to  the  mouth,  nor  the  mouth  re¬ 
ceive  it  if  offered,  nor  the  teeth  chew  it.  While  they  wish¬ 
ed,  by  these  angry  measures,  to  subdue  the  belly  through 
hunger,  the  members  themselves,  and  the  whole  body,  were, 
together  with  it,  reduced  to  the  last  stage  of  decay:  from 
thence  it  appeared  that  the  office  of  the  belly  itself  was  not 
confined  to  a  slothful  indolence;  that  it  not  only  received 
nourishment,  but  supplied  it  to  the  others,  conveying  to  every 
part  of  the  body,  that  blood,  on  which  depend  our  life  and 
vigour,  by  distributing  it  equally  through  the  veins,  alter 
having  brought  it  to  perfection  by  digestion  of  the  food,” 
Applying  this  to  the  present  case,  and  showing  what  simili¬ 
tude  there  was  between  the  dissension  of  the  members,  and 
the  resentment  of  the  commons  against  the  patricians,  he 
made  a  considerable  impression  on  the  people’s  minds. 
XXXI I L  A  negociation  was  then  opened  for  a  reconcilia¬ 
tion;  and  an  accommodation  was  effected,  on  the  terms,  that 
the  plebeians  should  have  magistrates  of  their  own,  invested 
with  inviolable  privileges,  who  might  have  power  to  afford 
them  protection  against  the  consuls;  and  that  it  should  not 
be  lawful  for  any  of  the  patricians  to  hold  that  office.  Ac¬ 
cordingly,  there  were  two  tribunes  of  the  commons  created, 
Caius  Licinius  and  Lucius  Albinius;  and  these  created  three 
colleagues  to  themselves,  among  whom  was  Sicinius,  the  ad¬ 
viser  of  the  secession:  but  who  the  other  two  were,  is  not 
agreed;  some  say  that  there  were  only  two  tribunes  created 
on  the  sacred  mount,  and  that  the  devoting  law*  was  passed 
*  Which  declared,  that  any  person  who  should  violate  the  person  or 
privileges  of  a  plebeian  tribune,  should  be  devoted  to  Ceres,  with  his  pro¬ 
perty;  and  any  one  might  put  him  to  death  with  impunity."  These  tribunes,' 
at  their  first  institution,  could  not  properly  be  called  magistrates,  having 
no  particular  tribunal,  nor  any  jurisdiction  over  their  feUuw  citizens. 
Dressed  like  private  men,  and  attended  only  by  one  officer,  or  beadle, 
called  Viator,  they  sat  on  a  bench  without  the  senate,  into  which  they 

152 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  261 

*  Y  ggi  there.  During  the  secession  of  the  commons,  Spu- 
B.  C.  491.  j-ius  Cassius  and  Postumus  Cominius  entered  on  the 
consulship.  In  their  consulate  the  treaty  with  the  Latines 
was  concluded;  for  the  purpose  of  ratifying  this,  one  of  the 
consuls  remained  at  Rome,  and  the  other,  being  sent  with  an 
army  against  the  Volscians,  defeated  and  put  to  flight  those 
of  Antium;  and  having  driven  them  into  the  town  of  Lon- 
gula,  pursued  the  blow,  and  made  himself  master  of  the 
town.  He  afterwards  took  Polusca,  another  town  belonging 
to* the  same  people;  then  with  all  his  force  attacked  Corioli, 
There  was  then  in  the  camp,  among  others  of  the  young  no¬ 
bility,  Caius  Marcius,  a  youth  of  quick  judgment  and  lively 
courage,  who  was  afterwards  sumamed  Coriolanus.'  The 
Roman  army,  while  engaged  in  the  siege  of  Corioli,  applying 
their  whole  attention  to  the  garrison,  which  they  kept  shut 
up  in  the  town,  without  any  fear  of  an  attack  from  without, 
were  assaulted  on  a  sadden  by  the  Volscian  legions,  who  had 
marched  thither  from  Antium,  and  at  the  same  time  the 
enemy  sallied  out  from  the  town:  Marcias  happened  to  be 
then  on  guard,  and  being  supported  by  a  chosen  body  of  men, 
were  not  admitted,  except  when  the  consuls  required  their  attendance,  to 
give  their  opiuion  ou  some  affair  which  concerned  the  interest  of  the*  ple¬ 
beians.  Their  sole  function  was  to  protect  the  plebeians,  by  interposing  in 
case  of  any  grievance  or  imposition  attempted  by  their  superiors;  and 
their  power  extended  no  farther  than  one  mile  round  the  city.  Yet  they 
afterwards  found  means,  under  various  pretences,  and  by  almost  imper¬ 
ceptible  degrees,  to  draw  to  themselves,  and  to  the  commons,  the  larger 
share  of  the  power  of  government;  introducing  a  gieat  degree  of  de¬ 
mocracy  into  the  polity  of  the  state,  vrhich,  since  the  expulsion  of  tlie 
kings,  had  been  a  kind  of  aristocracy.  They  were  not  allowed  to  be  ab¬ 
sent  from  the  city  one  whole  day,  except  during  the  Latiue  festivals,  and 
were  obliged  to  keep  their  doors  open,  night  and  day,  to  admit  complain¬ 
ants.  At  the  same  time  were  elected  two  other  plebeian  officers,  called 
assistants  to  the  tnbunes;  but  being  afterwards  charged  with  the  care  of 
the  public  buildings,  and  the  cognizance  of  a  like  nature,  which  had  before 
belonged  to  the  consuls,  they  got  the  title  51diles;  (ab  sedibus  curandis,> 
from  inspecting  the  public  edifices. 

BOOK  II. 

153 

B.  C.  491.3 
he  not  only  repelled  the  attack  of  the  sallying  party,  but 
rushed  furiously  in  at  the  open  gate;  and  putting  all  to  the 
sword  in  that  part  of  the  city,  laid  hold  of  the  first  fire  which 
he  found,  and  threw  it  on  the  houses  adjoining  the  wall;  on 
which  the  shouts  of  the  townsmen  mingling  with  the  cries  of 
the  women  and  children,  occasioned  by  the  first  fright,  served 
both  to  add  courage  to  the  Romans,  and  to  dispijrit  the  Vol- 
scians,  as  they  perceived  that  the  town  was  taken  which  they 
had  come  to  relieve.  By  this  means  the  Volscians  of  Antium 
were  defeated,  and  the  town  of  Corioli  taken;  and  so  entirely 
did  the  glory  of.Marcius  eclipse  the  fame  of  the  consul,  that, 
were  it  not  that  the  treaty  with  the  Latines,  being  engraved 
on  a  brazen  pillar,  remained  to  testify  that  it  was  ratified  by 
Spurius  Cassius  alone,  the  other  consul  being  absent,  it  would 
not  have  been  remembered  that  Postumus  Cominius  was 
appointed  to  conduct  the  war.  This  year  died  Menenius 
Agrippa,  through  the  whole  course  of  his  life  equally  be¬ 
loved  by  the  patricians  and  the  plebeians;  and  after  the  seces¬ 
sion,  still  more  endeared  to  the  latter,  1  his  man,  who,  in 
the  character  of  mediator  and  umpire,  had  re-established 
concord  among  his  countrymen,  the  ambassador  of  the  senate 
to  the  plebeians,  the  person  who  brought  back  the  Roman 
commons  to  the  city,  was  not  possessed  of  property  sufficient 
for  the  expense  of  a  funeral.  He  was  burled  at  the  charge 
of  the  commons,'  by  a  contribution  of  a  sextans'*^  from  each 
person. 
XXXIV.  The  consuls  who  succeededf were  Titus  ^  ^ 
Greganius  and  Publius  Minucius.  During  this  year,  B*  C-  490. 
when  the  state  was  undisturbed  by  foreign  wars,  and  the  dis- 
sentions  at  home  had  been  healed,  a  more  grievous  calamity 
of  another  nature  fell  upon  it:  at  first  a  scarcity  of  provisions^ 
occasioned  by  the  lands  lying  untilled  during  the  secession 
of  the  commons;  and  afterwards,  a  famine,  not  less  severe 
*  About  one  half-penny  each. 
vor.  I,— X 

154 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.263. 

than  what  is  felt  in  a  besieged  city.  This  without  doubt 
would  have  increased  to  such  a  degree  that  the  slaves,  and 
also  many  of  the  commons,  must  have  perished,  had  not  the 
consuls  taken  measures  to  remedy  it,  by  sending  to  all  quar¬ 
ters  to  buy  up  com;  not  only  into  Etruria  on  the  coast  to 
the  right  of  Ostia,  and  by  permission  of  the  Volscians,  along 
the  coast  on  the  left  as  far  as  Cumse,  but  even  to  Sicily;  for 
the  hatred  entertained  against  them  by  their  neighbours  com¬ 
pelled  them  thus  to  look  for  aid  to  distant  countries.  After 
a  quantity  of  corn  had  been  purchased  at  Cum«e,  the  ships 
were  detained  by  the  tyrant  Aristodemus,  as  the  property  of 
the  Tarquinii,  whose  heir  he  was.  Among  the  Volscians,  and 
in  the  Pomptine  district,  it  could  not  even  be  purchased,  the 
persons  employed  in  that  business  being  in  danger  of  their 
lives  from  the  violence  of  the  inhabitants.  From  Etruria, 
some  corn  was  conveyed  by  the  Tiber,  by  which  the  people 
were  supported.  At  this  unseasonable  time,  while  thus  dis¬ 
tressed  by  the  scarcity,  they  were  in  danger  of  being  farther 
harassed  by  war,  had  not  a  most  destructive  pestilence  at¬ 
tacked  the  Volscians,  when  they  were  just  ready  to  com¬ 
mence  hostilities.  By  this  dreadful  calamity  the  enemy  were 
so  dispirited,  that,  even  after  it  had  abated,  they  could  not 
entirely  rid  their  minds  of  the  terror  which  it  had  occasioned. 
Besides,  the  Romans  not  only  augmented  the  numbers  in 
their  settlement  at  Velitrfe,  but  sent  a  new  colony  into  the 
mountains  of  Norba,  to  serve  as  a  barrier  in  the  Pomptine 
Y  R  territory.  In  the  succeeding  consulate  of  Marcus 
B.  C  489.  Minucius  and  Aulus  Sempronius,  a  great  quantity 
of  corn  was  brought  from  Sicily,  and  it  was  debated  in  the 
senate,  at  what  price  it  should  be  given  to  the  commons. 
Many  were  of  opinion,  that  now  was  the  time  to  humble  the 
commons,  and  to  recover  those  rights  which,  by  the  seces¬ 
sion  and  violence  had  been  extorted  from  the  patricians j 
Marcius  Corioianus  particularly,  an  avowed  enemy  of  the 
power  of  the  tribunes,  said,  If  they  wish  to  have  provisions 

BOOK  IL 

155 

B.  C.  489.] 
at  the  usual  price,  let  them  restore  to  the  patricians  their  for¬ 
mer  rights:  why  am  I  obliged,  after  being  sent  under  the  yoke, 
after  being  ransomed,  as  it  were,  from  robbers,  to  behold  ple¬ 
beian  magistrates,  to  behold  Sicinius  invested  with  power  and 
authority?  Shall  I  submit  to  such  indignities  longer  than  ne¬ 
cessity  compels  me?  Shall  I,  who  could  not  endure  Tarqui- 
nius  on  the  throne,  endure  Sicinius?  Let  him  now  secede, 
let  him  call  away  the  commons;  the  road  is  open  to  the 
sacred  mount,  and  to  other  hills:  let  them  carry  off  the  corn 
from  our  lands,  as  they  did  two  years  ago:  let  tl|em  make 
the  best  of  the  present  state  of  the  market,  which  they  have 
occasioned  by  their  own  madness,  I  affirm  with  confidence, 
that  when  they  are  brought  to  reason  by  their  present  suf¬ 
ferings,  they  will  themselves  become  tillers  of  the  lands, 
rather  than  take  arms  and  secede,  to  prevent  their  being 
tilled/’  Whether  such  a  measure  were  expedient,  is  not  now 
easy  to  say;  but,  in  my  opinion,  it  was  very  practicable  for 
the  patricians,  by  insisting  on  terms  for  lowering  the  price 
of  provisions,  to  have  freed  themselves  from  the  tribunitian 
power,  and  every  other  restraint  imposed  on  them  against 
their  will. 
XXXV*  The  method  proposed  appeared  to  the  senate  to 
be  too  harsh,  and  incensed  the  commons  to  such  a  degree, 
that  they  were  very  near  having  recourse  to  arms.  The}’ 
complained,  that,  ‘‘  as  if  they  were  enemies,  attempts  were 
made  to  destroy  them  by  famine:  that  they  were  defrauded 
of  food  and  sustenance;  that  the  foreign  corn,  the  only  sup¬ 
port  which,  unexpectedly,  fortune  had  given  them,  was  to  be 
snatched  out  of  their  mouths,  unless  the  tribunes  were  sur¬ 
rendered  up  in  bonds  to  Caius  Marcius;  unless  he  were 
gratified  by  the  personal  sufferings  of  the  Roman  commons; 
a  new  kind  of  executioner  had  come  forward,  who  gave  them 
no  alternative  but  death  or  slavery.”  They  would  have  pro¬ 
ceeded  to  violence  against  him  as  he  came  out  of  the  senate- 
house,  had  not  the  tribunes  ver}^  opportunely  summoned  him 

156 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  S63. 
to  a  trial.  This  suppressed  their  rage,  when  every  one  saw 
himself  a  judge,  and  empowered  to  decide  on  the  life  and 
death  of  his  foe.  At  first,  Marcius  heard  the  threats  of 
the  tribunes  with  scorn:  ‘‘  The  authority  given  to  their  of¬ 
fice,”  he  said,  extended  only  to  the  affording  protection, 
not  to  the  inflicting  of  punishment.  That  they  were  tribunes 
of  the  commons,  not  of  the  patricians.”  But  the  whole  body 
of  the  commons  had  taken  up  the  cause  with  such  implacable 
animosity,  that  the  patricians  were  under  the  necessity  of 
devoting  «ne  victim  to  punishment  for  Ihe  general  safety. 
Thev  struggled  however,  notwithstanding  the  weight  of  the 
public  hatred  which  they  had  to  contend  with,  and  not  only 
each  particular  member,  but  the  whole  collective  body  exert- 
ed  their  utmost  efforts;  and  first  they  tried,  whether,  by  post¬ 
ing  their  clients  in  divers  places  convenient  for  the  purpose, 
they  could  not  deter  the  several  plebeians  from  attending  the 
meetings  and  cabals,  and  thereby  put  a  stop  to  farther  pro¬ 
ceedings.  Afterwards,  they  all  came  forth  in  a  body,  ad' 
dressing  the  commons  with  intreaties  and  stipplications;  one 
would  have  thought  that  every  patrician  was  going  to  stand 
his  trial.  They  besought  them,  if  they  did  not  think  proper 
to  acquit  Marcius  as  innoc^^nt,  yet  considering  him  as  guilty, 
to  grant  as  a  favour,  on  their  request,  the  pardon  of  one 
citizen,  one  senator.  However,  as  he  himself  did  not  appear 
on  the  day  appointed,  they  persisted  in  their  resentment  He 
was  condemned  in  his  absence,  and  went  into  exile  to  the 
Volscians,  uttering  menaces  against  his  country,  and  breath¬ 
ing  already  the  resentment  of  an  enemy.  The  Volscians 
received  him  kindly,  and  daily  increased  their  attention  and 
respect,  in  proportion  as  they  had  opportunities  of  observing 
the  violence  of  his  anger  towards  his  countrymen,  against 
whom  he  would  often  utter  complaints,  and  even  threats.  He 
lodged  in  the  house  of  Attius  Tullus,  who  was  then  the  man 
of  by  far  greatest  consequence  among  the  Volscians,  and  an 
inveterate  enemy  to  the  Romans:  so  that  the  one,  being  stimu- 

BOOK  11. 

157 

B.  C.  489.] 
lated  bv  an  old  animosity,  the  other,  by  fresh  resentment, 
they  began  to  concert  schemes  for  bringing  about  a  war  with 
Rome.  They  judged,  however,  that  it  would  be  a  difficult 
matter  to  prevail  on  their  people  to  take  arms*  which  they 
had  so  often  tried  without  success;  that  by  the  many  wars 
which  they  had  sustained  at  different  times,  and  lately  by  the 
loss*  of  their  young  men  in  the  pestilence,  their  spirits  were 
broken;  and  that  it  was  necessary  to  make  use  of  art,  in  or¬ 
der  that  their  hatred,  which  had  now  lost  its  keenness  through 
length  of  time,  might  be  thereby  whetted  anew. 
XXXVI.  It  happened  that  preparations  were  then  making 
at  Rome  for  a  repetition  of  the  great  games.  The  reason  of 
repeating  them  was  this:  on  the  morning  of  the  day  when 
the  games  were  to  have  been  celebrated,  before  the  shows 
began,  a  master  of  a  family,  after  lashing  his  slave  load¬ 
ed  with  a  neck-yoke,  had  driven  him  across  the  middle  of 
the  circus;  the  games  were  afterw^ards  exhibited,  as  if 
this  affair  had  no  relation  to  religion.  Some  shorf  time  after, 
Titus  Atinius,  a  plebeian,  had  a  dream;  he  imagined  Jupiter 
to  have  said  to  him,  that  ‘‘the  dancer,  who  performed  pre¬ 
viously  to  the  games,  had  been  displeasing  to  him,  and  un¬ 
less  those  games  were  repeated,  and  that  in  a  magnificent 
manner,  the  city  would  be  in  danger;  and  ordered  him  to  go 
and  tell  this  to  the  consuls.”  Although  the  man’s  mind  was 
under  the  influence  of  a  considerable  degree  of  superstition, 
yet  the  awe  vrhich  he  felt  at  the  high  dignity  of  the  magis¬ 
trates,  and  his  owrl  apprehensions  lest  he  should  be  treated 
by  them,  and  the  public,  as  an  object  of  ridicule,  overcame 
his  religious  fears;  this  delay  cost  him  dear;  for  within  a  few 
days  he  lost  his  son;  and,  lest  the  cause  of  that  sudden  dis¬ 
aster  should  be  doubtful,  while  he  was  overwhelmed  with 
grief,  the  same  phantom  appeared  to  him  in  his  sleep,  and 
seemed  to  ask  him,  “  whether  he  had  gotten  a  sufficient  re¬ 
ward  for  his  contempt  of  the  deity?”  telling  him  that  ‘‘  astiB 
greater  awaited  him,  unless  he  went  immediately  and  deli- 

158 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  26^. 
vered  the  message  to  the  consuls.”  This  made  a  deeper  im¬ 
pression  on  his  mind,  and  yet  he  hesitated  and  delayed,  until 
at  length  he  was  attacked  by  a  grievous  disorder,  a  stroke  of 
the  palsy.  He  then  submitted  to  the  admonitions  of  the  di¬ 
vine  displeasure:  and,  wearied  out  by  his  past  sufferings,  and 
the  apprehension  of  others  which  threatened  him,  he  called 
a  council  of  his  intimate  friends;  and,  after  acquainting  them 
with  the  several  things  which  he  had  seen  and  heard,  and 
with  Jupiter’s  having  appeared  to  him  so  often  in  his  sleep, 
and  likewise  the  anger  and  threats  of  the  deity,  so  speedily 
fulfilled  in  the  calamities  which  had  befallen  him,  he  was,  in 
pursuance  of  the  clear  and  unanimous  opinion  of  all  present, 
carried  in  a  litter  into  the  Forum,  to  the  consuls:  from  thence 
he  was  cqpveyed,  by  their  order,  into  the  senate-house;  where, 
when  he  had  related  the  same  accounts,  to  the  utter  aston¬ 
ishment  of  all,  behold  another  miracle;  it  is  recorded  that  he, 
who  had  been  carried  thither  incapable  of  using  any  of  his 
limbs,  had  «no  sooner  discharged  his  duty,  than  he  was  able 
to  walk  home  without  assistance. 
XXX VII.  The  senate  decreed  that  the  games  should  be 
exhibited  in  the  most  splendid  manner.  To  these  games,  in 
consequence  of  a  plan  laid  by  Attius  Tullus,  a  vast  number 
of  the  Volscians  repaired.  Before  the  commencement  of 
the  exhibition,  Tullus,  according  to  a  scheme  concerted  at 
home  with  Marcius,  came  to  the  consuls,  told  them  that  he 
wished  to  confer  with  them,  in  private,  on  some  matters 
which  concerned  the  commonwealth,  and  every  other  person 
having  retired,  he  addressed  them  thus:  ‘‘  It  is  painful  to  me 
in  the  extreme,  to  .say  any  thing  of  my  countrymen  that  is 
not  to  their  honour:  I  do  not  come,  however,  to  charge  them 
with  having  committed  any  wrong  act,  but  to  guard  against 
such  being  committed.  That  the  dispositions  of  our  people 
are  fickle,  to  a  degree  infinitely  beyond  what  might  be  wish- 
ai,  numerous  disasters  have  given  sensible  proofs;  for,  to 
your  forbearance  it  is  owing,  and  not  to  our  own  deserts. 

BOOK  IL 

159 

B,  C.  489.] 
that  we  have  not  been  vitterly  destroyed.  There  are  great 
numbers  of  the  ‘Volscians  now  in  Rome;  there  are  giimes  to 
be  celebrated,  the  public  will  be  intent  on  the  exhibition,  I 
well  remember  the  outrage  which  was  committed  in  this  city, 
by  the  Sabine  youths,  on  a  similar  occasion.  I  shudde;r  with 
apprehension,  lest  some  inconsiderate  and  rash  deed  may  en¬ 
sue;  thus  much  I  thought  it  my  duty,  both  for  our  own  sake, 
and  for  yours,  to  mention  beforehand  to  you,  who  are  con- 
suU;  for  my  own  part,  1  intend  instantly  to  return  home,  lest, 
if  I  should  be  present,  my  character  might  be  stained  with 
the  imputation  of  some  improper  word  or  action.’’  After 
this  discourse  he  departed.  The  consuls  proposed  the  mat¬ 
ter  to  the  consideration  of  the  senate;  a  matter,  indeed,  un¬ 
supported  by  proof,  but  yet  coming  from  a  person  whose 
authority  was  qf  great  weight.  The  authority  then,  rather 
than  any  reason  appearing  in  the  case,  as  it  often  happens, 
determined  them  to  use  precautions,  even  though  they  might 
be  unnecessary;  and  a  decree  being  passed,  that  the  Volsci- 
ans  should  retire  from  the  city,  criers  were  despatched  to 
every  quarter,  to  order  them  all  to  remove  before  night.  At 
first,  they  were  struck  with  great  terror,  as  they  ran  up  and 
down  to  their  lodgings,  to  take  away  their  effects:  indigna¬ 
tion  afterwards  filled  their  minds,  when  they  were  begin¬ 
ning  their  journey;  they  considered  themselves  stigmatized 
as  persons  infamous  and  polluted;  driven  away  from  the  con¬ 
verse  of  men  and  gods;  from  public  games,  on  the  day  of 
a  festival. 
XXXVIII.  As  they  formed  in  their  journey  almost  one 
continued  train,  Tullus,  who  had  proceeded  to  the  fountain 
of  Ferintina,  accosted  the  chief  persons  among  them  as  each 
arrived;  and,  by  asking  questions,  and  expressing  indigna¬ 
tion,  while  they  greedily  listened  to  expressions  which  fa¬ 
voured  their  resentment,  led  them  on,  and  by  their  means, 
the  rest  of  the  multitude,  to  a  plain  that  lay  near  the  road, 
and  there  began  to  harangue  them,  as  if  at  a  general  assem- 

160 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  263. 
bly:  Although,”  said  he,  ye  should  forget  all  the  injuT 
rious  treatment  which  ye  formerly  received  from  the  Roman 
people,  the  calamities  of  the  Volsgian  race,  and  every  other 
matter  of  the  kind,  with  what  degree  of  patience  do  ye 
bear  this  insult  thrown  on  you,  when  they  commenced  their 
games  by  exhibiting  us  to  public  ignominy?  Did  ye  not  per¬ 
ceive,  that  they  performed  a  triumph  over  you  this  day? 
That,  as  ye  were  letiring,  ye  served  as  a  spectacle  to  all 
their  citizens,  to  foreigners,  to  so  many  of  the  neighbouring 
nations?  That  your  wives  and  your  children  were  led  cap¬ 
tives  before  the  eyes  of  the  public?  What  do  ye  suppose 
were  the  sentiments  of  those  who  heard  the  words  of  the  cri¬ 
er,  of  those  who  beheld  you  departing,  or  of  those  who  met 
this  disgraceful  cavalcade?  What  else  but  that  we  must  be 
some  polluted  wretches,  whose  presence  at  the  shows  would 
contaminate  the  games,  and  render  an  expiation  necessary; 
and  that  therefore  we  were  driven  away  from  the  mansions 
of  a  people  of  such  purity  of  character,  from  their  meeting 
and  converse?  And  besides,  does  it  not  strike  you,  that  we 
should  not  now  be  alive,  if  we  had  not  hastened  our  depar¬ 
ture?  if  indeed  it  ought  to  be  called  a  departure,  and  not  a 
flight.  And  do  ye  not  consider  as  enemies  the  inhabitants 
of  that  city»  wherein,  had  ye  delayed  for  one  day,  ye  must, 
every  one  of  you,  have  perished?  It  was  a  declaration  of 
war  against  you;  for  which,  those  who  made  it  will  suffer 
severely,  if  ye  have  the  spirit  of  men.”  Their  anger,  which 
was  hot  before,  was  by  this  discourse,  kindled  to  a  flame,  in 
which  temper  they  separated  to  their  several  homes;  and 
each  taking  pains  to  rouse  those  of  his  own  state  to  ven¬ 
geance,  they  soon  effected  a  general  revolt  of  the  whole  Vol- 
scian  nation. 
XXXIX.  The  commanders  appointed  for  this  war,  by  the 
unanimous  choice  of  all  the  states,  were  Attius  Tullus  and 
Caius  Marcius  the  Roman  exile;  on  the  latter  of  whom  they 
reposed  by  far  the  greater  part  of  their  hopes;  nor  did  he 

BOOK  II. 

161 

B.  C.  489.] 
disappoint  their  expectations,  but  gave  a  convincing  proof 
that  the  commonwealth  was  more  indebted  for  power  to  its 
generals,  than  to  its  troops.  Marching  to  Circeii,  he  first 
expelled  the  Roman  colonists,  and  delivered  the  city,  after 
restoring  it  to  freedom,  into  the  hands  of  the  Volscians:  turn¬ 
ing  thence  across  the  country  towards  the  Latine  road,  he 
deprived  the  Romans  of  their  late  acquisitions,  Satricum 
Longula,  Polusca,  and  Corioli.  He  then  retook  Lavinium, 
and  afterwards  made  a  conquest  of  Corbio,  Vitellia,  Trebia, 
Lavici,  and  Pedum,  one  after  another.  From  Pedum,  lastly 
he  led  his  forces  towards  Rome,  and  pitching  his  camp  at 
the  Cluilian  trenches,  five  miles  from  the  city,  sent  parties 
to  ravage  the  lands;  at  the  same  time  appointing  persons 
among  the  plunderers  to  take  care  that  the  possessions  of  the 
patricians  should  be  left  unmolested;  either  because  his  anger 
was  levelled  principally  against  the  plebeians,  or  with  the 
design  of  causing  thereby  a  greater  dissension  between  these 
different  orders;  and  this  would,  no  doubt,  have  been  the 
consequence,  so  powerfully  did  the  tribunes,  by  their  invec¬ 
tives  against  the  patricians,  excite  the  resentment  of  the  com¬ 
mons,  which  was  sufficiently  too  violent  before,  but  that,  how¬ 
ever  full  their  minds  were  of  mutual  distrust  and  rancour, 
their  dread  of  a  foreign  enemy,  the  strongest  tie  of  concord, 
obliged  them  to  unite:  in  one  point  only  did  they  disagree; 
the  senate  and  consuls  placing  their  hopes  entirely  in  arms, 
the  commons  preferring  all  other  measures  to  war.  By  this 
time  Spurius  Nautius  and  Sextus  Furius  were  con-  «  „ 
suls.  While  they  were  employed  in  reviewing  the  c.  486. 
legions,  and  posting  troops  on  the  walls,  and  in  other  places, 
where  it  was  ifhought  proper  to  fix  guards  and  watches,  a 
vast  multitude  of  people  assembling,  and  ibsisting  on  peace, 
terrified  them,  at  first,  by  their  seditious  clamours,  and,  at 
length,  compelled  them  to  assemble  the  senate,  and  there 
propose  the  sending  of  ambassadors  to  Caius  Marcius.  The 
senate,  finding  that  they  could  not  depend  on  the  support  of 
VOL,  I. — Y 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.8-266. 

162 
the  commons,  took  the  matter  into  consideration,  and  sent 
deputies  to  Marcius  to  treat  of  an  accommodation:  to  d^esc 
he  replied  in  harsh  terms,  that  “  if  the  lands  were  restored 
to  the  Volscians,  a  treaty  might  then  be  opened  for  an  ac¬ 
commodation;  but  if  they  were  resolved  to  enjoy,  at  their 
ease,  what  they  had  plundered  from  their  neighbours  in  war, 
he  would  not  forget  either  the  injustice  of  his  countrymen, 
or  the  kindness  of  his  hosts,  but  would  take  such  steps  as 
should  show  the  world,  that  his  courage  was  irritated  by  ex¬ 
ile,  not  depressed.”  The  same  persons  being  sent  a  second 
time,  were  refused  admittance  into  the  camp.  It  is  related, 
that  the  priests,  afterwards,  in  their  sacred  vestments,  went 
as  suppliants  to  the  camp  of  the  enemy,  but  had  no  more  in¬ 
fluence  on  him  than  the  ambassadors. 
XL.  The  matrons  then  assembled  in  a  body  about  Veturia, 
the  mother  of  Coriolanus,  and  Volumnia  his  wife;  whether 
this  was  a  scheme  of  government,  or  the  result  of  the  wo¬ 
men’s  own  fears,  I  cannot  discover.  It  is  certain  that  they 
carried  their  point,  and  that  Veturia,  who  was  far  advanced 
in  years,  and  Volumnia,  leading  two  little  sons  whom  she 
had  by  Marcius,  went  to  the  camp  of  the  enemy;  so  that 
women,  by  tears  and  prayers,  preserved  the  city  which  the 
men  were  not  able  to  preserve  by  arms.  When  they  arrived 
at  the  camp,  and  Coriolanus  was  informed  that  a  great  pro¬ 
cession  of  women  was  approaching,  he,  who  had  not  been 
moved,  either  by  the  majesty  of  the  state,  represented  in  its 
ambassadors,  or  by  the  awful  address  made  by  the  ministers 
of  religion  both  to  his  sight  and  his  understanding,  at  first 
resolved  to  show  himself  still  more  inflexible  against  female 
tears:  but  soon  after,  one  of  his  acquaintance  ki  ^wing  Veturia, 
who  was  distinguished  above  the  rest  by  an  extraordinary 
degree  of  sadness;  as  she  stood  between  her  daughter-in4aw 
and  grand* children,  said  to  him,  unless  my  eyes  deceive 
me,  your  mother  with  your  wife  and  children  are  coming.” 
Coriolanus,  in  a  transport  of  amazement,  smd  almost  distrac- 

BOOK  11. 

165 

B.  C.  4S6,3 
ted,  sprang  from  his  seat  to  embrace  his  mother  as  she  ad¬ 
vanced,  who,  instead  of  imreaties,  addressed  him  with  angry 
reproofs;  ‘‘  Let  me  know,”  said  she,  before  I  receive 
your  embrace,  whether  I  am  come  to  an  enemy  or  to  a  son; 
whether  I  am  in  your  camp  a  prisoner,  or  a  mother,  W as 
It  for  this,  that  age  has  been  lengthened  out,  that  I  might 
behold  you  an  exile,  and  afterwards  an  enemy;  could  you 
lay  waste  this  land,  which  gave  you  birth  and  education; 
whatever  degree  of  anger,  whatever  thirst  of  vengeance, 
might  have  occupied  your  mind  on  your  march,  did  you  not, 
on  entering  its  borders,  feel  your  passion  subside?  When 
you  came  within  sight  of  Rome,  did  it  not  recur  to  you,— 
Within  those  walls  are  my  house  and  guardian  gods,  my 
mother,  my  wife,  my  children?  Had  I  never  been  a  mother, 
then  Rome  would  not  have  been  now  besieged:  had  I  not  a 
son,  I  might  havtf  died  free,  and  left  my  country  free;  but, 
for  my  part,  there  is  no  suffering  to  which  I  can  be  exposed, 
that  will  not  reflect  more  dishonour  on  you,  than  misery  on 
me;  and  be  my  lot  as  wretched  as  it  may,  I  am  not  to  endure 
it  long;  let  these  claim  your  regard,  who,  if  you  persist,  can 
have  no  other  prospect,  but  either  untimely  death  or  lasting 
slavery.”  His  wife  and  children  then  embraced  him;  and 
the  whole  crowd  of  women,  uttering  bitter  lamentations,  and 
deploring  their  own  and  their  country’s  fate,  at  length  got 
the  better  of  his  obstinacy:  so  that,  after  embracing  and  dis¬ 
missing  his  family,  he  removed  his  camp  to  a  greater  dis¬ 
tance  from  the  city.  In  a  short  time  he  drew  off  the  troops 
entirely  from  the  Roman  territories,  which  is  said  to  have 
incensed  the  Volscians  so  highly  against  him,  that  he  perish¬ 
ed  under  the  effects  of  their  resentment;  by  what  kind  of 
death  writers  do  not  agree.  In  the  account  given  by  Fabi- 
us,  the  most  ancient  writer  by  far,  I  find  that  he  lived  even 
to  old  age;  he  mentions  positively,  that,  when  Marcius  be¬ 
came  far  advanced  in  years,  he  used  frequently  to  utter  this 
remark,  that  the  evils  of  exile  bore  much  the  heavier  on 

164 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  286. 

the  aged.”  The  men  of  Rome  were  not  sparing  in  bestow¬ 
ing  on  the  women  the  honours  which  they  had  earned;  so 
distant  were  the  manners  of  that  age  from  the  practice  of 
detracting  firdim  the  merits  of  others:  they  even  erected  and 
dedicated  a  temple  to  Female  Fortune,  as  a  lasting  monu¬ 
ment  of  their  meritorious  conduct.  The  Volscians  after¬ 
wards,  in  conjunction  with  the  iEquans,  made  another  inroad 
into  the  Roman  territories;  but  the  iEquans  soon  became 
dissatisfied  at  being  commanded  by  Attius  Tullus;  and  in 
consequence  of  the  dispute,  whether  the  Volscians  or  the 
iEquans  should  give  a  general  to  the  combined  army,  a 
separation  ensued,  and  soon  after  a  furious  battle.  There 
the  good  fortune  of  the  Roman  people  wasted  the  two  armies 
of  its  enemies,  in  a  contest  no  less  bloody  than  obstinate. 
Y  2^*;  The  consuls  of  the  next  year  were  Titus  Sicinius 
B.  Caius  Aquillius.  The  Volsoians  were  allot¬ 
ted,  as  a  province,  to  Sicinius;  the  Hemicians,  for  they  also 
were  in  arms,  to  Aquillius.  The  Hemicians  were  subdued 
in  that  year.  The  operations  against  the  Volscians  ended 
without  any  advantage  being  gained  on  either  side. 
Y.  R.  268.  XLL  The  next  consuls  elected  were  Spurius 
B.  C.  481.  Cassius  and  Proculus  Virginius.  A  league  was 
made  with  the  Hemicians.  Two-thirds  of  their  lands  were 
taken  from  them,  one  half  of  which  the  consul  Cassius  in¬ 
tended  to  distribute  among  the  Latines,  the  other  half  among 
the  commons.  To  this  donation  he  proposed  to  add  a  con¬ 
siderable  tract  of  land,  which  belonged,  he  said,  to  the  pub¬ 
lic,  though  possessed  by  private  persons.  Many  of  the 
patricians,  who  were  themselves  in  possession  of  this  land, 
were  hereby  alarmed  for  their  property,  and  besides,  that 
body  in  general  was  seized  with  anxiety  for  the  safety  of 
the  people;  observing  that  the  consul,  by  these  donatives, 
was  forming  an  influence  at  once  dangerous  to  liberty  and 
to  right.  I'hls  was  the  first  proposal  of  the  agrarian  law, 
which,  from  that  time  to  the  present  age,  has  never  been 

B,  C.  484.3 

BOOK  IL 

155 

agitated  without  the  most  violent  commotions  in  the  state. 
The  other  consul  opposed  the  donations;  and  in  this,  he  was 
supported  by  the  patricians;  nor  did  all  the  commons  op¬ 
pose  him:  at  first,  they  began  to  despii^|fci|p^  which  was 
not  confined  to  themselves,  but  extei]^4!^;  allies,  in 
common  with  the  citizens:  then  they  aiTcustomed  to 
hear  the  consul  Virginius  in  the  assemblies  frequently,  as  it 
were  prophesying,  that  the  donatives  of  his  colleagues 
were  full  of  infectious  poison;  that  those  lands  would  bring 
slavery  on  such  as  should  receive  them;  that  he  was  paving 
the  way  to  arbitrary  power;  for  why  should  the  allies  and 
the  Latine  nation  be  thus  includear  What  was  the  intent  of 
restoring  a  third  part  of  the  lands,  taken  in  war,  to  the  Her- 
nicians,  who  so  lately  were  enemies,  only  that  these  nations 
might  set  Cassias  at  their  head  as  a  leader,  instead  of 
Coriolanus,^’  Whoever  argued  and  protested  against  the 
agrarian  law,  as  thus  proposed,  was  sure  of  popularity:  and, 
from  that  time,  both  the  consuls  vied  with  each  other  in 
humouring  the  commons.  Virginius  declared,  that  he  would 
allow  the  lands  to  be  assigned,  provided  they  were  not  made 
over  to  any  other  than  citizens  of  Rome.  Cassius,  finding 
that,  by  his  pursuit  of  popularity  among  the  allies,  which  he 
had  betrayed  in  the  proposed  distribution  of  the  lands,  he 
had  lowered  himself  in  the  estimation  of  his  countrymen, 
and,  hoping  to  recover  their  esteem  by  another  donative, 
proposed  an  order  that  the  money  received  for  the  Sicilian 
corn  should  be  refunded  to  the  people.  But  this  the  com¬ 
mons  rejected  with  as  much  disdain,  as  if  he  were  avowedh 
bartering  for  arbitrary  power;  so  strongly  were  they  inflaen- 
ced  by  their  inveterate  suspicions  of  his  ambition,  that  they 
spumed  at  all  his  presents,  as  if  they  were  in  a  state  of  af¬ 
fluence;  and  no  sooner  did  he  go  out  of  office,  than  he  was 
condemned  and  executed,  as  we  are  informed  by  undoubted 
authority.  Some  say  that  it  was  his  father  who  inflicted 
this  punishment  on  him;  that  having,  at  home,  held  an  in- 

166 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

CY.  R.  270. 

quiry  into  his  conduct,  he  scourged  him,  and  put  him  to 
death,  and  consecrated  the  allowance  settled  on  his  son,^  to 
Ceres;  that  out  of  this  a  stotue  was  erected,  with  this  in¬ 
scription,  the  Cassian  family.”  I  find  in  some 
writers,  more  credible  account,  that  he  was 
prosecuted  by  the  qusestors  Cseso  Fabius  and 
Lucias  Valerius;  that  he  was  found  guilty  on  a  trial  before 
the  people,  and  his  house  razed  by  a  public  decree:  it  stood 
on  the  spot  which  is  now  the  area  before  the  temple  of 
Tellus.  However,  whether  the  trial  was  private  or  public, 
Y.  R.  269.  'W'as  condemned  in  the  consulate  of  Servius 
B.  C.  483,  Cornelius  and  Quintus  Fabius. 
XLIL  The  anger  which  the  people  had  conceived  against 
Cassius,  was  not  of  long  continuance.  The  alluring  prospects, 
held  out  by  the  agrarian  law,  were  sufficient,  of  themselves, 
now  the  proposer  of  it  was  removed  out  of  the  way,  to  make 
a  lively  impression  on  their  minds;  and  their  eagerness,  in 
pursuit  of  them,  was  inflamed,  by  an  act  of  unreasonable 
parsimony  in  the  patricians,  who,  when  theV  olsdans  and 
iEquans  were  vanquished  in  that  year,  deprived  the  troops 
of  the  booty;  the  whole  of  what  was  taken  from  the  enemy, 
the  consul  Fabius  sold,  and  lodged  the  produce  of  it  in  the 
treasury.  The  name  of  Fabius  was  odious  to  the  commons, 
on  account  of  this  conduct;  yet  the  patricians  had  influence 
Y  R  2*30*  procure  the  election  of  Cseso  Fabius  to 
B,  C.  482.  the  consulship,  with  Lucius  iEmilius.  This  far- 
ther  exasperated  the  people,  who,  by  raising  a  sedition  at 
home,  encouraged  foreign  enemies  to  attack  them:  but  war, 
put  a  stop  to  intestine  dissensions.  The  patricians  and  ple¬ 
beians  united,  and  under  the  conduct  of  iEmilius,  with  little 
♦  Bv  the  Roraafl  law,  a  father  had  full  and  absolute  power,  even  to  life 
and  death,  over  his  children,  who  were  in  a  state  of  absolute  slavery;  even 
what  property  they  mig^ht  acquire>  belonged  not  to  them,  but  to  their 
father 

B,  C,  482-3 

BOOK  II. 

167 

loss  to  themselves,  overthrew  in  battle  the  Voketans  and 
^quans,  who  had  revived  hostilities.  On  this  occasion  the 
enemy  lost  greater  numbers  during  their  retreat,  than  in  the 
battle;  for,  after  they  were  broken,  they  were  pursued  by  the 
cavalry  to  a  vast  distance.  In  the  same  year,  on  the  ides 
of  July,  the  temple  of  Castor  was  dedicated;  it  had  been 
vowed,  during  the  Latine  war,  by  Postumius  the  dicta¬ 
tor,  and  his  son,  being  appointed  duumvir  for  the  purpose, 
performed  the  dedication.  This  year  also  the  people  were 
tempted  to  new  exertions,  by  the  charms  of  the  agrarian 
law.  The  tribunes  wished  to  enhance  the  importance  of 
their  office,  by  promoting  that  popular  decree.  The  patri¬ 
cians,  convinced  that  the  multitude  were,  of  themselves,  too 
much  inclined  to  desperate  measures,  looked  with  horror  on 
such  largesses,  as  incitements  to  acts  of  temerity;  and  they 
found  in  the  consuls,  leaders  as  active  as  they  could  wish,  in 
opposing  those  proceedings.  Their  party  consequently  pre¬ 
vailed;  and  that,  not  only  for  the  present,  but  they  were  un¬ 
able  to  appoint  as  consuls  for  the  approaching  year  Marcus 
Fabius,  brother  to  Ceeso,  and  Lucius  Verus,  who  ^ 
was  still  more  odious  to  the  plebeians,  on  account  of  B  C.  48i. 
his  having  been  the  prosecutor  of  Spurius  Cassius.  In  that 
consulship,  there  was  another  contest  with  the  tribunes;  the 
law  in  question  was  considered  as  a  vain  project,  and  the 
proposers  of  it  disregarded  as  claiming  merit  from  holding 
out  to  the  people’s  view,  advantages  which  were  not  attaina¬ 
ble.  The  name  of  Fabius  was  now  held  in  the  highest  esti¬ 
mation  after  three  successive  consulates,  all  of  which  had 
been  uniformly  distinguished  by  opposition  to  the  tribunitian 
power;  and,  for  that  reason,  this  dignity  was  continued  in  the 
same  family,  for  a  considerable  time,  from  a  general  persua¬ 
sion  that  it  could  not  be  placed  in  better  hands.  Soon  after 
this,  war  was  undertaken  against  the  Veientians.  The  Vol- 
scians  also  renewed  hostilities.  For  security  against  foreign 

168 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  27^^. 

enemies^  the  strength  of  the  Romans  was  more  than  suffi¬ 
cient;  but  they  perverted  it  to  a  bad  purpose,  namely,  to  the 
support  of  quarrels  among  themselves.  To  add  to  the  ge¬ 
neral  disquiet,  several  prodigies  appeared;  the  sky,  almost 
daily,  exhibiting  threatening  portents,  both  in  the  city  and 
in  the  country.  The  soothsayers,  employed  as  well  by  the 
state,  as  by  private  persons,  after  consulting  both  entrails, 
and  birds,  declared  that  no  other  cause  of  the  displeasure  of 
the  deity  existed,  than  that  the  worship  of  the  gods  was  not 
duly  performed.  All  their  apprehensions  however  ended  in 
this;  Oppia,  a  vestal,  was  convicted  of  a  breach  of  chasti¬ 
ty,  and  suffered  punishment. 
Y.  R,  272.  XLIII.  Quintus  Fabius,  a  second  time,  and  Caius 
B.  c.  4S0.  Julius,  then  succeeded  to  the  consulship.  During 
this  year,  the  domestic  dissensions  abated  not  of  their  acri¬ 
mony,  and  the  war  abroad  wore  a  more  dangerous  aspect. 
The  jEquans  took  up  arms.  The  Veientians  even  carried 
their  depredations  into  the  territories  of  the  Romans.  And 
as  these  wars  appeared  every  day  more  alarming,  Cgeso  Fa- 
T  R  273  Spurius  Furius  were  made  consuls.  The 
B.  C.  479.  vEquans  laid  siege  to  Ortona,  a  Latine  city.  The 
Veientians,  now  satiated  with  booty,  threatened  to  besiege 
Rome  itself:  yet  all  these  dangers  which  surrounded  them, 
instead  of  restraining  the  ill-humour  of  the  commons,  only 
served  to  augment  it.  They  resumed  the  practice  of  refu¬ 
sing  to  enlist  as  soldiers,  not  indeed  of  their  own  accord,  but 
by  the  advice  of  Spurius  Licinius,  a  plebeian  tribune,  who, 
thinking  that  this  was  the  time  to  force  the  Agrarian  law 
on  the  patricians,  when  it  would  be  impossible  for  them  to 
make  opposition,  had  undertaken  to  obstruct  the  preparations 
for  war.  However,  all  the  odium  excited  by  this  exertion 
of  the  tribunitian  power  rested  solely  on  the  author;  nor  did 
the  consuls  unite  their  efforts  against  him  with  more  eager 
zeal,  than  did  his  own  colleagues,  by  whose  assistance  the 
levy  was  completed.  Armies  were  raised  for  the  two  wars  at 

BOOK  11. 

169 

B.  C.  479.] 
the  same  ftme;  the  command  of  ofie  was  given  to  Fabius^  to  he 
led  against  the  iEquans;  of  the  other  to  Furius,  against  the 
Veientians.  In  the  expedition  against  the  latter^  nothir  :  me¬ 
morable  was  performed.  Fabius  met  with  a  great  more 
trouble  from  his  countrymen,  than  from  the  cnem\ :  that  single 
man,  by  his  conduct,  as  consul,  supported  the  commonwealth, 
which  the  troops,  out  of  aversion  to  him  as  far  as  lay  in  their 
power,  treacherously  betrayed  to  ruin:  tor,  after  numberless 
other  instances  of  military  skill,  which  he  had  displaced,  both 
in  his  preparatory  measures,  and  in  his  operatioiis  in  the  field, 
and  when  he  had  made  such  a  disposition  of  his  forces,  that, 
by  a  charge  of  .his  cavalry  alone,  he  put  the  enemy  to  r(>ut, 
the  infantry  refused  to  pursue  their  broken  troops;  nor  could 
any  motive,  not  to  mention  the  exhortations  of  the  general, 
whom  they  hated,  nor  even  the  immediate  consequence  of 
infamy  to  themselves,  and  disgrace  to  the  public,  nor  the 
danger  to  which  they  would  be  exposed,  shouid  the  eneniy 
resume  their  courage,  prevail  on  them  to  quicken  their  p,.  :e, 
or  even  to  stand  in  order  of  battle,  so  as  to  resist  an  atDt  k. 
Without  orders,  they  faced  about;  and,  with  countenances 
as  dejected  as  though  they  had  been  vanquished,  retired  to 
their  camp,  execrating,  at  one  time,  the  general,  at  another, 
the  exertions  of  the  cavalry.  The  consul,  however,  sought 
not  any  remedy  against  so  pestilent  an  example,  showing  by 
one  instance  among  many,  that  men  of  the  most  transcend- 
ant  abilities  are  more  apt  to  be  deficient  in  regard  to 
the  discipline  of  their  own  troops,  than  in  conquering  an 
enemy.  Fabius  returned  to  Rome,  having  reaped  little  fresh 
glory  from  the  war,  but  having  irritated  and  exasperated, 
to  a  high  degree,  the  hatred  of  the  soldiers  against  him.  The 
patricians,  notwithstanding,  had  influence  enough  to  continue 
the  consulship  in  the  Fabian  family:  they  elected  Marcus 
Fabius  to  that  office,  and  Cneius  Manlius  was  ap-  y  274 
pointed  his  colleague.  C.  478. 
XLIV.  This  year  also  produced  a  tribune.hardy  enough 
V'OL.  I. — Z 

170 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  274. 
to ’make  another  attempt  at  carrying  the  agrarian  Sw-  This 
was  Titus  Pontificius,  who  pursued  the  same  method,  as  if 
it  had  succeeded,  with  Spurius  Licinius,  and  for  some  time 
obstructed  the  levy:  the  patricians  being  hereby  again  per¬ 
plexed,  Appius  Claudius  asserted,  that  “  the  ^plan  adopted 
last  year  had  effectually  subdued  the  tribunitian  power,  for 
the  present,  by  the  very  act,  and,  to  all  future  times,  by  the 
example,  which  it  had  established;  since  it  was  discovered, 
how  that  power  might  be  deprived  of  efficacy,  through  the 
very  means  supplied  by  its  own  strength;  for  there  would,  at 
all  times,  be  one  among  them,  desirous  of  procuring  to  him¬ 
self  a  superiority  over  his  colleague,  and,  at. the  same  time, 
the  favour  of  the  better  part  of  the  community,  by  promo¬ 
ting  the  good  of  the  public.  They  would  even  find  more 
than  one  tribune,  if  more  were  necessary,  ready  to  support 
the  consuls,  though  one  would  be  sufficient  against  all  the 
rest:  only  let  the  consuls,  and  principal  senators,  exert  them¬ 
selves,  to  secure  in  the  interest  of  the  commonwealth  and 
of  the  senate,  if  not  all  the  tribunes,  yet  as  many  at  least 
as  they  could.”  Convinced  of  the  propriety  of  Appius’s  ad¬ 
vice,  the  patricians  in  general  addressed  the  tribunes  with 
civility  and  kindriess;  and  those  of  consular  dignity  employ¬ 
ed  whatever  personal  influence  they  had  over  each  of  them; 
and  thus,  partly  by  conciliating  their  regard,  and  partly 
by  the  weight  of  their  influence,  they  prevailed  on  them 
to  let  their  powers  be  directed  to  the  advantage  of  the 
state:  while  the  consuls,  being  supported  by  four  tribunes, 
against  ohe  opposer  of  the  public  interest,  completed  the 
levy.  They  then  marched  their  army  against  the  Veien- 
tians,  to  whom  auxiliaries  had  flocked  from  all  parts  of 
Etruria,  induced  to  take  arms,  not  so  much  from  affection  to 
the  Veientians,  as  in  the  hope  that  the  Roman  state  might  be 
brought  to  ruin  by  intestine  discord.  Accordingly,  in  the 
assemblies  of  each  of  the  states  of  Etruria,  the  leading  men 
argued  warmly,  that  the  power  of  the  Romans  would  be 

BOOK  IL 

in 

B.  C.  4^8.] 
everlastings  unless  civil  dissension  armed  them  with  rage 
against  each  other.  This  was  the  only  infection,  the  only  poi¬ 
son  that  operated,  so  as  to  set  limits  to  the  duration  of  great 
empires*  This  evil,  whose  progress  had  been  long  retarded, 
partly  by  the  wise  management  of  the  patricians,  and  partly 
by  the  patient  conduct  of  the  commons,  had  now,  proceeded 
to  extremity:  out  of  the  one,  were  formed  two  distinct  states, 
each  of  which  had  its  own  magistrates,  and  its  own  laws. 
At  first,  though  they  used  to  give  a  loose  to  their  rancorous 
animosities,  when  troops  were  to  be  levied,  yet  these  very 
men,  as  long  as  war  continued,  paid  obedience  to  their  offi* 
cers;  and  while  military  discipline  remained  in  force,  what¬ 
ever  might  be  the  state  of  affairs  in  the  city,  ruin  might  be 
deferred.  But  now,  the  Roman  soldier  earned  with  him  to 
the  field,  the  custom  of  refusing  submission  tn  superiors:  dur¬ 
ing  the  last  war,  in  the  very  heat  of  battle,  the  troops  con¬ 
spired  to  make  a  voluntary  surrender  of  victory  to  the  van¬ 
quished  -iEquans;  deserted  their  standards,  forsook  their  ge¬ 
neral,  and,  in  despite  of  orders,  retreated  to  their  camp. 
Without  doubt,  if  proper  exertions  were  made,  Home  might 
be  subdued  by  means  of  its  own  forces:  nothing  more  was 
necessary,  than  to  make  a  declaration,  and  a  show  of  wan 
The  fates  and  the  gods  would  of  themselves  accomplish  the 
rest.’*  Such  prospects  as  these  had  allured  the  Etrurians  to 
arm,  notwithstanding  the  little  success  they  had  experienced 
in  their  wars. 
XLV.  The  Roman  consuls  had  no  other  dread  than 
of  the  power,  anU  the  arms,  of  their  countrymen.  When 
they  reflected  on  the  very  dangerous  tendency  of  their  mis¬ 
behaviour  in  the  last  war,  they  were  deterred  from  bringing 
themselves  into  a  situation  where  they  would  have  two  ar* 
mies  to  fear  at  the  same  time;  to  avoid  therefore  being  ex¬ 
posed  to  this  double  danger,  they  kept  the  troops  confined 
within  the  camp,  in  hopes  that  delay,  and  time  itself  might 
perhaps  soften  their  resentment,  and  bring  them  back  to  a 

175^ 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  274. 

right  way  of  thinking.  This  encouraged  their  enemies  the 
Veientians  and  Etrurians,  to  act  with  greater  precipitation: 
at  first,  they  endeavoured  to  provoke  the  foe  to  fight,  by 
riding  up  to  the  camp,  and  offering  challenges;  and,  at  length, 
finding  that  this  had  no  effect,  by  reviling  both  the  consuls 
and  the  army;  telling  them,  that  “  the  pretence  of  dissensions 
among  themselves,  was  an  artifice  contrived  to  cover  their 
cowardice;  that  the  consuls  were  more  diffident  of  the  cou¬ 
rage  of  their  troops  than  of  their  disposition  to  obey  orders: 
that  was  a  strange  kind  of  sedition,  which  showed  itself  in 
silence,  and  inaction,  among  men  who  had  arms  in  their 
hands:”  throwing  out,  besides,  many  reproaches,  some  true, 
and  some  false,  on  their  upstart  origin.  Such  invectives, 
though  uttered  with  great  vociferation,  close  to  the  very 
rampart  and  the  gates,  gave  the  consuls  no  manner  of  un- 
easiness:  but  the  minds  of  the  uninformed  multitude  were 
strongly  agitated,  at  one  time  by  indignation,  at  another  by 
shame,  which  diverted  them  from  reflecting  on  domestic 
quarrels:  they  could  not  bear  the  thoughts  of  suffering  the 
enemy  to  insult  them  unrevenged,  neither  could  they  wish 
success  either  to  the  consuls,  or  the  patricians.  Thus  there 
was  a  struggle  in  their  breasts,  between  their  animosity 
against  foreigners,  and  that  which  inflamed  them  against 
their  countrymen:  the  former  at  length  prevailed,  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  the  haughty  and  insolent  scoffs  of  the  enemy: 
they  assembled  in  crowds  at  the  Prgetorium,*  demanding 
the  fight,  and  requiring  the  signal  to  be  given.  The  consuls 
held  a  consultation  together,  as  if  deliberating  on  the  de¬ 
mand,  and  conferred  for  a  considerable  time:  they  wished  to 
•fight;  but  it  was  necessary  to  restrain  and  conceal  that  wish, 
in  order,  by  opposition  and  delay,  to  add  to  the  alacrity 
which  had  now  sprung  up  in  the  minds  of  the  troops;  they 
returned  for  answer,  that  the  measure  was  premature;  it 

Tke  j^enerafs  quarters. 

BOOK  II. 

IfS 

B.  C.  478.] 

was  not  yet  a  proper  time  for  meeting  the  enemy.  That 
they  must  keep  within  the  camp.’’  They  then  issued  orders, 
that  “  all  should  refrain  from  fighting;  declaring,  that  if  any 
should  engage  without  orders,  they  would  be  punished.” 
After  the  troops  were  thus  dismissed,  their  ardour  for  battle 
increased,  in  proportion  to  the  aversion,  which  they  supposed, 
in  the  consuls:  besides,  the  enemy  approached  with  much 
greater  boldness,  as  soon  as  it  became  known  that  it  was  de¬ 
termined  not  to  come  to  an  engagement.  They  thought  they 
might  continue  their  insults  with  perfect  safety ;  that  the  sol¬ 
diers  would  not  be  intrusted  with  arms,  that  the  business 
would  end  in  a  desperate  mutiny;  and  that  the  final  period 
of  the  Roman  empire  was  arrived.  Buoyed  up  with  these 
hopes,  their  parties  pressed  forward  to  the  very  gates,  heap¬ 
ed  reproaches  on  the  troops,  and  hardly  refrained  from 
assaulting  the  camp.  But  now,  the  Romans  could  no  longer 
endure  such  insults;  from  every  quarter  of  the  camp,  they 
ran  hastily  to  the  consuls^  and  did  not,  as  before,  propose 
their  demand  regularly,  through  the  principal  centurions, 
but  joined  in  one  general  clamour.  The  affair  was  now  ripe; 
vet  still  the  consuls  showed  a  backwardness:  but  at  length 
beginning,  from  the  increasing  uproar,  to  dread  a  mutiny, 
Fabius,  with  the  consent  of  his  colleague,  having  caused  si¬ 
lence  by  sound  of  trumpet,  said,  Cneius  Manlius,  that 
those  men  are  able  to  conquer,  I  know;  but  they  themselves 
have  given  me  reason  to  d^ubt,  whether  it  is  their  wish:  for 
which  reason  I  am  determined  not  to  give  the  signal,  unless 
they  swear  that  they  will  return  from  the  battle  with  victory. 
Soldiers  have  once  deceived  a  Roman  consul  in  the  field, 
but  they  will  never  deceive  the  gods.”  There  was  a  cen¬ 
turion,  called  Marcus  Flavoleius,  who  was  among  the  fore¬ 
most  in  demanding  battle;  he  cried  out,  Marcus  Fabius,  I 
will  return  victorious  from  the  fielil;”  and,  at  the  same  lime, 
imprecated  on  himself  the  anger  of  Father  Jupiter,  of  Mars 
Oradivus,  and  the  other  gods,  if  he  did  not  perform  his 

174 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  274. 
promise;  after  him  the  whole  army  severally  took  the  same 
oath.  As  soon  as  they  had  sworn,  the  signal  was  given;  in¬ 
stantly  they  inarched  out  to  battle,  full  of  rage  and  of  confi¬ 
dence.  They  bade  the  Etrurians  now  throw  out  their  re¬ 
proaches,  now  let  the  enemy,  who  was  so  bold  in  words, 
come  in  the  way  of  their  arms.  There  was  not  a  man,  on 
that  day,  either  plebeian  or  patrician,  who  did  not  display  an 
uncommon  degree  of  valour:  the  Fabian  name,  and  Fabian 
race,  shone  forth  with  peculiar  lustre:  they  were  determined 
to  recover,  in  that  battle,  the  affection  of  the  commons, 
which,  during  the  many  quarrels  of  the  parties  at  home,  had 
been  withdrawn  from  them.  The  line  was  formed,  nor  did 
their  Veientian  enemy  or  the  Etrurian  legions  decline  the 
combat. 
XLVI.  These  expected,  and  indeed  firmly  believed,  that 
the  Romans  would  show  no  more  willingness  to  fight  with 
them,  than  they  had  with  the  iEquans;  nay,  considering  the 
high  ferment  of  their  passions,  and  that,  in  the  present  case, 
the  issue  of  a  battle  was  the  more  uncertain,  they  did  not 
despair  of  obtaining  some  important  advantage.  In  this  they 
were  entirely  disappointed,  for  in  no  former  war  did  the 
Romans  enter  the  field,  inflamed  with  keener  animosity;  so 
highly  were  they  exasperated  by  the  taunts  of  the  enemy  on 
one  side,  and  the  delay  of  the  consuls  on  the  other.  The 
Etrurians  had  scarcely  time  to  form  their  ranks,  before  they 
found  themselves  engaged  in  close  fight,  hand  to  hand  with 
swords,  the  most  desperate  method  of  deciding  a  battle,  the 
javelins  having  in  the  first  hurry  been  thrown  at  random,  ra¬ 
ther  than  aimed  at  the  enemy.  Among  the  foremost,  the 
Fabian  family  particularly  attracted  the  notice  of  their  coun¬ 
trymen,  and  encouraged  them  by  their  example:  as  one  of 
these,  Quintas  Fabius,  who  had  been  consul  two  years  before, 
advanced  before  the  rest  against  a  thick  body  of  the  Veientians, 
a  Tuscan,  who  assumed  resolution  from  a  confidence  in  his 
strength  and  skill  in  arms,  came  up  to  him  unobserved,  while 

B  C-  478.3 

BOOK  II. 

\7S 

he  was  busily  engaged  with  a  number  of  foes,  and  thrust  him 
through  the  breast  with  his  sword;  on  the  weapon’s  being  drawn 
out  of  the  wound,  Fabius  fell  to  the  ground.  Both  armies  felt 
the  fall  of  this  one  man,  and  the  Rc.mans  were  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  it  beginning  to  give  ground,  when  Marcus  Fabius 
the  consul  leaped  over  the  body  where  it  lay,  and  opposing 
his  buckler  to  the  enemy,  called  out,  Soldiers,  is  this  what 
ye  bound  yourselves  to  perform?  Was  it  that  ye  would  re¬ 
turn  to  the  camp  in  flight?  Are  ye  so  much  more  afraid  of 
the  most  dastardlj  enemy,  than  of  Jupiter  and  Mars,  by 
whom  ye  swore?  But  for  my  part,  though  bound  by  no  oath, 
I  will  either  return  victorious,  or  die  here,  fighting  beside 
thee,  Quintus  Fabius.’^  On  this,  Cseso  Fabius,  consul  of  the 
former  year,  said,  Brother,  do  you  expect  bywords  to  pre¬ 
vail  on  them  to  fight?  The  gods  by  whom  they  have  sworn 
will  prevail  on  them.  Let  us,  as  becomes  our  noble  birth, 
as  is  worthy  of  the  Fabian  name,  animate  the  men  by  deeds 
of  valour,  rather  than  by  exhortations.”  The  two  Fabii 
then  rushed  forw  ard  to  the  front  wuh  their  presented  spears, 
and  drew  the  whole  line  alone:  with  them. 
XLVII.  By  these  means,  the  battle  was  renewed  on  that 
side;  nor,  in  the  other  wing,  was  Cneius  Manlius,  the  con¬ 
sul,  less  strenuous  in  his  efforts  against  the  enemy.  Here, 
too,  a  like  course  of  events  took  place:  for  as  the  soldiers  fol¬ 
lowed  Quintus  Fabius  with  alacrity,  so  did  they  here  follow 
the  consul  Manlius,  while  he  pressed,  and  almost  routed  the 
enemy:  and  when  he  was  compelled  by  a  severe  wound  to  re¬ 
tire  from  the  field,  supposing  him  slain,  they  began  to  shrink. 
They  would  indeed  have  given  way  entirely,  had  not  the 
other  consul,  riding  up  to  the  place  at  full  speed  with  some 
troops  of  horse,  revived  their  drooping  courage;  calling  out, 
that  his  colleague  was  alive,  and  that  he  was  come  to  their 
support,  having  defeated  the  enemy  in  the  other  wing:  Man¬ 
lius  also  showed  himself,  in  order  to  encourage  them  to  re¬ 
turn  to  the  fight.  The  sight  of  the  two  consuls  rekindled  the 

176 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  274. 

courage  of  the  soldiers,  and  by  this  time,  too,  the  enemy’s 
line  was  considerably  weakened;  for,  confiding  in  the  supe¬ 
riority  of  their  numbers,  they  had  drawn  off  a  part,  and  sent 
them  to  attack  the  camp;  these  met  but  little  resistance  in  the 
assault,  but  wasted  time  afterwards,  being  more  intent  on 
plunder  than  on  fighting.  The  Roman  Triarii,*  however, 
who  had  not  been  able  to  prevent  their  breaking  in  at  first, 
and  who  had  despatched  to  the  consuls  an  account  of  their 
situation,  returned  in  a  compact  body  to  the  Preetorium,  and 
without  waiting  for  aid,  of  themselves  renewed  the  combat. 
At  the  same  time,  (he  consul  Manlius  having  rode  back  to 
the  camp,  posted  troops  at  all  the  gates,  and  blocked  up  every 
passage  by  which  the  enemy  could  retreat.  The  desperate 
situation  in  which  the  Etrurians  then  saw  themselves,  in¬ 
spired  them  not  only  with  boldness,  but  with  fury;  so  that, 
after  they  had  made  several  fruitless  efforts,  attempting  every 
place  where  they  saw  any  prospect  of  gaining  a  passage,  one 
band  of  their  young  men  made  an  attack  on  Manlius  himself, 
whom  they  distinguished  by  his  armour.  His  attendants 
covered  him  from  the  first  discharge  of  their  weapons;  but 
could  not  long  withstand  their  force;  the  consul,  receiving  a 
mortal  wound,  fell,  and  his  defenders  were  entirely  dispersed. 
This  added  new  confidence  to  the  Etrurians,  and  so  dispirit¬ 
ed  the  Romans,  that  they  fled  in  dismay,  through  all  parts 
of  the  camp;  and  would  probably  have  been  utterly  ruined, 
had  not  the  lieutenant-generals,  hastily  removing  the  con¬ 
sul’s  body,  opened  a  passage  for  the  enemy  by  one  of  the 
gates.  Through  this  they  rushed  out;  and,  as  they  were  re¬ 
treating  in  the  utmost  disorder,  fell  in  with  Fabius,  who  was 
flushed  with  success.  In  this  second  encounter  many  were 
cut  off,  and  the  rest  fled  different  ways.  The  victory  was 
complete,  but  the  joy,  which  it  occasioned,  was  greatly 
damped  by  the  death  of  two  such  illustrious  persons  as  Fa- 
*  The  Triarii  were  veteran  soldiers,  of  approved  valour:  they  formed 
the  third  line,  hence  their  name. 

B.  C,  4780 

BOOK  II. 

177 

bius  and  Manlius:  for  which  reason  the  consul^  when  the 
senate  were  proceeding  to  vote  him  a  triumph,  told  them, 
that  “  if  the  army  could  triumph  without  their  general,  he 
would  readily  consent  to  it,  on  account  of  their  extraordina- 
ry  good  behaviour  in  that  war:  but  as  to  himself,  while  his 
own  family  was  overwhelmed  with  grief,  for  the  death  of  his 
brother  Quintus  Fabius,  and  the  commonwealth  bewailed 
the  loss  of  a  parent,  as  it  were,  in  that  of  one  of  its  consuls, 
he  would  not  accept  of  the  laurel,  blasted  both  by  public  and 
private  mourning.”  A  triumph  refused  on  such  grounds, 
redounded  more  to  his  honour,  than  if  he  had  actually  en¬ 
joyed  it;  so  true  it  is,  that  fame  prudently  declined,  often 
breaks  forth  with  increased  lustre.  He  then  celebrated  the 
two  funerals  of  his  colleague  and  his  brother,  one  after  the 
other,  and  took  upon  himself  the  office  of  pronouncing  the 
panegyric  of  l)oth;  in  which  he  attributed  to  them  the  merit 
of  his  own  performances,  in  such  a  manner,  as  showed  him 
to  be  entitled  to  the  greatest  share  of  any.  ’  Not  losing  sight 
of  the  design  which  he  had  conceived  at  the  beginning  of 
his  consulate,  of  recovering  the  affection  of  the  commons,  he 
distributed  the  wounded  soldiers  among  the  patricians,  to  be 
taken  care  of,  until  they  were  cured.  The  greater  number 
were  given  to  the  Fabii,  and  by  no  others  w’ere  they  treated 
with  more  attention.  Henceforward  the  Fabii  grew  high  in 
the  favour  of  the  people,  and  that  without  any  practices  pre¬ 
judicial  to  the  state. 
XLVIIL  With  the  same  view,  Oe^so  Fabius,  y.  r.  275^ 
whose  election  to  the  consulship,  with  Titus  Vir- 
ginius,  was  owing  as  much  to  the  support  of  the  commons,  as 
to  that  of  the  patricians,  would  enter  on  no  business,  either  of 
wars  or  levies,  or  any  other  matter,  until  the  hopes  of  con¬ 
cord,  which  had  already  made  some  progress,  should  be 
ripened  into  a  perfect  union  between  the  plebeians  and  pa¬ 
tricians.  In  the  beginning  of  the  year  therefore  he  proposed, 
that  ‘‘  before  any  tribune  should  stand  forth  to  press  the 
VOL.  I. — A  a 

178 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

fY.R.  2fJ. 

grarian  law,  the  senate  should  seize  the  opportunity,  and 
take  to  themselves  the  merit  of  conferring  that  favour;  that 
they  should  distribute  among  the  commons,  in  as  equal  pro¬ 
portion  as  possible,  the  lands  taken  from  their  enemies:  for 
it  was  but  just  that  they  should  be  enjoyed  by  those  whose 
blood  and  labour  acquired  them.”  The  senate  rejected  the 
proposal  with  disdain;  some  of  them  even  complained,  that 
the  talents  of  Caeso,  formerly  so  brilliant,  were,  through  a 
surfeit  of  glory,  become  heavy  and  languid.  No  disputes 
ensued  between  the  factions  in  the  city.  The  Latines  were 
harassed  by  incursions  of  the  iEquans;  Caeso  being  sent 
thithtr,  with  an  army,  retaliated  on  the  iEquans,  by  ravaging 
their  territories.  They  retired  into  the  towns,  and  kept 
themselves  within  the  walls;  consequently,  there  was  no  bat¬ 
tle  of  any  importance.  But,  from  the  arms  of  the  Veien- 
tians,  a  severer  blow  was  received,  through  the  rashness  of 
the  other  consul:  and  the  army  would  have  been  utterly  de¬ 
stroyed,  had  not  Caeso  Fabius  arrived  seasonably  to  its  sup¬ 
port.  '  From  that  time  there  was  properly  neither  peace  nor 
war  with  the  Veientians,  whose  proceedings  were  more  like 
those  of  a  banditti,  than  of  regular  troops.  On  the  approach 
of  the  Roman  legions,  they  retreated  into  the  tDwn,  and  when 
they  understood  that  those  were  withdrawn,  they  made  in¬ 
cursions  into  the  country;  shifting  alternately  from  war  to 
quiet,  and  from  quiet  to  war.  For  this  reason,  nothing  could 
be  brought  to  a  conclusion.  There  was  also  apprehension  of 
other  wars,  two  of  which  were  just  ready  to  break  out,  that 
is,  with  the  ^Equans  and  Volscians,  who  only  remained  in¬ 
active,  until  the  smart  of  their  late  disaster  should  wear  off. 
And  besides,  it  was  evident  that  the  Sabines,  ever  hostile, 
and  all  Etruria,  would  soon  be  in  motion.  But  the  Veien¬ 
tians  kept  the  Romans  in  continual  uneasiness,  rather  indeed 
by  frequent  insults,  than  by  any  enterprise  which  threatened 
danger,  yet  this  was  such  a  business  as  would  neither  allow 
them  to  neglect  it  at  any  time,  nor  to  turn  their  attention  to 
other  matters.  While  affairs  were  in  this  state,  the  Fabian 

BOOK  IL 

179 

B.  c.  4rr.] 
family  addressed  the  senate;  the  consuli  in  the  name  of  the 
whole,  speaking  in  this  manner: — Conscript  fathers,  ye 
know  that  the  Veientian  war  requires  rather  an  established, 
than  a  strong  force,  on  the  frontiers:  let  your  care  be  direct¬ 
ed  to  other  wars:  commit  to  the  Fabii  that  against  the  Veien* 
tians*  We  pledge  ourselves,  that  the  majesty  of  the  Roman 
name  shall  be  safe  on  that  side:  that  war,  as  the  particular 
province  of  our  family,  we  propose  to  wage  at  our  own  pri¬ 
vate  expense.  The  state  shall  not  be  troubled  either  for  men 
or  money  to  support  it/’  The  warmest  thanks  were  given 
to  them,  and  the  consul  coming  out  of  the  senate,  returned 
to  his  house,  accompanied  by  the  Fabii  in  a  body,  who  had 
stood  in  the  porch  of  the  senate  house,  waiting  the  senate’s 
determination.  They  received  orders  to  attend  next  day  in 
arms,  at  the  consul’s  gate,  and  then  retired  to  their  respec¬ 
tive  homes. 
XL IX.  The  report  of  this  conduct  spread  immediately 
over  the  whole  city,  and  all  extolled  the  Fabii  with  the  most 
exalted  encomiums;  that  a  single  family  had  undertaken 
to  sustain  the  burthen  of  the  state;  that  the  Veientian  war 
was  become  a  private  concern,  a  private  quarrel.  If  there 
were  two  other  families  of  equal  strength  in  the  city,  one  of 
them  might  claim  the  Volscians  for  their  share,  the  other 
the  iEquans;  thus  all  the  neighbouring  states  might  be  sub¬ 
dued,  and  the  majority  of  Roman  people,  in  the  mean  time, 
enjoy  perfect  tranquillity.”  Next  day  the  Fabii  took  arms, 
and  assembled  in  the  place  appointed.  The  consul,  coming 
forth  in  his  military  robe,*  saw  his  whole  family  in  the 
court-yard,  drawn  up  in  order  of  march,  and  being  received 
into  the  centre,  commanded  them  to  set  forward.  Never 
did  an  army,  either  smaller  in  number,  or  more  highly  dis- 
Before  a  consul  set  out  on  any  expedition,  he  offered  sacrifices  and 
prayers  in  the  Capitol;  and  then,  laying  aside  his  consular  gown,  marched 
out  of  the  city,  dressed  m  a  military  robe  of  state,  called  PaludErmentum. 

ise  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  2/6. 
tinguished  in  fame,  and  the  general  admiration  of  all  men, 
march  through  the  city.  Three  hundred  and  six  soldiers, 
all  of  them  patricians,  not  one  of  whom  would  be  judged 
unfit  for  supreme  command  by  the  senate  at  any  time  what¬ 
ever,  proceeded  on  their  way,  threatening  destruction  to  the 
state  of  the  Veientians,  by  the  prowess  of  one  family.  A 
crowd  attended  them,  composed,  partly,  of  their  own  con¬ 
nections,  relations,  and  particular  acquaintances,  who  held  no 
moderation  either  in  their  hopes  or  anxieties;  and  partly,  of 
such  as  were  attracted  by  zeal  for  the  public  interest,  all  en¬ 
raptured  with  esteem  and  admiration.  They  bade  the  he¬ 
roes  to  proceed;  to  proceed  with  happy  fortune,  and  to  obtain 
success  proportioned  to  the  merit  of  their  undertaking:  de¬ 
siring  them  to  expect  afterwards,  consulships,  triumphs,  every 
reward,  every  honour,  which  was  in  the  power  of  the  public 
to  bestow.”  As  they  passed  by  the  Capitol,  the  citadel,  and 
other  sacred  places,  whatever  deities  occurred  to  the  people’s 
sight  or  thoughts,  to  them  they  offered  up  their  prayers,  that 
they  would  “  crown  that  band  with  success  and  prosperity,  and 
soon  restore  them  in  safety  to  their  country  and  their  parents.” 
But  their  prayers  were  made  in  vain.  Passing  through  the 
right  hand  postern  of  the  Carmental  gate,  they  arrived  at 
the  river  Cremei  a,  which  they  judged  to  be  a  proper  situa¬ 
tion  for  securing  a  post  by  fortifications,  Lucius  jEmilius 
V  l<  276  Caius  Servilius  were  soon  after  elected  consuls^ 
B  C.  470.  As  long  as  the  operations  of  the  war  were  confin¬ 
ed  to  predatory  expeditions,  the  Fabii  were  not  only  suffi- 
ci tilth  able  to  defend  their  post,  but  by^  their  excursions, 
along  the  common  boundaries,  they  both  effectually  secured 
their  own  frontiers,  and  spread  terror  and  devastation  in  those 
of  tne  enemy,  through  the  whole  tract,  as  far  as  the  Etrurian 
territories  join  the  Roman.  Their  mutual  depredations  were 
soon  after  discontinued,  chough  but  for  a  short  time,  for  the 
Veientians  having  collected  a  reinforcement  from  Etruria, 
laid  siege  to  the  post  at  the  Cremera;  and  the  Roman  legions 

BOOK  IT. 

181 

B.  C.  476.] 
led  thither  by  the  consul  Lucius  ^milius,  fought  a  close  en¬ 
gagement  with  the  Etrurians  in  the  field,  in  which,  however, 
the  Veientians  had  scarcely  time  to  form  their  troops;  for  in 
the  midst  of  the  hurry,  while  they  were  taking  their  posts 
under  their  several  banners,  and  placing  bodies  of  reserve,  a 
brigade  of  Roman  cavalry  charged  them  suddenly  on  the 
flank,  in  such  manner  as  to  put  it  out  of  their  power  either 
to  make  a  regular  onset,  or  even  to  stand  their  ground.  Being 
thus  compelled  to  retreat  to  the  Red  Rocks,  where  they  had 
their  camp,  they  humbly  sued  for  peace:  yet  after  it  had  been 
granted,  they  renounced  it,  before  the  Roman  guard  was 
withdrawn  from  the  Cremera;  such  was  their  natural  incon¬ 
stancy,  and  such  their  bad  faith. 
L.  The  contest,  then,  again  lay  between  the  Fabii  and  the 
Veientian  state,  unsupported  by  any  additional  forces  on 
either  side.  There  passed  between  them  not  only  incursions 
into  each  other’s  territories,  and  sudden  attacks  on  the  par¬ 
ties  employed  in  those  incursions,  but  several  pitched  battles 
in  the  open  field;  in  which  a  single  family  of  the  Roman 
people  often  obtained  victory  over  a  state,  at  that  time  the 
most  powerful  in  Etruria.  This,  at  first,  stung  the  Veien¬ 
tians  with  grief  and  indignation;  afterwards  they  formed  a 
design,  suggested  by  the  present  circumstances,  of  ensnaring 
their  enemy,  elated  with  success;  and  they  even  observed, 
with  pleasure,  the  confidence  of  the  Fabii  daily  increasing, 
from  a  series  of  successful  attempts.  In  pursuance  of  this 
design,  cattle  were  frequently  driven  In  the  way  of  the  plun¬ 
dering  parties,  as  if  they  had  come  there  by  chance;  the  fields 
were  deserted,  by  the  flight  of  the  peasants,  and  the  bodies 
of  troops,  sent  to  repel  the  invaders,  retreated  with  pretend¬ 
ed,  oftener  than  real,  fear.  The  Fabii  had  now  contracted 
such  a  contempt  of  the  enemv,  that  they  thought  their  own 
arms  invincible,  and  not  to  be  withstood  in  any  place  or  on  any 
occasion.  This  presumption  carried  them  so  far,  that  on  see¬ 
ing,  from  Cremera.  some  cattle  at  a  distance — a  long  tract 

182 

[Y.  R.277. 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 
of  country  lying  between,  in  which,  however,  but  few  of  the 
enemy’s  troops  appeared, — they  ran  down  to  seize  them,  and 
pressed  forward  with  such  careless  haste,  as  to  pass  by  the 
Veientians,  who  lay  in  ambush  on  each  side  of  the  very  road 
through  which  they  marched.  They  then  dispersed  them¬ 
selves  on  all  sides  to  collect  the  cattle,  which  ran  up  and 
down,  as  was  natural  on  being  frightened;  when,  suddenly, 
the  soldiers  rose  from  their  concealments,  and  appeared  not 
only  in  front,  but  on  every  side  of  them.  The  shout  first 
struck  them  with  terror,  and  in  a  little  time,  they  were  as¬ 
sailed  by  weapons  on  all  sides.  As  the  Etrurians  closed  in 
upon  them,  they  were  obliged,  hemmed  in  as  they  were,  by 
one  continued  line  of  troops,  to  contract  the  circle  which  they 
had  formed,  into  a  narrower  compass;  which  circumstance 
showed  plainly,  both  the  smallness  of  their  number,  and  the 
great  superiority  of  the  Etrurians,  whose  ranks  were  multi¬ 
plied  as  the  space  grew  narrower.  They  then  changed  their 
method  of  fighting,  and  instead  of  making  head  on  all  sides, 
bent  their  whole  force  towards  one  point;  where,  forming  in 
the  shape  of  a  wedge,  and  exerting  every  effort  of  their  bo¬ 
dies  and  arms,  they  at  length  forced  a  passage.  Their  course 
led  to  a  hill  of  moderate  acclivity;  there,  first,  they  halted; 
and  then  the  advantage  of  the  ground  affording  them  a  little 
time  to  breathe,  and  to  recover  from  the  consternation  into 
which  they  had  been  thrown,  they  afterwards  even  repulsed 
an  attack  of  the  enemy;  and  this  little  band  would  probably, 
with  the  aid  of  the  ground,  have  come  off  victorious,  had  not 
a  body  of  Veientians  sent  round  the  ridge  of  the  hill,  made 
their  way  to  the  summit:  by  which  means  the  enemy  became 
again  superior;  the  Fabii  were  all  cut  off  to  a  man,  and  their 
fort  taken.  It  is  agreed  on  all  hands,  that  the  three  hundred 
and  six  perished;  and  that  only  one  single  person,  then  quite  a 
youth,  was  left,  as  a  stock  for  the  propagation  of  the  Fabian 
race;  and  who  was,  afterwards,  on  many  emergences,  both 
in  peace  and  war,  to  prove  the  firmest  support  of  the  state. 

B,C.475.] 

BOOK  IL 

183 

Li.  At  the  time  when  this  disaster  happened,  y  ^ 
Caius  Horatius  and  Titus  Menenius  were  in  the  B.  C.  4i5. 
consulship.  Menenius  was  immediately  sent  against  the  Etru¬ 
rians,  elated  with  their  victory.  He  also  was  worsted  in  bat¬ 
tle,  and  the  enemy  took  possession  of  the  Janiculum;  nor 
would  the  city,  which,  besides  the  war,  was  distressed  also 
by  scarcity,  have  escaped  a  siege,  the  Etrurians  having  pass¬ 
ed  the  Tiber,  had  not  the  consul  Horatius  been  recalled  from 
the  country  of  the  Volscians.  So  near,  indeed,  did  the  ene¬ 
my  approach  to  the  walls^  that  the  first  engagement  was  at 
the  temple  of  Hope,  in  which  little  was  gained  on  either 
side;  and  the  second  at  the  Coiine  gate,  in  which  the  Ro¬ 
mans  obtained  some  small  advantage;  and  this,  though  far 
from  decisive,  yet  by  restoring  to  the  soldiers  their  former 
courage,  qualified  them  the  better  to  contend  with  the  ene¬ 
my  in  future.  Aulus  Virginias  and  Spurius  Servilius  were 
next  elected  consuls.  After  the  loss  sustained  in  the  last 
battle,  the  Veientians  avoided  coming  again  to  an  engagement. 
They  employed  themselves  in  committing  depreda-  y  ^ 
tions,  by  sending  out  parties  from  the  Janiculum,  B.  C.  4i4. 
which  served  them  as  a  fortress;  and  these  parties  scoured 
ever>^  part  of  the  Roman  territories,  so  that  neither  the  cattle 
nor  the  husbandmen,  could  any  where  remain  in  safety.  At 
last  they  were  entrapped  by  the  same  stratagem  by  which  they 
had  circumvented  the  Fabii:  pursuing  some  cattle,  which  had 
been  purposely  thrown  in  their  way  as  a  temptation,  they  fell 
into  an  ambuscade.  In  proportion  as  their  numbers  were 
greater,  so  was  the  slaughter.  The  violent  rage  which  this 
overthrow  excited,  gave  cause  to  one  of  greater  magnitude: 
for,  having  crossed  the  Tiber  by  night,  they  made  an  assault 
on  the  camp  of  the  consul  Servilius;  and  being  repulsed  with 
great  loss,  with  difficulty  effected  a  retreat  to  the  Janiculum. 
The  consul  immediately  passed  the  Tiber,  and  fortified  a 
camp  at  the  foot  of  the  Janiculum.  Next  day,  as  soon  as 
light  appeared,  partly  led  by  the  confidence  inspired  by  his 

184 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  278, 

success  in  the  fight  of  the  day  before,  but  chiefly  because  the 
scarcity  of  com  made  it  expedient  to  adopt  even  dangerous 
measures,  provided  they  were  expeditious,  he  rashly  march¬ 
ed  up  his  troops  against  the  steep  of  the  Janiculum,  to  the 
camp  of  the  enemy:  there  he  met  with  a  repulse,  more  shame¬ 
ful  than  that  which  he  had  given  them  the  preceding  day; 
and  both  he  and  his  army  owed  their  preservation  from  de¬ 
struction  to  the  timely  intervention  of  his  colleague.  The 
Etrurians,  now  inclosed  between  the  two  armies,  to  one  or 
other  of  which  their  rear  was  by  turns  exposed,  were  en¬ 
tirely  cut  off.  Thus,  through  a  fortunate  act  of  temerity,  the 
Veientians  were  effectually  overpowered,  and  the. war  brought 
to  a  conclusion. 
LIL  Together  with  peace,  plenty  returned  to  the  city, 
corn  being  brought  from  Campania;  and  every  one,  as  soon 
as  he  was  freed  from  the  dread  of  impending  famine,  pro¬ 
ducing  the  stores  which  he  had  concealed.  In  this  state  of 
abundance  and  ease,  the  people  began  again  to  grow  licen¬ 
tious,  and  not  finding  abroad  any  cause  of  complaint,  sought 
for  it,  as  usual,  at  home.  By  infusing  into  their  minds  the 
usual  poison,  the  agrarian  law,  the  tribunes  threw  the  people 
into  a  ferment,  at  the  same  time  rousing  their  resentment 
against  the  patricians,  who  opposed  it;  and,  not  only  against 
that  body  in  general,  but  against  particular  members  of  it. 
Quintus  Considius  atid  Titus  Genucius,  the  present  proposers 
of  the  agrarian  law,  lodged  an  accusation  against  Titus  Me- 
nenius;  the  charge  brought  against  him  was,  the  loss  of  the 
fort  of  Cremera,  when  he,  the  consul,  w^;s  encamped  in  a  fixed 
post  at  no  great  distance.  Him  they  crushed,  although  the 
patricians  struggled  in  his  cause  with  no  less  zeal  than  they 
had  shown  for  Coriolanus,  and  though  his  father  Agrippa’s 
title  to  the  favour  of  the  public  was  not  yet  forgotten.  The  tri¬ 
bunes,  however,  went  no  farther  than  to  impose  a  fine,  though 
they  had  carried  on  the  prosecution  as  for  a  capital  offence. 
On  his  being  found  guilty,  they  fixed*  the  mulct  at  two  thou- 

B.  C.  574.] 

BOOK  II. 

185 

sand  asses, ^  This  proved  fatal  to  him;  for  we  are  told  that 
he  could  not  bear  the  ignominy  and  anguish  of  mind  which 
jf  occasioned,  and  that  this  threw  him  into  a  disorder  which 
put  an  end  to  his  life.  Another  was  soon  after  brought  to  trial, 
Spurius  Servilius,  against  whom,  as  soon  as  he  went  out  of  the 
consulship,  in  the  beginning  of  the  year  in  which  ^ 
Caius  Nautius  and  Publius  Valerius  were  consuls,  a  C.  473, 
prosecution  was  commenced  by  two  tribunes,  Lucius  Ceedicius 
and  I'itus  Statius.  He  did  not,  like  Menenius,  meet  the  attacks 
of. these  tribunes  with  supplications  from  himself  and  the 
patricians,  but  with  the  utmost  confidence,  inspired  by  inno* 
cence,  and  by  the  justice  of  his  claim  to  the  favour  of  the 
public.  He  was  charged  with  misconduct  in  the  battle  with 
the  Etrurians  at  the  Janiculum;  but  being  a  man  of  an  in* 
trepid  spuit,  as  he  had  done  formerly  in  the  case  of  public 
peril,  so  now  in  one  that  threatened  himself,  he  dispelled  the 
danger  by  facing  it  with  boldness.  In  a  speech  full  of  un¬ 
daunted  fortitude,  he  retorted  on  both  tribunes  and  commons, 
and  upbraided  them  with  the  cemdemnation  and  death  of 
Titus  Menenius,  the  son  of  that  man,  to  whose  good  offices 
the  people  stood  indebted  for  the  restoration  of  their  privi¬ 
leges,  for  those  very  laws  and  magistrates,  which  enabled 
them  now  to  let  loose  their  passions  in  this  unreasonable 
manner.  His  colleague  Virginius  too,  being  produced  as  a 
witness,  greatly  assisted  his  cause,  by  attributing  tei  him  a 
share  of  his  own  merit;  but  what  did  him  the  most  essential 
service  was,  the  sentence  passed  on  Menenius;  so  great  a 
change  had  taken  place  in  the  minds  of  the  people. 
LIII.  No  sooner  had  these  domestic  disputes  subsided, 
than  a  new  war  broke  out  with  the  Veientians,  with  whom 
the  Sabines  had  united  their  forces.  After  auxiliaries  had 
been  brought  from  the  Latines  and  Hernicians,  the  consul 
Valerius,  being  sent  with  an  army  to  Vcii,  instantly  attacked 
+  Five  pounds  sterling 
VOL.  r.  — B  b 

186 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  280, 

the  Sabine  camp,  which  they  had  pitched  under  the  walls  of 
their  allies.  This  occasioned  such  consternation  among  the 
Sabines,  that  while  they  ran  different  ways  in  small  parties,  to 
repel  the  enemy’s  assault,  the  gate,  first  attacked,  was  taken; 
and  afterwards,  within  the  ramoart,  there  was  rather  a  car¬ 
nage  than  a  battle.  From  the  tents  the  alarm  spread  into  the 
city,  and  the  Veientians  ran  to  arms  in  as  great  a  panic  as  if 
Veil  itself  were  taken:  some  went  to  support  the  Sabines, 
others  fell  upon  the  Romans,  whose  whole  force  and  atten¬ 
tion  were  emploved  on  the  camp.  For  a  little  time  the  latter 
were  put  to  a  stand  and  disordered;  but  soon  forming  two 
fronts,  they  faced  the  enemy  on  both  sides;  and,  at  the  same 
time,  the  cavalry  being  ordered  by  the  consul  to  charge, 
routed  and  dispersed  the  Etrurians.  Thus  were  overcome  in 
the  same  hour,  two  armies  of  the  two  greatest  and  most 
powerful  of  the  neighbouring  states.  During  these  transac¬ 
tions  at  Veil,  the  Volscians  and  .^Equans  had  encamped  in 
the  Latine  territories,  and  laid  waste  the  country.  The  La- 
tines,  however,  being  joined  by  the  Hernicians,  without  the 
aid  either  of  Roman  general  or  troops,  beat  them  out  of  their 
camp,  and  there,  besides  recovering  their  own  effects,  got 
possession  of  immense  booty.  The  consul  Caius  Nautius  was, 
however,  sent  against  the  Volscians  from  Rome,  where,  1 
suppose,  it  was  considered  as  improper,  that  the  allies  should 
get  a  custom  of  carrying  on  wars,  with  their  own  forces  and 
under  their  own  direction,  without  a  Ronian  general  and 
troops.  Every  kind  of  severity  and  indignity  was  practised 
against  the  Volscians,  yet  they  could  not  be  brought  to  an 
engagement  in  the  field. 
y  R  ^'80  I^IV.  The  next  consuls  were  Lucius  Furius  and 
B.  C,  412.  Aulus  Manlius.  The  Veientians  fell  to  the  lot  of 
Manlius  as  his  province;  but  the  war  with  that  people  did 
not  continue.  At  their  request  a  tiuce  for  forty  years  was 
granted  them,  and  they  were  obliged  to  furnish  corn,  and  to 
pay  the  soldiers.  No  sooner  was  peace  restored  abroad,  than 

BOOK  11. 

187 

B,  C.  472.] 

discord  began  at  home.  The  commons  were  set  in  a  flame  ai 
the  instigation  of  the  tribunes,  on  their  constant  subject,  the 
agrarian  law,  which  the  consuls,  not  deterred  by  the  con¬ 
demnation  of  Menenius,  or  the  danger  incurred  by  Servilius, 
opposed  with  all  their  might.  On  this  account,  as  soon  as 
they  went  out  of  office,  Titus  Genucius,  the  tribune,  laid 
hold  of  them.  They  were  succeeded  in  the  consul-  y  ^ 
ship  by  Lucias  -^milius  and  Opiter  Virginius.  In  ^ 
some  annals,  instead  of  Virginius,  I  find  Vopiscus  Julius  set 
down  for  consul.  During  this  year,  whoever  were  the  con¬ 
suls,  Furius  and  Manlius  being  summoned  to  a  trial  before 
the  people,  went  about  in  the  garb  of  suppliants,  addressing 
not  only  the  commons,  but  the  younger  patricians.  The  lat¬ 
ter  they  advised  and  cautioned  to  keep  at  a  distance  from 
public  employments,  and  the  administration  of  affairs,  and 
to  look  on  the  consular  fasces,  the  praetexta,  and  curule 
chair,  as  nothing  better  than  the  decorations  of  a  funeral, 
for  those  splendid  badges,  like  the  fillets  of  victims,  were 
placed  on  men  who  were  doomed  to  death.  But,  if  there 
were  such  charms  in  the  consulship,  let  them,  once  for  all, 
be  convinced,  that  the  office  was  crushed,  and  held  in  cap¬ 
tivity  by  the  tribuniiian  power;  that  a  consul  must  act  in 
every  thing  according  to  command,  and,  like  a  bailiff,  be 
obedient  even  to  the  tribune's  nod.  If  he  should  exert  him¬ 
self,  if  he  should  show  any  respect  to  the  patricians,  if  he 
should  suppose  that  there  was  am'  powerful  part  in  the  state 
but  the  commons  alone,  let  him  place  before  his  eyes  the 
banishment  of  Caius  Marcius,  with  the  penalty  and  death  of 
Menenius.”  By  such  discourses  the  patricians  were  fired 
with  indignation,  and  from  that  time  they  no  longer  held 
th<rlr  consultations  publicly,  but  in  private,  and  suflfered  but 
*\v  to  be  privy  to  them:  and  here,  however  the}*  might  dif- 
fc'  in  other  points,  in  this  they  were  unanimous,  that  the  ac- 
cUi.d  should  be  rescued  from  danger  by  any  means  possible, 
wh^^er  right  or  wrong;  and  the  most  violent  method  pro- 

188 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  281. 

posed,  was  the  most  acceptable.  Nor  were  they  at  a  loss  for 
an  actor  to  perpetrate  any,  the  most  atrocious  deed:  on  the 
day  of  trial,  therefore,  the  people,  standing  in  the  Forum,  in 
eager  expectation  of  the  tribune’s  appearing,  first  began  to 
wonder  that  he  did  not  comedown;  then  beginning  from  his 
delay,  to  suspect  something  amiss,  they  supposed  that  he  had 
been  terrified  from  attending  by  the  nobles,  while  some  com¬ 
plained  that  the  cause  of  the  public  was  deserted  and  betrayed 
by  him.  At  length,  an  account  was  brought  of  the  tribune’s 
being  found  dead  in  his  house.  As  soon  as  this  report  had 
spread  through  the  assembly,  every  one  separated  different 
ways,  just  as  an  army  disperses  on  the  fall  of  its  leader.  The 
tribunes,  particularly,  were  seized  with  the  greatest  terror, 
warned  by  the  death  of  their  colleague,  how  very  little  se¬ 
curity  the  devoting  laws  afforded  them.  The  patricians,  on 
the  other  side,  exulted  with  too  little  moderation:  and  so  far 
were  they  from  feeling  any  compunction  at  the  deed,  that 
even  those  who  were  clear  of  the  crime,  wished  to  be  con¬ 
sidered  as  the  perpetrators  of  it;  and  they  declared  openly, 
that  the  tribunitian  power  must  be  subdued  by  severity. 
LV.  Soon  after  this  victory  had  been  obtained,  by  means 
which  furnished  a  precedent  of  the  worst  tendency,  a  procla¬ 
mation  was  issued  for  a  levy  of  soldiers:  and  the  tribunes 
being  awed  into  submission,  the  consuls  accomplished  the 
business  'without  any  interruption.  The  commons,  on  this, 
were  highly  enraged,  more  on  account  of  the  acquiescence 
of  the  tribunes,  than  of  the  execution  of  the  orders  of  the 
consuls;  they  declared  that  ‘‘  there  w’as  an  end  of  their 
liberty;  that  they  were  reduced  again  to  their  old  condition, 
for  the  tribunitian  power  had  expired  with,  and  was  buried 
in  the  grave  of  Genucius.  Other  means  must  be  devised 
and  practised,  to  put  a  stop  to  the  tyranny  of  the  patricians. 
There  remained  now  only  one  method  to  be  pursued;  whicA 
w^as,  that  the  commons,  since  they  were  destitute  of  every 
other  protection,  should  undertake  their  own  defence.  The 

BOOK  II. 

189 

B.  C. 
retinue  of  the  consuls  consisted  of  twenty-four  lictors,  and 
even  these  were  plebeians;  no  force  could  be  more  con¬ 
temptible^  or  less  capable  of  resistance,  if  people  had  but 
the  spirit  to  despise  them;  but  every  one  magnified  those 
matters,  and  made  them  objects  of  terror  to  himself.’’'  While 
they  thus  spurred  on  each  other  with  such  discourses  as 
these,  it  happened  that  a  lie  tor  was  sent  by  the  consul  to  a 
plebeian  of  the  name  of  Volero'Publilius,  who  had  insisted, 
that,  having  been  a  centurion,  he  could  not  be  compelled  to 
enlist  as  a  common  soldier.  Volcro  appealed  to  the  tribunes; 
but  none  of  them  supporting  him,  the  consuls  ordered  the 
man  to  be  stripped,  and  the  rods  to  be  got  ready:  I  ap¬ 
peal  to  the  people, said  Volero;  the  tribunes  choose 
rather  that  a  Roman  citizen  should  be  beaten  with  rods  be¬ 
fore  their  eyes,  than  that  themselves  should  be  murdered  in 
their  beds  by  your  faction.’’  The  more  vehemently  he  ex¬ 
claimed,  the  more  violently  did  the  lictor  proceed  in  tearing 
off  his  clothes,  and  stripping  him.  Then  Volero,  who  was 
a  man  of  great  bodily  strength,  and  aided  also  by  those  who 
took  part  with  him,  drove  away  the  lictor,  and  retired  into 
the  thickest  part  of  the  crowd,  where  he  heard  the  loudest 
expressions  of  indignation  at  the  treatment  which  he  receiv¬ 
ed;  at  the  same  lime  crying  aloud,  1  appeal,  and  implore 
the  protection  of  the  commons.  Support  me,  citizens;  sup¬ 
port  me,  fellow -soldiers.  You  have  nothing  to  expect  from 
the  tribunes,  who  themselves  stand  in  need  of  your  support.” 
The  people,  inflamed  with  passion,  prepared  themselves  as 
for  a  battle;  and  there  was  every  appearance  of  the  contest 
proceeding  to  such  extremity,  as  that  no  regard  whatever 
w-uld  be  paid  either  to  public  or  private  rights.  The  con¬ 
suls,  having  undertaken  to  face  this  violent  storm,  quickly 
experienced  that  dignity,  unsupported  by  strength,  is  not 
exempt  from  dahg^.  Their  lictors  were  abused,  the  fasces 
broken,  and  themselves  forced  to  take  refuge  in  the  senate- 
houj^,  uncertain  how  far  Volero  would  push  his  victory.  In 

190 

HISTORY  OF  ROME,  [Y.  R,  282. 

some  time  after,  the  tumult  subsiding,  they  assembled  the 
senators,  and  complained  to  them  of  the  ill-treatment  which 
they  had  suffered,  of  the  violence  of  the  commons;  and  the 
audacious  behaviour  of  Volero.  Though  many  harsh  me¬ 
thods  of  proceeding  were  proposed,  the  opinion  of  the  elder 
members  prevailed^  who  recommended  to  the  senate,  not  to 
let  their  conduct  be  as  strongly  marked  by  passionate  re¬ 
sentment,  as  that  of  the  conlmons  was  by  inconsiderate  vio¬ 
lence. 
LVI.  The  commons,  interesting  themselves  warmly  in 
favour  of  Volero,  chose  him  at  the  next  election  tribune  for 
Y.  R.  282.  year:  the  consuls  being  Lucius  Pinarius  and 
B.  C.  470.  Publius  Furius.  And  now,  contrary  to  the  ex¬ 
pectation  of  all  men,  who  supposed  that  he  would  give  a 
loose  to  the  reins  of  the  tribunitian  power,  in  harassing  the 
consuls  of  the  preceding  yearj  postponing  his  own  resent¬ 
ment,  and  affecting  only  the  public  interest,  without  uttering 
even  a  word  to  offend  the  consuls,  be  proposed  a  law  that 
plebeian  magistrates  should  be  elected  in  assemblies  where 
the  votes  were  given  by  tribes.  This,  though  covered  under 
an  appearance  which,  at  first  view,  showed  not  any  evil  ten¬ 
dency,  was  considered  as  a  matter  of  no  trivial  consequence; 
as  it  would  entirely  deprive  the  patricians  of  the  power  of 
electing  such  tribunes  as  they  liked,  by  means  of  the  votes 
of  their  dependents.  To  prevent  this  proposition,  which 
was  highly  pleasing  to  the  commons,  from  passing  into  a 
law,  the  patricians  strained  every  nerve;  and  though  neither 
the  influence  of  the  consuls  nor  that  of  themselves  could 
prevail  on  any  one  of  the  college  of  tribunes  to  protest 
against  it,  that  being  the  only  power  that  could  effectually 
stifle  it;  yet,  as  it  was  in  itself  an  affair  of  great  weight,  and 
required  long  and  laborious  exertions,  the  obstacles  thrown 
in  its  way  were  sufficient  to  delay  it  until  J:he  following  year. 
The  commons  re-elected  Voiero  to  the  tribuneship;  and  the 
patricians,  judging  that  this  business  would  not  end  without 

BOOK  li. 

191 

n.  c.  470,] 
the  severest  struggle,  procured  the  consulship  for  Appius 
Claudius,  son  of  Appius,  who  both  hated,  and  was  y.  R.  283 
hated  by  the  commons,  in  consequence  of  the  con- 
tentions  between  them  and  his  father,  Titus  Quintius  w^as  given 
him  for  colleague.  The  law  was  the  first  matter  agitated  in  the 
beginning  of  the  year;  and  though  Volero  was  the  author  of 
it,  yet  Lsetorius  his  colleague,  from  having  more  recently 
joined  in  the  business,  became  in  consequence  the  more 
eager  for  its  adoption:  his  renown  in  war  inspired  him  with 
confidence,  for  there  was  no  one  of  that.^e  possessed  of 
more  personal  prowess,  Volero  contented  himself  with 
arguing  in  favour  of  the  law,  and  avoided  all  abuse  against 
the  consuls;  but  Lpetorious  began  with  severe  invectives 
against  Appius  and  his  family,  charging  them  with  having 
always  shown  a  disposition  in  the  highest  degree  overbearing 
and  cruel:  asserting  that  the  patricians  had  elected  him  not 
for  a  consul,’  but  an  executioner,  ic  torment  and  torture 
the  plebeians.  Being  however  a  rough  soldier,  unskilled  in 
the  art  of  speaking,  he  was  at  a  loss  for  expressions  suited 
to  the  boldness  of  his  thoughts;-  and  finding  himself  unable 
to  proceed  in  his  discourse,  he  said,  ‘‘‘  Citizens,  since  I 
cannot  speak  with  the  same  readiness  with  which  I  can  per¬ 
form  what  I  have  spoken,  I  request  your  attendance  to¬ 
morrow.  Either  1  will  lose  my  life,  here  in  your  presence, 
or  I  will  carry  the  iavp/'  Next  day  the  tribunes  took  pos¬ 
session  of  the  temple;  and  the  consuls  and  nobles  placed 
themselves  among  the  crowd,  in  order  to  oppose  the  law. 
Lsetorius  ordered  all  persons  to  retire,  except  those  who 
were  to  vote;  but  the  younger  nobility  kept  their  seats,  and 
paid  no  regard  to  the  officer;  on  which  Ltetorius  ordered 
some  of  them  to  be  taken  into  custody.  The  consul  Appius 
insisted,  that  “  a  tribune  had  no  power  over  any  but  the 
plebeians;  for  he  was  not  a  magistrate  of  the  people  at  large, 
but  of  the  commons;  that  even  he  himself  could  not,  con¬ 
formably  to  ancient  usage,  of  his  own  authority,  compel 

192 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  983, 

people  to  withdraw,  the  words  in  use  being.  If  ye  think 
proper^  Romans^  retire, It  was  easy  for  him  to  disconcert 
La^torius  in  arguing,  even  thus  contemptuously,  about  his 
authority;  the  tribune  therefore,  inflamed  with  anger,  sent 
one  of  his  officers  to  the  consul,  while  the  consul  sent  a  lie- 
tor  to  the  tribune,  calling  out  that  he  was  but  a  private  per¬ 
son  without  command  and  without  magistracy;  nor  would 
the  tribune  have  escaped  ill-treatment,  had  not  the  whole 
assembly  joined,  with  great  warmth,  in  taking  his  part  against 
the  consul;  and  rt  the  same  time,  the  alarm  having  spread 
among  the  populace,  brought  a  great  concourse  from  all 
parts  of  the  city  to  the  Forum.  Appius,  notwithstanding, 
inflexibly  withstood  the  violence  of  the  storm;  and  the  dis¬ 
pute  must  have  terminated  in  blood,  had  not  Quintius  the 
other  consul,  giving  it  in  charge  to  the  consulars  to  take 
away  his  colleague  from  the  Forum  by  force,  if  they  could 
not  do  it  otherwise,  now  soothing  the  enraged  plebeians  with 
intreaties,  then  begging  the  tribunes  to  dismiss  the  assembly, 
so  as  to  give  time  for  their  anger  to  cool,”  telling  them, 
that  “  delay  would  not  diminish  aught  of  their  power,  but 
would  afford  them  the  advantage  of  uniting  prudence  with 
that  power;  that  the  patricians  would  still  be  under  the  direc¬ 
tion  of  the  people,  and  the  consul  under  that  of  the  patri¬ 
cians.” 
LVII.  With  great  difficulty  the  commons  were  pacified 
by  Quintius;  and  with  much  greater,  was  the  other  consul 
quieted  by  the  patricians;  and  the  assembly  of  the  people  be*- 
ing  at  length  dismissed,  the  consuls  convened  the  senate. 
There,  fear  and  anger  prevailing  by  turns,  produced  for 
some  time  a  variety  of  opinions;  but  having  gained  time  for 
reflection,  in  proportion  as  passion  gave  place  to  reason, 
they  became  more  and  more  averse  from  inflammatory  mea¬ 
sures;  in  so  much,  that  they  returned  thanks  to  Quintius,  for 
having  by  his  exertions  put  a  stop  to  the  quarrel.  Appius 
they  requested  to  be  satisfied  with  such  a  degree  of  defe- 

B.  C.  469.] 

BOOK  II. 

193 

reQce  to  the  consular  authority,  as  was  compatible  witk  con¬ 
cord  between  the  severe  parts  of  the  state j  for,  whilst  the 
tribune  and  consuls  violently  drew  all  power,  each  to  their 
own  side,  there  was  none  left  in  the  other  members  of  the 
community.  The  object  of  the  dispute  was  not  the  safety  o£ 
the  commonwealth,  but  who  should  have  the  disposal  of  it, 
mangled  and  tom  as  it  was.’’  On  the  other  ham),  Appius 
appealed  to  gods  and  men  that  the  state  was  betrayed  and 
deserted  through  cowardice;  that  the  consul  was  not  wanting 
in  support  of  the  senate,  but  the  senate  in  support  of  the  con¬ 
sul;  and  that  they  were  submitting  to  more  grievous  laws 
than  those  which  were  imposed  at  the  sacred  mount.”  Yield¬ 
ing,  however,  to  the  unanimous  judgment  of  the  senate,  he 
desisted,  and  the  law  was  carried  through  without  farther 
opposition! 
LVIII,  Then,  for  the  first  time,  were  the  tribunes  elect¬ 
ed  in  an  assembly  of  the  people,  voting  by  tribes.  Piso  re¬ 
lates  also,  that  there  were  three  added  to  their  number,  ha¬ 
ving  before  been  but  two.  He  even  names  the  tribunes,  Ca- 
ius  Sicinius,  Lucius  Numitorius,  Marcus  Duilius,  Spurius 
Icilius,  Lucius  Mecilius.  During  the  dissensions  at  Rome, 
war  commenced  with  the  iEquans  and  Volscians,  who  had 
committed  depredations  on  the  Roman  lands,  wi  th  design 
that  if  the  commons  should  again  think  pr  oper  to  secede 
they  might  find  a  refuge  with  them.  When  the  difierences 
in  the  city  were  afterwards  composed,  they  removed  their 
camp  to  a  greater  distance;  Appius  Claudius  was  sent  against 
the  Volscians,  the  iEquans  fell  to  Quintius  as  his  province. 
The  same  severity,  which  Appius  had  shown  at  home,  he 
practised  at  the  head  of  the  army  abroad,  and  even  with  less 
reserve,  as  he  was  out  of  the  reach  of  any  control  from  the 
tribunes.  He  detested  the  commons  to  a  degree  of  rancour, 
even  beyond  what  he  inherited  from  his  father;  and  consi¬ 
dered  himself  as  vanquished  by  them;  for  that  when  he  had 
been  set  up  as  the  only  person,  who,  in  the  character  of  con** 
vot.  I.— C  c 

194 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y,  R.  tSS. 

»«1,  was  qeaMed  to  oppose  the  tribtmidmi  power,  dmt  law 
had  been  carried  which  the  former  consuls  had  been  to 
prevent,  though  they  made  not  such  strenuous  exerUons  as 
himself  against  it,  nor  did  the  patricians  expect  so  ntudb 
•from  them.  His  anger  and  indignation  hereby  excited,  he 
sought  to  wreak  on  the  army  every  kind  of  rigour  winch  the 
command  had  put  in  his  power:  but  no  degree  of  violence 
was  able  to  subdue  the  temper  of  the  troops,  such  an  uncon*- 
querable  spirit  of  opposition  had  they  imbibed.  In  every 
part  of  their  business  they  showed  indolence  and  carelessness, 
negligence  and  stubbornness;  neither  shame  nor  fear  had  any 
effect  on  them.  If  he  wished  that  the  army  should  ]m>ceed 
with  more  expedition,  they  marched  the  slower;  if  he  came  to 
encourage  them  to  hasten  their  work,  every  one  relax¬ 
ed  the  diligence  which  he  had  used  before;  when  he  was 
present,  they  cast  down  their  eyes;  as  he  passed  by,  they 
muttered  curses  against  him;  so  that  while  he  seemed  invul¬ 
nerable  to  popular  dislike,  his  mind  was  occasionally  affected 
with  disagreeable  emotions.  After  trying  every  kind  of  harsh 
treatment  without  effect,  he  renounced  all  intercourse  with 
the  soldiers,  declaring  that  the  army  was  corrupted  by 
the  centurions,  whom,  in  a  gibing  manner,  he  sometimes  cal¬ 
led  plebeian  tribunes,  and  Voleroes. 
LIX.  Not  one  of  these  circumstances  was  unknown  to 
the  Volscians,  who,  for  that  reason,  pressed  forward  their 
operations  the  more  vigorously,  in  hopes  that  the  Roman  ar¬ 
my  would  be  animated  with  the  same  spirit  of  opposition 
against  Appius,  which  they  had  formerly  displayed  against 
Fabius,  when  consul;  and  in  fact,  in  Appius’s  case,  it  show¬ 
ed  itself  with  a  much  greater  degree  of  inveteracy  than  in 
that  of  Fabius;  for  they  were  not  only  unwilling  to  conquer, 
like  Fabius ’s  troops,  but  even  chose  to  be  conquered.  When 
led  out  the  field,  they  fled  shamefully  to  their  camp,  nor 
made  a  halt,  until  they  saw  the  Volscians  advancing  to  the 
rampart,  and  committing  great  slaughter  on  the  rear  of  the 

B,  C;  469.] 

BOOK  IL 

195 

army.  The  necessity  of  repelling  the  victorious  enemy  from 
the  rampart,  then  prevailed  on  them  to  fight,  which,  however, 
they  did  in  such  a  manne'*,  as  made  it  evident,  that  they  act¬ 
ed  only  because  Roman  soldiers  would  not  suffer  their  camp 
to  be  taken:  in  other  respects,  they  rejoiced  at  their  own 
liases  and  disgrace.  All  this  had  so  little  effect  towards 
softening  the  stubborn  fierceness  of  Appius,  that  he  resolved 
to  exhibit  farther  examples  of  severity;  but  when  he  had 
summoned  an  assembly  for  the  purpose,  the  lieutenant-gene¬ 
rals  and  tribunes  gathered  hastily  about  him,  and  cautioned 
him  ‘‘  not  to  hazard  a  trial  of  the  extent  of  an  authority 
whose  whole  efficacy  depended  on  the  wiU  of  those  who  were 
to  obey  it;  informed  him,  that  the  soldiers  in  general  declar¬ 
ed  that  they  would  not  attend  the  assembly;  and  that  in  every 
quarter,  they  were  heard  loudly  demanding  that  the  camp 
should  be  removed  out  of  the  Volscian  territories.  They 
reminded  him  that  the  conquering  army  had  approached  al¬ 
most  to  the  gates  and  to  the  rampart,  and  that  if  he  persist¬ 
ed,  there  was  not  only  reason  ta  apprehend,  but  every  cer¬ 
tain  indication  of  a  most  grievous  calamity  ensuing.”  At 
length  yielding  to  persuasion,  as  nothing  but  a  delay  of  pu¬ 
nishment  could  be  the  consequence,  he  prorogued  the  assem¬ 
bly;  gave  orders  that  the  troops  should  be  in  readiness  to 
inarch  next  day;  and,  at  the  first  dawn,  gave,  by  sound  of 
trumpet,  the  signal  for  setting  out.  When  the  army  had 
scarcely  got  clear  of  the  camp,  and  while  they  were  just 
forming  in  order  of  march,  the  Volscians,  as  if  they  had  been 
summoned  by  the  same  signal,  made  an  attack  on  their  rear; 
and,  the  alarm  spreading  from  thence  to  the  van,  caused 
such  consternation,  as  threw  both  the  battalions  and  ranks  in¬ 
to  confusion,  so  that  neither  could  orders  be  heard,  nor  a 
line  formed.  No  one  now  thought  of  any  thing  but  flight, 
smd  with  such  precipitation  did  they  make  their  way  through 
the  ranks,  that  the  enemy  ceased  to  pursue  sooner  than  the 
Romans  to  fly.  In  vam  did  the  consul  follow  his  call- 

m 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y  .R.  283. 

ing  OQ  them  to  halt.  But  when  he  had  at  length  collected 
them  together^  he  encamped  in  a  peaceful  part  of  the  coun- 
tr}';  and  tiiere,  having  summoned  an  assembly,  after  utter¬ 
ing  tevere  and  ju$t  reproaches  against  the  army  as  betrayers 
of  military  discipline,  and  deserters  from  their  posts,  asking 
each  where  were  their  standards?  where  were  their  arms?  he 
.beat  with  rods,  and  beheaded,  the  soldiers  who  had  thrown 
away  their  swords,  the  standard-bearers  who  had  lost  their 
ensigns,  and  also  such  of  the  centurions,  and  of  the  privates 
as  had  quitted  their  ranks.  Of  the  rest  of  the  multitude  eve¬ 
ry  tenth  man  was  drawn  by  lot  and  punished. 
LX.  In  a  very  different  manner  were  matters  conducted 
in  the  country  of  the  iEquans.  There  seemed  a  mutual  con¬ 
test  carried  on  between  the  consul  and  his  troops,  who  should 
exceed  the  other  in  civility  and  good  offices.  Quintius  was 
naturally  of  a  milder  disposition,  and  besides,  the  ill  conse¬ 
quences  attending  the  harshness  of  his  colleague  made  him 
feel  the  greater  satisfaction  in  indulging  his  own  temper. 
The  .^quans,  not  daring  to  meet^  in  the  field,  a  general  and 
army  so  cordially  united,  suffered  them  to  carry  their  de¬ 
predations  through  every  part  of  the  country;  and  in  no  for¬ 
mer  war  was  a  greater  abundance  of  booty  brought  off  from 
thence,  all  which  was  distributed  among  the  soldiers.  Their 
behaviour  was  also  rewarded  with  praises,  in  which  the  minds 
of  soldiers  find  as  much  delight  as  in  gain.  The  troops  re¬ 
turned  home  in  better  temper  towards  their  general,  and,  on 
the  general’s  account,  towards  the  pan*icians  also;  declaring, 
that  the  senate  had  given  to  them  a  parent,  to  the  other  army 
a  master.  This  year,  during  which  they  experienced  a  va¬ 
riety  of  fortune  in  their  military  operadems,  and  furious  dis- 
sei^ions  both  at  home  and  abroad,  was  particularly  distin¬ 
guished  by  the  assemblies  of  the  people  voting  by  trffies;  a 
matter  which  derived  its  seeming  imporiance  rather  from  the 
honour  of  the  victory  obuined  by  one  party  oVer  the  other, 
than  from  any  real  advantage  accruing  from  it.  For  the 

B.  C.  469.] 

BOOK  II. 

197 

share  of  power,  which  was  either  gained  by  the  commons, 
or  taken  from  the  patricians,  was  trifling,  in  proportion  to 
the  great  degree  of  dignity  of  which  the  assemblies  them¬ 
selves  were  deprived  by  the  exclusion  of  the  patricians. 
LXL  The  following  year,  the  consulate  of  Lucius  Y 
Valerius  and  Tiberius  iEmilius  was  disturbed  by  c.  46s. 
more  violent  commotions,  both  in  consequence  of  the  struggles 
between  the  different  orders  of  the  state  concerning  th :  agra¬ 
rian  law,  and  also  of  the  trial  of  Appius  Claudius;  who,  hav¬ 
ing  taken  a  most  active  part,  in  opposition  to  the  law,  and 
supported  the  cause  of  those  who  were  in  possession  of  the 
public  lands,  as  if  he  were  a  third  consul,  and  thought  it  his 
duty,  had  a  criminal  prosecution  instituted  against  him  by 
Marcus  Duilius  and  Caius  Sicinius.  Never  hitherto  had  a 
person,  so  odious  to  the  commons,  been  brought  to  trial  be¬ 
fore  the  people,  overwhelmed  as  he  was  with  their  hatred,  on 
his  father’s  account,  besides  the  load  which  his  own  conduct 
had  drawn  on  him;  and  hardly  ever  did  the  patricians  exert 
such  strenuous  efforts  in  favour  of  any  other,  seeing  this 
champion  of  the  senate,  the  assertor  of  its  dignity,  their  bul¬ 
wark  against  all  the  outrageous  attempts  both  of  tribunes  and 
commons,  exposed  to  the  rage  of  the  populace,  only  for  hav¬ 
ing  in  the  contest  exceeded,  in  some  degree,  as  they  conceiv¬ 
ed,  the  bounds  of  moderation.  Appius  Claudius  himself 
was  the  only  one  among  the  patricians,  who  looked  with 
scorn  on  the  tribunes  and  commons,  even  affecting  a  disre¬ 
gard  as  to  his  own  trial.  Neither  the  threats  of  the  com¬ 
mons,  nor  the  intreaties  of  the  senate,  could  ever  prevail  on 
him  either  to  change  its  garb,'*'  or  use  a  suppliant  address, 
or  even  to  soften  and  relax,  in  any  degree,  the  usual  harsh¬ 
ness  of  his  language,  when  he  was  to  plead  his  cause  before 
the  people.  He  still  preserved  the  same  expression  of  coun¬ 
tenance,  the  same  stubborn  fierceness  in  his  looks,  and  the 
»  It  was  usual  for  persons  undei  accusation  to  put  on  a  mourmag  dress, 
and  to  let  their  hair  and  beard  grow. 

198  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  284. 
same  vehemence  in  his  discourse;  so  that  a  great  many  of 
the  commons  felt  no  k  ss  dread  of  Appius,  while  he  stood  a 
culprit  at  their  bar,  than  they  had  done  w  hen  he  was  consul* 
He  pleaded  in  his  defence,  and  that  with  all  the  haughtinesa 
which  he  could  have  shown,  had  he  been  the  accuaer,  just 
as  he  used  to  behave  on  every*  other  occasion;  and,  by  his 
intrepidity,  so  astonished  the  tribunes  and  commons,  that,  of 
their  own  choice,  they  adjourned  the  trial  to  another  day, 
and  afterwards  suffered  the  business  to  cool.  The  day  of 
adjournment  was  not  very  distant,  yet,  before  it  arrived,  he 
was  seized  with  a  disorder  and  died.  The  tribunes  endea¬ 
voured  to  prevent  his  being  honoured  with  a  funeral  pane¬ 
gyric,  but  the  commons  would  not  allow  that  the  last  day  of 
so  great  a  man  should  be  defrauded  of  the  usual  glories. 
They  listenened  to  the  encomiums  pronounced  on  him  after 
his  death  with  as  favourable  an  attention  as  they  had  shown 
to  the  charges  brought  against  him  when  alive,  and,  in  vast 
numbers,  attended  his  funeral. 
LXII.  During  this  year,  the  consul  Valerius  marched 
with  an  army  against  the  iEquans;  and,  finding  it  impracti¬ 
cable  to  entice  them  to  an  engagement,  made  an  assault  on 
their  camp.  A  violent  storm  of  thunder  and  hail  obliged 
him  to  desist,  and  people’s  surprise  was  increased,  when, 
as  soon  as  the  signal  for  retreat  had  been  given,  the  weather 
became  perfectly  calm  and  clear;  so  that  they  were  deterred 
by  a  religious  scruple  from  again  attacking  a  camp  which 
had  been  defended  by  an  evident  interposition  of  some  divi¬ 
nity,  and  vented  all  their  rage  in  devastations  on  the  enemy’s 
lauds.  The  other  consul  iEmilius  conducted  the  war  in  the 
country  of  the  Sabines,  and  there  also,  the  enemy  keeping 
within  their  walls,  the  lands  were  laid  waste;  at  length,  by 
the  burning,  not  only  of  the  country-houses,  but  of  the  vil¬ 
lages,  which  in  that  populous  country  were  very  numerous, 
the  Sabines  wrere  provoked  to  give  battle  to  the  troops  em¬ 
ployed  in  the  depredations;  and,  being  obliged  to  retreat 

BOOK  IL 

199 

B.  C-  46a.] 

w^out  having  gained  smy  advantage,  removed  their  camp, 
m^jU  day,  to  a  place  of  greater  safety.  This  appeared  to  the 
consul  a  sufficient  reason  to  cmiaidef  the  enemy  as  vanquish¬ 
ed,  and  to  cease  any  farther  operations;  he  accordingly  with¬ 
drew  his  mes^  without  having  made  any  j»-ogress  in  the 
war. 
LXIII.  While  these  wars  still  raged  abroad,  and  ^  ^ 
party  divisicass  at  home,  Titus  Numicius  Priscus 
and  Aulus  Virginias  were  elected  consuls.  There  was  rea- 
Bon  to  l^lieve  that  the  commons  would  not  endure  any  far¬ 
ther  delay  with  respect  to  the  agrarian  law,  and  every  degree 
of  violence  was  ready  to  be  committed,  when  it  was  discover¬ 
ed,  by  the  smoke  from  the  burning  of  the  country-houses, 
and  by  the  inhabitants  fl}ing  to  the  city,  that  the  Volscians 
were  at  hand;  this  incident  repressed  the  sedition,  when  just 
ripe,  and  on  the  point  of  breaking  forth.  The  consuls  were 
ii»tantly  ordered  fay  the  senate  to  lead  out  the  youth  from 
the  city  against  the  enemy;  and  this  made  the  rest  of  the 
commons  less  turbulent.  On  the  other  side,  the  assmlants, 
without  performing  any  thing  farther  than  alarming  the  Ro¬ 
mans  by  the  destruction  of  some  few  buildings,  retired  with 
great  precipitation.  Numicius  marched  to  Antium  against 
the  Volscians;  Virginias  against  the  iEquans.  Here,  the  ar¬ 
my  falling  into  an  ambuscade,  and  being  in  the  utmost  dan¬ 
ger  of  a  total  overthrow,  was  rescued  by  the  bravery  of  the 
soldiers  from  the  imminent  peril  to  which  the  carelessness 
of  the  consul  had  exposed  them.  The  operations  against 
the  Volscians  were  better  conducted;  in  the  first  engage¬ 
ment,  the  enemy  were  routed,  and  compelled  to  fly  into  An¬ 
tium,  which,  considering  those  times,  was  a  city  of  great 
strength;  the  consul  therefore  not  choosing  to  venture  to  at¬ 
tack  it,  took  from  the  Antians  another  town  called  Ceno, 
which  was  not  near  so  strong.  Whilst  the  iEquans  and  Voi- 
scians  gave  employment  to  the  Roman  armies,  the  Sabines  car¬ 
ried  depredation  to  the  very  gates  of  the  city;  however,  they 

200 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  286. 

themselves,  in  a  few  days  after,  suffered,  from  the  two  Ro¬ 
man  armies,  greater  losses  than  any  which  ^y  had  occasion- 
cd|  both  Ac  consuls,  prdvoked  at  Aeir  proceedings,  having 
marched  into  their  tenrk^ies. 
LXIV.  Towards  the  close  of  the  year,  there  was  some* 
interval  of  peace,  but  disturbed,  as  was  always  the  case, 
by  smuggles  between  the  patricians  and  plebeians.  The 
latter  were  so  incensed,  that  they  refused  to  attend  the  as¬ 
sembly  held  for  the  election  of  consuls,  so  that  by  the  -votes 
of  the  patricians  and  their  dependants,  Titus  Quintius  and 
Quintus  Servilius  were  appointed  to  the  consulship.  These 
y  experienced  a  year  similar  to  the  preceding;  the  be- 
B.  C.  486.  tuning  of  it  filled  with  civil  broils,  whidi  were  af¬ 
terwards  repressed  by  Ae  breaking  out  of  foreign  wars.  The 
SAines,  marching  acrcss  tb^  plains  of  CrustuminumwiA  great 
rapidity,  carried  fire  and  sword  through  all  Ae  country  on  the 
banks  of  the  Anio;  and  though,  when  they  had  advanced  almost 
to  the  Collinc  gate,  and  the  walls  of  the  city,  they  met  with  a 
repulse,  yet  they  carried  off  a  vast  booty  both  of  men  and 
cattle.  The  consul  Servilius  marched  in  pursuit,  with  design 
to  bring  them  to  an  engagement:  but,  not  being  able  to  over¬ 
take  their  main  body  in  the  champaign  country,  he  spread 
devastation  to  such  an  extent,  as  to  leave  nothing  unmolest¬ 
ed,  and  returned  with  a  quantity  of  spoil,  exceeding,  by 
many  degrees,  what  the  enemy  had  carried  off.  In  the  cam¬ 
paign  against  the  Volsciaus  also,  the  arms  of  the  state  were 
remarkably  successful,  through  the  conduct  both  of  the  ge¬ 
neral  and  of  the  soldiers:  first,  they  fought  a  pitched  battle, 
on  equal  ground,  with  great  loss  of  blood  on  both  sides. 
The  Romans,  however,  whose  sm^l  number  made  them 
feel  the  loss  more  sensibly,  would  have  quitted  the  field,  had 
not  the  consul,  by  a  happy  feint,  re-animated  the  troops,  call¬ 
ing  out,  Aat  the  enemy  were  flying  on  the  other  wing:  Aey 
then  returned  to  the  charge,  and  l^e  opinion  that  victory 
was  on  their  side,  was  the  means  of  their  obtaining  it  in  re¬ 
ality.  But  Titus  fearing  lest,  if  he  pressed  the  fugitives  too 

BOOK  IL 

201 

B.  C.  466.] 
far,  he  might  have  the  battle  to  fight  over  again,  gave  the 
signal  for  retreat.  After  this,  an  interval  of  some  few  days 
passed,  during  which  both  parties  reposed,  as  if  they  had 
tacitly  agreed  to  a  suspension  of  arms;  and,  in  the  mean 
time,  vast  multitudes  from  every  state  of  the  Volscians  and 
i^^quans  flocked  to  their  camp,  not  doubting  but  that  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  when  informed  of  their  numbers,  would  make  their 
retreat  by  night.  About  the  third  watch,  therefore,  they 
came  to  attack  the  camp.  Quintius,  after  appeasing  the  tu¬ 
mult  which  the  sudden  alarm  had  excited,  and  ordering  the 
soldiers  to  stay  quiet  in  their  tents,  led  out  a  cohort  of  Her- 
nicians  to  form  an  advanced  guard,  mounted  the  trumpet¬ 
ers,  with  others  of  their  band,  on  horses,  and  ordered  them 
to  sound  their  instruments  before  the  rampart,  so  as  to  keep 
the  enemy  in  suspense  until  daydight.  During  the  remain¬ 
der  of  the  night,  every  thing  was  quiet  in  the  camp,  so  that 
the  Romans  were  not  even  prevented  from  sleeping.  The 
Volscians,  on  the  other  hand,  expecting  every  instant  an  at¬ 
tack,  were  kept  in  a  state  of  earnest  attention  by  the  appear¬ 
ance  of  the  armed  infantry,  whom  they  believed  to  be  Ro¬ 
mans,  and  whom  they  also  conceived  to  be  more  numerous 
than  they  really  were,  from  the  bustle  and  neighing  of  the 
horses,  and  which,  being  under  the  management  of  riders 
with  whom  they  were  acquainted,  and  having  their  ears  con¬ 
tinually  teazed  with  the  sound  of  the  instruments,  made 
in  their  trampling  a  considerable  noise. 
LXV.  When  day  appeared,  the  Romans,  marching  into 
the  field  in  full  vigour,  after  being  thoroughly  refreshed  with 
sleep,  at  the  first  onset  overpowered  the  Volscians,  fatigued 
with  standing  and  want  of  rest.  However,  the  enemy  might 
be  said  to  retire,  rather  than  to  be  routed;  for  some  hills, 
which  lay  behind  them,  afforded  a  safe  retreat  to  all  the 
troops  that  were  stationed  to  the  rear  of  the  first  line,  whose 
ranks  were  still  unbroken.  On  coming  to  this  place,  where 
the  height  of  the  ground  was  against  him,  the  consul  order- 
voL,  1, — D  d 

202 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

ed  his  men  to  halt:  but  it  was  with  great  difficulty  that  they 
could  be  restrained;  they  called  out,  and  insisted  on  being  al¬ 
lowed  to  pursue  the  advantage  which  they  had  gained:  while 
the  horsemen,  collected  round  the  general,  were  still  more 
ungovernable,  loudly  declaring  that  they  would  advance  be¬ 
fore  the  front  line.  While  Titus  hesitated,  between  the  con¬ 
fidence  which  he  knew  he  might  place  in  the  valour  of  his 
men,  and  the  difficulty  of  the  ground,  all  cried  out,  with  one 
voice,  that  they  would  proceed;  and  they  instantly  put  their 
words  in  execution;  sticking  their  spears  in  the  ground,  that 
they  might  be  lighter  to  climb  the  steeps,  they  ran  forward 
in  full  speed.  The  Volscians  having  at  the  first  onset  dis¬ 
charged  their  missive  weapons,  began  to  pour  down  on  them, 
as  they  approached.  The  incessant  blows  from  the  stones 
of  the  higher  ground,  and  which  lay  among  their  feet,  so 
galled  and  disordered  the  Romans,  that  their  left  wing  was 
by  this  means  almost  overborne;  when  the  consul,  just  as 
they  were  beginning  to  give  way,  reproaching  them  with 
their  rashness,  and  at  the  same  time  with  want  of  spirit, 
made  their  fears  give  place  to  shame.  At  first,  they  stood 
their  ground  with  determined  firmness;  then,  as  they  reco¬ 
vered  strength  to  renew  the  attack,  in  spite  of  the  disadvan¬ 
tage  of  situation,  they  ventured  to  advance,  and  raising  the 
shout  anew,  moved  forward  in  a  body.  Rushing  on  again 
in  full  career,  they  forced  their  way,  and  when  they  had 
reached  almost  to  the  summit  of  the  hill,  the  enemy  turned 
their  backs,  and  the  pursuers  and  pursued,  exerting  their  ut¬ 
most  speed,  both  rushed  into  the  camp  together,  almost  in 
one  body.  In  this  consternation  of  the  Volscians,  their  camp 
was  taken.  Such  of  them  as  could  make  their  escape,  took 
the  road  to  Antium;  thither  also  the  Roman  army  marched; 
and,  after  a  siege  of  a  few  days,  the  town  surrendered,  not 
because  the  force  of  the  besiegers  was  stronger  now  than  in 
the  former  attack,  but  because  the  spirits  of  the  besieged 
were  broken  by  the  late  unsuccessful  battle,  and  the  loss  of 
their  camp. 

THE 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

BOOK  III. 
OissensioDs  about  the  agrarian  laws.  The  Capitol  seized  by  exiles  and 
slaves.  Quintius  Cmcinnalus  called  from  the  cultivation  of  his  farm, 
to  conduct  a  war  against  the  .^quans;  vanquishes  them  and  makes 
them  pass  under  the  yoke.  The  number  of  the  tribunes  of  the  people 
augmented  to  ten.  Ten  magistrates,  called  decemvirs,  invested  with 
the  authority  of  the  consuls,  and  of  all  other  magistrates,  are  appointed 
for  the  purpose  of  digesting  and  publishing  a  body  of  laws.  These  hav- 
ing  promulgated  a  code  of  laws,  contained  in  ten  tables,  obtain  a  con¬ 
tinuation  of  their  authority  for  another  year,  during  which,  they  add 
two  more  to  the  former  ten  tables.  They  refuse  to  resign  their  oflSce 
and  retain  it  a  third  year.  At  first  they  act  equitably  and  justly;  af¬ 
terwards,  arbitrarily  and  tyrannically.  At  length  the  commons,  provok¬ 
ed  by  a  base  attempt  of  one  of  them,  Appius  Claudius,  to  violate  the 
chastity  of  a  daughter  of  Virginias,  seize  upon  the  Aventine  mount, 
and  compel  them  to  resign.  Appius  and  Oppius,  two  of  the  most 
obnoxious,  are  thrown  into  prison,  where  they  put  an  end  to  their  own 
lives;  the  rest  are  banished.  War  with  the  Sabines,  Volscians,  and 
Aiquans.  Unjust  determidation  of  the  Roman  people,  who,  being  chosen 
arbitrators  in  an  affair  between  the  people  of  Ardea  and  Aricia, 
concerning  some  disputed  lands,  adjudge  them  to  themselves. 
I.  Soon  after  the  taking  of  Antium,  Titus  ^mi-  y  ^ 
Kus  and  Quintus  Fabius  were  elected  consuls  -B.  C,  465. 
This  Quintus  was  the  single  one  of  the  Fabii  who  remained 
alive  when  the  family  were  cut  oif  at  the  Cremera.  ilimilius 
had  before,  in  his  former  consulate,  recommended  the  distribu¬ 
tion  of  lands  among  the  commons:  now,  therefore,  on  his  be- 

204 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  287, 
ing  a  second  time  invested  with  that  office,  those,  who  ex* 
peered  the  lands,  conceived  sanguine  hopes  of  the  law  being 
passed.  The  tribunes,  supposing  that  an  affair  for  which 
such  struggles  had  often  been  made,  in  opposition  to  both 
the  consuls,  might  probably  be  accomplished  now,  when  one 
of  those  magistrates  was  an  advocate  for  it,  set  the  business 
on  foot;  and  the  consul  continued  in  the  same  sentiments. 
The  possessors  of  the  lands,  and  most  of  the  patricians, 
complaining  loudly  that  a  person  at  the  head  of  the  state  aim¬ 
ed  to  distinguish  himself  by  intrigues  more  becoming  a  tri¬ 
bune  courting  popularity,  by  making  donations  out  of  other 
people’s  property,  removed  the  odium  of  the  whole  transac¬ 
tion  from  the  tribunes  to  the  consul.  A  desperate  contest 
would  have  ensued,  had  not  Fabius  struck  out  an  expedient 
to  prevent  it,  by  a  plan  disagreeable  to  neither  party;  which 
was,  that,  as  a  considerable  tract  of  land  had  been  taken  from 
the  Volscians  in  the  preceding  year,  under  the  conduct  and 
auspices  of  Titus  Quintius,  a  colony  should  be  led  off  to 
Antium,  a  town  at  no  great  distance,  convenient  in  every  re¬ 
spect,  and  a  sea-port;  by  these  means,  the  commons  might 
come  in  for  lands,  without  any  complaints  from  the  present 
possessors  at  home,  and  harmony  might  be  preserved  in 
the  state.  This  proposition  was  approved  of,  and  he  had 
commissioners,  called  triumvirs,  appointed  to  distribute  the 
same;  these  were  l  itus  Quintius,  A.  Virginius,  and  Publi¬ 
us  Furius;  and  such  as  chose  to  accept  of  those  lands, 
were  ordered  to  give  in  their  names.  The  gratification  of 
their  tvishes,  as  is  generally  the  case,  instantly  begat  disgust; 
and  so  few  subscribed  to  the  proposal,  that,  to  fill  up  the  colo- 
nv,  they  were  obliged  to  take  in  a  number  of  the  Volscians. 
The  rest  of  the  populace  chose  rather  to  prosecute  claims  of 
land  at  Rome,  than  to  receive  immediate  possession  of  it 
elsewhere.  The  Aiquans  sued  to  Quintus  Fahius  for  peace, 
for  he  had  gone  against  them  with  an  army;  \  et  they  them- 

205 

B.  C.  465.J  BOOK  III, 
selves  broke  it,  by  a  sudden  incursion  into  the  Latine  tcrrite- 
ries. 
IL  In  the  year  following,  Quintus  ServUius,  y  r  288 
who  was  consul  with  Spurius  Postumius,  being  B.  C.  464. 
sent  against  the  iEquans,  fixed  his  camp  in  the  Latine  ter¬ 
ritory,  a  post  which  he  intended  to  retain.  Here  the  troops 
were  compelled,  by  sickness,  to  remain  inactive  within  their 
lines;  by  which  means  the  war  was  protracted  to  the  third 
year,  in  which  Quintus  Fabius  and  Titus  Quin-  y  ^ 
tins  were  consuls.  As  Fabius,  in  consequence  of  B.  C.  463. 
his  former  successes  there,  had  granted  peace  to  the  ,^.quans, 
that  province  was  now  particularly  assigned  to  him.  He  set 
out  with  confident  expectations,  that  the  splendor  of  his  name 
would  be  sufficient  to  induce  the  JEquans  to  put  an  end  to 
hostilities,  and  sent  ambassadors  to  the  general  meeting  of 
that  nation,  with  orders  to  tell  them,  that  Quintus  Fabius, 
consul,  gave  them  notice,  that,  as  he  had  brought  peace  to 
Rome  from  the  .£quans,  so  now  he  brought  war  to  the 
iEquans  from  Rome;  having  armed  for  war  the  same  hand 
which  be  had  formerly  given  to  them  as  a  pledge  of  peace. 
Which  of  the  parties  had,  by  perjury  and  perfidy,  given  oc¬ 
casion  to  this  rupture,  was  known  to  the  gods,  who  would 
soon  prove  avengers  of  the  crime:  yet,  notwithstanding  this, 
he  was  still  more  desirous  that  the  -^quans  should,  of  their 
own  accord,  repent  of  their  misconduct,  than  suffer  the  evils 
of  war.  If  they  repented,  they  should  find  safety  in  that 
clemency  which  they  had  already  experienced:  if  they  chose 
to  persist  in  a  conduct  which  involved  them  in  the  guilt  of 
perjury,  they  must  expect,  in  the  progress  of  the  war,  to  find 
the  resentment  of  the  gods  even  greater  than  that  of  their 
enemies.”  So  far  were  these  declarations  from  producing 
the  desired  effect  on  them,  that  the  amba^sadors  narrowly 
escaped  ill-treatment,  and  an  army  was  sent  to  Algidum 
against  the  Romans.  When  the  news  of  these  transactions 
was  brought  to  Rome,  the  indignity  of  the  affair,  rather  than 

206 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  289. 

the  danger,  called  out  the  other  consul  from  the  city,  and 
the  two  consular  armies  advanced  to  the  enemy  in  order  of 
battle^  prepared  for  an  immediate  engagement.  But  this 
happening  rather  late  in  the  day,  a  person  called  out  from 
one  of  the  enemy^s  posts,  Romans,  this  is  making  an  os¬ 
tentatious  parade,  not  waging  war:  ye  draw  up  your  forces 
for  battle,  when  night  is  at  hand.  We  require  a  greater 
length  of  day-light  to  decide  the  contest  which  is  to  come 
on;  return  into  the  field  to-morrow  at  sun-rise;  ye  shall  have 
an  opportunity  of  fighting,  doubt  it  not.”  The  soldiers 
were  led  back  into  camp  until  the  next  day,  highly  irritated 
by  those  expressions,  and  thinking  the  approaching  night 
would  appear  too  long,  which  was  to  occasion  a  delay  to  the 
combat;  the  intervening  hours,  however,  they  employed  in 
refreshing  themselves  with  food  and  sleep.  Next  morning, 
as  soon  as  it  was  light,  the  Roman  army  were  the  first,  by 
a  considerable  time,  to  take  their  post  in  the  field.  At  length, 
the  ^quans  also  came  forward.  The  battle  was  fought  with 
great  fury  on  both  sides,  for  the  Romans  were  stimulated  both 
by  anger  and  hatred,  while  the  ,®quans,  conscious  that  the 
dangers  to  which  they  were  exposed  were  the  consequence  of 
theirown  crimes,  and  despairing  of  ever  being  treated  with  con¬ 
fidence  in  future,  felt  a  necessity  of  making  the  most  desperate 
exertions.  However,  they  were  not  able  to  withstand  the  Ro¬ 
man  troops.  They  were  driven  from  the  field,  and  retreat¬ 
ed  to  their  own  territories;  where  the  outrageous  multitude, 
not  at  all  the  more  disposed  to  peace  from  their  failure, 
censured  their  leaders  for  having  hazarded  success  in  a 
pitched  battle;  a  manner  of  fighting  in  which  the  Romans 
possessed  superior  skill.  The  t^quans,  they  said,  were  bet¬ 
ter  fitted  for  predatory  expeditions;  and  there  was  greater 
reason  to  hope  for  success,  from  a  number  of  detached  par¬ 
ties  acting  separately,  than  from  one  army  of  unwieldy 
bulk. 
III.  Leaving  therefore  a  guard  in  the  camp,  they  marched 

BOOK  IIL 

207 

B.  C,  463.] 

out,  and  fell  upon  the  Roman  frontiers  with  such  fury,  as  to 
carry  terror  even  to  the  city.  Such  an  event  caused  the 
greater  uneasiness,  because  it  was  entirely  unexpected;  for 
nothing  could  be  less  apprehended,  than  that  a  vanquished 
enemy,  almost  besieged  in  their  camp,  should  entertain  a 
thought  of  committing  depredations.  The  country  people, 
in  a  panic,  pouring  into  the  gates,  and,  in  the  excess  of  their 
fright,  exaggerating  every  thing,  cried  out,  that  they  were 
not  small  ravaging  parties,  nor  employed  in  plundering;  but 
that  the  legions,  and  the  entire  army  of  the  enemy,  were  ap- 
preaching,  marching  rapidly  towards  the  city,  and  prepared 
for  an  assault.  The  first  who  heard  these  rumours,  spread 
them  about  among  others,  unauthenticated  as  they  were,  and 
therefore  the  more  liable  to  exaggeration;  which  caused  such 
a  hurry  and  confused  clamour,  every  one  calling  to  arms,  as, 
in  some  measure,  resembled  the  consternation  of  a  city  taken 
by  storm.  Luckily  Quintius  the  consul  had  returned  from 
Algidum;  this  proved  a  remedy  for  their  fears;  he  calmed 
the  tumult,  upbraiding  them  with  being  afraid  of  a  van¬ 
quished  people,  and  posted  guards  at  the  gates.  He  then 
convened  the  senate,  and  having,  by  their  directions,  issued 
a  proclamation  for  a  cessation  of  all  civil  business,*  march¬ 
ed  out  to  protect  the  frontiers,  leaving  Quintus  Servilius  to 
command  in  the  city;  but  he  found  no  enemy  in  the  country. 
The  other  consul  encountered  the  iEquans  with  extraordi¬ 
nary  success;  for  he  attacked  them  on  the  road  while  heavily 
laden  with  booty,  which  so  embarrassed  their  motions,  as  to 
render  them  unfit  for  action,  and  took  severe  revenge  for  the 
devastations  which  they  had  committed.  He  succeeded  so 
effectually,  that  few  made  their  escape,  and  the  whole  of  the 
booty  was  recovered.  On  this  the  consul  Quin ti us  returned 
to  the  city,  and  took  off  the  prohibition  of  business,  %vhen  it 

*  JudUium;  qumjus  sisiebatur.  In  cases  of  great  and  immediate  dan¬ 
ger,  all  proceedings  at  law  were  suspended;  the  shops  also  were  shut,  and 
all  civil  business  stopped,  until  the  alarm  was  over. 

208 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.290. 

had  continued  four  days.  The  genial  survey  was  then  held, 
and  the  lustruna  was  closed  by  Quintius;*  the  number  of 
citizens  rated  in  the  survey,  being  one  hundred  and  twenty- 
four  thousand  two  hundred  and  fourteen,  besides  the  orphans 
of  both  sexes.  Nothing  memorable  passed  afterwards  in  the 
country  of  the  iEquans;  they  took  shelter  in  their  towns, 
abandoning  their  surrounding  possessions  to  fire  and  devas¬ 
tation.  The  consul,  after  having  repeatedly  carried  hostili¬ 
ties  and  depredations  through  every  part  of.  the  enemy’s 
country,  returned  to  Rome  with  great  glory,  and  abundance 
of  spoil. 
Y  R  290  consuls  were  Aulus  Postumius 
B.  C.  462.  Albus  and  Spurius  Furius  Fusus.  The  Furii,some 
writers  have  called  Fusii;  this  I  mention,  lest  any  should 
think  there  was  a  difference  in  the  persons,  when  it  is  only 
in  the  name.  There  was  no  doubt  entertained,  but  that  one 
of  the  consuls  w^ould  march  an  army  against  the  iEquans; 
these,  therefore,  requested  assistance  from  the  Volscians  of 
Ecetra,  who  gladly  complied  with  the  request;  and  so  in¬ 
veterate  was  the  hatred  which  those  states  bore  towards  the 
Romans,  that  they  eagerly  vied  with  each  other,  in  making 
the  most  vigorous  preparations  for  war.  This  coming  to  the 
knowledge  of  the  Hernicians,  they  gave  notice  to  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  that  the  people  of  Ecetra  had  revolted  to  the  iEquans. 
The  colony  of  Antium  was  also  suspected,  because  on  that 
town  being  taken,  a  great  multitude  had  fled  thence  for  re¬ 
fuge  to  the  ^quansj  and  while  the  war  with  that  people 
*  The  lustrum  was  a  period  of  five  years,  at  the  expiration  of  which  a 
g-eneral  review  of  the  people  was  held,  and  their  number,  state,  and  cir¬ 
cumstances  inquired  into.  The  senate  also  was  reviewed  by  one  of  the 
censors:  and  if  any  one,  by  bis  behaviour,  had  rendered  himself  unworthy 
of  a  place  in  that  body,  or  had  sunk  his  fortune  below  the  requisite  quali¬ 
fication,  his  name  was  passed  over  by  the  censor,  in  reading  the  roll  of 
senators;  and  thus  he  was  held  to  be  excluded  from  the  senate.  When  the 
business  was  done,  the  censor,  to  whose  lot  it  fell,  condidit  lustrum^  closed 
the  lustrum,  by  offering  a  solemn  sacrifice  in  the  Campus  Martius. 

B.  C.  462.] 

BOOK  HI- 

209 

lasted,  these  proved  the  most  valiant  soldiers  in  their  army^ 
Afterwards,  when  the  ^quans  were  driven  into  their  towns, 
this  rabble  withdrawing  privately,  and  returning  to  Antium, 
seduced  the  colonists  there,  from  their  allegiance  to  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  which,  even  before  that  time,  was  not  much  to  be  re¬ 
lied  on.  Before  the  business  was  yet  ripe,  on  the  first  infor¬ 
mation  being  laid  before  the  senate  of  their  intention  to  re¬ 
volt,  directions  were  given  to  the  consuls  to  send  for  the 
heads  of  t  e  colony,  and  inquire  into  the  truth  of  the  mat¬ 
ter.  These  having  readily  attended,  and  being  introduced 
to  the  senate  by  the  consuls,  answered  the  questions  put  to 
them  in  such  a  manner,  that  the  suspicions  against  them 
were  stronger  when  they  were  dismissed,  than  before  they 
came.  War  was  then  considered  as  inevitable,  Spurius 
Furius,  to  whose  lot  that  province  had  fallen,  marching 
against  the  iEqnans,  found  the  enemy  in  the  country  of  the 
Hernicians,  employed  in  collecting  plunder;  and,  being  igno¬ 
rant  of  their  numbers,  because  they  had  never  been  seen  all 
together,  he  rashly  hazarded  an  engagement,  though  his  army 
was  very  unequal  to  the  forces  of  the  enemy.  At  the  first 
onset,  he  was  driven  from  his  ground,  and  obliged  to  retreat 
to  his  tents;  nor  did  the  misfortune  end  there:  in  the  course 
of  the  next  night,  and  the  following  day,  his  camp  was  sur¬ 
rounded  on  all  sides,  and  attacked  so  vigorously,  that  there 
was  no  possibility  even  of  sending  a  messenger  from  thence 
to  Rome.  The  Hernicians  brought  an  account  both  of  the 
defeat,  and  of  the  consul  and  the  army  being  besieged,  which 
struck  the  senate  with  such  dismay,  that  by  a  decree,  in  thaf 
form  which  has  been  always  deemed  to  be  appropriated  to 
cases  of  extreme  exigency,  the  other  consul  Postumius  was 
charged  to  “  take  care,  that  the  commonwealth  should  re¬ 
ceive  no  detriment.”  It  was  judged  most  expedient,  that 
the  consul  himself  should  remain  at  Rome,  in  order  to  enlist 
all  who  were  able  to  bear  arms;  and  that  Titus  Quintius 
should  be  sent  as  proconsul  to  the  relief  of  the  camp,  with 
VOL.  I. — E  e 

210 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  290, 

an  army  composed  of  the  allies;  to  complete  the  number  of 
v;hich,  the  Latines,  Hernicians,  and  the  colony  at  Antium, 
were  ordered  to  supply  Quintius  with  subitary  soldiers;  this 
was  the  appellation  then  given  to  auxiliaries  called  out  on  a 
sudden  emergency. 
V.  For  some  time  there  was  a  great  variety  of  movements, 
and  many  attempts  made,  both  on  one  side  and  on  the  other; 
for  the  enemy,  relying  on  their  superiority  in  number,  en¬ 
deavoured  to  tveaken  the  force  of  the  Romans,  b)  obliging 
them  to  divide  it  into  many  parts,  in  hopes  that  it  would 
prove  insufficient  to  withstand  them  on  every  different  quar¬ 
ter.  At  the  same  time  that  the  siege  of  the  camp  was  car¬ 
ried  on,  a  part  of  their  forces  was  sent  to  ravage  the  lands 
of  the  Romans,  and  to  attempt  even  Rome  itself,  if  a  favour¬ 
able  occasion  should  offer.  Lucius  Valerius  was  left  to  guard 
the  city,  and  the  consul  Postumius  was  sent  to  protect  the 
frontiers  from  the  enemy’s  incursions.  No  degree  of  vigi¬ 
lance  and  activity  was  left  unemployed  in  any  particular: 
watches  were  stationed  in  the  town,  out-posts  before  the 
gates,  and  guards  along  the  walls;  and,  as  was  necessary  in 
a  time  of  such  general  confusion,  a  cessation  of  civil  busi¬ 
ness  was  observed  for  several  days.  Meanwhile  at  the  camp, 
the  consul  Furius,  after  havinjr  endured  the  siege  for  some 
time,  without  making  any  effort,  hurst  forth,  from  the  De¬ 
cuman  gate,*  on  the  enemy,  when  they  least  expected  him; 
and  though  he  might  have  pursued  their  flving  troops  with 
advantage,  yet,  fearing  lest  an  attack  might  be  made  on  the 
camp  from  the  opposite  side,  he  halted.  Another  Furius, 
who  was  a  lieutenant-general,  and  brother  to  the  consul,  has¬ 
tily  pushed  forward  too  far;  and  so  eagerly  intent  was  he  on 
the  pursuit,  that  he  neither  perceived  his  own  party  retreat¬ 
ing,  nor  the  enemy  intercepting  him  behind:  being  thus  shut 
out  from  assistance,  and  having  often  in  vain  essayed,  by 
♦  The  DecumaQ  g’ate  was  in  the  rear  of  the  encampment.  For  the 
r.nler  and  disposition  of  a  Roman  camp,  see  Adam's  Roman  Antiquities. 

B.  C.  462,] 

BOOK  nr, 

211 

every  kind  of  effort,  to  open  himself  a  passage,  he  fell,  fight¬ 
ing  with  great  bravery.  The  consul  on  the  other  hand,  hear¬ 
ing  that  his  brother  was  surrounded,  turned  back  on  the  ene¬ 
my,  and  while,  forgetting  all  caution,  he  rushed  too  precipi¬ 
tately  into  the  thick  of  the  fight,  he  received  a  wound,  and 
was,  not  without  difficulty,  carried  off  by  his  attendants. 
This  both  damped  the  courage  of  his  own  men,  and  render¬ 
ed  the  enemy  more  daring;  and  so  highly  Avere  the  latter 
elated  by  the  deatk,  of  the  lieutenant-general,  and  the  con¬ 
sul's  being  wounded,  that  no  force  could  afterwards  withstand 
them,  so  as  to  prevent  their  driving  the  Romans  back  to  their 
camp,  and  compelling  them  to  submit  again  to  a  siege,  with 
both  strength  and  hopes  considerably  diminished;  they  were 
even  in  danger  of  utter  destruction,  had  not  Titus  Quintius, 
with  the  troops  supplied  by  the  Latines  and  Hernicians,  come 
to  their  relief.  He  attacked  the  iEquans  on  their  rear,  whilst 
their  attention  was  employed  on  the  Roman  camp,  and  as 
they  were  insultingly  exhibiting  to  view  the  head  of  the  lieu¬ 
tenant-general;  and  a  sally  being  made  from  the  camp  at  the 
same  time,  on  a  signal  given  by  him  at  some  distance,  a 
great  number  of  the  enemy  were  surrounded  and  cut  off. 
Of  the  ^quans  who  were  employed  in  the  Roman  territo¬ 
ries,  the  number  slain  was  less,  but  their  defeat  and  disper¬ 
sion  was  more  complete.  Being  divided  into  separate  par¬ 
ties,  and  busied  in  collecting  plunder,  they  were  attacked  by 
Postumius  in  several  places,  where  he  had  posted  troops  in 
convenient  situations;  when,  not  knowing  what  course  to  take, 
and  pursuing  their  flight  in  great  disorder,  they  fell  in  with 
Quintius,  who,  after  his  victory,  was  returning  home  with 
the  wounded  consul.  Then  did  the  consular  army,  exerting 
themselves  with  extraordinary^  alacrity,  take  full  vengeance 
for  the  consul’s  wound,  and  for  the  loss  of  the  lieutenant- 
general  and  the  cohorts.  Many  heavy  losses  were  sustained 
on  both  sides  in  the  course  of  that  campaign:  but  it  is  diffi¬ 
cult,  at  this  distance  of  time,  to  assign,  with  any  degree  of 

212 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  291. 
certainty,  the  precise  number  of  those  who  were  engaged, 
and  of  those  who  fell.  Yet  Valerius  Antias  undertakes  to 
estimate  them,  affirming  that,  of  the  Romans,  there  fell  in 
the  country  of  the  Hemicians  five  thousand  three  hundred; 
that,  of  the  plundering  parties  of  the  iEquans,  who  spread 
themselves  over  the  Roman  territories^  two  thousand  four 
hundred  were  slain  by  the  consul  Aulus  Postumius;  that  the 
other  bbdv  of  them,  who,  while  they  were  carrying  off  the 
spoil,  fell  in  with  Quintius,  escaped  not  without  a  much 
greater  loss,  there  being  slain  of  these,  four  thousand  ( and 
pretending  exactness,  he  adds )  two  hundred  and  thirty.  After 
this,  the  troops  returned  to  Rome,  and  the  order  for  cessa¬ 
tion  of  civil  business  was  discharged.  The  sky  appeared 
as  on  fire  in  many  places,  and  other  portents  either  occurred 
to  people’s  sight,  or  were  formed  by  terror  in  their  imagina< 
tions.  To  avert  the  evils  which  these  foreboded,  a  procla¬ 
mation  was  issued  for  a  solemn  festival,  to  be  observed  for 
three  days,  during  which  all  the  temples  were  filled  with 
crowds,  both  of  men  and  women,  supplicating  the  favour  of 
the  gods.  The  cohorts  of  the  Latines  and  Hemicians  were 
then  dismissed  by  the  senate  to  their  respective  homes,  with 
thanks  for  their  spirited  behaviour.  During  the  campaign,  a 
thousand  men,  who  came  from  Antium  after  the  battle,  but 
too  late  to  be  of  any  service,  were  sent  off  in  a  manner  little 
less  than  ignominious. 
V.  R  291  elections  were  then  held,  and  Lucius  uEbu- 
B.  C.  461.  tius  and  Publius  Servilius  being  chosen  consuls,  en¬ 
tered  on  their  office,  on  the  calends  of  August,  which  was  at 
that  time  considered  as  the  beginning  of  the  year  with  respect 
to  them.  This  was  a  season  of  great  distress;  for,  during  this 
year,  a  pestilential  disorder  spread  itself,  not  only  through 
the  city,  but  oyer  the  country,  affecting  both  men  and  cattle 
with  equal  malignity;  the  violence  of  the  disorder  was  increas¬ 
ed  by  admitting  into  the  city  the  cattle,  and  also  the  inhabi¬ 
tants  of  the  country,  who  fled  thither  for  shelter  from  the 

B,  C.  461.] 

BOOK  IIL 

213 

enemy’s  ravages-  Such  a  collection  of  animals  of  every  kind 
nearly  suffcM^ated  the  citizens  by  the  intolerable  stench;  while 
the  country  people,  crowded  together  in  narrow  apartments, 
suffered  no  less  from  the  heat,  the  want  of  rest,  and  their  at¬ 
tendance  on  each  other;  besides  which,  mere  contact  served 
to  propagate  the  infection.  While  they  could  scarcely  sup¬ 
port  the  weight  of  the  calamities  under  which  they  laboured 
ambassadors  from  the  Hernicians  suddenly  arrived  with  in¬ 
telligence,  that  the  iEquans  and  Volscians  in  conjunction  had 
encamped  in  their  territory,  and  from  thence  were  ravaging 
the  country  with  very  numerous  forces.  Besides  the  proof, 
w^hich  the  thinness  of  the  senate  affordeil  to  the  observation 
of  the  allies,  of  the  low  state  to  which  the  commonwealth 
was  reduced  by  the  pestilence,  the  answer  v/hich  they  receiv¬ 
ed,  demonstrated  a  great  dejection  of  spirits:  that  the  Her¬ 
nicians  themselves,  with  the  assistance  of  the  Latines,  must 
provide  for  their  own  safety.  That  the  city  of  Rome,  through 
the  sudden  anger  of  the  gods,  was  depopulated  by  sickness. 
If  they  (the  Romans]  should  find  any  respite  from  that  ca¬ 
lamity,  they  would,  as  they  had  done  the  year  before,  and  on 
all  occasions,  give  assistance  to  their  allies.”  Thus  the  am¬ 
bassadors  departed,  carrying  home  the  most  sorrowful  intel¬ 
ligence;  as  they  now  found  themselytjs  obliged,  with  their 
own  single  strength,  to  support  a  war,  to  which  they  had 
hardly  been  equal,  even  when  assisted  by  the  power  of  Rome. 
The  enemy  remained  not  long  in  the  country  of  the  Hernici¬ 
ans,  but  proceeded  thence,  with  hostile  intentions,  into  the 
Roman  territory;  which,  without  the  injuries  of  war,  was 
now  become  a  desert.  Without  meeting  there  one  human 
being  even  unarmed,  and  finding  every  place  through  which 
they  passed  destitute,  not  only  of  troops,  but  of  the  culture 
of  the  husbandman,  they  yet  came  as  far  as  the  third  stone  on 
the  Gabian  road.  By  this  time  ^butius  the  Roman  consul 
was  dead,  and  his  colleague  Servilius  so  ill,  that  there  was 
very  little  hope  of  his  recovery;  most  of  the  leadings  men 

214 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y,  R.291. 

were  siezed  by  the  distemper,  as  were  the  greater  part  of 
the  patricians,  and  almost  every  one  of  military  age,  so  that 
they  wanted  strength,  not  only  to  form  the  expeditions  which 
were  requisite  in  a  conjuncture  so  alarming,  but  even  to 
mount  the  guards,  where  no  exertion  was  necessary.  The 
duty  of  the  watches  was  performed  by  such  of  the  senators 
in  person,  as  by  their  age  and  strength  were  qualified  for  it: 
the  care  of  posting  and  visiting  these,  was  intrusted  to  the 
plebeian  sediles;  on  them  devolved  the  whole  administration 
of  affairs,  and  the  dignity  of  the  consular  authority. 
VII.  The  commonwealth  in  this  forlorn  state,  without  a 
head,  without  strength,  was  saved  from  destruction  by  its 
guardian  deities,  who  inspired  the  Volscians  and  ^quans 
with  the  spirit  of  banditti,  rather  than  of  warriors;  for  so  far 
w'ere  they  from  conceiving  any  hope,  either  of  mastering,  or 
even  of  approaching  the  walls  of  Rome,  and  such  an  effect 
had  the  distant  view  of  the  houses  and  adjacent  hills,  to  di- 
vert  their  thoughts  from  the  attempt,  that  murmurs  spread 
through  all  the  camp,  each  asking  the  other,  why  they  should 
throw  away  their  time  without  employment,  and  without 
booty,  in  a  waste  and  desert  country,  among  the  putrid  car¬ 
cases  of  men  and  cattle;  when  they  might  repair  to  places 
that  had  felt  no  distres's;  to  the  territory  of  Tusculum,  where 
every  kind  of  opulence  abounded?”  and  accordingly,  they 
hastily  put  themselves  in  motion,  and,  crossing  the  country, 
passed  on  through  the  territory  of  I.avici,  to  the  Tusculan 
hills;  and  to  that  quarter  was  the  whole  storm  and  violence  of 
the  war  directed.  Meanwhile,  the  Hernicians  and  Latines, 
prompted  not  only  by  compassion,  but  also  by  the  shame 
which  they  must  incur,  if  they  neither  gave  opposition  to  the 
common  enemy,  marching  to  attack  the  city  of  Rome,  nor 
even  when  their  allies  were  besieged,  afforded  them  any  as¬ 
sistance,  united  their  forces,  and  proceeded  to  Rome.  Not 
finding  the  enemy  there,  and  pursuing  their  tracks  by  such 
intelligence  as  they  could  procure,  they  met  them  coming 

BOOK  III. 

215 

B.  C.  461.] 
down  from  the  heights  of  Tusculiim  to  the  Alban  vale*  There 
an  engagement  ensued,  in  which  they  were  by  no  means  a 
match  for  the  combined  forces^  and  the  fidelity  of  the  allies 
proved^  for  the  present  unfortunate  to  them.  The  mortality 
occasioned  by  the  distemper  at  Rome  was  not  less  than  what 
the  sword  caused  among  the  allies.  The  consul  Servilius, 
with  many  other  illustrious  persons,  died:  namely,  Marcus 
Valerius  and  Titus  Virginias  Rutilus,  augurs;  Servius  Sul- 
picius,  principal  curio;  while,  among  persons  of  inferior  note 
the  virulence  of  the  disorder  spread  its  ravages  on  every' 
side.  The  senate,  unable  to  discover  a  prospect  of  relief  in 
any  human  means,  directed  the  people  to  have  recourse  to 
vows  and  to  the  deities:  they  w'ere  ordered  to  go,  with  their 
wives  and  children,  to  offer  supplications  and  implore  the 
favour  of  the  gods;  and  all  being  thus  called  out  by  public 
authority,  to  perform  what  each  man  was  strongly  urged  to 
by  his  own  private  calamities,  they  quickly  filled  the  places 
of  worship.  In  every'  temple,  the  prostrate  matrons,  sweep¬ 
ing  the  ground  with  their  hair,  implored  a  remission  of  the 
displeasure  of  heaven,  and  deliverance  from  the  pestile  nee. 
VIII.  From  that  time,  whether  it  was  owing  to  the  gods 
having  become  propitious,  or  to  the  more  unhealth\^  season 
of  the  y'car  being  now  past,  the  people  began  to  find  their 
health  gradually  restored.  And  now  their  attention  being  turn¬ 
ed  to  public  business,  several  interregna  having  expired,  Pub¬ 
lius  Valerius  Publicola,  on  the  third  day  after  he  had  entered 
on  the  office  of  interrex,  caused  Lucius  Lucretius  y  ^ 
Tricipitinus  and  Titus  Veturius,  or  Vetusius,  Gemi-  C.  460 
nus  to  be  elected  consuls.  These  assumed  their  office  on  the 
third  of  the  ides  of  August,  at  which  time  the  state  haS  recov¬ 
ered  its  strength  so  far  as  to  be  able  not  only  to  repel  an  attack 
but  to  act  offensively  on  occasion.  Wherefore, on  the  Hernici- 
ans  sending  information,  that  the  enemy  had  made  an  irrup¬ 
tion  into  their  frontiers,  they  cheerfully  promised  to  assist 
them.  Two  consular  armies  were  raised.  Veturius  wa*' 

216 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  292. 

sent  to  carry  on  an  offensive  war  against  the  Volscians.  Tri- 
cipitinus  being  appointed  to  protect  the  territories  of  the  al¬ 
lies  from  all  incursions,  proceeded  no  farther  than  the  coun¬ 
try  of  the  Hernicians.  Veturius,  in  the  first  engagement, 
routed  and  dispersed  his  enemy.  While  Lucretius  lay  en¬ 
camped  among  the  Hernicians,  a  party  of  plunderers,  unob¬ 
served  by  him,  marched  over  the  Prsenestine  mountains,  and 
from  thence  descended  into  the  plains.  I'hese  laid  waste  all 
the  country  about  Preeneste  and  Gabii,  and  from  the  latter 
turned  their  course  towards  the  high  grounds  of  Tusculum. 
Even  Rome  was  very  much  alarmed,  more  so  by  the  unex¬ 
pectedness  of  the  affair,  than  that  they  wanted  strength  to 
defend  themselves.  Quintus  Fabiua  had  the  command  in 
the  city.  He  armed  the  young  men,  posted  guards,  and 
soon  put  every  thing  into  a  state  of  safety  and  tranquillity. 
The  enemy  therefore  not  daring  to  approach  the  walls,  but 
hastily  carrying  off  whatever  they  could  find  in  the  adjacent 
places,  set  out  on  their  return,  making  a  long  circuit  and 
while  their  caution  relaxed,  in  proportion  as  they  removed 
to  a  greater  distance,  they  fell  in  with  the  consul  Lucretius, 
who,  having  procured  intelligence  of  all  their  motions,  lay 
with  his  troops  drawn  up  and  impaiient  for  the  combat. 
These  the  consul,  with  premeditated  resolution,  attacked, 
who,  terrified  and  thrown  into  disorder  by  this  sudden  ap¬ 
pearance  of  danger,  and  though  considerably  greater  in  num¬ 
ber,  were  easily  routed  and  put  to  flight.  He  then  drove 
them  into  deep  vallies,  from  which  being  surrounded  by  his 
troops,  it  was  difficult  to  escape.  On  this  occasion  the  Vol- 
scian  race  was  nearly  extinguished.  I  find  in  some  histories, 
that  thft*e  fell  in  the  field  and  the  pursuit,  thirteen  thousand 
four  hundred  and  seventy;  that  one  thousand  two  hundred 
and  fifty  were  made  prisoners;  and  that  twenty-seven  milita¬ 
ry  standards  were  taken.  However,  though,  in  those  ac¬ 
counts,  the  numbers  may  be  somewhat  exaggerated,  the 
slaughter  certainly  was  very  great.  The  victorious  consul, 

BOOK  III. 

217 

B.  C.  460.] 

possessed  of  an  immense  booty,  returned  to  his  former  post. 
The  consuls  then  made  a  junction  of  their  forces.  The  Vol- 
scians  and  iEquans  also  united  their  shattered  troops.  On 
which  ensued  the  third  battle  in  the  course  of  that  campaign. 
The  same  good  iortune  attended  the  Romans,  the  enemy  be¬ 
ing  routed  with  the  loss  of  his  camp. 
IX,  Thus  did  the  course  of  affairs  at  Rome  return  into 
its  former  channel,  and  successes  abroad  immediately  exci¬ 
ted  commotions  at  home.  Caius  Terentiilus  Arsa  was  tri¬ 
bune  of  the  people  that  year.  He,  taking  advantage  of  the 
absence  of  the  consuls,  as  an  opportunity  favourable  to  tribu« 
nitian  intrigues,  entertained  the  commons  for  several  days 
with  railings  against  the  arrogance  of  the  patricians;  but 
levelled  his  invectives  chiefly  against  the  consular  govern¬ 
ment,  as  possessing  an  exorbitant  degree  of  power,  and 
intolerable  in  a  free  state:  “  in  name,”  he  said,  it  was 
less  odious  than  regal  government;  while,  in  fact,  it  was 
rather  more  oppressive:  as,  instead  of  one  tyrant,  two  had 
been  set  over  them,  invested  with  immoderate  and  unlimited 
rule;  who,  while  they  themselves  wese  privileged  and  uncon¬ 
trolled,  directed  every  terror  of  the  laws,  and  every  kind  of 
severity  against  the  commons.  Now,  in  order  to  prevent 
their  continuing  foj*  ever  to  possess  this  arbitrary  influence, 
he  would  propose,  that  five  commissioners  be  appointed  to 
compose  a  set  of  laws  for  the  regulation  of  the  consular  go¬ 
vernment.  Whatever  share  of  authority  the  people  should 
think  proper  to  intrust  in  the  hands  of  the  consuls,  such  they 
should  enjoy;  but  they  should  not  hold  their  own  will  and 
absolute  determinations,  as  law.”  When  this  decree  was 
published,  the  patricians  were  filled  with  dread,  lest,  in  the 
absence  of  the  consuls,  the  yoke  might  be  imposed  on  them; 
the  senate  was  called  together  by  the  preefect  of  the  city, 
Quintus  Fabius,  who  inveighed  against  the  proposition,  and 
the  author  of  it,  with  such  vehemence,  as  to  omit  no  kind  of 
threats,  or  means  of  intimidation,  which  could  have  been 
VOL.  I, —  F  f 

218 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  292 

applied,  had  both  the  consuls,  provoked  to  the  highest,  stood 
beside  the  tribune.  He  urged,  that  “  this  man  had  lain  in 
ambush,  and  watching  his  opportunity,  had  made  an  assault 
on  the  commonwealth-  *If  the  gods,  in  their  anger,  had 
sent  a  tribune  like  him,  during  the  last  year,  while  sickness 
and  war  raged  together,  his  designs  could  not  have  been 
prevented.  When  both  the  consuls  were  dead,  and  the 
enfeebled  state  lay  overwhelmed  in  universal  anarchy  and 
confusion,  he  would  probably  have  introduced  laws  for 
abolishing  the  consular  government,  and  would  have  become 
a  leader  to  the  Volscians  and  ^Equans  in  an  attack  upon  the 
city.  And,  after  all,  where  was  the  occasion  for  such  a 
law?  If  a  consul,  in  his  behaviour  towards  the  citizens, 
proved  himself  arbitrary  or  cruel,  was  it  not  in  the  tribune’s 
power  to  bring  him  to  a  trial?  to  prosecute  him,  where  his 
judges  would  be  those  very  persons,  against  one  of  whom 
the  injury  was  committed?  His  manner  of  acting  tended 
to  render,  not  the  consular  goveniment,  but  the  office,  of 
tribune,  odious  and  intolerable,  because,  from  being  in  a 
state  of  peace  and  amity  with  the  patricians,  he  was  forcing 
it  back  into  the  old  evil  practices.  But  it  was  not  intended 
to  beseech  him  to  desist  from  proceeding  as  he  had  begun. 
Of  you,  the  other  tribunes,”  said  Fabiusj  “  we  request,  that 
ye  will,  first  of  all,  consider,  that  your  office  was  instituted 
for  the  protection  of  individuals,  and  not  for  the  destruction 
of  any  part  of  the  community;  that  ye  were  created  tribunes 
of  the  commons,  not  foes  of  the  patricians.  It  reflects  as 
much  dishonour  on  you,  as  it  does  concern  on  us,  that  the 
commonwealth  should  be  invaded  in  the  absence  of  its  chief 
magistrates.  Take  measures  with  your  colleague,  that  he 
may  adjourn  this  business  until  the  arrival  of  the  consuls,  ye 
will  not  hereby  lessen  your  rights,  but  ye  will  lessen  the 
odium  which  such  proceedings  must  excite.  Even  the 
iEquans  and  Volscians,  when  the  consuls  were  carried  off 
last  year  by  the  sickness,  refrained  from  adding  to  our 

BOOK  IIL 

B.  C.  460.] 

219 

afflictions  by  a  cruel  and  implacable  prosecution  of  war.’’ 
The  tribunes  accordingly  made  application  to  Terentillus, 
and  the  business  being  suspended,  in  appearance,  but,  in 
reality,  suppressed,  the  consuls  were  immediately  called 
home. 
X.  Lucretius  returned  with  a  very  great  quantity  of  spoil, 
and  much  greater  glory.  He  added  to  the  glory  which  he 
had  acquired,  by  exposing,  on  his  arrival,  all  the  spoil  in  the 
field  of  Mars,  in  order  that  every  one  should  have  an  op¬ 
portunity,  during  three  days,  to  recognize  and  carry  home 
his  share  of  the  same.  The  remainder,  u6t  having  claim¬ 
ants,  was  sold.  All  men  agreed  in  opinion,  that  a  triumph 
was  due  to  the  consul;  but  the  consideration  of  that  matter 
was  postponed,  because  the  tribune  had  renewed  his  at¬ 
tempts  to  carry  his  law;  and  this  was  deemed  by  the  consul 
an  affair  of  more  importance.  The  business  was  canvassed 
during  several  days,  both  in  the  senate,  and  the  assembly  of 
the  people:  at  length,  the  tribune  yielded  to  the  weight  of 
the  consul’s  authority,  and  desisted.  I'hen  was  paid  to  the 
consul  and  his  army,  the  honour  which  they  so  justly  merited. 
He  triumphed  over  the  Volscians  and  ^Equans,  his  own 
legions  attending  him  in  the  procession.  To  the  other  con¬ 
sul,  was  granted  the  honour  of  entering  the  city  in  ovation,* 
unattended  by  the  troops.  In  the  following  year,  the  law 
of  Terentillus,  supported  by  the  concurrence  of  all  the  tri¬ 
bunes,  again  assailed  the  consuls.  These  were  Pub-  y  R.  293. 
^  lius  Volumnius  and  ServiusSulpicius.  Inthisyear  the 
sky  appeared  on  fire,  and  a  violent  earthquake  happened;  it 
w^as  also  now  believed  that  an  ox  spoke,  an  incident  to  which 
in  the  last  yeat  credit  had  been  refused.  Among  other  pro¬ 
digies,  a  shower  of  flesh  fell,  which,  as  was  reported,  w  as 

*  Tiie  ovation  was  an  inferior  kind-  of  triumph,  in  which  the  victorious 
general  entered  the  city,  crowned  with  myrtle,  not  with  laurel;  and 
in'rtead  of  bullocks,  as  in  the  triumph,  sacrificed  a  sheep,  ovt^;  hence  the 

name. 

220 

HIS  rO*RY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  293. 
in  a  great  measure  intercepted  in  its  fall  by  a  vast  number 
of  birds  flying  about  the  place,  and  what  escaped  them,  lay 
scattered  on  the  ground  for  several  days,  without  any  degree 
of  putrefaction,  or  being  even  changed  in  smell.  The  books* 
Were  consulted  by  the  duumviri  presiding  over  sacred  rites, 
and  it  was  predicted  that  dangers  impended  from  a  con¬ 
course  of  foreigners,  that  an  attack  was  to  be  made  on  the 
higher  parts  of  the  city,  and  lives  lost  in  consequence;  among 
other  things,  warning  was  given,  that  all  seditious  practi¬ 
ces  should  be  avoided.  This  the  tribunes  cried  out  against, 
as  a  forgery,  contrived  for  the  purpose  of  hindering  the 
passing  of  their  law;  and  matters  were  tending  to  a  desperate 
contest;  when,  lo!  that  things  might  revolve  in  the  same 
circle  every  year,  the  Hernicians  brought  an  account,  that 
the  Volscians  and  ^quans,  notwithstanding  their  late  defeat, 
were  recruiting  their  armies;  that  their  chief  dependence 
was  upon  Antium;  that  the  people  of  that  colony  held  meet¬ 
ings  openly  at  Ecetra;  that  they  were  the  first  movers  of 
the  war,  and  composed  the  greatest  part  of  the  forces.  As 
soon  as  this  intelligence  was  communicated  to  the  senate,  an 
order  was  passed  for  levying  troops,  and  the  consuls^were 
directed  to  take  the  management  of  the  war  between  them, 
*  These  were  the  famous  sibylline  books,  purchased,  it  was  said,  by 
Tarqninius  Superbus,  from  an  old  woman  w  hom  nobody  knew,  and  who 
was  never  seen  again.  These  books,  wijich  were  supposed  to  contain 
prophetic  information  of  the  fate  and  fortune  of  the  Roman  state,  were 
carefully  reposited  in  a  stone  chest,  in  a  vault  under  the  Capitol,  and  two 
officers  chosen  from  the  order  of  patricians,  called  duumviri  sacrorum^ 
appointed  to  take  care  of  them.  The  number  of  these  was  afterwards  in 
creased  to  ten,  half  of  whom  w'ere  plebeians;  then  to  fifteen,  upon  which 
occasion  they  were  called  Quiridecemviri;  w  hich  name  they  retained 
when  augmented  to  sixty.  Upon  occasions  of  extreme  danger,  of  pesti¬ 
lence,  or  the  appearance  of  any  extraordinary  prodigies,  these  officers 
were  ordered  by  the  senate  to  consult,  or  lo  pretend  to  consult,  the  hoicks, 
and  they  reported  what  expiations  and  other  rites  were  necessary  to  avert 
ithe  impending  evil. 

BOOK  III. 

221 

B.  C,  459J 
so  that  one  should  have  the  Volscians  as  his  province,  the 
other  the  jEquans.  The  tribunes  -exclaimed  loudly  to  their 
faces  in  the  Forum  that  “  this  Volscian  war  was  but  a  con¬ 
certed  farce;  that  the  Hernicians  had  been  instructed  how  tp 
act  their  part  in  it;  that  now  the  Roman  people  were  not  de¬ 
prived  of  liberty  by  manly  efforts,  but  cheated  out  of  it  by 
cunning.  That  because  it  was  incredible,  that  the  Volscians 
and  iEquans,  who  were  almost  exterminated,  could  of  them¬ 
selves  commence  hostilities,  new  enemies  had  been  sought 
for,  and  slanders  thrown  on  a  loyal  colony  closely  connected 
with  Rome;  that  the  war  was  proclaimed,  indeed,  against 
the  unoffending  people  of  Antium,  but  waged  against  the 
commons  of  Rome,  whom  they  intended  to  lead  out  of  the 
city  with  precipitate  haste,  loaded  with  arms,  thus  wreaking 
their  vengeance  on  the  tribunes  b}^  the  expulsion  and  banish¬ 
ment  of  the  citizens.  That  by  these  means,  and  let  not 
people  think  there  was  any  other  design,  all  efforts  in  favour 
of  the  law  would  be  effectually  overpowered,  if  they  did 
not,  before  matters  proceeded  farther,  while  they  were  yet  at 
home,  and  retained  the  garb  of  citizens,  adopt  such  measures 
as  would  prevent  their  being  driven  out  of  possession  of  the 
city,  and  obliged  to  submit  to  the  yoke.  If  they  had  spirit, 
they  should  not  want  support;  the  tribunes  were  all  unani¬ 
mous  in  their  favour;  there  was  no  danger,  no  rea^n  of 
apprehension  from  abroad.  The  gods  had  taken  care  the 
year  before,  that  they  might  now  stand  up  with  safety  in 
defence  of  their  liberty.”  Such  was  the  language  of  the 
tribunes. 
XL  But,  on  the  other  side,  the  consuls,  fixing  their  chairs 
within  view  of  them,  began  to  proceed  in  the  levy;  thither 
the  tribunes  hastened,  and  drew  the  assembly  with  them.  A 
few  were  cited  by  way  of  experiment,  and  immediately  out¬ 
rages  commenced.  Whenever  a  lictor,  by  the  consul’s  com¬ 
mand,  laid  hold  of  any  person,  a  tribune  ordered  him  to  be 
set  at  liberty.  Nor  did  either  party  confine  themselves  within 

222 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  295. 
the  limits  of  that  authority,  to  which  their  office  entitled 
them;  every  measure  taken  was  to  be  supported  by  force. 
The  same  line  of  conduct,  which  the  tribunes  had  observed 
in  obstructing  the  levy,  was  followed  by  the  consuls  in  their 
opposition  to  the  law,  which  was  brought  forward  on  every 
day  whereon  an  assembly  could  be  held.  The  riot  was  con¬ 
tinued  by  the  patricians  refusing  to  withdraw,  after  the  tri¬ 
bunes  had  ordered  the  people  to  proceed  to  the  place  of 
voting.  The  elder  citizens  hardly  ever  attended  the  meet¬ 
ings  on  this  affair,  by  reason  that  they  were  not  regulated  by 
prudence,  but  abandoned  to  the  direction  of  rashness  and 
violence;  and  the  consuls  generally  kept  out  of  the  way,  lest, 
in  such  general  confusion,  they  should  expose  their  dignity 
to  insult.  There  was  a  young  man,  called  Cseso  Quintius, 
full  of  presumption,  on  account  both  of  the  nobility  of  his 
descent,  and  his  personal  size  and  strength;  to  these  qualifi¬ 
cations  bestowed  by  the  gods,  he  added  many  warlike  ac¬ 
complishments,  and  had  evinced  a  considerable  degree  of 
eloquence  in  the  Forum,  insomuch  that  no  person  in  the 
state  was  deemed  to  possess  greater  abilities,  either  for  act¬ 
ing  or  speaking.  This  man  having  placed  himself  in  the  midst 
of  the  body  of  the  patricians,  conspicuous  in  stature  above 
the  rest,  and  as  if  he  carried  in  bis  eloquence  and  bodily 
strength,  every  power  of  the  consulship  or  dictatorship,  with¬ 
stood  by  his  single  efforts  the  attacks  of  the  tribunes,  and  the 
whole  popular  storm.  In  consequence  of  his  exertions,  the 
tribunes  were  often  driven  out  of  the  Forum,  and  the  com¬ 
mons  routed  and  dispersed.  Such  of  them  as  came  in  his 
way,  he  caused  to  be  stripped,  and  otherwise  severely  han¬ 
dled;  so  that  every  one  saw,  that  if  he  were  allowed  to  pro¬ 
ceed  in  this  manner,  it  would  be  impossible  to  carry  the  law. 
At  this  juncture,  when  the  tribunes  were  almost  reduced  to 
despair,  Aulus  Virginius,  one  of  their  body,  instituted  a 
criminal  prosecution  on  a  capital  charge  against  Caeso.  But 
by  this  proceeding  he  rather  irritated  than  repressed  his 

B.  e.  459.] 

BOOK  III. 

223 

impetuous  temper:  he  thence  became  the  more  vehement  in 
his  opposition  to  the  law,  persecuted  the  commons,  and  ha¬ 
rassed  the  tribunes,  in  a  manner,  with  open  hostilities.  The 
prosecutor  suffered  the  accused  to  run  headlong  to  ruin,  and 
to  draw  down  on  himself  such  a  degree  of  public  displeasure, 
as  would  serve  to  inflame  men’s  minds  on  the  charges  which 
he  had  brought  against  him,  and  in  the  meantime  frequently 
introduced  the  law,  not  so  much  in  hope  of  carrying  it 
through,  as  with  design  to  provoke  the  rashftess  of  Cseso. 
Many  inconsiderate  expressions  and  actions,  which  often 
passed  on  these  occasions  among  the  young  men,  were  all, 
through  the  general  prejudice  against  him,  imputed  to  Ceeso’s 
■violent  temper.  The  law,  however,  was  still  opposed,  and 
A  ulus  Virginius  frequently  observed  to  the  people,  “  Do  ye 
not  perceive,  Romans,  that  it  is  impossible  for  you  to  have,  at 
the  same  time,  Cceso  among  the  number  of  your  citizens,  and 
this  law  which  ye  wish  for?  Though  why  do  1  speak  of  this 
law?  Your  liberty  is  endangered  by  him;  he  surpasses,  in 
tyrannical  pride,  all  the  Tarquinii  together:  wait  until  he  is 
made  consul  or  dictator,  whom  ye  now  behold  in  a  private 
station,  exerting  all  the  prerogatives  of  royalty.”  He  was 
supported  in  these  invectives  by  great  numbers,  who  com¬ 
plained  of  being  personally  abused  by  Cseso,  and  importuned 
the  tribune  to  go  through  with  the  prosecution. 
XI L  The  day  of  trial  now  approached,  and  it  was  mani¬ 
fest  that  the  people  in  general’had  conceived  an  opinion,  that 
the  existence  of  their  liberty  depended  upon  the  condemna¬ 
tion  of  Cseso.  Then  at  length  he  \vas  compelled,  though  not 
without  indignation,  to  solicit  the  favour  of  each;  he  was  fol¬ 
lowed  by  his  relations,  who  were  the  principal  persons  in 
the  state.  Titus  Quintius  Capitolmus,  who  had  been  thrice 
consul,  after  recounting  many  honourable  achievements  of 
his  own,  and  of  his  family,  affirmed,  that  there  never  had 
appeared,  either  in  the  Quintian  family,  or  in  the  Roman 
state,  any  person  possessed  of  such  a  capacity,  and  who  ex~ 

224 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  293. 

hibited  so  early,  such  displays  of  valour.  That  he  served  his 
first  campaign  under  himself,  and  had  often  in  his  sight  fought 
with  the  enemy.’’  Spurius  Furius  declared  that  he  had,  by 
order  of  Quintius  Capitolinus,  come  to  his  relief,  when  in  a 
dangerous  situation;  and  that  there  was  no  one  person  to 
whom  he  thought  the  public  so  much  indebted  for  the  re¬ 
storation  of  their  affairs.”  Lucius  Lucretius,  consul  the  pre¬ 
ceding  year,  in  the  full  splendour  of  fresh  glory,  atributed 
to  Casso  a  share  of  his  own  merits;  enumerated  the  battles  he 
had  been  engaged  in;  related  extraordinary  instances  of  his 
good  behaviour,  both  on  expeditions  and  in  the  field;  advised 
and  warned  them,  rather  ‘‘  to  preserve  among  themselves, 
than  to  drive  into  a  foreign  country,  a  youth  of  such  extra¬ 
ordinary  merit,  endowed  with  every  accomplishment  which 
nature  and  fortune  could  bestow,  and  who  would  prove  a 
vast  accession  to  the  interest  of  any  state,  of  which  he  should 
become  a  member.  That  the  only  parts  in  his  character 
which  could  give  offence,  heat  and  vehemence,  diminished 
daily,  as  he  advanced  in  age;  while  the  only  requisite  want¬ 
ing,  namely,  prudence,  was  continually  gathering  strength: 
that  as  his  faults  were  on  the  decline,  and  his  virtues  ad¬ 
vancing  to  maturity,  they  should  allow  a  man  of  such  rare 
talents  to  become  an  old  member  of  their  community.”  Along 
with  these,  his  father,  Lucius  Quintius,  surnamed  Cincinna- 
tu8,  not  dwelling  on  his  praises,  for  fear  of  heightening  the 
public  displeasure,  but  intreating  their  forgiveness  for  his 
mistakes  and  his  youth,  besought  them  to  pardon  the  son  for 
the  sake  of  him  who,  neither  in  word  or  deed,  had  ever  given 
offence  to  any.  But  some,  either  through  respect  or  fear, 
avoided  listening  to  hisr  intreaties;  while  others,  complaining 
of  the  ill  treatment  which  they  and  their  friends  had  receiv¬ 
ed,  showed  beforehand,  by  their  harsh  answers,  what  their 
sentence  would  be. 
XIII.  Besides  the  notorious  instances  of  the  ill  conduct 
of  the  accused,  there  was  one  charge  which  bore  heavily  on 

BOOK  HI. 

225 

B.  C.  459.3 
him:  Marcus  Volscius  Fictor,  who  some  years  before  had 
been  tribune  of  the  people,  stood  forth  and  testified,  that  a 
short  time  after  the  pestilence  in  the  city,  he  met  with  a 
number  of  young  men  rioting  in  the  Suburra;*  that  a  scuffle 
ensued,  and  that  his  brother,  who  was  advanced  in  years, 
and  not  thoroughly  recovered  from  the  disorder,  received 
from  Cseso  a  blow  of  his  fist,  which  felled  him  to  the  ground; 
that  he  was  carried  home  from  thence,  and  that  he  believed 
this  blow  was  the  cause  of  his  death;  but  that  he  was  pre- 
vented  from  prosecuting  him  for  such  an  atrocious  act,  by 
the  consuls  of  the  preceding  years.”  The  loud  asseverations 
of  Volscius  on  the  matter  so  enraged  the  people,  that  they 
could  hardly  be  restrained  from  falling  on  Ceeso,  and  putting 
him  to  death,  Virginius  ordered  him  to  be  seized  and  car¬ 
ried  to  prison:  the  patricians  opposed  force  to  force.  Titus 
Quintius  exclaimed,  that  a  person  formally  accused  of  a 
capital  crime,  whose  trial  was  shortly  to  come  on,  ought  not, 
before  trial,  and  without  sentence  passed,  to  suffer  violence.” 
The  tribune  declared,  that  he  had  no  intention  of  inflicting 
pains  before  condemnation,  but  that  he  would  keep  him  in 
custody  until  the  day  of  trial,  that  the  Roman  people  might 
have  it  in  their  power  to  punish  the  man  who  had  been  guil¬ 
ty  of  murder.”  The  other  tribunes  being  appealed  to,  re¬ 
solved  on  a  middle  course,  and  thereby  avoided  every  im¬ 
peachment  of  their  right  to  give  protection;  they  forbade  his 
being  put  in  confinement,  and  declared  it  as  their  determina¬ 
tion,  that  Cseso  should  give  bail  for  his  appearance,  and  that 
a  sum  of  money  should  be  secured  to  the  people,  in  case  of 
his  failing  so  to  do.  The  sum  in  which  it  was  reasonable 
that  the  sureties  should  be  bound,  came  then  to  be  discussed; 
it  was  refered  to  the  senate;  and  until  they  should  come  to  a 
resolution,  the  accused  was  detained  in  the  public  assembly. 
It  was  determined  that  he  should  find  sureties,  and  that  each 
*  A  part  of  the  tow'n,  so  called. 
VOL.  1. — G  g 

226 

HISTORY  OF  HOME. 

[Y.  R.  293. 

surety  should  be  bound  to  the  amount  of  three  tlunuiand 
asses:*  the  number  of  sureties  to  be  furnished  was  teft  to 
the  decision  of  the  tribunes;  they  fixed  it  at  ten,  and  on  that 
number  being  bound,  the  prosecutor  consented  that  the  of* 
fender  should  be  admitted  to  bail.  He  was  the  first  who 
gave  bail,  in  this  manner,  where  the  peimlty  was  to  be  ap¬ 
plied  to  the  use  of  the  public.  Being  dismissed  from  the 
Forum,  he  went  the  night  following  into  exile  among  the 
Etrurians,  On  the  day  appointed  for  his  trial  it  was  pleaded 
in  his  favour,  that  he  had  gone  into  exile;  nevertheless,  Vir- 
ginius  presiding  in  the  assembly,  his  colleagues,  on  being 
appealed  to,  dismissed  the  meeting,  and  the  forfeited  money 
was  exacted  from  his  father  with  such  severity,  that  all  his 
property  being  sold,  he  lived  for  a  long  time  in  an  obscure 
cottage  beyond  the^  Tiber,  as  if  banished  from  his  country. 
This  trial,  and  the  proceedings  about  the  law,  gave  full  em¬ 
ployment  to  the  state.  Thef?was  no  disturbance  from  foreign 
enemies.  ^ 
XIV.  The  tribunes,  flushed  with  this  success,  imagined, 
from  the  dismay  into  which  the  patricians  had  been  thrown 
by  the  exile  of  Cgeso,  that  the  passing  of  the  law  was  al¬ 
most  certain.  But  though  the  elder  patricians  had  in  fact 
relinquished  the  administration  of  affairs,  the  younger  part 
of  them,  especially  those  who  were  Cseso’s  friends,  instead 
of  suffering  their  spirits  to  droop,  assumed  a  higher  degree 
of  vehemence  in  their  rage  against  the  commons.  Yet  in 
one  particular  they  improved  their  plan  exceedingly,  which 
was  by  moderation.  The  first  time,  indeed,  after  Cseso’s  ba¬ 
nishment,  when  the  law  in  all  their  proceedings  became  the 
question,  having  prepared  themselves  for  the  occasion,  and 
formed  in  a  body  with  a  great  band  of  their  dependents, 
they,  as  soon  as  the  tribunes  afforded  a  pretext  by  ordering 
them  to  retire,  attacked  the  people  furiously,  and  all  exerted 

^  91.  13«.  6il. 

BOOK  IIL 

227 

B.  C,459.] 
ih^m^rcs  with  activity  so  equals  that  no  one  carried  home 
a  greater  share  than  another,  either  of  honour  or  of  iU-wiUj 
while  the  commons  complmned,  that  a  thousand  Ceesos  had 
started  up  in  the  room  of  one.  During  the  intermediate 
days,  however,  in  which  the  tribunes  brought  forward  no 
proceedings  respecting  the  law,  nothing  could  be  more  mild 
and  peaceable  than  these  same  personsj  they  saluted  the  ple¬ 
beians  kindly;  entered  into  conversation  with  them;  invited 
them  to  their  houses;  took  care  of  their  affairs  in  the  Forum, 
and  allowed  even  the  tribunes  themselves  to  hold  meetings 
for  any  other  purposes  without  interruption*  In  a  word, 
they  showed  no  kind  of  incivility  to  any,  either  in  public  or 
private,  except  when  the  business  of  the  law  began  to  be 
agitated.  On  other  occasions,  as  I  have  said,  the  behaviour 
of  the  young  patricians  was  popular,  and  the  tribunes  not 
only  executed  the  rest  of  their  business  without  disturbance, 
but  were  even  re-elected  for  the  following  year  without  one 
offensive  expression,  much  less  any  violence  being  used.  By 
thus  soothing  and  managing  the  commons,  they  rendered 
them,  by  degrees,  more  tractable,  and  by  these  methods  the 
passing  of  the  law  was  evaded  during  that  whole  year. 
XV.  The  succeeding  consuls,  Caius  Cladius,  ^  ^ 
son  of  Appius,  and  Publius  Valerius  found,  on  en-  B.  C.4^. 
tering  on  the  office,  the  commonwealth  in  a  state  of  perfect 
tranquillity.  The  new  year  had  brought  no  change  in  affairs. 
The  thoughts  of  every  member  of  the  state  were  occupied, 
either  in  wishes  for  the  passing  of  the  law,  or  in  apprehen¬ 
sions  of  being  obliged  to  submit  to  it.  The  more  the  youn¬ 
ger  patricians  endeavoured  to  insinuate  themselves  into  the 
favour  of  the  commons,  the  more  earnestly  did  the  tribunes 
strive  to  counteract  them;  exciting  suspicions  to  their  pre¬ 
judice  in  the  minds  of  the  populace;  and  asserting,  that 
there  was  a  conspiracy  formed.  They  maintained  likewise, 
that  Cffiso  was  at  Rome;  that  plans  had  been  concerted  for 
putting  the  tribunes  to  death,  and  massacring  the  commons: 

228 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  294. 

that  the  elder  patricians  had  engaged  the  younger  to  abolish 
the  office  of  tribune,  and  to  reduce  the  state  to  the  same  form 
which  had  subsisted  before  the  secession  to  the  sacred 
mount.  While  fears  were  entertained  of  an  attack  from  the 
Volscians  and  JSquans,  which  had  now  become  a  stated  mat¬ 
ter,  and  occurred  regularly  almost  every  year,  a  new  danger 
made  its  appearance  nearer  home.  A  number  of  exiles  and 
slaves,  amounting  to  four  thousand  five  hundred,  under  the 
command  of  Appius  Herdonius  a  Sabine,  seized  on  the  Ca¬ 
pitol  and  citadel  by  night,  and  put  to  death  all  those  in  the 
latter,  who  refused  to  join  the  conspiracy,  and  take  arms 
along  with  them.  Some,  during  this  tumult,  ran  down  to 
the  Forum  with  all  the  precipitance  which  their  fright  in¬ 
spired,  and  the  cries  of,  “  to  arms,”  and  “  the  enemy  are  in 
the  city,”  resounded  alternately.  The  consuls  were  afraid 
either  to  arm  the  commons,  or  let  them  remain  without  arms, 
not  knowing  what  this  peril  was,  which  had  so  suddenly  as¬ 
sailed  the  city^  whether  it  was  occasioned  by  foreign  or  do¬ 
mestic  forces;  whether  by  the  disaffection  of  the  commons, 
or  the  treachery  of  the  slaves.  They  exerted  themselves 
to  quiet  the  tumults;  but,  not  unfrequently,  these  very  en¬ 
deavours  served  but  to  exasperate  them  the  more:  for  it  was 
impossible,  in  such  a  state  of  terror  and  consternation,  to 
make  the  populace  obey  command.  They  gave  them  arms 
notwithstanding,  but  not  to  all  without  distinction,  only  to 
such  as  they  could  safely  rely  on  in  all  emergences,  not  yet 
knowing  with  what  enemy  they  had  to  contend.  The  rest 
of  the  night  was  passed  in  posting  guards  in  proper  places 
all  over  the  city,  the  magistrates  still  remaining  in  anxious 
suspense,  and  unable  to  find  out  who  the  enemy  were,  or 
what  their  number*  Daylight  then  arriving,  made  a  dis¬ 
covery  of  the  insurgents,  and  of  their  leader:  Appius  Her¬ 
donius  from  the  Capitol  invited  the  slaves  to  Ul^rty,  telling 
them  that  he  had  undertaken  the  cause  of  all  the  unfortu*- 
nate,  with  intent  of  restoring  to  their  country  those  who  had 

BOOK  III. 

229 

B.  C.  458.] 
been  unjustly  driven  into  banishment,  and  of  delivering 
those  who  groaned  under  the  grievous  yoke  of  slavery. 
He  rather  wished  that  this  might  be  accomplished  by  the  vo¬ 
luntary  act  of  the  Roman  people:  but  if  it  was  not  to  be  so 
effected,  he  would  rouse  the  Volscians  and  ^Equans  in  the 
cause,  and  would  persevere  in  the  attempt  to  the  utmost  ex- 
tretnity.” 
XV L  Tfe  affair  appeared  now  to  the  consuls  and  senate 
in  a  less  formidable  light,  yet  they  still  dreaded  lest,  besides 
the  purposes  which  were  declared,  that  this  might  be  a 
scheme  of  the  Veientians  or  the  Sabines;  and  that  the  disaf¬ 
fected  might,  in  consequence  of  a  concerted  plan,  be  sup¬ 
ported  presently  by  the  Sabine  and  Etrurian  legions;  and 
that  their  everlasting  enemies,  the  Volscians  and  iEquans, 
might  come,  not,  as  formerly,  to  ravage  the  country,  but  to 
seize  on  the  city,  which  their  favourers  already*  possessed 
in  part.  Many  and  various  were  their  fears,  the  principal  of 
which  was  their  dread  of  the  slaves,  lest  every  one  should 
find  in  his  own  house  an  enemy,  whom  it  was  neither  safe 
to  trust,  nor,  by  apparent  distrust,  to  provoke  to  infidelity 
and  hate.  So  critical,  indeed,  was  their  situation,  that,  had 
perfect  harmony  subsisted  in  the  state,  they  coidd  scarcely 
hope  to  be  extricated  from  it.  But  amidst  the  crowd  of 
dangers  which  started  up  on  every  side,  no  one  had  any  ap¬ 
prehensions  from  the  turbulence  of  the  tribunes  or  the  com 
mons:  that  was  deemed  an  evil  of  a  milder  nature;  and 
which,  as  it  always  began  to  operate  in  times  undisturbed  by 
foreign  affairs,  they  supposed  would  now  be  at  rest.  Yet 
this  alone  proved  the  heaviest  aggravation  of  their  distress;  for 
such  madness  possessed  the  tribui^s,  that  they  insisted  that 
they  were  not  enemies,  but  people  under  the  appearance  of  ene¬ 
mies,  who  had  seized  on  the  capitol,for  the  purpose  of  diverting 
the  attention  of  the  commons  from  the  business  of  the  law; 
and  that  these  guests  and  dependants  of  the  patricians,  if  the 
law  were  once  passed,  and  it  were  perceived  that  the  tumults, 

230 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.294. 

which  they  raised,  had  not  answered  their  purpose,  would 
depart  in  greater  silence  than  they  came.  They  then  called 
away  the  people  from  their  arms,  and  held  an  assembly  for 
passing  the  law.  In  the  mean  time,  the  consuls  convened  the 
sena^,  more  terrified  by  the  danger  apprehended  from  the 
tribunes,  than  from  the  exiles  and  slaves. 
XVII.  On  hearing  that  the  people  were  laying  down  their 
arms,  and  quitting  their  posts,  Publius  Valerius,  leaving  his 
colleague  to  preside  in  the  senate,  rushed  forth  from  the  se¬ 
nate-house,  and  came  to  the  assembly  of  the  tribunes,  whom 
he  thus  accosted:  “  What  mean  ye,  tribunes,  by  these  pro¬ 
ceedings?  Do  ye  intend,  under  the  command  and  auspices 
of  Appius  Herdonius,  to  overturn  the  commonwealth?  Has 
he  been  successful  in  corrupting  you,  though  he  had  not  au¬ 
thority  sufficient  to  influence  the  slaves?  Do  ye  think  this  a 
proper  time,  when  the  foe  is  within  our  walls,  for  arms  to 
be  laid  aside,  and  laws  to  be  proposed?”  Then  directing  his 
discourse  to  the  populace,  “  If,  Romans,  ye  are  unconcern¬ 
ed  for  the  city  and  for  yourselves,  yet  pay  respect  to  the 
gods  of. your  country,  now  taken  captive.  Jupiter  supreme¬ 
ly  good  and  great,  Juno  queen  of  heaven,  Minerva,  with  the 
other  gods  and  goddesses,  are  held  in  confinement:  a  band  of 
slaves  occupies  the  residence  of  the  tutelar  deities  of  the 
state.  Do  ye  think  this  method  of  acting  consistent  with 
sound  policy?  These  slaves  have  a  powerful  force,  not  only 
within  the  walls,  but  in  the  citadel,  looking  down  on  the  Fo¬ 
rum  and  the  senate-house;  meanwhile,  in  the  Forum, ^re  as¬ 
semblies  of  the  people;  in  the  senate-house,  the  senate  sitting; 
just  as  in  time  of  perfect  tranquillity  the  senator  gives  bis 
opinion,  the  other  Romans  their  votes.  Ought  not  every 
man,  as  well  of  the  patricians  as  commoners,  the  consul,  tri¬ 
bunes,  citizens,  all  in  short,  to  have  snatched  up  arms  in 
such  a  cause,  to  have  run  to  the  capitol,  to  have  restored  to 
liberty  and  peace  that  most  august  residence  of  the  supreme¬ 
ly  good  and  great  Jupiter?  O  father  Romulus,  grant  to  thine 

BOOK  III. 

231 

B.  C.  458.] 

offspring  that  spirit,  by  which  thou  formerly  recoveredst  the 
citadel  from  these  same  Sabines,  when  they  had  got  posses¬ 
sion  of  it  by  means  of  gold.  Direct  them  to  pursue  the 
same  path,  in  which  thou  ledst  the  way,  and  which  thine  ar¬ 
my  followed,  Lo,  I  as  consul  will  be  the  first  to  follow  thee 
and  thy  footsteps,  as  far  as  a  mortal  can  follow  a  divinity.’' 
The  conclusion  of  his  speech  was,  that  “  he  now  took  up 
arms,  and^lummoned  every  citizen  of  Rome  to  arms.  If 
any  one  should  attempt  to  prevent  the  execution  of  this 
order,  he  would  never, he  said,  “  regard  the  extent  of 
the  consular  authority,  nor  of  the  tribunitian  power,  nor  the 
devoting  laws;  but,  be  he  who  he  might,  or  where  he  might, 
whether  in  the  capitol,  or  in  the  Forum,  he  would  treat  him 
as  an  enemy.  Let  the  tribunes,  then,  give  orders  for  arm¬ 
ing  against  Publius  Valerius  the  consul,  since  they  had  for¬ 
bidden  it  against  Appius  Herdonius,  and  he  would  not  he¬ 
sitate  to  use  those  tribunes,  in  the  same  manner  which  the 
founder  of  his  family  had  the  spirit  to  show  towards  kings*” 
On  this  declaration,  every  one  expected  the  utmost  degree 
of  violence,  and  that  the  enemy  would  be  gratified  with  the 
sight  of  a  civil  war  among  the  Romans.  Yet  neither  could 
the  law  be  carried,  nor  the  consul  march  to  the  capitol;  night 
coming  on,  put  a  stop  to  the  contests;  and  the  tribunes  dread¬ 
ing  the  armed  attendants  of  the  consuls,  retired.  And  as 
soon  as  the  fomenters  of  sedition  had  withdrawn,  the*  pa¬ 
tricians  went  about  among  the  commons,  and  introducing 
themselves  into  their  circles  of  conversation,  threw  out  dis¬ 
courses  adapted  to  the  juncture,  advising  them  to»‘*  consider 
well  into  what  hazards  they  were  bringing  the  common¬ 
wealth;”  telling  them,  that  “  the  contest  was  not  between 
the  patricians  and  plebeians,  but  whether  the  patricians  and 
plebeians  together  the  fortress  of  the  city,  the  temples  of  the 
gods,  and  the  guardian  deities  of  the  state,  and  of  private 
families,  should  all  be  given  up  into  the  hrnids  of  the  ene¬ 
my.”  While  these  measures  were  employed  in  the  Forum 

232 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  294. 

to  appease  the  dissensions,  the  consuls  had  gone  to  visit  the 
gates  and  walls,  lest  the  Sabines  or  Veientians  might  make 
any  hostile  attempt. 
XVIII,  The  same  night,  messengers  arrived  at  Tuscu- 
ium,  with  accounts  of  the  citadel  being  taken,  the  capitol 
seized,  and  of  the  other  disturbances  which  had  taken  place 
in  the  city-  Lucius  Mamilius  was  at  that  time  dictator  at 
TuscuUim.  He  instantly  assembled  the  senate,  introdu¬ 
cing  the  messengers,  warmly  recommended,  that  “  they 
should  not  wait  until  ambassadors  might  arrive  from  Rome 
to  request  assistance,  but  instantly  send  it;  the  danger  and 
distress  of  their  allies,  with  the  gods,  who  witnessed  their 
alliance,  and  the  faith  of  treaties,  demanded  it.  That  the 
deities  would  never  afford  them  again  perhaps  so  good  an 
opportunity  of  engaging  the  gratitude  of  so  powerful  a  state, 
and  so  near  a  neighbour/’  It  was  immediately  resolved? 
that  assistance  should  be  sent;  and  the  youth  were  enrolled 
and  armed.  Coming  to  Rome  at  day  break,  they  were  at  a 
distance  taken  for  enemies;  it  was  imagined  that  they  were 
the  ^quans  or  the  Volscians;  but  this  groundless  alarm 
being  removed,  they  were  received  into  the  city,  and  march¬ 
ed  down  in  a  body  to  the  Forum,  where  Publius  Valerius, 
having  left  his  colleague  to  secure  the  gates,  was  employed 
at  the  time  in  drawing  up  the  people  in  order  of  battle. 
The^  had  been  prevailed  on  to  arm  by  the  confidence  pla¬ 
ced  in  his  promises,  when  he  assured  them,  that,  as  soon 
as  the  capitol  should  be  recovered,  and  peace  restored  in  the 
city,  if  they  would  suffer  themselves  to  be  convinced  of  the 
dangerous  designs  that  lurked  under  the  law  proposed  by 
the  tribunes,  he  would  give  no  obstruction  to  the  assembly 
of  the  people,  mindful  of  his  ancestors,  mindful  of  his  sur¬ 
name,  by  which,  attention  to  promote  the  interest  of  the 
community  was  handed  down  to  him,  as  an  inheritance  from 
his  ancestors.”  Led  by  him,  then,  and  notwithstanding  that 
the  tribunes  cried  out.  loudly  against  it,  they  directed  their 

BOOK  IIL 

233 

B.  C  458.] 
inarch  up  the  steep  of  the  capitoh  They  were  jdmed  by 
the  troops  of  Tusculum;  and  citizens  and  allies  vied  with 
each  other  for  the  glory  of  recovering  the  citadel;  each  lead¬ 
er  encouraging  his  own  men.  The  besieged,  on  this,  were 
greatly  terrified,  having  no  reliance  on  any  thing  but  the 
strength  of  the  place;  and  while  they  were  thus  disconcerted, 
the  Romans  and  allies  pushed  forward  to  the  assault.  They 
had  already  broken  into  the  porch  of  the  temple,  when  Ptdb- 
lius  Valerius,  leading  on  the  attack,  was  slain  at  the  head  of 
his  men.  Publius  Volumnius,  formerly  ccmsul,  saw  him 
fall,  and  charging  those  about  him  to  cover  the  body,  rush¬ 
ed  forward  to  take  the  place  and  the  office  of  the  consul. 
The  ardour  and  eagerness  of  the  soldiers  were  such,  as  hin¬ 
dered  their  perceiving  so  great  a  loss,  and  they  gained  the 
victory,  before  they  knew  that  they  were  fighting  without 
their  leader.  Many  of  the  exiles  defiled  the  temple  with 
their  blood;  many  were  taken  alive;  Herdonius  was  slain. 
Thus  was  the  capitol  recovered.  Punishments  were  indict¬ 
ed  on  the  prisoners,  suitable  to  their  several  conditions  ei¬ 
ther  of  freemen  or  slaves.  Thanks  were  given  to  the  Tus- 
culans.  I'he  capitol  was  cleansed  and  purified.  It  is  said, 
that  the  plebeians  threw  into  the  consul’s  house  a  quadrans 
each,  that  his  funeral  might  be  solemnized  with  the  greater 
splendour. 
XIX.  Peace  being  re-established,  tlie  tribunes  earnestly 
pressed  the  senate  to  fulfil  the  promise  of  Publius  Valerius, 
and  pressed  Claudius  to  acquit  the  shade  of  his  colleague  of 
breach  of  faith,  and  suffer  the  business  of  the  law  to  proceed. 
The  consul  declared,  that  he  would  not  listen  to  the  matter, 
until  he  should  have  a  colleague  appointed  in  the  room  of 
the  deceased.  The  disputes  on  this  subject  lasted  until  the 
assembly  was  held  for  substituting  a  consul.  In  the  month 
of  December,  in  consequence  of  very  zealous  efforts  of  the 
patricians,  Lucius  Quintms  Cincinnatus,  father  of  C®^o,  was 
elected  consul,  to  enter  on  his  office  without  delay.  The 
VOL.  I— H  h 

234 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

fY.  R.  294. 

commofiS  wcte  qui^  dismayed^  on  Ihidifig,  that  they  were  to 
have  for  consul  a  person  highly  incensed  against  them, 
and  whose  power  was  strengthened  by  the  support  of  the  pa* 
trkians,  by  his  own  merit,  and  by  three  sons,  no  one  of 
whom  was  inferior  to  Cseso  in  greatness  of  spirit,  while 
they  excelled  him  in  prudence  and  moderation  on  proper  oc* 
casions.  When  he  came  into  office,  in  the  frequent  ha¬ 
rangues  which  he  made  from  the  tribunal,  he  showed  not 
more  vehemence  in  his  censures  of  the  commons,  than  in  his 
reproofs  to  the  senate,  ‘‘through  the  indolence  of  which 
body,^’  he  said,  “  the  tribunes,  now  become  perpetual,  by 
means  of  their  harangues  and  prosecutions,  exercised  sove¬ 
reign  authority,  as  if  they  were  not  in  a  republic  of  Roman 
citizens,  but  in  an  ill  regulated  family.  That,  together  with 
his  son  Cseso,  fortitude,  constancy,  and  every  qualification 
that  gives  ornament  to  youth,  either  in  war  or  peace,  had 
been  driven  out  and  banished  from  the  city  of  Rome;  while 
talkative,  seditious  men,  sowers  of  dissension,  twice  and 
even  thrice  re-elected  tribunes,  spent  their  lives  in  the  most 
pernicious  practices,  and  in  the  exercise  of  regal  tyranny. 
Did  Aulus  Virginius,’’  said  he,  “  because  he  was  not  in  the 
Capitol,  deserve  less  severe  punishment  than  Appius  Herdo- 
nius  would  have  merited?  More,  undoubtedly,  if  we  judge 
fairly  of  the  matter.  Herdonius,  though  nothing  else  could 
be  said  in  his  favour,  by  announc'mg  himself  an  enemy  gave 
out  public  orders  in  such  a  manner,  that  ye  necessarily  would 
take  arms.  The  other,  denying  that  there  were  enemies 
to  be  opposed,  took  the  arms  out  of  your  hands,  and  exposed 
you  defenceless  to  your  slaves  and  exiles.  And  did  ye,  not¬ 
withstanding,  (I  wish  to  speak  without  offence  to  Caius 
Claudius,  or  in  detriment  to  the  memory  of  Publius  Valeri- 
rius}  lead  your  troops  to  an  attack  on  the  Capitoline  hill,  be¬ 
fore  ye  had  expelled  these  enemies  from  the  Forum?  It  is 
scandalous  in  the  sight  of  gods  ^nd  men,  that  when  a  host 
of  rebels  was  in  the  citadel,  m  the  Capitol,  and  when  a  lea- 

B,  C.  458.] 

BOOK  III. 

£35 

der  of  exiles  md  slaves,  profaning  every  thing  sacred,  took 
up  his  habitation  in  the  shrine  of  Jupiter  supremely  fpod 
and  great,  it  is  disgraceful,  I  say,  that  arms  were  tAm  up 
at  Tusculum  sooner  than  at  Rome.  It  actually  appeared 
doubtful,  whether  Lucius  Mamilius,  a  Tusculan  general,  or 
Publius  Valerius  and  Caius  Claudius,  consuls,  should  have 
the  honour  of  recovering  the*  Roman  citadel.  Thus  we  who, 
heretofore,  would  not  suffer  the  Latines  to  take  up  arms,  not 
even  in  their  own  defence,  and  when  they  had  the  enemy 
within  their  territories,  should  have  been  taken  and  destroy¬ 
ed,  had  not  these  very  Latines  afforded  us  assistance  of  their 
own  accord.  Is  this,  tribunes,  your  duty  towards  the  com¬ 
mons,  to  unarm  and  expose  them  to  slaughter?  Surely,  if 
any,  even  the  lowest  person  among  these  commons  of  yours, 
whom  from  being  a  part  ye  have  broken  off,  as  it  were,  ffom 
the  body  of  the  people,  and  made  a  republic  peculiar  to 
yourselves;  if  any  one  of  these  should  inform  you  that  his 
house  was  surrounded  by  an  armed  band  of  slaves,  surely 
ye  would  think  that  he  ought  to  go  to  his  assistance.  And 
was  the  supremely  good  and  great  Jupiter,  when  hemmed 
round  bv  the  arms  of  exiles  and  slaves,  unworthy  of  any  hu¬ 
man  aid?  Yet  these  men  expect  to  be  held  sacred  and  invio¬ 
lable,  who  esteem  not  the  gods  themselves  as  either  sacred 
or  inviolable.  But  it  seems,  contaminated  as  yc  arc  with 
the  guilt  of  your  offences  against  gods  and  men,  ye  give  out 
that  ye  will  carry  through  your  law  before  the  end  of  this 
year.  It  would  then,  indeed,  be  an  unfortunate  day  to  the 
state,  on  which  I  was  created  consul,  much  more  so,  than 
that  on  which  the  consul  Valerius  perished,  if  ye  should  car¬ 
ry  it.  Now,  first  of  all,  Romans,  my  colleague  and  I  intend 
to  march  the  legions  against  the  Volscians  and  .^Equans.  I 
know  not  by  what  fatality  we  find  the  gods  more  propitious, 
while  we  are  employed  in  war  than  during  peace.  How 
great  the  danger  from  those  nations  would  have  been  if  they 
had  known  that  the  Capitol  was  in  the  possession  of  exiles. 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

235 

[Y.  R.  294. 

it  is  bettor  that  we  should  conjecture  from  the  past  than  feel 
from  experience.” 
XX*  The  consul’s  discourse  had  a  considerable  effect  on 
the  commons:  and  the  patricians  recovering  their  spirits, 
looked  on  the  commonwealth  as  restored  to  its  proper  state* 
The  other  consul,  showing  more  eagerness  in  promoting 
than  in  forming  a  design,  readily  allowed  his  colleague  to 
take  the  lead  in  the  preparatory  proceedings  on  so  weighty 
an  affair;  but  in  the  execution  of  the  plan,  claimed  to  him¬ 
self  a  share  of  the  consular  duties.  The  tribunes  mocking 
these  declarations,  proceeded  to  ask,  ‘‘  by  what  means  the 
consuls  would  he  enabled  to  lead  out  an  arro>\  when  no  one 
would  suffer  them  to  make  a  levy?  To  this  Quintius  repli¬ 
ed,  ‘‘We  have  no  occasion  for  a  levy,  because  when  Pub¬ 
lius  Valerius  gave  arms  to  the  commons,  for  the  recovery  of 
the  Capitol,  they  all  took  an  oath  to  him,  that  they  would 
assemble  on  an  order  from  the  consul,  and  would  not  depart 
withput  his  permission.  We  therefore  publish  our  orders, 
that  every  one  of  you  who  have  taken  the  oath,  attend  to¬ 
morrow,  under  arms,  at  the  lake  Regillus.”  The  tribunes 
then  began  to  cavil,  and  alleged,  that  “  the  people  were  ab¬ 
solved  of  that  obligation,  because  Quintius  was  in  a  private 
station,  at  the  time  when  the  oath  was  taken.”  But  that  dis¬ 
regard  of  the  gods,  which  prevails  in  the  present  age,  had 
not  then  taken  place;  nor  did  every  one,  by  his  own  inter¬ 
pretations,  accommodate  oaths  and  the  laws  to  his  particular 
views,  but  rather  adapted  his  practice  to  them.  The  tri¬ 
bunes,  therefore,  finding  no  hope  of  succeeding  in  their  op¬ 
position  on  that  ground,  endeavoured  to  delay  the  marching 
of  the  troops;  and  in  this  they  were  the  more  earnest,  be¬ 
cause  a  report  had  spread,  that  orders  had  been  given  for 
the  augurs  also  to  attend  at  the  lake  Regillus,  and  that  a 
place  should  be  consecrated  by  them,  in  order  that  the  peo¬ 
ple  might  transact  business  with  the  benefit  of  auspices,  so 
that  any  measures  enacted  at  Rome  through  means  of  the 

BOOK  III. 

237 

B.  C.  458.] 
violence  of  the  tribunes,  might  be  repealed  in  an^issembty 
held  there.  It  was  urged,  however,  that  any  one  would 
vote  there,  just  as  the  consuls  chose;  for  at  any  greater  dis¬ 
tance  from  the  city  than  that  of  a  mile,  there  was  no  ap¬ 
peal:  and  even  should  the  tribunes  come  thither,  they  would, 
among  the  crowd  of  other  citizens,  be  subject  to  the  consu¬ 
lar  authority.  This  alarmed  them.  But  what  excited  their 
strongest  apprehensions  was,  that  Quintius  used  frequently 
to  say,  that  “  he  would  not  hold  an  election  of  consuls:  that 
the  distemper  of  the  state  was  not  such  as  could  be  stopped 
by  the  usual  remedies:  that  the  commonwealth  stood  in  need 
of  a  dictator,  in  order  that  any  person  who  should  stir  one 
step  towards  raising  disturbances,  might  feel,  that  the  power 
of  that  magistrate  was  above  an  appeal,” 
XXL  The  senate  was  sitting  in  the  Capitol;  thither  came 
the  tribunes,  attended  by  the  commons,  who  were  full  of 
perplexity  and  fear:  the  populace,  with  loud  clamours,  im¬ 
plored  the  protection,  at  one  time,  of  the  consuls,  at  another 
of  the  senate;  yet  diey  could  not  prevail  on  the  consul  to  re¬ 
cede  from  his  resolution,  until  the  tribunes  promised  that 
they  would  be  directed  by  the  senate.  The  consul  then  laid 
before  the  senate  the  demand  of  the  tribunes  and  commons, 
and  it  was  decreed,  that  the  tribunes  should  not  introduce 
the  law  during  that  year;  and  that,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
consuls  should  not  lead  out  the  troops  from  the  city.  For 
the  time  to  come,  it  was  the  judgment  of  the  senate,  that 
re-electing  the  same  magistrates,  and  re-appointing  the  same 
tribunes,  was  injurious  to  the  interest  of  the  commonwealth.” 
The  consuls  conformed  to  the  decisions  of  the  senate;  but 
the  tribunes,  notwithstanding  the  remonstrances  of  the  con¬ 
suls,  were  re-appointed.  The  senate  likewise,  not  to  yield 
to  the  commons  in  any  particular,  on^ their  side  wished 
to  re-elect  Lucius  Quintius  consul.  On  no  occasion  during 
the^whole  year,  did  the  consul  exert  himself  with  more 
warmth.  Can  I  wonder,”  said  he,  conscript  fathers,  if 

23S 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

tY.  R.  m 
y0ur  aul^rity^  is  li^tly  regarded  among  the  commons?  ye 
yourselves' deprive  it  of  its  weight.  For  instance,  becaa^ 
the  commons  have  broken  through  a  decree  of  the  senau^ 
with  respect  to  the  re-election  of  their  magistrates,  ye  wish 
to  break  through  it  ako,  lest  ye  should  fall  short  of  Ac  popu¬ 
lace  in  rashness;  as  if  superiority  of  power  in  the  state  con¬ 
sisted  in  superior  degrees  of  inconstancy  and  irregularity;  for  it 
is,  certainly,  an  instance  of  greater  inconstancy  and  irregulari¬ 
ty,  for  us  to  counteract  our  own  decrees  and  resolutions,  than 
those  of  others.  Go  on,  conscript  fathers,  to  imitate  the  incon¬ 
siderate  multitude;  and  ye,  who  ought  to  show  an  example  fo 
the  rest,  rather  follow  the  steps  of  others  in  a  wrong  course, 
than  guide  them  into  the  right  one.  But  let  me  not  imitate 
the  tribunes,  nor  suffer  myself  to  be  declared  consul  in  con¬ 
tradiction  to  the  decree  of  the  senate.  And  you,  Caius  Clau¬ 
dius,  I  exhort,  that  you,  on  your  part,  restrain  the  Roman 
people  from  this  licentiousness;  and  be  persuaded,  that,  on 
my  part,  I  shall  regard  your  conduct  therein  in  such  a  light, 
that  I  shall  not  consider  you  as  obstructing  my  attainment 
of  honour,  but  as  augmenting  the  glory  of  my  refusal,  and 
protecting  me  against  the  ignominy  which  I  should  incur  by 
being  re-elected.”  They  then  issued  their  joint  orders,  that 
“  no  person  should  vote  for  Lucius  Quintius  being  consul; 
and  that,  if  any  one  did,  they  would  not  allow  such  vote.” 
Y.  R.  295.  XXI L  The  consuls  elected  were  Quintus  Fabius 
B.  C.  457.  Vibulanus,  a  third  time,  and  Lucius  Cornelius  Ma- 
luginensis:  The  general  survey  was  performed  that  year.  The 
lustrum  could  not  be  closed,  consistently  with  the  rules  of 
religion,  on  account  of  the  Capitol  having  been  taken  and  the 
consul  slain.  In  che  beginning  of  the  year,  in  which  Quintus 
Fabius  and  Lucius  Cornelius  were  consuls,  various  distur¬ 
bances  arose.  The  tribunes  excited  commotions  among  the 
commons.  The  Latines  and  Hemicians  gave  information  of 
a  formidable  war  being  commenced  against  them  by  .the 
Volscians  and  .SSquans;  that  the  legions  of  the  Volscians 
vrere  at  Antium;  and  that  there  were  strong  apprehensions 

0.  C.  457.]  BOOK  in. 
of  that  coiooy  itself  revolting.  With  4ij£culty  tritoses 
were  prevailed  on  to  allow  the  business-of  the  war  to  be  first 
attended  to.  The  consuls  then  divided  ^e  provinces  betwe^^ 
them:  Fabiua  was  appointed  to  msu'chthe  legions  to  Atitium^ 
Cornelius  to  remain  at  Rome,  for  the  pixjtection  of  the  city, 
in  case  any  party  of  the  enemy,  as  was  the  practice  of  the 
^quans,  should  come  to  make  depredations.  The  Hemicians 
and  Latines  were  ordered  to  supply  a  number  of  men  in 
conformity  to  the  treaties;  and  of  the  army,  two  parts  were 
composed  of  the  allies,  the  third  consisted  of  natives.  The 
allies  arrk’ing  on  the  day  appointed,  the  consul  encamped 
outside  the  Capuan  gate;  and,  after  purifying  the  army, 
marched  from  thence  to  Antium,  and  sat  down  at  a  small 
distance  from  the  city,  and  the  post  occupied  by  the  enemy; 
where  the  Volscians,  not  daring  to  risk  an  engagement,  be¬ 
cause  the  troops  from  the  Aiquans  had  not  yet  arrived,  en¬ 
deavoured  to  screen  themselves  within  their  trenches.  Fa- 
bias,  next  day,  forming  his  troops,  not  in  one  body,  composed 
of  his  countrymen  and  the  allies  intermixed,  but  in  three  sepa¬ 
rate  bodies,  consisting  of  the  three  several  nations,  surround¬ 
ed  the  rampart  of  the  enemy.  Placing  himself  in  the  centre 
with  the  Roman  legions,  he  commanded  all  to  look  for  the 
signals  from  thence,  in  order  that  the  allies  and  his  own  forces 
might  begin  the  action  at  the  same  time,  and  also  retire  to¬ 
gether,  if  he  should  sound  a  retreat:  in  the  rear  of  each  di¬ 
vision,  he  also  placed  their  own  cavalry.  Having  thus  sur¬ 
rounded  the  camp,  he  assaulted  it  in  three  different  places, 
and  pressing  them  vigorously  on  every  side,  beat  down  the 
Volscians  from  the  rampart,  who  were  unable  to  withstand 
his  force:  then  advancing  within  the  fortifications,  Jbe  drove 
them  before  him  in  confusion  and  dismay  towards  one  side, 
and  at  length  compelled  them  to  abandon  their  works.  After 
which,  the  cavalry,  who  could  not  easily  have  passed  over 
the  rampart,  and  had  hitherto  stood  as  spectators  of  the  fight, 
coming  up  with  them,  as  they  fled  in  disorder  in  the  open 

240 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

[Y. 

plain,  and  making  great  havoc  of  their  affrighted  troops,  en¬ 
joyed  a  share  in  the  honour  of  the  victory.  The  number  of 
slain,  both  within  the  camp,  and  on  the  outside  of  the  forti¬ 
fications,  was  great,  but  the  spoil  was  much  greater;  for  the 
enemy  were  scarcely  able  to  carry  off  their  arms,  and  their 
army  would  have  been  entirely  destroyed,  had  not  the  woods 
covered  them  in  their  flight. 
XXI IL  During  these  transactions  at  Antium,  the  iEquans, 
sending  forward  the  main  strength  of  their  youth,  surprized 
the  citadel  of  Tusculum  by  night;  and,  with  the  rest  of  their 
army,  sat  down,  at  a  little  distance  from  the  watts  of  that 
town,  for  the  purpose  of  dividing  the  force  of  their  enemies. 
Intelligence  of  this  being  carried  to  Rome,  and  from  Rome 
to  the  camp  at  Antium,  the  Romans  were  not  less  deeply 
affected,  than  if  they  had  been  told  that  the  Capitol  was 
taken.  Their  obligations  to  the  Tusculans  were  recent,  and 
the  similarity  of  the  danger  seemed  to  demand  a  requital, 
in  kind,  of  the  aid  which  they  had  received.  Fabius,  there¬ 
fore,  neglecting  every  other  business,  having  hastily  convey¬ 
ed  the  spoils  from  the  camp  to  Antium,  and  left  a  small 
garrison  there,  hastened  to  Tusculum  by  forced  marches. 
The  soldiers  were  allowed  to  carry  nothing  but  their  arms, 
and  what  food  they  had  ready  dr^essed;  the  consul  Cornelius 
sent  supplies  of  provision  from  Rome.  The  troops  found 
employment  at  Tusculum  for  several  months.  With  one 
half  of  the  army,  the  consul  besieged  the  camp  of  the 
iEquans;  the  other  he  gave  to  the  Tusculans  to  effect  the 
recover^"  of  the  citadel;  but  they  never  could  have  made 
their  way  into  it  by  force.  Famine,  however,  compelled  the 
enemy  to.  give  it  up:  and  when  they  were  reduced  to  that 
extremity,  the  Tusculans  sent  them  all  away  unarmed  and 
naked  under  the  yoke.  But  as  they  were  attempting  their 
ignominious  flight,  the  Roman  consul  overtook  them  at  Al- 
gidum,  and  put  every  man  to  the  sword.  After  this  sue-* 
cess,  he  led  back  his  army  to  a  place  called  Columen,  where 
he  pitched  his  camp.  The  other  consul  also,  the  city  being  no 

«.  C.  457.}  BQOJL  m. 
longer  in  d^ger,  the  defeat  of  the  iEquans,  m^ched 
out  trom  Ron^.  Thus  the  two  consuls  entering  tlw:  eheiny’s 
territories  on  different  sides^  vied  eagerly  with  each  other  in 
making  depredations,  the  one  on  the  Volscians,  the  other  on 
the  JBquaus.  1  find,  in  many  writers,  that  the  people  of  An- 
tium  revolted  this  year,  that  Lucius  Cornelius,  consul,  con¬ 
ducted  the  war  against  them,  and  took  their  city.  I  cannot 
venture  to  affirm  this  as  certain,  because  in  dte  earlier  writers 
there  is  no  mention  of  Such  a  transaction, 
XXIV.  No  sooner  was  this  war  brought  to  a  conclusion, 
than  a  tribunitian  commotion  at  home  alarmed  the  senate. 
The  tribunes  exclaimed,  that  the  detaining  of  the  troops 
abroad  was  a  mere  artifice,  calculated  to  frustrate  their  endea¬ 
vours  respecting  the  law.  But  that  they  ^ere  detemiined, 
nevertheless,  to  go  through  with  the  business  which  they  had 
undertaken.’’  However,  Publius  Lucretius,  prefect  of  the 
city,  so  managed  matters,  that  the  proceedings  of  the  tribunes 
were  postponed  until  the  arrival  of  the  consuls.  There  arose 
also  a  new  cause  of  disturbance:  Aulus  Cornelius  and  Quin¬ 
tus  Servili,us,  queesiors,  commenced  a  prosecution  against 
Marcus  Volscius  for  having  manifestly  given  false  evidence 
against  Cseso:  a  discovery  having  been  made,  supported  by 
many  proofs,  that  the  brother  of  Volscius,  from  the  time 
when  he  was  first  taken  ill,  had  not  only  never  appeared  in 
public,  but  that  he  never  rose  from  his  sick  bed,  where  he 
died  of  a  disorder,  which  lasted  many  months;  and  also  that, 
at  the  time  when  the  witness  had  charged  the  fact  to  have 
been  committed,  Cseso  had  not  been  seen  at  Rome.  Those 
who  had  served  in  the  army  with  him  also  affirmed  that  he, 
at  that  time,  regularly  attended  in  his  post  along  with  them, 
without  having  once  obtained  leave  of  absence.  Many  in 
private  stations  challenged  Volscius,  in  their  own  names,  to 
abide  the  decision  of  the  judge,^  content  to  submit  to  the 
*  As  the  praetors  could  not  altend  the  trial  of  every  czme,  they  always 
had  a  list  of  persons  properly  qualified^  called  yWircs  selecUy  out  of  whose 
VOL.  i. —  I  i 

542 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  EY,  R.  295. 
penalty,  if  they  should  fail  in  proof*  As  he  did  not  dare  to 
stand  the  trial,  all  these  circumstances  ctaicurring  together, 
no  more  doubt  was  entertained  of  the  condemnation  of  Vol- 
scius,  than  there  had  been  of  C«eso’s,  after  Volscius  had  giv¬ 
en  his  testimony.  The  business,  however,  was  put  a  stop 
to  by  ttie  tribunes,  who  declared,  that  they  would  not  suffer 
the  quaestors  to  hold  an  assembly  on  the  business  of  the  pro¬ 
secution,  until  one  was  first  held  on  that  of  the  lawj  and  thus 
both  affairs  were  deferred  till  the  arrival  of  the  consuls. 
When  these  entered  the  city  in  triqmph,  with  their  victo¬ 
rious  army,  silence  being  observed  with  respect  to  the  law, 
people  from  thence  imagined  that  the  tribunes  were  struck 
with  fear.  But  they,  directing  their  views  to  the  tribune- 
ship  for  the  fourth  time,  it  being  now  the  latter  end  of  the 
year,  had  changed  the  direction  of  their  efforts,  from  the 
promoting  of  the  law,  to  canvassing  for  the  election j  and  al¬ 
though  the  consuls  struggled  against  the  continuing  of  that 
office  in  the  same  hands  with  no  less  earnestness  than  if  the 
act  had  been  proposed  for  the  purpose  of  lessening  their  own 
dignity,  the  tribunes  got  the  better  in  the  contesU  The  same 
year,  peace  was,  on  petition,  granted  to  the  iEquansj  and  a 
number,  as  occasion  required,  they  delegated  judges  to  act  in  their  stead. 
These  select  judges  were  chosen  in  an  assembly  of  the  tribes,  five  out  of 
each  tribe;  and  the  prsetor,  according  to  the  importance  or  the  difficulty  of 
the  cause  in  dispute,  appointed  one  or  more  of  them  to  try  it.  This  office 
was,  at  first,  confined  to  the  senators;  but  was,  afterwards,  trausferredL  to 
the  knights;  and  was,  at  different  times,  held  sometimes  by  one  of  these 
bodies,  sometimes  by  the  other,  and  sometimes  in  common  between  them 
both.  The  usual  method  of  proceeding  was  this;  the  plaintiff  eiffier 
named  the  judge,  before  whom  he  summoned  the  defendant  to  appear, 
which  was  termed  ferrejudkem;  or  he  left  the  noroioation  to  the  defend¬ 
ant,  tU  judicem  diceret^  and  when  they  had  agreed  on  the  judge,  guum  ju* 
dicem  convenisset^  they  presented  a  joint  petition  to  the  prator,  praying 
that  he  would  appoint,  nt  daret^  that  person  to  try  the  cause;  and,  at  the 
same  time,  they  bound  themselves  to  pay  a  certain  sum  of  money,  thc- 
plaintiff,  ni  iia  eiset,  if  he  should  not  establish  his  charge;  the  defendant,  if 
he  should  not  acquit  himself. 

BOOK  III. 

243 

B.  C.  45^3 
survey  which  had  been  begun  in  the  former  one,  was  now 
finished,  the  lustrum  being  closed,  ^hich  was  the  tenth  from 
the  founding  of  the  city.  The  number  of  citizens  rated, 
was  one  hundred  and  thirty -two  thousand  four  hundred  and 
nine.  The  consuls  acquired  great  glory  this  year,  as  well 
in  the  conduct  of  the  war,  as  in  the  establishing  of  peace 
while  at  home:  though  the  state  enjoyed  not  perfect  concord, 
yet  the  dissensions  were  less  violent  than  at  other  times. 
XXV.  Lucius  Minucius  and  Caius  Nautius,  who  y.  r.  296. 
were  next  elected  consuls,  found  on  their  hands  ^  ' 
the  two  causes  in  dispute,  which  lay  over  from  the  last  year. 
The  consuls  obstructed  the  passing  of  the  law,  and  the  tri¬ 
bunes  the  trial  of  Volscius,  with  equal  degrees  of  activity. 
Bu^the  new  qusestors  were  possessed  of  greater  power  and 
influence.  Together  with  Marcus  Valerius,  son  of  Manius 
Valerius,  grandson  of  Volesus,  Titus  Quintius  Capitolinas, 
who  had  been  thrice  consul,  was  qusestor.  Although  CsBso 
could  not  be  thereby  restored  to  the  Quintian  family,  and, 
in  him,  one  of  the  most  valuable  of  the  young  Romans,  to 
the  state,  yet  with  a  rigour  dictated  by  justice  and  duty,  he 
prosecuted  the  false  witness,  by  whose  means  an  innocent 
person  bad  been  deprived  of  the  liberty  of  making  his  de¬ 
fence.  The  tr  ibunes,  and  par ticula;  ly  V irginius,  .endeavour¬ 
ing  to  procure  the  passing  of  their  law,  the  consuls  were 
allowed  the  space  of  two  months  to  examine  it,  on  condition 
that  when  they  should  have  informed  the  people  of  the  dan¬ 
gerous  designs  which  were  concealed  under  the  propositions 
which  it  contained,  they  would  then  allow  them  to  give  their 
votes  on  it.  This  respite  of  proceedings  being  acceded  to, 
rendered  matters  quiet  in  the  city.  But  the  iEquans  did  not 
allow  them  long  to  ^njoy  rest;  for,  violating  the  league  which 
had  been  made  the  preceding  year  with  the  Homans,  they 
conferred  the  chief  command  on  Gracchus  Ckelius,  a  man 
at  that  time  of  by  far  the  greatest  consequence  among  them; 
and,  headed  by  him,  carried  hostile  depredations  into  the 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  298. 

district  of  Lavici;  from  thence  into  that  of  Tusculum;  and 
then,  loaded  with  booty,  ♦pitched  their  camp  at  Algidum* 
To  that  camp  came  Quintus  Fabius,  Publius  Volumnius, 
and  Aulus  Postumius,  ambassadors  from  Rome,  to  complain 
of  injuries,  and  demand  redress,  in  conformity  to  the  treaty. 
The  general  of  the  iEquans  bade  them  deliver  to  that  oak 
whatever  message  they  had  from  the  Roman  senate,  while 
he  should  attend  to  other  business:  a  very  large  oak  tree 
hung  over  the  prsetorium,  and  under  its  shade  aflForded  a 
pleasant  seat;  to  this,  one  of  the  ambassadors,  as  he  was 
going  away,  replied,  Let  that  consecrated  oak,  and  all  the 
deities,  bear  witness,  that  the  treaty  has  been  broken  by  you, 
and  so  favour  both  our  complaints  at  present,  and  our  arms 
hereafter,  as  that  we  avenge  the  violated  rights  of  godsend 
men.”  On  the  return  of  the  ambassadors  to  Rome,  the  se¬ 
nate  ordered  one  of  the  consuls  to  lead  an  army  to  Algid um 
against  Gracchus;  and  gave  to  the  other,  as  his  province,  the 
ravaging  the  territories  of  the  jEquans.  The  tribunes,  ac¬ 
cording  to  their  usual  custom,  obstructed  the  levy,  and  might, 
perhaps,  have  eflfec tualiy  prevented  it,  but  that  a  new  and 
sudden  alarm  excited  stronger  apprehensions  of  danger. 
XX VL  A  very  large  body  of  Sabines,  spreading  devasta- 
tiems  around,  advanced  almost  to  the  walls  of  Rome.  The 
fields  were  deserted,  and  the  city  struck  with  terror.  The 
Commons  then  cheerfully  took  arms,  while  the  tribunes  in 
vain  attempted  to  dissuade  them  from  it.  Two  large  armies 
were  raised.  Nautius  led  one  against  the  Sabines,  and,  pitch¬ 
ing  his  camp  at  Eretum,  by  detaching  small  parties,  especial¬ 
ly  on  incursions  by  night,  he  caused  such  desolation  in  the 
country  of  the  Sabines,  that,  compared  to  it,  the  injuries 
sustained  in  the  Roman  territories  seemed  trifling.  Minucius 
neither  met  the  same  success,  nor  showed  the  same  ability 
in  the  conduct  of  his  business;  for,  having  encamped  at  a 
little  distance,  without  experiencing  any  considerable  loss,  he 
kept  his  men  confined  widiin  the  trenches.  When  the  enemy 

B.  C.  456.] 

BOOK  III. 

245 

perceived  this,  they  assumed  new  boldness  from  the  others'* 
fears,  and  made  an  assault  on  the  camp  by  night;  but  Ending 
that  they  were  not  likely  to  succeed  by  open  force,  they 
began,  next  day,  tu  inclose  it  by  lines  of  circumvallation. 
Before  this  work  could  be  completed,  and  the  passes  thereby 
entirely  shut  up,  five  horsemen  were  despatched,  who,  mak¬ 
ing  their  way  between  the  enemy’s  posts,  brought  intelligence 
to  Rome,  that  the  consul  and  his  army  were  besieged*  No¬ 
thing  could  have  happened  so  unexpected,  or  so  contrary  to 
people’s  hopes;  and  the  fright  and  consternation,  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  it,  were  not  less  than  if  the  city  were  surrounded 
and  threatened,  instead  of  the  camp.  They  sent  for  the  con¬ 
sul  Nautius,  yet  not  supposing  him  capable  of  affording  them 
sufficient  protection,  resolved  that  a  dictator  should  be  chosen 
to  extricate  them  from  this  distress,  and  Lucius  Quintius 
Cincinnatus  was  accordingly  appointed  with  unanimous  ap¬ 
probation.  Here,  they  may  receive  instruction,  who  despise 
every  quality  which  man  can  boast,  in  comparison  with 
riches;  and  who  think,  that  those  who  possess  them  can  alone 
have  merit,  and  to  such  alone  honours  and  distinctions  be¬ 
long.  Lucius  Quintius,  the  now  sole  hope  of  the  people,  and 
of  the  empire  of  Home,  cultivated  a  larm  of  four  acres  cm 
the  other  side  of  the  l  iber,  at  this  time  called  the  Quintian 
meadows,  opposite  to  the  very  spot  where  the  dock-yard 
stands.  Theie  he  was  found  by  the  deputies,  either  leaning 
on  a  stake,  in  a  ditch  which  he  was  making,  or  ploughing; 
in  some  work  of  husbandry  he  was  certainly  employed.  Af¬ 
ter  mutual  salutations,  and  wishes  on  the  part  of  the  com¬ 
missioners,  that  it  might  be  happy  both  to  him  and  the 
commonwealth,”  he  was  requested  to  put  on  his  gown,  and 
hear  a  message  from  the  senate.”  Surprised,  and  asking  if 
all  was  well?”  he  bade  his  wife  Raciiia  bring  out  his  gown 
quickly  from  the  cottage.  When  he  had  put  it  on,  after  wip¬ 
ing  the  sweat  and  dust  from  his  brow,  he  came  forward, 
when  the  deputies  congratulated  him,  and  saluted  him  die- 

246 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  296. 

tator;  requested  his  presence  in  the  city,  and  informed  him 
of  the  alarming  situation  of  the  army.  A  vessel  had  been 
prepared  for  Quintius  by  order  of  government,  and  on  his 
landing  on  the  ol^er  side,  he  was  received  by  his  three 
sons,  who  came  out  to  meet  him;  then  by  his  other  relations 
and  friends,  and  afterwards  by  the  greater  part  of  the  patri¬ 
cians.  Surrounded  by  this  numerous  attendance,  and  the 
iictors  marching  before  him,  he  was  conducted  to  his  resi¬ 
dence.  The  plebeians  likewise  ran  together  from  all  quar¬ 
ters;  but  they  were  far  from  beholding  Quintius  with  equal 
pleasure,  for  they  thought  the  powers  annexed  to  his  office 
too  unlimited,  and  the  man  still  more  arbitrary.  During  that 
night,  no  farther  steps  were  taken  than  to  post  watches  in  the 
city. 
XXVII.  Next  day,  the  dictator  coming  into  the  Forum 
before  it  was  light,  named  Lucius  Tarquitius  master  of  the 
horse;  he  was  of  a  patrician  family,  but  though,  by  reason 
of  the  narrowness  of  his  circumstances,  he  had  served  among 
the  foot,  yet  he  was  accounted  by  many  degrees  the  first  in 
military  merit  among  all  the  young  men  of  Rome.  Attend¬ 
ed,  then,  by  his  master  of  the  horse,  Quintius  came  to  the 
assembly  of  the  people,  proclaimed  a  cessation  of  civil  bu¬ 
siness,  ordered  the  shops  to  be  shut  in  all  parts  of  the  city, 
and  that  no  one  should  attend  to  any  private  affairs.  He  then 
issued  orders  that  all  who  were  of  the  military  age  should 
attend,  under  arms,  in  the  field  of  Mars,  before  sun-set,  with 
victuals  for  five  days,  and  twelve  palisades  each;  and  ^^at 
those  whose  age  rendered  them  unfit  for  service,  should  dress 
that  victuals  for  the  soldiers  who  lived  near  them,  while  they 
were  preparing  their  arms,  and  procuring  the  military  pales. 
Immediately  the  young  men  ran  different  ways  to  look  for 
palisades,  which  every  one  without  molestation  took,  wher¬ 
ever  he  could  find  them;  and  they  all  attended  punctually  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  dictator’s  order.  The  troops  being  then  form¬ 
ed  in  a  such  a  manner  as  was  not  only  proper  for  a  march. 

BOOK  III. 

24f 

B.  C.  456.] 
but  for  an  engagement  also,  if  occasion  should  require  it,  the 
dictator  set  out  at  the  head  of  the  legions,  and  the  master  of 
the  horse  at  the  head  of  his  cavalry.  In  both  bodies  such 
exhortations  were  used,  as  the  juncture  required;  that  “  they 
should  quicken  their  pace;  that  there  was  a  necessity  for  ex¬ 
pedition,  in  order  to  reach  the  enemy  in  the  night;  that  the 
Roman  consul  and  his  arm}^  were  besieged;  that  this  was  the 
third  day  of  their  being  invested;  that  no  one  could  tell  what 
any  one  night  or  day  might  produce;  Aat  the  issue  of  the 
greatest  affairs  often  depended  on  a  moment  of  time.”  The 
men  too,  to  gratify  their  leaders,  called  to  each  other  stand¬ 
ard-bearer,  advance  quicker;  soldiers  follow.”  At  midnight 
they  arrived  at  Algidum,  and  when  they  found  themselves 
near  the  enemy,  halted. 
XXVIIL  The  dictator  then  having  rode  about,  and  ex¬ 
amined  as  well  as  he  could  in  the  night,  the  situation  and 
form  of  the  enemy’s  camp,  commanded  the  tribunes  of  the 
soldiers  to  give  orders  that  the  baggage  should  be  throVn 
together  in  one  place;  and  then  that  the  soldiers,  with  their 
arms  and  palisades,  should  return  into  the  ranks.  These  or¬ 
ders  were  executed;  and  then  with  the  same  regularity  in 
which  they  had  marched,  he  drew  the  whole  army  in  a  long 
column,  and  directed  that,  on  a  signal  being  given,  they 
should  all  raise  a  shout,  and  that  on  the  shout  being  raised, 
every  man  should  throw  up  a  trench  in  front  of  his  post,  and 
fix  his  palisades.  As  soon  as  these  orders  were  communi¬ 
cated,  and  the  signal  given,  the  soldiers  performed  what  they 
were  commanded:  the  shout  resounded  on  every  side  of  the 
enemy,  and  reaching  beyond  their  camp,  was  heard  in  that 
of  the  consul,  exciting  terror  in  the  one,  and  the  greatest  joy 
in  the  other.  The  Romans  observing  to  each  other,  with  ex¬ 
ultation,  that  this  was  the  shout  of  their'  countrymen,  and 
that  assistance  was  at  hand,  took  courage,  and  from  their 
watch-guards  and  outposts  issued  threats.  The  consul  like¬ 
wise  declared,  that  they  ought  not  to  lose  time,  for  that  the 

24a  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  2%. 
shout  then  heard  was  a  signal,  not  only  that  their  friends 
were  arrived,  but  that  they  had  entered  upon  action;  and 
they  might  take  it  for  granted,  that  the  camp  was  attacked 
on  the  outside.”  He  therefore  ordered  his  men  to  take  arms, 
and  follow  him;  these  falling  on  the  enemy  before  it  was 
light,  gave  notice  by  a  shout  to  the  dictator’s  legions,  that 
on  their  side  also  the  action  was  begun.  The  iEquans  were 
now  preparing  measures  to  hinder  themselves  from  being 
surrounded  with  woi^s;  when  being  attacked  within,  they 
were  obliged,  lest  a  passage  might  be  forced  through  the 
midst  of  their  camp,  to  turn  their  attention  from  those  em¬ 
ployed  on  the  fortifications,  to  the  others  who  assailed  them 
on  the  inside,  and  thus  left  the  former  at  leisure,  through  the 
remainder  of  the  night,  to  finish  the  works,  and  the  fight 
with  the  consul  continued  until  morn  appeared.  At  the 
break  of  day,  they  were  entirely  encompassed  by  the  dicta¬ 
tor’s  works,  and  while  they  were  hardly  able  to  support  the 
fight  against  one  army,  their  trenches  were  assaulted  by 
Quintius’s  troops,  who  instantly,  on  completing  those  works, 
had  returned  to  their  arms.  Thus  they  found  themselves 
obliged  to  encounter  a  new  enemy,  and  the  former  never 
slackened  their  attack.  Being  thus  closely  pressed  on  every 
side,  instead  of  fighting,  they  had  recourse  to  entreaties,  be¬ 
seeching  the  dictator  on  one  side,  and  the  consul  on  the 
other,  to  be  content  with  the  victory  without  their  entire  de¬ 
struction,  and  to  permit  them  to  retire  without  arms.  By  the 
consul  they  were  referred  to  the  dictator,  and  he,  highly  in¬ 
censed  against  them,  added  ignominy  to  their  defeat.  He 
ordered  their  general,  Gracchus  Clcelius,  and  the  other  lead¬ 
ers,  to  be  brought  to  him  in  chains,  and  the  town  of  Corbie> 
to  be  evacuated;  then  told  them,  that  “  he  wanted  not  the 
blood  of  the  iEquans;  that  they  were  at  liberty  to  depart;  but 
he  would  send  them  under  the  yoke,  as  an  acknowledgment, 
at  length  extorted,  that  their  nation  was  conquered  and  sub¬ 
dued.”  The  yoke  is  formed  of  three  spears,  two  being  fixed 

BOOK  III. 

M9 

B.  C.  456.] 
upright  in  the  ground,  and  the  other  tied  across  betw^een  the 
upper  ends  of  them.  Under  this  yoke  the  dictator  sent  the 
£quans. 
XXIX.  Having  possessed  himself  of  the  enemy’s  camp, 
which  was  filled  with  plenty,  for  he  had  sent  them  away 
naked,  distributed  the  entire  booty  among  his  own  troops. 
Reprimanding  the  consular  army  and  the  consul  himself,  he 
said  to  dietn,  ‘‘  Soldiers,  ye  shall  share' no  part  of  the  spoil 
of  that  enemy,  to  whom  ye  were  near  becoming  a  pr«y;  and 
as  to  you,  Lucius  Minucius,  until  you  begin  to  show  a  spirit 
becoming  a  consul,  you  shall  command  those  legions  with 
the  rank  of  lieutenant-general  only.”  Accordingly  Minucius 
resigned  the  consulship,  and,  in  obedience  to  orders,  remain¬ 
ed  with  the  army-  But  so  well  were  people  then  disposed  to 
obey,  without  repining,  the  commands  of  superiors,  that  this 
army,  regarding  more  the  benefit  which  he  had  conferred, 
than  the  disgrace  which  he  had  inflicted  on  them,  not  only 
voted  a  golden  crown  of  a  pound  weight  to  the  dictator,  but 
at  his  departure  saluted  him  as  their  patron.  At  Rome,  the 
senate,  being  convened  by  Quintus  Fabius,  prsefect  of  the 
city,  ordered  that  Quintius  on  his  arrival  should  enter  the 
city  in  triumph,  without  changing  his  order  of  march.  The 
generals  of  the  enemy  were  led  before  his  chariot,  the  mili¬ 
tary  ensigns  carried  before  him,  and  his  army  followed, 
laden  with  spoil.  It  is  said  that  tables  were  laid  out  with 
provisions  before  every  house,  and  that  the  troops,  partaking 
of  the  entertainment,  singing  the  triumphal  hymn,  and  throw¬ 
ing  out  their  customary  jests,  followed  the  chariot  like  re¬ 
vellers  at  a  feast.  The  same  day,  the  freedom  of  the  state 
was,  with  universal  approbation,  conferred  on  Lucius  Mami- 
lius  of  Tusculum.  The  dictator  would  have  immediately  re¬ 
signed  his  office,  but  was  induced  to  hold  it  some  time  longer 
on  account  the  assembly  for  the  trial  of  Volscius,  the  false 
witness.  Their  dread  of  the  dictator,  prevented  the  tribunes 
from  obstructing  it,  and  Volscius  being  sentenced  to  exile, 
V01 . 1. — K  k 

250 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

CY.  R.  297. 

departed  into  Lanuvitim.  Quiatiua,  on  the  sixteendi  day  re^ 
signed  the  dictatorship,  whicivhe  had  received  for  the  term 
of  six  months.  About  -the  same  time,  the  consul  Nautius 
engaged  the  Sabines  at  Eremm  with  great  success;  a  heavy 
blow  to  the  Sabines  after  the  devastation  of  their  country: 
Fabius  Quintus  was  sent  to  Algidum  in  the  room  qf  Minu- 
cius.  Toward  the  end  of  the  year,  the  tribunes  i«gan  to 
agitate  the  affair  of  the  law;  but  as  two  armies  were  then 
abroad,  the  patricians  carried  the  point,  that  no  business 
should  be  proposed  to  the  people.  The  commons  prevailed 
so  far  as  to  appoint  the  same  tribunes  the  fifth  time.  It  was 
reported  that  wolves  had  been  seen  in  the  Capitol,  and  were 
driven  away  by  dogs;  and,  on  account  of  that  prodigy,  the 
Capitol  was  purified:  such  were  the  transactions  of  that  year. 
Y.  1^.  297.  XXX.  Quintus  Minucius  and  Caius  Horatius  Pul- 
B.  C.  455.  villus  succeeded  to  the  consulship.  In  the  beginning 
of  .this  year,  while  the  public  were  undisturbed  by  any  foreign 
enemy,  the  same  tribunes  and  the  same  law  occasioned  sedi¬ 
tions  at  home;  and  these  would  have  proceeded  to  still  greater 
lengths,  so  highly  were  people’s  passions  inflamed,  but  that,  as 
if  it  had  been  concerted  for  the  purpose,  news  was  brought, 
that  by  an  attack  of  the  iEqunns,  in  the  night,  the  garrison  at 
Corbio^was  cut  The  cnnsuls  Csdled  the  senate  together, 
by  whom  they  were  ordered  to  make  a  hasty  levy  of  troops, 
and  to  lead  them  to  Algidum.  The  contest  about  the  law 
was  now  laid  aside,  and  a  new  struggle  began  about  the  le¬ 
vy;  in  which  the  consular  authority  was  in  danger  of  being 
overpowered  by  the  force  of  tribunitian  privileges,  when 
their  fears  were  more  effectually  roused  by  an  account  of  the 
Sabine  army  having  come  down  into  the  Roman  territories 
to  plunder,  and  nearly  advanced  to  the  city.  '^This  struck 
such  terror,  that  the  tribunes  suffered  the  troops  to  be  en¬ 
listed,  yet  not  without  a  stipulaticsi,  that  since  diey  had  been 
baflied  for  five  years,  and  as  their  office,  as  it  stood,  wiis  but 
a  small  protection  to  the  commons,  there  i^onld  for  the  fu- 

BOOK  lii. 

251 

II.  C.  455,] 

turc  be  ten  ^ibunes  of  the  people  appointed.  Necessity  ex¬ 
torted  a  concessicm  from  the  senate:  they  only  made  one 
exception^  that  the  people  should  not,  hereafter,  re-elect  the 
same  tribanes.  An  assembly  was  mstantly  held  for  the  elec¬ 
tion  of  those  officers,  lest,  if-  the  war  was  once  ended,  they 
might  be  disappointed  in  that,  as  in  other  matters.  In  the# 
thirty-sixth  year  from  the  first  creation  of  the  tribanes  of  the 
people,  the  number  ten  were  elected,  two  out  of  each  of  the 
classes;  and  it  was  established  as  a  rule,  that  they  should 
thenceforth  be  elected  in  the  same  manner.  The  levy  being 
then  made,  Minucius  marched  against  the  Sabines,  but  did 
not  come  up  with  them.  Horatius,  after  the  Ailquans  had 
put  the  garrison  of  Corbio  to  the  sword,  and  had  also  taken 
Ortona,  brought  them  to  an  engagement  in  the  district  of 
Algidum,  killed  a  great  number,  and  drove  them  not  only 
out  of  that  district,  but  from  Corbio  and  Ortona.  Corbio 
he  razed  to  the  ground,  in  revenge  for  the  treachery  prac¬ 
tised  there  against  the  garrison. 
XXXI.  Marcus  Valerius  and  Spurius  Virginias  y.  r.  2^8. 
were  next  elected  consuls.  Quiet  prevailed  both 
at  home  and  abroad.  Hie  price  of  provisions  was  high,  in 
consequence  of  an  extraordinary  fall  of  rain.  A  law  passed 
for  disposing  of  the  Aventine  as  public  property.  The  §ame 
tribunes  of  the  people  were  continued  in  office.  These,  dur¬ 
ing  the  following  year,  which  had  for  consuls  Titus  Romi- 
lius  and  Caius  Veturius,  warmly  recommended  the  law  in 
all  their  harangues.  They  must  be  ashamed  of  y.  r.  299. 
the  useless  addition  made  to  their  number,  if  that 
affair  were  to  lie,  during  the  course  of  their  two  years,  in  the 
same  hopeless  state,  in  which  it  had  lain  for  the  last  five.” 
While  they  were  most  earnestly  engaged  in  this  pursuit,  mes¬ 
sengers  arrived,  in  a  fright,  from  Tusculum,  with  information 
that  the  iEquans  were  in  the  Tusculan  territory.  The  recent 
services  of  that  people  made  the  tribunes  Ashamed  of  throwing 
any  delay  in  4he  way  of  assistance  being  given  them.  Both 

252 

HISTORY  0|f  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  300. 

Ae  cottsuk  were  Seiit  with  an  army,  and  found  the  enemy  in 
their  ustkai  post,  in  the  district  of  Algidum.  There  they 
fought;  dbove  seven  thousand  of  the  iEquans  were  slain,  the 
rest  dispersed,  and  vast  booty  was  acquired.  This  the 
cotisuls  sold  cm  account  of  the  low  state  of  the  treasury  j 
‘^i^ith  proceeding  excited  a  general  dissatisfaction  among  the 
soldiery,  and  also  afforded  founds  to  the  tribunes  for  bring¬ 
ing  an  accusation  against  the  consuls  before  the  commons. 
Accordingly,  as  soon  as  they  went  out  of  office,  Spurius 
y  R  soo.  Aulus  Alterius  having  succeeded  them 
B.  c.  452.  a  charge  was  instituted  against  Romilius  by  Caius 
Claudius  Cicero,  tribune  of  the  people,  and  against  Veturius, 
by  Lucius  Allienus,  plebeian  sedile.  To  the  great  mortification 
of  the  patricians  they  were  both,  sentenced  to  fine,  Romilius  to 
pay  ten  thousand  Veturius  fifteen  thousand.f  The 
sufferings  of  these  consuls,  however,  did  not  lessen  the  acti¬ 
vity  of  their  successors;  they  said,  they  were  able  to  sup¬ 
port  a  similar  sentence,  Avhile  !)oth  tribunes  and  commons 
combined,  were  insufficient  to  carry  the  point.  The  tribunes 
now  desisting  from  farther  prosecution  of  the  law,  with  regard 
to  which,  in  the  length  of  time  since  its  publication,  people^s 
ardour  had  cooled,  applied  to  the  senate  in  amicable  terms, 
requesting  that  they  would  at  length  ‘‘  put  an  end  to  all  con¬ 
tentions:  and,  since  it  was  disagreeable  to  them,  that  laws 
should  be  proposed  by  plebeians,  would  permit  lawgivers  to  be 
chosen  in  common,  out  of  the  plebeians,  and  out  of  the  patri¬ 
cians,  in  order  to  the  framing  of  such  as  would  be  advan^ 
tageous  to  both  parties,  and  tend  to  establish  liberty  €m  an 
equal  footing.’’  This  proposal  the  senate  did  not  disap¬ 
prove^  of,  but  declared,  that  no  one,  except  a  patrician,  should 
have  the  propounding  of  laws^  As  they  agreed  with  regard 
to  the  necessary  statutes,  and  only  differed  about  the  persems 
to  propose  them,  ambassadors  were  sent  to  Athens,  namely, 
Spurius  Postumius  Albus,  Aulus  Manlius,  and  Servius  Sul- 

*  25? 

I  371.  10s. 

B.  C.  452.] 

BOOK  III. 

253 

pkius  Camcrinus,  who  were  ordered  to  procure  a  copy  of  “ 
the  famous  laws  of  Solon,  and  to  make  themselves  acquaint* 
ed  with  the  institutions,  customs,  and  laws  of  the  other 
states  of  Greece, 
XXX I L  This  year  passed  undisturbed  by  any  y  ^ 
foreign  wars.  The  following  also,  in  which  Pub-  C,  46i. 
lius  Curiatius  and  Sextus  Quintiiius  were  consuls,  was  still 
more  quiet:  the  tribunes  observing  uninterrupted  silence^ 
which  was  owing,  at  first,  to  their  waiting  for  the  arrival  of 
the  ambassadors  who  had  gone  to  Athens,  for  copies  of  the 
laws  of  that  state;  and,  afterwards,  to  two  heavy  calamities, 
which  fell  on  them  at  once,  famine  and  pestilence  making 
dreadful  havoc  among  both  men  and  cattle.  The  country 
was  desolated,  the  city  exhausted,  by  a  continual  succession  of 
deaths.  Many  illustrious  houses  were  in  mourning:  Servi- 
lius  Cornelius,  Flamen  Quirinalis  died,  and  Caius  Horatius 
Pulvillus,  augur,  in  whose  room  the  augurs  elected  Caius 
Veiurius,  with  the  greater  satisfaction,  because  he  had  been 
condemned  by  the  commons.  The  consul  Quintilius  also 
died,  and  four  tribunes  of  the  people.  Such  a  multiplicity 
of  losses  made  it  a  melancholy  year,  but  there  was  no  dis¬ 
turbance  from  any  enemy.  *1  he  next  consuls  were  y  ^  ^^2 
Caius  Menenius  and  Publius  Sestius  Capitolinus.  c.  460. 
Neither  during  this  consulate  was  there  any  foreign  war:  at 
home,  however,  some  commotions  arose.  The  ambassadors 
had  now  returned  with  the  Athenian  laws,  and  the  tribunes 
therefore  pressed  more  earnestly,  that  the  buisness  of  com¬ 
piling  and  settling  their  own  laws  might  be  begun.  It  was* 
at  last  resolved,  that  ten  magistrates,  to  be  called  decemvirs, 
should  be  created,  from  whom  no  appeal  should  lie,  and 
that  there  should  be  no  other  appointed  during  that  year.  It 
was  disputed  for  some  time,  whether  plebeians  should  be 
admitted  among  them.  At  length,  that  point  was^  given  up 
to  the  patricians,  provided  that  the  Icilian  law  concerning 
the  Aventine,  and  others,  called  the  devoting  laws,  should 
not  be  repealed. 

354 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  803- 

XXXIII.  Thoa,  in  the  three  htmdred  and  first  year  from 
the  building  ■  of  Rome,  the  form  of  the  government  under^ 
went  a  second  change;  the  supreme  power  being  transferred 
from  consuls  to  decemvirs,  as  it  had  formerly  b^n  from 
kings  to  consuls.  This  new  form^lmwever,  was  not  of 'long 
duration;  for  the  happy  beginnings  of  that  government  ter¬ 
minated  in  extravagant  licentiousness,,  which  hastened  its 
dissolution;  and  recourse  was  had  to  the  former  practice  ot 
intrusting  the  power  and  cmisuiar  title  to  two  persons.  The 
decemvirs  created  were,  Appins  Claudius,  Titus  Genucias, 
•r  R  80S  Ptiblius  Sestius,  Lucius  Veturius,  Caius  Tulius,  Au- 
b!c.  449.  lus  Manlius,  Serr  ius  Sulpicius,  Publius  Curiatius, 
Titus  Romilius,  and  Spurius  Postumius.  Claudius  and  Ge- 
nucius  being  consuls  elect,  this  honour  of  being  of  the  decem- 
virate  was  conferred  on  them  as  a  compensation  for  the  loss 
of  the  other;  and  on  Sestius,  one  of  the  consuls  of  the  former 
year,  because  he  had  proposed  this  business  to  the  senate, 
against  the  wUl  of  his  colleague.  Next  to  these,  were  con¬ 
sidered  the  three  who  had  gone  ambassadors  to  Athens,  that 
the  honour  might  serve  as  a  recompense  for  such  a  distant 
embassy,  and,  at  the  same  time,  it  was  supposed,  that  they, 
having  acquired  a  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  foreign  countries, 
would  be  useful  in  digesting  the  new  proposed  regulations. 
It  is  smd,  that  in  choosing  the  remainder,  they  pitched  upon 
persons  far  advanced  in  years,  widt  intent  that  there  slmuld 
be  the  less  warmth  in  any  opposition  which  might  be  made 
to  the. opinions  of  the  others.  The  direction  of  the  whole 
business  of  government,  however,  was  lodged  in  the  hands 
of  Appius  Claudius,  through  the  favour  of  the  peojde;  for 
he  had  assumed  a  demeanour  «>  entirely  new,  that  from  a 
harsh  and  severe  prosecutor  of  the  commons,  he  became,  on 
a  sudden,  a  zealous  promoter  of  their  interests,  and  an  m- 
ger  candidate  for  popular  applause.  Each  of  them  adminis¬ 
tered  justice  one  in  day  in  ten.  On  that  day,  the  twelve  fas¬ 
ces  attended  him  who  presided  in  the  court  of  justice;  his 

BOOK  IlL 

255 

B.  C.  4494 
nine  colleagues  l^ing  attended  each  by  a  beadle;  and,  while 
perfect  harmony  subsisted  among  themselves,  although  such 
union  between  governors  is  sometimes  fbimd  prejudicial  to 
the  governed,  they  observed  the  strictesreqaity  towards  dl* 
It  will  be  sufficient  to  produce  a  single  proof  of  dieir  modera¬ 
tion  and  fairness.  by  the  terms  of  their  appoint¬ 
ment  there  couhl  be  no  appeal  from  their  decbions;  yet  upon 
occasion  of  a  dead  body  being  found  buried  in  the  house  of 
Publius  Sestius,a  man  of  patrician  family,  and  of  the  decem- 
virate,  (and  which  dead  body  was  produced  in  a  public  as¬ 
sembly,  in  a  case  as  clear  as  it  was  atrocious,)  Caius  Julius^ 
a  decemvir,  also  commenced  a  criminal  process  against  Sesii- 
us,  and  appeared  before  the  people  as  prosecutor  when  he 
might  legally  have  sat  as  judge;  departing  from  his  own 
right,  that,  while  he  took  away  from  the  power  of  the  ma¬ 
gistracy,  he  might  add,  in  proportion,  to  the  liberty  of  the 
people. 
XXXIV.  Whilst  the  highest  and  the  lowest  alike  experien¬ 
ced  this  prompt  execution  of  justice,  impartial,  as  if  dictated 
by  an  oracle,  the  decemvirs  at  the  same  time  employed 
themselves  assiduously  in  framing  the  laws;  and  at  length, 
after  people’s  expectations  had  been  raised  to  the  utmost 
height,  th^y  produced  for  public  inspection  ten  tables;  and 
then,  summoning  an  assembly  of  the  people,  after  praying 
that  it  might  prove  fgiluuateLand  advantageous,  and  happy 
to  the  commonwealth,  to  themselves,  and  to  their  posterity;” 
ordered  them,  **  to  go  and  read  the  laws  which  were  exhi¬ 
bited;  declared,  that  they  had  placed  the  rights  of  all  on  an 
equal  footing,  and  in  as  precise  a  manner  as  could  be  devis¬ 
ed  by  the^  abilities  of  ten  men;  but  that  the  understandings 
and  judgments  of  a  larger  number  might,  perhaps,  strike 
out  improvements^ desired  them  to  examine  rigorously  eacl: 
particular  in  their  own  minds,  canvass  it  in  conversation, 
and  bring  it  to  public  discussion,  should  any  dctlriency  or 
exce^  appear  in  any  article.  They  were  re'soh  ed,”  they 

356  HISTORY  OF  «OME.  [Y,  B.  m, 
said,  that  ^  Homan  people  should  be  bou»d  mdy  ^ 
such  laws  ^  tile  whole  eommunUy,  with  general  cemsent, 
tnig^t  appear,  not  so  much  to  ha^  ratified,  when  proposed, 
as  to  have  proposed  from  themselves.”  When,  according  to 
the  reports  of  the  people,  respecting  each  head  of  the  laws, 
they  appeared  sufficiently  correct,  then,  in  an  assembly  voting 
by  centuries^  were  ratified  the  laws  of  the  ten  tables,  which 
even  at  this  present  time,  after  all  which  have  been  added, 
continue  to  be  the  source  of  all  our  jurisprudence,  respecting 
either  public  or  private. affairs.  It  was  afterwards  said,  that 
there  were  two  tables  wanting,  amd  that  by  the  addition  of 
these,  a  body,  as  it  were,  of  the  whole  Roman  law  might  he 
completed.  The  expectation  of  this,  when  the  day  of  eiec* 
tion  of  officers  approached,  raised  a  wish  that  decemvirs 
should  be  chosen  a  second  time;  and  the  commons,  besides 
that  they  hated  the  name  of  consuls,  as  .much  as  they  did 
that  of  kings,  felt,  at  the  present,  no  loss  even  of  the  support 
of  the  tribunes,  because  the  decemvirs  in  turn  allowed  an  ap¬ 
peal  to  their  colleagues, 
XXXV.  But  when  the  assemWy  ftn*  electing  decemvirs 
was  proclaimed  to  be  held  on  the  third  marketed  ay,  the 
minds  of  many  were  so  fired  with  ambition  of  obtaining  the 
office,  that  even  persons  of  the  first  dignity  in  the  state,  dread* 
ing,  I  suppose,  lest  if  it  should  be  left  unoccupied  by  them,  an 
opening  might  be  given  for  improper  persons  to  obtrude 
themselves  in  a  post  of  such  high  authority,  solicited  votes, 
humbly  suing  for  a  power,  the  establishment  of  which  they 
had  with  their  utmost  efforts  before  opposed,  and  from  those 
same  plebeians,  against  the  gratification  of  whose  wishes  they 
had  hitherto  so  strenuously  contended.  Persons  of  advan¬ 
ced  age,  and  who  had  passed  through  dignified  st^ions,  thus 
lo.werlng  thehr  pride  to  hazard  a  cemtest  of  this  made 
Appius  Claudius  redouble  his  ex^lious.  It  wef^  to 
detemine  whether  he  should  be  reckoned  among  the  decem- 
virs,  or  among  the  candidates:  he  appeared  sometimes  more 

*  BOOK  Ilf. 

257 

B.  C.  449.;j 

like  a  persem  petltioumg  for,  than  one  who  was  invested 
with,  the  office;  he  aspersed  the  charactm  of  the  candidates 
of  high  rank,  and  extolled  the  most  insignifieant  and  the  low¬ 
est.  Surrounded  by  the  Icilii  and  Duilii,  who  had  been  tribunes, 
he  bustled  dniut  the  Forum,  and  through  dieir  means  recom¬ 
mended  himself  to  the  commons;  until  even  his  colleagues, 
who  that  time  had  been  entirely  attached  to  his  interests, 
locdced  on  him  with  amazement,  wmidering  what  his  inten¬ 
tions  could  be.  They  were  convinced,  that  there  was  no 
sincerity  in  his  professions;  that  such  affability,  in  one  who 
bad  always  evinced  a  haughty  mind,  could  not  be  without 
some  interested  views;  that  lowering  himself  to  the  commem 
level  in  this  extraordinary  manner,  and  mbdng  on  an  equal 
footing  with  the  private  citizens,  did  not  look  like  haste  to 
quit  the  office,  but  rather  like  seeking  for  means  to  be  con¬ 
tinued  in  it.®^^ot  daring,  however,  openly  to  oppose  his 
wishes,  they  endeavoured  to  baffie  his  efforts  by  a  seeming 
desire  to  gt^ify  him;  and  agreed  among  themselves  to  ap¬ 
point  him,  as  the  youngest  of  their  body,  to  the  office  of  pre¬ 
siding  at  the  election.  This  was  sm  artifice  to  prevent  his 
returning  himself,  which  no  one  had  ever  done,  except  in 
the  case  of  tribunes  of  the  people;  and,  even  there,  it  was 
deemed  a  most  pernicious  precedent.  However,  he*"declared, 
that,  with  the  favour  of  fortune,  he  would  preside  at  the 
election;  and  be  laid  hold  of  the  intended  obstruction  to  his 
design,  as  the  lucky  means  of  effecting  its  ayomplishment. 
Having,  by  means  of  a  coalition  which  he  formed,  foiled 
he  pretensions  of  the  two  Quintli,  Capitolinus  and  Cincin- 
natus;  of  his  own  uncle  Caius  Claudius,  a  most  steady  sup¬ 
porter  of  the  cause  of  the  nobility;  and  of  other  citizens  of 
the  same  high  rank,  he  promoted  to  the  decemvirate  persons 
of  very  inferior  condition  in  life.  And  among  the  first  rais-  - 
ed,  was  himself:  an  act  highly  disapproved  of  by  all  men  of 
hotmurable  minds,  and  which  no  one  had  believed  that  he 
would  dare  to  be  guilty  of  Together  with  him  were  elected 
VOL.  i.^ — L  I 

HISTORY  or  ROME. 

Marcm  Mdugtfignsls,  M^rcm  Sergius,  Efucius 
Mtuueius,  %Hittus  P^bius  Vifaulnuus,  %iiiilus  PfetUius,  Ti¬ 
tus  AutOiuus  Mereuda,  Cmm  Diulius,  Spuriits  Oppii^  Cor¬ 
nier,  Mauius  Ra^Hileius. 
XXXVI.  Now  the  mask,  which  ApptuS  had  assumed,  fell 
off.  He  began  to  live  according  to  his  natural  disposition; 
and  to  fonn  his  new  colleagues  early  to  his  own  plan  of  pro¬ 
ceeding  before  they  shotdd  enter  on  the  admbiistration  of 
their  dEce,  They  held  daily  cabtds,  remote  from  witnesses; 
wherein,  being  famished  with  schemes  of  tyranny,  digested 
among  themselves,  and  withoift  the  knowledge  of  any,  they 
no  longer  dtssembled  ihmr  armgance;  became  difficult  of  ac¬ 
cess,  morose  to  such  as  addressed  them,  and  continued  this 
Y  304  behaviour  until  the  ides  of  May,  the  then  usual 
B.  C.  448.  time  for  entering  on  office.  At  the  beginning,  then, 
of  their  magistracy,  they  distinguished  the  very  first  day  of 
it  by  an  exhibition  which  excited  the  greatest  alarm:  for 
whereas  the  former  decemvirs  had  observed  a  mle,  that  on¬ 
ly  one  should  have  the  fasce#^  and  that  this  emblem  of 
royalty  should  pass  in  rotation  with  them  all,  that  ia,  to  each 
in  his  turn,  but  these  unexpectedly  made  their  af^arance, 
attended  severally  by  twelve  fasces.  One  hundred  and  twen¬ 
ty  lictors  filled  the  Forum,  and  carried  axes  bound  up  with 
those  ensigns,  the  decemvirs  alleging  that,  as,  by  the  terms 
of  their  appointment,  there  lay  not  any  appeal,  there  could 
be  no  reason  w^y  the  axe  should  be  taken  away.  Thus  these 
ten  magistrates  appeared  as  so  many  kings,  and  thus  they 
multiplied  terrors,  not  only  among  the  lower  classes,  but 
amcmg  the  principal  patricians;  every  one  being  persuaded, 
that  they  wanted  only  a  pretext  to  begin  the  Mrork  of  death, 
so  that  should  any  one,  either  in  the  senate,  or  in  a  meeting 
of  the  people,  utter  an  expression  favourable  to  liberty,  the 
rods  and  axes  would  instantly  be  got  ready,  to  strike  tenor 
into  the  rest.  For,  besides  that  Acre  was  no  hope  of  pro¬ 
tection  from  the  people,  an  appeal  to  them  having  been  pro- 

BOOK  IIL 

25f 

B.  C.  443.3 
hibitedi  they  hsui^  by  a^eement,  also  prohibited  diemselves 
from  interfering  with  each  other’s  decrees;  whereas  the  former 
decemvirs  had  allowed  their  deorees  to  be  amended  by  an 
appesd  to  a  colleague,  and  had  referred  to  the  public  decisiou 
severed  matters  which  might  seem  to  belong  to  their  own 
jurisdiction*  For  some  time  the  danger  seemed  to  threaten 
equally  all  ranks  of  men,  but  began,  by  degrees,  to  be  di* 
rect^  entirely  against  the*  commons.  They  avoided  giving 
offence  to  the  patricians,  while  they  treated  the  lower  ranks 
with  arbitrary  cruelty.  Interest  having  usurped  in  their 
breasts  the  place  of  justice,  they  on  every  occasion  regarded 
the  person,  not  the  cause.  Their  decisions  they  adjusted 
privately  at  home,  and  afterwards  pronounced  them  in  the 
Forum.\If  an  appeal  was  made  from  any  one  of  them  to  his 
colleagues,  the  treatment  he  met  from  those  to  whom  he  ap¬ 
pealed  w^  always  such  as  made  him  repent  of  not  having 
abided  by  the  fc^mer  sentence.  An  opinion  had  also  gone 
abroad,  though  without  known  authority,  that  they  had  cem- 
spired  in  this  scheme  of  iniquity,  not  merely  for  the  present 
year,  but  that  a  cland|:^stine  league  had  been  struck  among 
them,  and  ratified  by  an  oath,  that  they  would  not  call  an  as¬ 
sembly  for  elections,  but,  perpetuating  the  decern v irate,  keep 
a  lasting  hold  of  the  power  which  they  had  now  in  their 
hands. 
XXXVII.  The  plebeians  now  began  to  watch  the  counte« 
nances  of  the  patricians;  and  though  they  had  been  accustom¬ 
ed  to  dread  being  enslaved  by  them,  and,  influei^ed  by  that 
dread,  had  brought  the  commonwealth  into  its  present  situa¬ 
tion;  yet  they  now  anxiously  looked  to  those  patricians  for 
some  ray  of  hope  which  might  guide  ihem  to  liberty.  The 
principal  of  these,  while  they  hated  the  decemvirs,  bore  no 
less  hatred  toward  the  commons;  and,  though  they  did  not 
approve  the  proceedings  of  the  former,  thought  the  latter  suf¬ 
fered  no  more  than  they  had  deserved;  and  had  no  inclination 
to  give  assistance  to  men  who,  through  their  intemperate 

260 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

[Y.  R.  305, 

eageme^  in  pm^wt  of  liberty,  had  fidlen  into  ^very.  On 
the  contrary,  Aey  heaped  injuries  tm  them,  in  ho|^s,  that, 
being  thoroughly  disgi^ted  with  the  present  state  of  %fEairs, 
they  might  wish  for  the  restoration  of  the  former  govern¬ 
ment  by  consuls.  The  greater  part  of  the  year  was  now- 
past;  and  two  tables  of  laws  had  been  added  to  ten  of  the 
former  year;  so  that  there  was  not  any  circumstance,  if  these 
laws  were  once  ratified  in  assembly  of  the  centuries, 
which  could  make  the  now  form  of  government  necessm-y 
to  the  commonwealth.  People  were  in  continual  expectation 
of  an  assembly  being  called  for  the  election  of  consuls,  and 
the  thoughts  of  the  commons  were  solely  employed  in  devis¬ 
ing  a  revival  of  that  bulwark  of  liberty,  the  tribunitian  olEce, 
which  had  beea  laid  aside  so  long.  In  the  meantime,  not 
the  least  mention  was  made  of  an  election,  and  the  deosm- 
virs,  who,  at  first,  had  exhibited  themselves  to  the  commons, 
the  purpose  of  gaining  their  favour,  surrounded  by  men 
who  had  been  tribunes,  now*  collected  about  them  crowds  of 
young  patricians.  These  encompassed  every  tribunal;  they 
seized,  and  drove  about  at  will,  the  commons  and  their  ef¬ 
fects;  the  most  powerful  being  sure  of  success,  in  possessing 
himself  of  any  man’s  property,  in  which  he  saw  any  thing 
desirable,  while  even  their  persons  were  not  secure  from  in¬ 
jury.  Some  were  beaten  with  rods;  others  felt  the  stroke  of 
the  axe;  in  a  word,  cruelty  and  profit  went  hand  in  hand, 
for  a  grant  of  his  effects  to  some  of  their  parti2^ns  ever  fol¬ 
lowed  the  execution  of  the  owner.  The  young  nobility,  cor¬ 
rupted  by  such  bribes,  not  only  declined  making  opposition 
to  the  injustice,  but  openly  demonstrated  that  they  preferred 
the  indulgence  of  their  own  licentiousness  to  the  establish¬ 
ment  of  the  general  liberty. 
^  ^  3Q5  XXXVIII.  The  ides  of  May  came.  The  offi- 
B.  c.  447/  ces  of  the  state  not  having  been  filled  up  by  elec¬ 

tion,  men,  invested  with  no  public  character,  made  their 
appearance  as  decemvirs,  retaining  still  the  same  spirit  to  en- 

BOOK  IIL 

261 

B.C.  447.] 
force  their  mrthority,  and  tlie  sam^'  emblems  to  support  the 
splendor  of  their  station.  This  was  held  the  height  of  ar¬ 
bitrary  government,  and  the  loss  of  liberty  was  deplored  as 
irrecoverable.  No  one  chatnpion  stood  forth  in  its  cause, 
nor  was  there  a  prospect  of  any  such  appearing:  so  that  the 
people  not  only  sunk  into  desp<mdence,  but  began  to  be  de¬ 
spised  by  the  neighbouring  nations,  who  thought  it  would  re¬ 
flect  shame  <m  themselves,  if  a  state  which  had  forfeited  its 
own  liberty,  should  be  allowed  to  retain  its  dominion  over 
others.  The  Sabines,  with  a  numerous  army,  made  an  ir¬ 
ruption  into  the  Roman  territories;  and,  having  spread  de¬ 
vastation  through  a  great  part  of  the  country,  and  collected, 
without  loss,  a  great  booty  of  men  and  cattle,  they  recalled 
their  forces  from  the  various  parts  in  which  they  were  dis¬ 
persed,  and  pitched  their  camp  at  Eretum,  grounding  their 
hopes  on  the  dissensions  at  Rome,  which  they  trusted  would 
prevent  the  raising  of  troops.  Besides  the  couriers  that  ar¬ 
rived,  the  country  people,  flying  into  the  city,  caused  a  ge¬ 
neral  alarm.  The  decemvirs  held  a  consultation  on  the  mea¬ 
sures  necessary  to  be  taken;  and,  while  they  were  left  desti¬ 
tute  of  support  on  every  side,  being  equally  detested  by  the 
patricians  and  the  commons,  Another  circumstance  occurred 
which  aggravated  their  fears  by  presenting  an  additional 
danger  to  their  view:  the  -®quans  on  the  opposite  side  had 
encamped  in  the  district  of  Algidum,  and  ambassadors, 
who  came  from  Tusculum  to  request  assistance,  brought 
accounts,  that  their  lands  were  ravaged  by  detachments 
from  thence.  The  decemvirs  were  so  thoroughly  frighten¬ 
ed.  on  finding  the  cit\’  surrounded  by  two  enemies  at  once, 
that  they  determined  to  have  recourse  to  the  advice  of 
the  senate;  accordingly  they  ordered  the*senators  to  be  sum¬ 
moned  to  a  meeting,  though  they  well  knew  what  a  storm  of 
public  resentment  threatened  to  break  upow  themselves; 
that  all  men  would  heap  on  their  heads,  the  blame  of  the 
devastations  of  the  country,  and  of  all  the  dangers  by  whicL 

2m 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R. 
they  were  etieoth|mssed;  .aiid  t)iat|  cm  thes«  grounds,  attempts 
would  be  made  to  deprive  tliem  of  their  office,  if  diey  4M 
not  firmly  unite  in  the  support  Of  their  eause;  and,  by  efi- 
forcing  their  authority  with  seVi&rity,  on  a  few  of  the  most 
intractable  tempers,  repress  the  forwaidness  of  others. 
When  the  voice  of  the  crier  was  heard  in  the  Forum,  sum* 
mcmittg  the  senators  to  attend  the  decemvirs  in  the  stmate- 
house,  it  excited  no  less  wonder  than  if  it  wct^  a  matter  cn* 
tirely  new;  ‘‘what  could  have  happened tiow,”  the  people 
said,  that  those  who  had,  for  a  long  time  past,  laid  aside 
t}«  custom  of  consulting  the  senate,  should  now  revive  it? 
But  they  might,  no  doubt,  thank  the  war,  and  their  enemies, 
for  any  thing  being  done  that  was  formerly  usual  with  them 
as  a  free  state.”  They  looked  about  the  Forum  for  se¬ 
nators,  yet  could  hardly  discover  one.  They  then  turned 
their  eyes  to  the  senate-house,  remarking  the  solitude  which 
appeared  round  the  decemvirs,  who,  on  their  part,  attributed 
the  non-attendance  of  the  summoned  to  the  general  detesta¬ 
tion  of  their  government;  while  the  commons  found  a  rea¬ 
son  for  it,  in  the  want  of  authority  in  private  persons  to  con¬ 
vene  them,  observing  at  the  same  time,  that  a  head  was  now 
formed  for  those  who  wished  ftr  the  recovery  of  liberty,  if 
the  people  generally  would  let  their  endeavours  accompany 
those  of  the  senate;  and  if,  as  the  fathers  refused  to  attend 
in  senate,  they  should  in  like  manner  refuse  to  enlist.  Such 
were  the  general  topics  of  discourse  among  the  commons; 
while  of  the  senators,  there  was  scarcely  one  in  the  Forum, 
and  very  few  in  the  city.  Disgusted  with  the  times,  they 
had  retired  to  their  country-seats;  and,  being  deprived  of 
their  share  in  the  administration  of  the  public  business,  at¬ 
tended  solely  to  their  private  affairs;  thinking,  that,  by  remo¬ 
ving  to  a  distance  from  the  meeting  and  converse  of  their 
tyrannic  masters,  they  were  out  of  the  reach  of  ill-treat¬ 
ment.  Not  meeting  according  to  summons,  apparitors  were 
despatched  to  all  their  houses,  to  levy  the  pcnaltie’s,  and  at 

BOOK  HI. 

B*  C.  447.3 

tiie  same  tme  to  discover  ivhedier  lii^  iBxm-ztt€ndmce  mus 
owing  to  destgn;  ud  tliese  brought  badt  mi  account  dim  the 
membms  of  the  mnme  were  in  the  ciktntiy.  This  gave  less 
paia  to  the  decemvirs,  than  if  tiury  bad  l^mrd  that  they  were 
in  town,  and  refused  to  obey  their  conmnmids.  They  dien 
gave  orders,,  that  every  one  of  them  ^boald  be  summoned, 
mid  proclaimed  a  meeting  of  die  senate  <m  the  following, 
wl^n  the  members  assembled  in  much  greater  numbers  than 
the  decemvi]^  themselves  had  hoped.  This  raised  a  stwpi* 
ckm  in  the  minds  of  the  conmions,  tbtt  the  senators  had  de* 
sorted  the  cause  of  liberty,  since  they  had  paid  obedience,  as 
to  ^  legal  summons,  to  the  order  of  men  whose  office  had 
expired,  and  who,  except  so  far  force  prevailed,  were  no* 
thing  moie  than  private  citizens. 
XXXIX*  But,  by  all  accounts,  they  showed  more  the* 
dienoK  in  coming  to  die  house,  than  servility  in  delivering 
their  sentiments*  It  k  related,  that  after  Appius  Claudius 
^ofmsed  the  to  be  considered,  and  before  the 
opinloi^  wm  demanded  in  order,  Lucius  Valerias  Potitus 
occasioned  a  g^at  feraa^t,  by  insisting  on  being  allowed  to 
speak  on  the  smte  of  the  commonwealth;  and,  when  the  de* 
c^vtra  endeavoured  to  prevent  him,  by  declaring,  that  he 
would  go  mit  and  apply  to  the  commons*  It  is  likewise 
siud  that  Ma^us  Horatii^  Barbatus  entered  the  lists  with 
m)  less  Imkiaess,  calling  them  “  ten  Tarquinii,  md  putting 
them  in  mk^  diat  Vaierii  and  Horatil  were  among  the 
foremost  m  effecting  the  expulsion  of  the  Kings.  Nor  was 
it  the  title  mei^y^  which  had  then  given  people  so  much  of* 
fence;  fca*  it  was  cate  which  was  properly  applied  to  Jupiter, 
<me  whi^h  had  been  applii^  to  Romulus,  the  founder  of  the 
city^  and  to  the  princes  hk  successors;  and  which  was  still 
retained  in  the  reUgioas  insti^dom,  and  even  considered 
as  material  to  the  performmice  of  die  ^cred  rites.  It  was 
the  haughtiness,  Ae  vioknee  of  Tarquin,  which  then  filled 
thehi  with  ablu»rmice;  and  if  these  were  not  to  be  borne,  in 

2Bi 

HISTCSiy  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  SOS. 

a  persm  wn»^  at  the  time,  a  king,  and  the  son  of  a 
king,^  wbo  wmM  bear  them  in  so  mar^  private  eidzens^ 
Let  them.ee^e  c^e,  lest,  by  foihidding  men  to  speak *^mth 
freedom  m  the  senate-house,  they  might  oblige  them  to  utter 
their  smtiments  in  another  places’  Nor  did  he  see  how  he,  in 
his  private  t^paeity,  had  less  right  to  call  the  people  to  an 
assembly^  dum  they,  to  convene  the  serate.  Let  them  try, 
whenever  they  xhose,  how  much  more  forcibly  a  sense  of 
injuries  would  ope^te  in  vindication  of  liberty,  than  ambi- 
ti<m  in  retainii^  usurped  authority.  They  had  proposed 
the  Sabine  war  as  the  business  to  be  tonsidered:  as  if  the 
Hommi  people  had  any  more  important  war  on  their  hmnte, 
than  against  those,  who,  having  been  created  for  the  purple 
framing  laws,  had  left  no  law  remaining  in  the  sta^;  who 
had  abolished  elections;  abolished  annual  magistrate;  s^lolisfa- 
ed  the  regular  dbanging  of  the  chief  magiftraic,'  the  emfy 
means  of  preserving  the  Ijalance  oi  liberty;  who,  standing  in 
the  rank  of  private  citizens,  kept  possession  of  tl^  ifeces  and 
of  regal  sovereignty.  .After  the  e^tpulsfbn  of  tteking^/th^ 
were  pattieian  magistrates;  afterwards,  on  the  secession  of 
tlie  comment,  pldseian  magnates  w^e  created*  Of  which 
party  were  die  decemvirs?’’  he  i^ked,  Were  Aey  ctf  the 
popular  par^  la  what  business  did  diey  ev^  look  for  die 
coacumnee  of  the  people?  Were  ihey^of  dmt  of  tlm  nobi^ 
li^?.  who,^during  almost  a  whole  year,  n^er  hdd  ^  meeting 
of  die  senate;  and,  now,  hold  it  in  midi'  a  ihannet,  that  peo¬ 
ple  arc  not  allowed  to  speak  of  die  state  of  the  comtnem- 
wesidi.  Let  them  not  rely  too  much  ohdm  timi^ty  of  their 
fellowSf  for  men  feel  more  sensibty  dm^*%eight  of  present 
sufferings,  than  of  such  as  exist  tally  m  apprehension.^ 
XL*  While  Horatius  was  exclaiming  in  this  mann^,  and 
die  decemvirs  knew  not  how,  either  to gradfy  their  anger,  or 
to  pass  over  the  provocation,  nor  could  judge  how  the 
business  would  end,  Cains  Claudius,  uncle  to  Appius,  ad¬ 
dressed  him  in  a  speech,  fraught  widi  inireaties  rather  dian 

BOOK  III* 

265 

B.  C*  447,] 
reproaches;  besought  him  by  the  slmde  of  his  own  brother, 
die  decemvir’s  father,  “  to  pay  more  regard  to  the  rights  of 
that  civil  societyjin  which  he  was  bom,  than  to  a  confederacy, 
formed  on  the  most  flagkious  principles.  This  he  requested, 
more  earnestly  on  Appius’s  account,  than  even  on  that  of  the 
commem wealth;  for  the  commonwealth  would,  doubtless,  be 
abundantly  able  to  assert  its  own  rights,  in  spite  of  any 
resistance  which  the  then  magistrates  could  make;  but  that, 
as  great  contests  generally  excited  great  animosities,  he  could 
not,  without  horror,  think  of  what  might  be  the  consequence.” 
Although  the  decemvirs  had  refused  liberty  to  speak  on  any 
subject,  but  the  business  which  they  had  proposed,  yet  such 
was  their  respect  for  Claudius,  that  they  did  not  interrupt 
him;  he  proceeded,  therefore,  in  his  discourse,  which  he 
concluded,  with  moving  a  resolution,  that  no  decree  of  the 
senate  should  be  passed.  This  was  considered  by  every  one, 
as  importing  that,  in  the  judgment  of  Claudius,  they  were 
but  private  citizens,  and  many  of  the  consulars  expressed 
their  approbation.  Another  measure  was  proposed,  acre 
harsh  in  appearance,  but  much  less  efficacious;  it  was,  to  or* 
der  the  patricians  to  assemble  and  appoint  an  interrex:  for 
that  the  passing  of  any*  resolution  would  be  an  acknowledg¬ 
ment  that  the  persons,  who  convened  the  senate,  were  in¬ 
vested  with  some  office;  whereas  the  member,  who  recom¬ 
mended  that  no  resolution  should  pass,  meant  thereby  to  de¬ 
clare  them  private  citizens.  When  the  cause  of  the  decem¬ 
virs  was  thus  sinking  into  ruin,  Lucius  Cornelius  Malugi- 
nensis,  brother  to  Marcus  Cornelius,  the  decemvir,  having 
been  purposely  reserved  from  among  the  consulars  to  close 
the  debate,  under  the  pretence  of  anxiety  about  the  wan  sup¬ 
ported  his  brother  and  his  colleagues  thus:  He  wondered,” 
he  said,  by  what  fatality  it  happened,  that  those,  who  had 
been  themselves  candidates  for  the  decemvirate,  were  the 
persons  who,  either  as  secondaries  or  principals,  waged  this 
attack  on  the  decemvirs;  and  why  they  should  now,  at  this 
VOL.  I, — M  m 

266 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y,  R.  305. 

particular  time,  when  the  enemy  were  just  at  the  ^tes,  take 
such  pains  to  sow  dissension  among  the  citizens;  while  dur¬ 
ing  so  many  months,  wherein  the  attention  of  the  state  had 
been  disengaged,  no  one  ever  made  it  a  matter  of  dispute^ 
whether  those,  who  held  the  administration  of  the  govern¬ 
ment,  were  legal  magistrates  or  not;  unless  it  were  because 
they  supposed,  that,  in  a  state  of  confusion,  their  conduct 
would  not  be  so  easily  seen  through.  However,  it  was  highly 
improper  in  any  one  to  attempt  to  prejudice  a  cause  of  that 
magnitude,  while  men’s  minds  were  occupied  by  more  ur¬ 
gent  concerns.  It  was  his  opinion,  then,  that  the  plea  urged 
by  Valerius  and  Horatius,  that  the  ofl^ce  of  decemvirs  had 
expired  on  the  ides  of  May,  should  be  taken  into  considera¬ 
tion,  and  discussed  by  the  senate,  when  the  wars  with  which 
they  were  then  threatened  should  be  brought  to  a  conclusion, 
and  tranquillity  restored  to  the  state:  that  Appius  Claudius 
should  consider  himself  as  having  now  received  sufEcient 
notice,  that  he  must  be  ready  to  give  an  account  of  the  pro¬ 
ceedings  of  the  assembly  in  which  he,  in  quality  of  decem¬ 
vir,  had  presided,  and  in  which  the  decemvirs  were  elected, 
whether  they  were  appointed  for  one  year,  or  until  the  laws, 
then  wanting,  should  be  ratified.  It  was  also  his  opinion, 
that,  for  the  present,  every  other  business,  except  the  war, 
should  be  laid  aside;  and  that,  if  they  imagined  that  the  re¬ 
ports  concerning  it  were  propagated  without  foundation,  and 
that  not  only  the  couriers,  but  the  Tusculan  ambassadors, 
had  conveyed  false  intelligence,  then  that  scouts  should  be 
despatched  to  procure  more  certain  information;  but  that,  if 
they  gave  credit  to  the  couriers  and  the  ambassadors  in  that 
case,  troops  should  be  levied  without  delaj^  and  the  decem¬ 
virs  should  lead  armies  to  whatever  places  each  should  think 
proper.  He  repeated,  that  no  other  business  ought  to  take 
place,  until  this  was  disposed  of.” 
XLI.  This  resolution  was  carried,  on  a  division,  by  means 
of  the  young  patricians.  Valerius  and  Horatius  then,  with 

B.  C,  447.] 

BOOK  III. 

267 

greater  vehemence,  renewed  their  efforts,  and  loudly  demand^ 
cd  permission  to  speak  more  particularly  on  the  state  of  the 
commonwealth,  declaring,  that  **  if  by  a  faction  they  were 
prevented  from»delivering  their  sentiments  in  the  senate, 
they  would  appeal  to  the  people;  for  that  private  men  had 
no  right  to  hinder  them  from  speaking,  either  in  the  senate 
house,  or  in  a  general  assembly,  nor  would  they  give  way  to 
those  men^s  imaginary  fasces.”  Appius  then,  thinking  the 
juncture  so  critical,  that  the  authority  of  the  decemvirate 
must  be  overpowered,  unless  the  violence  of  their  opposers 
were  resisted  with  an  equal  degree  of  boldness,  called  out, 
that  whoever  uttered  a  sentence,  except  on  the  business 
proposed,  should  have  cause  to  repent;”  and,  on  Valerius 
insisting  ^at  he  would  not  be  silenced  by  a  private  citizen, 
ordered  a  iictor  to  advance:  Valerius,  from  the  door  of  the 
senate-house,  implored  the  protection  of  the  citizens;  when 
Lucius  Cornelius  embracing  Appius,  through  concern  for  an 
effect  so  different  from  what  he  intended,  put  a  stop  to  fhe 
contest,  and  procured  Valerius  permission  to  say  what  he 
chose.  This  producing  nothing  beyond  words  in  favour  of 
liberty,  the  decemvirs  carried  their  point;  and  even  the  con- 
sulars  and  elder  patricians,  from  inveterate  hatred  to  the 
tribunitian  office,  which  they  supposed  the  people  wished  for 
with  much  more  eagerness  than  for  the  consular  govern¬ 
ment,  would  have  been  rather  better  pleased  that  the  de¬ 
cemvirs  themselves  should,  at  some  future  time,  voluntarily 
resign  their  office,  than  that,  through  means  of  the  indigna¬ 
tion  of  the  public  against  them,  the  commons  should  rise 
again  to  consequence.  They  hoped,  too,  that  if,  by  gentle 
management,  the  consular  government  should  be  restored, 
without  the  turbulent  interposition  of  the  populace,  they 
might,  either  by  the  intervention  of  wars,  or  by  the  modera¬ 
tion  of  the  consuls  in  the  exercise  of  their  authority,  induce 
the  commons  to  forget  their  tribunes.  No  objection  being 
made  by  the  patricians,  a  levy  was  proclaimed,  and  the  young 

268 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y*  R.  305. 

men,  there  being  no  appeal  from  the  present  government,  an¬ 
swered  to  their  names.  When  the  legions  were  filled  op,  the 
decemvirs  settled  among  themselves,  who  should  go  out  with 
the  troops,  and  who  command  the  several  iM’mies.  The  lead¬ 
ing  men  among  the  decemvirs  were  Quintus  Fabius  and 
Applus  Claudius.  It  was  evident  that  there  would  be  a 
greater  war  at  home  than  abroad.  The  violence  of  A  ppius 
was  thought  the  better  calculated  for  suppressing  commo- 
tiems  in  the  city,  as  the  disposition  of  Fabius  had  long  been 
considered  as  rather  wanting  in  good  pursuits,  than  strenuous 
in  bad;  yet  this  man,  hitherto  highly  distinguished  both  in 
civil  and  military  conduct,  was  so  entirely  changed  by  his 
ofiSice  of  decemvir  and  the  example  of  his  colleagues,  that  he 
now  chose  rather  to  be  like  Appius,  than  like  himself.  To 
him  was  given  in  charge  the  war  against  the  Sabines;  and, 
along  with  him,  were  sent  his  xolleagues  Manias  Rabuleius 
and  Quintus  Paetiiius.  Marcus  Cornelius  was  sent  to  the 
territory  of  Aigidum,  with  Lucius  Minutius;  Titus  Anto- 
nlusy  Caeso  Huilius,  and  Marcus  Sergius,  and  it  was  deter¬ 
mined  that  Spurius  Appius  should  assist  Appius  Claudius 
in  the  management  of  affairs  in  the  city,  where  they  should 
have  full  authority,  as  if  all  the  decemvirs  were  present, 
XLIl.  Public  affairs  were  conducted  with  no  better  Ac¬ 
cess  in  "war  than  at  home.  In  this,  the  leaders  were  no  far¬ 
ther  to  blame,  than  for  having  rendered  themselves  odious 
to  their  countrymen;  in  other  respects,  the  fault  lay  entirely 
in  the  soldiery,  who,  rather  than  that  any  enterprise  should 
succeed  under  the  conduct  and  auspices  of  the  decemvirs, 
suffered  themselves  to  be  overcome,  to  the  disgrace  of  both. 
The  armies  were  routed,  both  by  the  Sabines  at  Eretum, 
and  by  the  ^quans  in  the  country  of  Aigidum.  From  Ere¬ 
tum  the  troops  made  a  retreat  in  the  dead  of  the  night,  and 
fmtt&sd  a  camp  nearer  to  the  city,  pn  a  high  ground,  between 
Fideme  and  Crustitmeria,  and,  being  pursued  by  the  enemy, 
would  not  risk  a  battle  on  equal  ground,  but  provided  far- 

BOOK  IIL 

269 

B.  C.  447.] 

thcr  safety  by  the  nature  af  the  place  and  a  rampart,  not  by 
valour  and  arms.  |n  the  country  of  Algidum  greater  dis¬ 
grace  and  greater  loss  were  sustained:  even  the  camp  was 
taken;  and  the  soldiers,  deprived  of  all  their  utensils,  betook 
themselves  to  Tuacuium,  depending,  for  the  necessaries  of 
life,  on  the  good  faith  and  compassion  of  their  hosts,  who, 
on  this  occasion,  did  not  disappoint  their  expectations.  Such 
terrifying  accounts  were  brought  to  Rome,  that  the  senate, 
dropping* the  prosecution  of  their  hatred  to  the  decemvirs, 
passed  an  order,  that  watches  should  be  held  in  the  city; 
commanded  all,  who  were  of  an  age  to  bear  arras,  to  mount 
guard  on  the  walls,  and  to  form  outposts  before  the  gates; 
they  also  decreed  a  supply  of  arms  to  be  carried  to  Tuscu- 
lum;  that  the  decemvirs  should  come  down  from  the  citadel 
of  Tusculura,  and  keep  their  troops  encamped;  and  that  the 
other  camp  should  be  removed  from  Fidenae  into  the  coun¬ 
try  of  the  Sabines,  to  the  end  that  the  enemy,  feeling  them¬ 
selves  attacked  at  home,  might  be  deterred  from  operations 
against  the  city. 
XLllL  To  the  calamities  inflicted  by  the  enemy,  the  de¬ 
cemvirs  added  two  moat  flagitious  deeds,  one  at  home,  and 
the  other  in  the  army.  In  the  array  which  acted  against  the 
Sabines,  a  person,  called  Lucius  Siccius,  taking  advantage  of 
the  general  aversion  from  the  decemvirs,  and  having  fre¬ 
quently,  in  private  conversation  with  the  common  soldiers, 
made  mention  of  a  secession,  and  of  electing  tribunes,  they 
.sent  him  on  a  party  of  observation,  to  choose  ground  for  a 
camp,  and  gave  instructions  to  the  men  whom  they  sent  to 
attend  on  the  expedition,  that  they  should  fall  upon  him  in 
some  convenient  place,  and  put  him  to  death.  He  did  not 
fail  unrevenged;  for,  though  surrounded  on  all  sides,  he 
stood  on  his  defence;  and  being  possessed  of  extraordinary 
personal  strength,  and  of  spirit  equal  to  his  strength,  he  slew' 
several  of  the  assassins.  The  rest,  on  the  return,  gave  out  in 
the  camp,  that  they  had  fallen  into  an  ambush,  and  that 

270 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y*  R.  305. 

Siccius  was  lost,  after  fighting  with  great  bravery,  and  some 
of  the  soldiers  with  him.  At  first  this  story  was  believed;  but 
afterwards,  a  cohort,  which  went„with  permission  of  the  de¬ 
cemvirs,  to  bury  those  who  had  fallen,  observing  that  none 
of  them  were  stripped;  that  Siccius,  with  his  arms,  lay  in 
tVie  middle,  with  the  faces  of  all  the  others  turned  towards 
him,  while  not  a  trace, covild  be  found  of  the  enemy  having 
retreated  from  thence;  they  brought  back  the  body,  with  an 
account  that  he  was  evidently  slain  by  his  own  n&en.  The 
camp  was  now  filled  with  indignation;  and  it  was  resolved, 
that  Siccius  should  be  carried  directly  to  Rome,  which  would 
have  been  put  in  execution,  had  not  the  decemvirs,  as  spee¬ 
dily  as  possible,  buried  him  with  military  honours,  at  the 
public  expense.  His  funeral  was  attended  with  great  grief 
of  the  soldiery,  and  a  general  belief  of  guilt  in  the  decem¬ 
virs. 
XLlV.  There  followed,  in  the  city,  another  atrocious 
proceeding,  which  took  its  rise  from  lust,  and  was  not  less 
tragical  in  its  consequences  than  that  which,  through  the 
injured  chastity  and  violent  death  of  Lucretia,  had  occasion¬ 
ed  the  expulsion  of  the  Tarquinii  from  the  throne  and  the 
city;  so  that  the  government  of  the  decemvirs  not  only 
ended  in  the  same  manner  as  that  of  the  kings,  but  was  lost 
through  the  same  cause.  Appius  Claudius  was  infixed 
with  a  criminal  passion  towards  a  young  woman  of  plebeian 
rank.  The  father  of  this  young  woman,  Lucius  Virginius, 
held  an  honourable  rank  among  the  centurions,  in  the  camp 
near  Algidum,  a  man  of  exemplary  good  conduct,  both  as  a 
soldier  and  a  citizen,  and  by  the  same  principles  were  the 
behaviour  of  his  wife,  and  the  education  of  his  family  regu¬ 
lated.  He  had  betrothed  his  daughter  to  Lucius  Icilius, 
who  had  been  tribune,  a  man  of  spirit,  mid  of  approved 
zeal  in  dbe  cause  of  the  commons.  This  maiden,  in  the 
bloom  of  youth,  and  ot  extraordinary  beauty,  Appius,  burn¬ 
ing  with  desire,  had  attempted  to  seduce  by  toibes  mid  pro- 

BOOK  HI. 

271 

B.  C-  447.} 
mises;  but,  (tndiug  every  avenue  to  his  hopes  barred  by 
modesty,  he  resolved  to  have  recourse  to  violence.  He 
gave  instructions  to  Marcus  Claudius,  one  of  his  dependents, 
^at  he  should  claim  the  young  woman  as  his  slave,  and  not 
submit  to  any  demand  which  should  be  made,  of  her  being 
left  at  liberty  until  the  decision  of  the  suit,  thinking  that  the 
absence  of  the  damsePs  father  afforded  the  fittest  opportunity 
for  the  injury  which  he  meditated.  As  Virginia  came  into 
the  Forum,  (for  the  schools  of  learning  were  held  dicrc  in 
sheds,)  this  minister  of  the  decemvir’s  lust  laid  his  hand  on 
her,  and  affirming  that  she  was  a  slave,  and  bom  of  a 
woman  who  was  his  slave,”  ordered  her  to  follow  him; 
threatening,  in  case  of  refusal,  to  drag  her  away  by  force. 
While  the  girl  stood  motionless  through  fright  and  astonish¬ 
ment,  a  crowd  was  collected  by  the  cries  of  her  nurse,  who 
implored  the  protection  of  the  citizens.  The  popular  names 
of  her  father  Virginius,  and  her  spouse  Icilius,  were  heard 
on  every  side.  Their  acc|uaintances  were  engaged  in  favour 
of  the  maiden,  by  their  regard  for  them;  and  the  multitude 
in  general,  by  the  heinousness  of  the  proceeding.  She  was 
now  secured  from  violence,  when  the  claimant  said  there 
was  no  occasion  for  raising  a  mob,  he  was  proceeding  by 
law,  not  by  force,”  and  summoned  the  maiden  to  a  court  of 
jusidee.  She  being  advised,  by  those  who  appeared  in  her 
favour,  to  follow  him,  they  arrived  at  the  tribunal  of  Appius. 
The  claimant  rehearsed  the  concerted  farce  before  the  judge, 
alleged  that  “  the  girl  was  bom  in  his  house,  and  had  been 
clandestinely  removed  from  thence  to  that  of  Virginius,  her 
supposed  father;  that  of  this  he  had  sufficient  evidence,  and 
would  prove  it  even  to  the  satisfaction  of  Virginius  himself, 
the  principal  sufferer  in  the  case;  and  it  was  reasonable,”  he 
added,  that  in  the  meantime,  the  servant  should  remain  in 
the  custody  of  her  master,”  The  advocates  for  Virginia, 
pleading  that  Virginius  was  absent  on  business  of  the  state, 
and  would,  were  notice  sent  him,  attend  in  two  days’  time, 

272 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R,  SQ5. 
and  that  it  unreasanable  that  a  suit  cmiceniing  his  child 
should  be  carried  <m  in  his  ^^seace^  demaniied  of  A{^ius  U) 
adjourn  all  proceedings  in  the  cause,  iwitil  the  father’s  arrive 
al;  that,  in  conformity  to  the  hm  which  he  himself  had 
framed,  he  should  leave  her  in  the  in  the  enjoys 
ment  of  her  liberty;  and  not  suffer  a  young  woman  of  ripe 
age  to  encounter  the  hazard  of  her  reputation,  befcH’e  the 
case  of  her  freedom  was  determinecL 
XLV.  Appius  prefaced  his  decree  with  observing  that 
the  very  law,  which  Virginius’s  friends  held  out  as  the 
foundation  of  their  demand,  was  a  proof  how  much  he  was 
inclined  to  favour  liberty:  however,  that  law  could  afford  no 
firm  security  to  liberty,  if  it  were  not  Invariable  in  the  tenor 
of  its  operation,  without  regard  either  to  causes  or  persons. 
In  the  case  of  those  who,  firom  servitude,  claimed  a  right  to 
freedom,  the  privilege  mentioned  was  allowed,  because  any 
citizen  can  act  in  their  behalf;  but  in  the  case  of  her,  who 
was  in  the  hands  of  her  father,  there  was  no  other  person  to 
whom  the  owner  should  yield  the  custody  of  her.  It  was, 
therefore,  his  determination,  that  the  father  should  be  sent 
for;  that,  in  the  meantime,  the  claimant  should  suffer  no  loss 
of  his  right,  but  should  take  the  maiden  into  his  custody, 
and  give  security  for  her  appearance,  on  the  arrival  of  him 
who  was  alleged  to  be  her  father.”  Whilst  all  murmured 
against  the  injustice  of  this  decree,  though  not  ode  had  cou¬ 
rage  to  oppose  it,  PubHus  Numitorius,  the  maiden’s  uneje, 
and  Icilius,  her  l^throthed  spouse,  arrived  at  the  spot.  The 
crowd  having  readily  made  way  for  them,  because  they  were 
of  opinion,  that  if  any  thing  could  stop  the  proceedings  of 
Appius,  it  would  be  the  interference  of  Icilius,  the  lictor 
called  out,  that  “  sentence  was  passed;”  and,  on  Icilius 
making  loud  remonstrances,  ordered  him  to  retire.  Even  a 
cool  temper  would  have  been  inflamed  by  such  grem  ill  treat¬ 
ment;  Icilius  said,  Appius,  you  must  drive  me  hence  with 
the  sword,  before  you  shall  accomplish,  in  silence,  what  you 

BOOK  III. 

B,  c.  44r.] 

ara 

wish  to  be  concealed.  This  young  woman  I  intend  to  wed, 
and  expect  to  find  in  her  a  lawful  and  a  chaste  wife.  Call 
together  then  even  all  the  lictors  of  your  colleagues,  order 
the  rods  and  axes  to  be  got  ready:  the  spouse  of  IdUus  shall 
not  remain  in  any  other  place  than  her  father's  house. 
Though  you  have  taken  from  us  the  protection  of  tribunes, 
and  an  appeal  to  the  Roman  people,  the  two  bulwarks  which 
secured  our  liberty,  yet  there  has  been  no  grant  made,  to 
your  lust  of  absolute  dominion  over  our  wives  and  daughters. 
Vent  your  fury  on  our  persons  and  our  lives;  let  chastity,  at 
least,  find  safety.  If  any  violence  is  offered  to  her,  I  -shall 
appeal  for  succour  to  the  citizens  now  present,  in  behalf  of 
my  spouse;  Virginius  will  appeal  to  the  soldiers  in  behalf  of 
his  onl^  daughter;  and  all  of  us  to  the  gods,  and  to  all  man¬ 
kind;  nor  shall  you  ever  carry  that  sentence  into  eft'ect, 
while  we  have  life  to  prevent  it.  I  charge  you,  Appius, 
consider  again  and  again  to  what  lengths  you  are  proceeding: 
let  Virginius,  when  he  comes,  determine  what  measures  he 
will  pursue  in  regard  to  his  daughter;  only  of  this  I  would 
have  him  assured,  that  if  he  submits  to  tliis  man’s  claim  of 
obtaining  the  custody  of  her,  he  must  seek  another  match 
for  his  daughter:  as  for  me,  in  vindication  of  the  liberty  of 
my  spouse,  I  will  forfeit  my  life  sooner  chan  my  honour.” 
XLVI.  The  passions  of  the  multitude  were  now  raised, 
and  there  was  every  sign  of  a  violent  contest  ensuing.  The 
lictors  had  gathered  round  Icilius,  but  proceeded,  however, 
no  farther  than  threats,  when  Appius  said,  that  the  de¬ 
fence  of  Virginia  w^as  not  the  motive  which  actuated  Icilius; 
but,  turbulent  by  nature,  and  breathing,  at  that  instant,  the 
spirit  of  the  tribuneship,  he  was  seeking  an  occasion  of 
sedition.  He  would  not  however,  at  that  time,  give  him 
matter  to  work,  on:  but,  in  order  to  convince  him  at  once 
that  this  indulgen  e  was  granted,  not  to  his  petulance,  but 
to  the  absent  Virginius,  to  the  name  of  father,  and  to  liberty, 
he  would  not  then  decide  the  cause,  nor  interpose  any  de- 
VOL,  — N  n 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  305. 

cree;  he  would  even  request  of  M areas  Claudius  to  depart 
somewhat  from  his  right,  and  suflFer  the  maiden  to  be  bailed 
until  the  next  day*  But  if,  oh  the  next  day,  the  father  did 
not  attend,  he  now  gave  notice  to  Iciiius,  and  to  persons 
like  Iciiius,  that,  as  its  founder,  he  would  not  fail  to  sup¬ 
port  his  own  law;  nor,  as  decemvir,  to  show  a  proper  degree 
of  resolution:  nor  should  he  call  together  the  lictors  of  his 
colleagues,  to  check  the  efforts  of  the  fom enters  of  sedition, 
but  be  content  with  his  own  lictors.”  The  execution  of  his 
iniquitous  design  being  thus  deferred,  the  advocates  of  the 
girl  having  retired,  resolved,  first  of  all,  that  the  brother  of 
Iciiius  and  the  son  of  Numitorius,  active  young  men,  should 
set  off  directly,  and  with  all  possible  haste  call  home  Vir- 
ginius  from  the  camp,  acquainting  him  that  the  safety  of 
the  maiden  depended  on  his  being  present  in  time  next  day 
to  protect  her  from  injury.”  They  set  out  the  instant  they 
received  their  directions,  and,  with  all  the  speed  their  horses 
could  ma^e,  carried  the  account  to  her  father.  In  the  mean¬ 
time,  the  claimant  of  the  maiden  urged  Iciiius  to  profess 
himself  a  defendant  in  the  cause,  and  to  produce  sureties. 
This,  however,  Iciiius  delayed,  in  order  that  the  messengers 
despatched  to  the  camp  might  gain  the  longer  time  for  their 
journey,  telling  him  that  he  %vas  preparing  to  do  so.  The 
whole  multitude  on  this  held  up  their  hands,  and  every  one 
showed  himself  ready  to  be  surety  to  Iciiius.  To  them  he 
replied,  tears  at  the  same  time  filling  his  eyes,  “  I  ana  thank¬ 
ful  for  your  goodness;  to-morrow  I  will  claim  your  assis¬ 
tance;  at  present,  I  have  sufficient  sureties.”  Virginia  was 
then  admitted  to  bail  on  the  security  of  her  relations..  Ap- 
pius,  after  remaining  on  the  tribunal  for  a  short  time  lest  he 
should  seem  to  have  sat  merely  for  the  sake  of  the  present 
busint  ss,  and  finding  that  no  one  applied  to  him,  the  general 
s^nxiety  about  Virginia  calling  their  attention  from  every 
other  subject,  retired  to  his  house,  and  wrote  to  his  colleagues 
in  camp  not  to  allow  Virginias  to  leave  it,  and  even  to  keep 

B.  C.  447.] 

BOOK  III. 

275 

him  in  confinement.  This  wicked  scheme,  as  it  deserved, 
was  too  late  to  succeed;  for  Virginias^  having  already  got 
leave  of  absence,  had  set  out  at  the  first  watch;  so  that  the 
letter  for  detaining  him,  which  was  delivered  in  the  mortiing, 
necessarily  produced  no  effect, 
XL VII.  In  the  city,  a  vast  multitude  of  citizens  were  as¬ 
sembled  in  the  Forum  at  day  break,  full  of  anxious  expecta* 
tion.  Virginias,  clad  in  mourning,  and  accompanied  by  a 
great  number  of  advocates,  led  his  daughter  into  the  Forum, 
habited  in  weeds,  denoting  her  distress,  and  attended  by  a 
number  of  matrons.  There  he  began  to  solicit  each  man’s 
favour;  and  not  only  requested  their  aid,  as  a  boon  granted 
to  his  prayers,  but  demanded  it  as  his  due,  reminding  them, 
that,  ‘‘  he  stood  daily  in  the  field  of  battle,  in  defence  of 
their  wives  and  children;  nor  was  there  any  man  who  had 
given  greater  proof  of  valour  and  intrepidity  in  action  than 
he  had  done.  Yet  what  did  this  avail,  if,  while  the  city  was 
secure  from  danger,  their  children  were  exposed  to  calami¬ 
ties  as  grievous  as  could  be  dreaded,  if  it  tvere  taken  by  an 
enemy?”  With  such  discourses,  uttered  in  a  manner  as  if  he 
were  addressing  a  public  assembly,  he  applied  to  the  people 
individually.  Icilius  addressed  them  with  like  arguments; 
and  the  female  attendants,  by  their  silent  tears,  affected  them 
more  deeply  than  any  words  could  do.  Appius,  whose  mind 
was  hardened  against  all  such  occurrences,  violent  madness, 
rather  than  love,  having  perverted  his  understanding,  ascend¬ 
ed  the  tribunal;  and  when  the  claimant  had  just  begun  to 
urge,  that,  “  through  partiality,  he  had  refused  yesterday 
to  pronounce  judgment  in  the  cause;”  Appius,  without  al¬ 
lowing  him  to  proceed  in  statioghis  claim,  or  giving  Virgi- 
nius  an  opportunity  of  answering,  delivered  his  sentence.  The 
discourse  with  which  he  introduced  his  decree  some  ancient 
writers  have  set  down,  perhaps  with  truth;  but  as  I  no  where 
find  any  one  that  seems  likely  to  have  been  used  on  oc¬ 
casion  of  such  an  iniquitous  business,  I  think  it  best  to  rep¬ 
resent  the  plain  fact,  of  which  there  is  no  doubt;  he  decreed, 

*  HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

Y.  R.  305.3 

that  she  should  be  held  in  bandage  until  the  final  decision. 
At  first,  all  were  struck  motioniess  with  astonishment  at  such 
an  atrocious  proceeding.  Silence  then  prevailed  for  some 
time,  afterwards,  when  Marcus  Claudius  went  to  seize  the 
maiden,  where  she  stood  in  the  midst  of  the  matrons,  and 
was  opposed  by  the  women  with  lamentable  cries  of  grief, 
Virginias,  stretching  forth  his  hands  in  a  menacing  attitude 
towards  Appius,  said,  Appius,  1  betrothed  my  daughter  to 
Icilius,  not  to  thee;  and  I  have  educated  her  for  a  wife,  not 
for  a  harlot.  Do  you  intend  that  men  shall  indulge  their 
lust  promiscuously  like  cattle  and  wild  beasts?  Whether 
these  present  will  endure  such  things  I  know  not;  but  those 
who  carry  arms,  1  hope,  never  will.”  The  claimant  of  the 
maiden  being  forced  back,  by  the  crowd  of  women  and  advo¬ 
cates  who  stood  round  her,  silence  was  commanded  by  the 
crier. 
XLVIIL  The  decemvir,  whose  mind  was  warped  by  his 
ungovernable  lust,  said,  that  “  the  abusive  language  of  Icilius 
yesterday,  and  the  violeitce  of  Virginias,  now  the  whole  Ro¬ 
man  people  were  witnesses  of,  but  that  he  had  learned  on 
good  authority,  that,  during  the  whole  night,  cabals  had  been 
held  for  the  purpose  of  stirring  up  sedition.  Wherefore  be¬ 
ing  aware  of  the  disputes  likely  to  ensue,  he  had  come 
down  with  a  band  of  men  in  arms,  not  with  a  design  of 
injuring  any  person  who  should  demean  himself,  but  cd* 
punishing,  in  a  manner  suited  to  the  majesty  of  government 
such  as  should  presume  to  disturb  the  tranquillity  of  the 
state.  It  will,  therefore  (said  he,)  be  your  better  way  to  re¬ 
main  quiet-  Go,  lictor,  remove  the  crowd,  and  make  way 
for  the  owner  to  seize  his  slave,”  When,  bursting  with  pas¬ 
sion,  he  had  thundered  out  these  words,  the  multitude  of 
themselves  voluntarily  separated,  and  the  maiden  stood  for¬ 
saken  a  prey  to  injustice.  Virginfus  then  seeing  no  prospect 
of  assistance  from  any  quarter,  said  ‘‘  Appius,  I  entreat  you 
first,  to  make  allowance  for  a  father’s  grief,  if  I  have  made 
use  of  too  harsh  expressions  towards  you;  and  next,  to  allow 

BOOK  III. 

2f7 

B.  C.  44r.] 
me  here,  in  the  presence  of  the  maiden,  to  inquire  of  her 
nurse  the  truth  of  this  affair;  that,  if  I  have  been  falsely 
called  her  father,  Lmay  depart  hence  with  the  more  resigna* 
tion.”  Permission  being  granted,  he  drew  the  maiden  and 
her  nurse  aside,  to  the  sheds  near  the  temple  ot  Cloacina, 
now  called  the  new  sheds,  and  there,  snatching  a  knife  from 
a  butcher,  plunged  it  into  his  daughter’s  breast,  with  these 
wrrds:  In  this  manner,  my  child,  the  only  one  in  my  power> 
do  I  secure  your  liberty.”  Then  looking  back  on  Appius, 
With  this  blood,  Appius,”  said  he,  I  devote  thee  and  thine 
head  to  perdition.”  Appius  alarmed  by  the  cry  raised  at  such 
a  horrid  deed,  ordered  Virginias  to  be  seized.  But  he, 
clearing  a  passage  with  the  weapon  wherever  he  went,  and 
protected  also  by  a  great  number  of  young  men  who  escorted 
him,  made  his  way  to  the  gate.  Icilius  and  Nnmitorius  rais¬ 
ed  up  the  lifeless  body,  and  exposed  it  to  the  view  of  the  peo¬ 
ple,  deploring  the  villamy  of  Appius,  the  fatal  beauty  of  the 
maiden,  and  the  necessity  which  had  urged  the  father  to  the 
act.  The  matrons  who  followed  joined  their  exclamations: 
“  were  these  the  consequences  of  rearing  children?  were 
these  the  rewards  of  chastity?”  with  other  mournful  reflec¬ 
tions,  such  as  are  suggested  by  grief  to  women,  and  which, 
from  the  greater  sensibility  of  their  tender  minds,  are  always 
the  most  affecting.  The  discourse  of  the  men,  and  particu¬ 
larly  of  Icilius,  turned  entirely  on  their  being  deprived  pf 
the  protection  of  tribunes,  and  consequently  of  appeals  to 
the  people,  and  on  the  indignities  thrown  upon  all. 
XL IX.  The  passions  of  the  multitude  were  strongly  ex¬ 
cited,  partly  by  the  villainy  of  the  decemvir,  partly  by  their 
hopes  that  the  occasion  might  be  improved  to  the  recovery 
of  liberty.  Appius  now  ordered  Icilius  to  be  called  before 
him;  then,  on  his  refusing  to  attend,  to  be  seized:  at  last, 
when  the  beadles  were  not  suffered  to  come  near  him,  he 
himself,  with  a  band  of  young  patricians,  pushing  through 
the  crowd,  ordered  him  to  be  taken  into  confinement.  By 
this  time,  there  had  collected  round  Icilius,  not  only  the  mul- 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

2f8 

[Y.  R.  305* 

tkude,  but  persons  fit  to  head  that  multitude^  Lucius  Vale- 
rius  and  Marcus  Horatius,  who,  driving  back  his  lictor, 
told  Appius,  that  ‘‘  if  he  meant  to  proceed  in  a  legal  wav, 
they  would  be  security  for  Icilius,  against  anv  charge  which 
he,  as  a  private  citizen,  should  bring.  If  he  should  attempt 
to  make  use  of  force,  in  that  point  too  they  would  not  be 
his  inferiors.”  A  furious  scuffle  ensued.  The  decemvir’s 
lictor  attacked  Valerius  and  Horatius.  The  fasces  u’ere 
broken  by  the  people.  Appius  then  mounted  the  tribunal, 
whither  he  was  followed  by  Horatius  and  Valerius;  to  these 
the  assembly  paid  attention,  but  drowned  the  decemvir’s 
voice  with  noise.  Valerius  now  assumed  authority  to  order 
the  lictors  to  depart  from  one  who  was  but  a  private  citizen; 
and  then  Appius,  bereft  of  courage,  and  dreading  for  his  life, 
covered  his  head,  and,  unobserved  bv  his  adversaries,  made  his 
escape  into  a  house  near  the  Forum.  Spurius  Oppius  rushing 
into  the  Forum  from  the  other  side,  in  order  to  assist  his 
colleague,  saw  their  authority  overpowered  by  force.  After 
revolving  several  expedients,  confused  by  listening  to  a  mul¬ 
titude  of  advisers  on  every’  side,  he  at  last  commanded  the 
senate  to  be  summoned.  This  step  calmed  the  minds  of 
the  populace,  by  giving  them  hopes,  that  as  the  conduct  of 
the  decemvirs  seemed  displeasing  to  the  greater  part  of  the 
patricians,  their  government  would  be  abolished  through  the 
means  of  the  senate.  The  senate  gave  their  opinion,  that 
the  commons  should  not  be  farther  exasperated;  and  that, 
above  all  things,  care  should  be  taken  to  hinder  disturbances 
being  excited  in  the  camp  on  the  arrival  of  Virginias. 
L.  Accordingly  some  of  the  youngfer  patricians  were  sent 
to  the  camp,  which,  at  that  time,  was  on  mount  Vecilius,  to 
caution  the  decemvirs  to  use  their  utmost  efforts  for  prevent¬ 
ing  a  mutiny  among  the  soldiers.  Here,  Virginias  caused 
greater  commotions  than  he  had  left  in  the  city;  for,  besides 
the  notice  which  he  attracted,  by  coming  attended  by  a  band 
of  near  four  hundred  men;  who,  incensed  at  the  scandalous 
injustice  done  him,  had  accompanied  him  from  the  city:  the 

BOOK  in. 

2f9 

B.  C,  447.] 
unsheathed  weapon,  and  himself  being  besmeared  with  blood, 
engaged  the  general  attention,  while  gowns*  being  observed 
in  many  different  parts  of  the  camp,  made  the  number  of 
people  from  the  city  appear  much  larger  than  it  was.  Being 
asked  the  reason  of  all  this,  grief  for  a  long  time  prevented 
Virgmius  from  uttering  a  word.  At  length,  when  the  crowd 
grew  still,  and  silence  took  place,  he  related  every  circum¬ 
stance  in  order  as  it  passed.  Then  raising  his  hands  towards 
heaven,  besought  his  fellow-soldiers  ‘‘  not  to  impute  to  him 
the  guiit  which  belonged  to  Appius  Claudius,  nor  to  abhor 
him  as  the  murderer  of  his  child.  Declaring,  that  the  life 
of  his  daughter  was  dearer  to  him  than  his  own,  could  she 
have  lived  with  honour  and  liberty.  When  he  saw  her 
dragged  as  a  slave  to  violation,  he  thought  it  better  that  his 
child  should  be  lost  by  death  than  by  dishonour.  Actuated 
by  compassion,  he  had  fallen  under  the  appearance  of  cruel¬ 
ty:  nor  would  he  have  survived  his  daughter,  had  he  not 
looked  to  the  aid  of  his  fellow-soldiers,  with  hopes  of  re¬ 
venging  her  death:  for  they  also  had  daughters,  sisters, 
wives;  and  the  lust  of  Appius  Claudius  was  not  extinguish¬ 
ed  by  the  death  of  Virginia,  but  would  be  encouraged,  by 
impunity,  to  rage  with  less  restraint.  They  had  now  warn¬ 
ing  given  them,  in  the  calamity  of  another,  to  guard  them¬ 
selves  against  the  like  injury.  As  to  what  concerned  him¬ 
self,  his  wife  had  been  torn  from  him  by  fate;  his  daughter, 
because  she  could  not  longer  preserve  her  chastity^,  had  fal¬ 
len  by  an  unfortunate  but  honourable  death.  There  was  now 
In  his  house  no  object  for  Appius’s  lust;  and  from  any  other 
kind  cf  violence  which  he  could  offer  he  would  defend  his 
own  person  with  the  same  spirit  with  which  he  had  rescued 
that  of  Virginia.  Let  others^  take  care  of  themselves  and  of 
their  children.”  To  these  representations,  uttered  by  Vir¬ 
ginias  in  a  loud  voice,  the  multitude  replied,  with  shouts, 
that  they  would  not  be  backward  in  vindicating  either  his 
wrongs  or  their  own  liberty.  At  the  same  time,  the  gown- 
*  The  citizen’s  dress,  different  from  that  of  the  military. 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

mo 

[Y*  R.  305. 

men  intemixed  wkh  the  crowd  of  soldiers,  relating  with  sor* 
fow  the  same  circumstances,  and  observing  how  much  more 
shockii^  they  appeared  to  the  sight  than  hearing,  acquaint¬ 
ing  them  also  that  die  ail^irs  of  the  decemvirs  at  Rome  were 
desperate;  while  some,  who  came  later,  averred  that  Appius, 
havit^  with  difficulty  escaped  with  life,  was  gone  into  exile. 
All  this  had  such  an  effect  on  the  soldiery,  that  they  cried 
out.  To  arms!  snatched  up  the  standards,  and  marched  to¬ 
wards  Rome*  The  decemvirs,  exceedingly  alarmed,  as  well 
by  the  transactions  which  they  saw,  as  by  those  which  they 
heard  had  passed  at  Rome,  ran  to  different  parts  of  the  camp, 
in  order  to  quell  the  commotion.  While  they  acted  with 
mildness,  they  received  no  answer.  If  any  of  them  offered 
to  exert  authority,  he  was  answered,  That  they  were  men; 
and  besides,  had  arms.  The  soldiers  proceeded  in  a  body 
to  the  city,  and  posted  themselves  on  the  Aventine,  exhort¬ 
ing  the  commons,  whenever  they  met  any  of  them,  to  reas¬ 
sume  their  liberty,  and  create  plebeian  tribunes.  No  other 
violent  expression  was  heard*  Spur i us  Oppius  held  the  meet¬ 
ing  of  the  senate,  when  it  was  resolved,  that  no  harsh  mea¬ 
sures  should  be  used,  because  themselves  had  given  occa¬ 
sion  to  the  insurrection.  Three  consulars  were  sent  as  de¬ 
puties  to  the  mount,  Spurius  Tarpeius,  Caius  Julius,  and 
Servius  Sulpicius,  to  ask,  in  the  name  of  the  senate,  by  whose 
orders  they  had  quitted  the  camp;  or  what  was  their  inten¬ 
tion  in  posting  themselves,  in  arms,  on  the  Aventine;  in 
changing  the  direction  of  their  hostile  operations  from  the 
enemy,  and  by  seizing  a  strong  post  in  their  native  country. 
The  revolters  were  at  no  loss  what  to  answer;  but  they  were 
at  a  loss  for  a  person  to  give  the  answer,  having  not  yet  ap¬ 
pointed  any  particular  leader,  and  individuals  not  being  very 
forward  to  take  on  themselves  the  invidious,  and  perhaps 
dangerous,  office.  The  multitude  only  called  out  with  one 
voice,  that  Lucius  Valerius  and  Marcus  Hm'atius  might 
be  sent,  and  to  them  they  would  give  their  answer. 

BOOK  IIL 

B.  C.  U7.] 

LI.  When  the  ^puti^  were  dismiss^,  Virgioitts  remind¬ 
ed  the  soldiers,  how  much  they  had  been  embarrassed  in 
a  case  of  no  extraordinary  difficulty,  in  consequence  of  tli^ir 
being  a  multitude  without  a  head;  and  that  the  answer  given, 
though  not  inexpedient,  was  the  residt  rather  of  an  acci¬ 
dental  concurrence,  than  of  a  concerted  plan:  he  recommended 
to  them,  therefore,  to  elect  ten  persons,  who  should  preside 
in  the  direction  of  their  afiairs,  and,  in  the  style  of  military 
dignity,  be  called  tribunes  of  the  soldiers.”  This  honour 
being  offered,  in  the  first  place,  to  himself,  he  said,  Reserve 
to  a  juncture  more  happy,  both  to  you  and  me,  such  expres-^ 
sions  of  your  good  opinion  of  me.  It  is  neither  possible  for 
me,  while  my  daughter  is  unrevenged,  to  reap  satisfaction 
from  any  honour,  nor  is  it  expedient  for  you,  in  the  present 
disordered  state  of  the  commonwealth,  to  have  those  at  your 
head  who  are  most  obnoxious  to  p^ty  malice.  If  I  can  be 
of  any  service,  my  remliining  in  a  private  capacity  will  in  no 
degree  prevent  it”  They  accordingly  elected  ten  military 
tribunes.  Nor  was  the  army  in  the  country  of  the  Sabines 
inactive.  There  also,  at  the  instance  of  Icilius  and  NumU 
torius,  a  secession  from  the  decemvirs  was  made;  &en  being 
no  less  strongly  agitated  by  having  the  murder  of  Siccius 
recalled  to  their  memory,  than  by  the  recent  account  of  the 
barbarous  attempt  against  the  chastity  of  Virginia.  When 
Icilius  heard  that  tribunes  of  the  soldiers  had  been  elected 
on  the  Aventine,  he  feared  lest  the  assembly  of  election  in 
the  city  might  follow  the  lead  of  the  military  assembly,  and 
choose  the  same  persons  tribunes  of  die  commons.  Being 
well  versed  in  popular  intrigues,  and  aiming  himself  at  that 
office,  he  took  care  that,  before  they  proceeded  to  the  city^ 
the  same  number  of  soldiers,  with  equal  lowers,  should  be 
elected  by  the  party  then  with  him.  They  entered  the  city, 
in  military  array,  through  the  Colline  gate,  and  continued 
their  march  in  a  body  through  the  middle  of  the  city  to  the 
Aventine.  There,  in  conjunction  with  the  other  army,  they 
gave  directions  to  the  twenty  tribunes  of  the  soldiers  to 
vot.  I. — O  o 

282  HISTOJKY  OP  ROME.  [Y.  R.  305. 
chocm  of  ^cir  wbo^ere  to  Eold  the  com* 
mand  to  chief:  ^hey  chose  Marcus  Opptus  and  Sextus  Maai- 
lius.  The  seuate  were  alarmed  for  Ae  general  safety,  Jhut 
though  tb^  sat  every 'day,  they  spent  more  time  in  wrang¬ 
ling  than  tn  didiberatlon:  the  decemvirs  were  upbraided  with 
the  murder  of  Siccius,  the  lust  of  Appius,  and  the  disgraces 
which  they  had  incurred  in  war.  It  was  resolved,  at  length, 
that  ^Valerius  and  Horatius  should  proceed  to  the  Aventine: 
but  they  refused  to  go  thither,  oa  any  other  terms  than  those 
*  of  the  decemvirs' resigning  the  badges  of  office,  tbeir  title  to 
which  had  expired  a  year  before.  The  decemvirs,  remon¬ 
strating  against  the  severity  of  degrading  them  to  the  com¬ 
mon  level,  declared  that  they  would  not  resign  their  autho¬ 
rity,  until  the  purpose  of  their  election*  should  be  fulfilled, 
by  the  ratification  of  the  laws* 
LIL  The  commons,  on  being  informed  by  Marcus  Dui- 
lius,  who  had  been  plebeian  tribune,  fiiat  the  time  wm  passed 
by  the  patricians  in  continual  disputes,  and  no  business  done, 
removed  from  the  Aventine  to  the  sacred  mount:  for  Duillus 
had  assured  them,  that  the  senate  would  never  attend  se- 
riously  to  the  business,  until  they  saw  the  city  deserted;  that 
the  sacred  mount  would  remind  them  of  the  firmness  of  the 
commons,  and  that  they  would  then  discover,  that  the  re¬ 
establishment  of  concord  was  impracticable,  without  the  re- 
stoiration  of  the  tribunitian  office/’  Marching  along  the 
Nomentan  road,  then  called  the  Fievdnean,  they  encamped 
on  the  sacred  mount,  imitating  the  moderation  of  their  fa¬ 
thers,  in  refraining  from  every  act  of  violence.  The  army 
was  followed  bv  the  commons,  not  one,  whose  age  would 
permit  him,  refusing  to  go.  Their  wives  and  children  at¬ 
tended  their  steps,  asking,  in  melancholy  accents,  to  whose 
care  they  were  to  be  left,  in  such  a  city,  where  neither  chas¬ 
tity  nor  liberty  was  safe?  So  general  a  desertion,  beyond 
what  was  ever  known,  left  every  part  of  the  city  void,  not  a 
creature  being  even  seen  in  the  Forum,  except  a  few  very 
old  men,  when  the  senators  were  called  into  their  house. 

,  BOOKHL 

283 

B.  C.  447.] 

Thus  die  Forum  appearing  entirely  forsaken^  fsany  others^ 
with  Horadua  mid  Valerius^  began  to  exclaim,  ^  Conscript 
fathers!  how  long  will  ye  delay?  If  the  decemvirs  will  not 
desist  from  their  obstinacy,  will  ye  suffer  every  thing  to  sink 
into  ruin?  And  ^c,  decemvirs,  what  is  this  power  which  ye 
so  ^sitively  r^se  to  part  with?  Do  ye  intend  to  adminis* 
ter  justice  to  bare  wails  and  empty  houses?  Are  ye  not 
ashamed^  that  the  number  of  your  lictors  should  exceed  that 
of  all  the  other  citizens  in  the  Forum?  What  do  ye  propose 
to  do,  should,  the  enemy  advance  to  the  city?  What,  if  the 
commons,  finding  that  we  are  not  moved  by  their  secession, 
should  presently  come  in  arms?  Do  ye  choose  that  your 
command  should  be  terminated  by  the  fall  of  the,  city?  The 
case  stands  thus;  either  we  must  lose  the  commons,  or  they 
must  have  their  tribunes.  We  would  sooner  part  with  our 
patrician  magistrates,  than  they  with  the  plebeian.  The 
office  of  tribunes,  when,  it  was  a  thing  unknown  and  untried, 
they  extorted  from  our  fathers;  and  it  is  much  more  impro* 
bable  that,  after  having  tasted  the  sweets  of  it,  they  will  put 
up  with  its  loss,  especially  as  we  do  not  exercise  authority 
with  such  moderation,  as  to  prevent  their  standing  in  need 
of  protection.”  Assailed  by  such  arguments  from  every 
quarter,  and  overpowered  by  the  united  opinions  of  all,  the 
decemvirs  declared,  that  since  it  was  judged  necessary,  they 
would  submit  to  the  orders  of  the  senate.  This  only  they 
requested,  that  they  would  afford  them  protection  from  the 
rage  of  the  opposite  party:  warning  them  at  the  same  time, 
not  to  suffer  the  commonsi,  by  the  spilling  of  their  blood,  to 
come  into  the  practice  of  inflicting  punishment  on  patricians. 
LIII.  Valerius  and  Horatius  were  then  deputed  to  invite 
the  commons  to  return,  on  such  conditions  as  they  should 
judge  proper,  and  to  adjust  all  matters  in  dispute.  They 
were  ordered  also  to  take  measures,  for  securing  the  dccem* 
virs  from  the  rage  and  violence  of  the  populace.  On  their 
arrival  at  the  camp,  they  were  received  with  excessive  joy, 
as  having  evidently  proved  themselves  the  patrons  of  liberty, 

284 

HISTORY  OF  mM)L. 

fY.  R.  305, 

both  the  mmmencement  of  the  di^rbanee^  wsd  im  the 
detennioatiotiof  the  business.  For  this,  they  received  thau^ 
on  their  coming,  Icilius  addressing  them  in  die  name  of  die 
whole;  and  when  they  began  to  treat  about  conttidons,  the 
same^  person,  on  the  deputies  inquirtug  what  were  the  de¬ 
mands  of  the  commons,  proposed,  in  pursuance  of  a  plan 
which  had  been  adjusted  before  dieir  arrival,  such  terms  as 
plainly  evinced,  that  dicy  grounded  their  expectations  on  the 
equity  of  their  cause,  rather  than  on  their  strength:  for  they 
only  required  the  restitution  of  the  tribunitian  qifice,  and  the 
pnvilege  of  appeal,  by  which  the  rights  of  the  commons  had 
been  guarded,  before  the  creation  of  decemvirs;  and,  that  no 
one  should  suffer  for  having  instigated  the  soldiery,  or  the 
commons,  to  procure  the  restoration  of  liberty,  by  a  seces¬ 
sion.  They  were  intemperate  only  in  respect  to  the  punish¬ 
ment  of  the  decemvirs:  for  they  expected  that  they  should 
be  delivered  into  their  hands,  and  they  threatened  to  bum 
them  alive.  In  reply,  the  deputies  said,  “  such  of  your  de¬ 
mands,  as  have  been  the  result  of  deliberation,  are  so  equi¬ 
table,  that  they  ought  to  be  voluntarily  offered  to  you:  for 
the  object  of  them  is  the  attainment  of  a  security  for  liberty, 
not  for  unbounded  licence  to  violate  the  rights  of  others. 
But  the  dictates  of  your  resentment,  we  must  rather  pardon 
than  indulge:  for,  through  your  detestation  of  cruelty,  ye 
are  precipitating  yourselves  into  the  very  vice  which  ye  abhor; 
and  before  ye  can  well  be  said  to  be  free  yourselves,  ye  wish 
to  act  the  tyrant  over  your  adversaries.  Is  our  state  never 
to  enjoy  rest  from  punishments,  either  infli<^ed,by  the  pa¬ 
tricians  on  the  Homan  commons,  or  by  the  commons  on  the 
patricians?  Ye  stand  in  need  of  a  shield,  rather  ihm  of  a 
sword*.  It  is  abundantly  sufficient  to  humble  a  man  so  far  as 
that  he  shall  live  on  an  equal  footing  with  the  rest  of  his 
countrymen,  neither  offering  nor  enduring  injury.  Besides, 
should  ye  ever  choose  to  render  yourselves  objects  of  toror, 
when  ye  shall  have  recovered  your  magistrates,  and  your 
laws,  and  shall  have  the  power,  in  your  hands,  of  deciding 

BOOK  III. 

285 

a  C.  447,] 
mi  our  Bvai  mid  fortunes,  tben  ye  wiU  determine  according 
to  the  ineiat  of  efch  casej  at  present  it  is  stifficient  to  require 
the  restoration  of  liberty.” 
LIV.  Having,  with  universal  consent,  received  permis¬ 
sion  to  act  as  they  thought  proper,  the  deputies  assured  them 
that  they  would  speedily  luing  back  a  final  settlement  of  the 
business;  and,  returning,  reported  to  the  senate  the  message 
from  the  commons.  On  which  the  other  decemvirs,  finding 
that,  beyond  their  hopes,  no  mention  was  made  of  any  pu¬ 
nishment  being  reserved  for  them,  raised  no  objectimi.  Ap- 
pins,  stern  in  his  nature,  conscious  that  he  was  the  object  of 
particular  detestation,  and  measuring  the  rancour  of  others 
toirards  him  by  his  own  towards  them,  said,  £  am  not  blind 
to  the  fate  which  hangs  over  me.  I  see  that  violent  proceed¬ 
ings  against  us  are  deferred  until  our  arms  are  surrendered 
into  the  hands^  of  our  adversaries*  Blood  must  be  offered  to 
the  rage  of  the  populace.  I  myself  no  longer  demur  to  resign 
the  office  of  decemvir.”  A  decree  of  the  senate  was  then 
made,  that  “  the  decemvirs  should,  without  delay,  resign 
their  office.  That  Quintus  Furius,  chief  pontiff,  should  hold 
an  election  of  plebeian  tribunes,  and  that  no  one  should  suf¬ 
fer,  on  account  of  the  secession  of  the  soldiers  and  commons.” 
As  soon^B  these  decrees  were  finished,  the  senate  was  dis¬ 
missed,  and  the  decemvirs  coming  forth  to  the  emnitium, 
made  a  resignation  of  their  office,  to  the  extreme  joy  of  all. 
News  of  this  was  carried  to  the  commons.  Whatever  people 
there  were  remaining  in  the  city,  escorted  the  deputies*  I'his 
was  met  by  another  procession  from  the  camp,  exulting  with 
joy;  and  they  mutually  congratulated  each  other  on  the  re¬ 
establishment  of  liberty  and  concord  in  the  state*  The  depu¬ 
ties  addressed  the  assembly  thus;  ‘‘  Be  it  advantageous,  for¬ 
tunate,  and  happy  u>  you,  and  to  the  commonwealth.  Return 
into  your  native  city,  to  your  household  gods,  your  wives 
and  children;  the  same  moderation,  with  which  ye  have  be¬ 
haved  here,  where,  notwithstanding  the  great  consumption 

2B6 

HISTORY  OF  HOME*  [Y.  R.  S0&. 
of  fiecess^es  m  so  large  a  ^oltitude,  ao  man^s  field  bad 
been  injured,  tbat,  moderati^m  cany  widi  fou  into  die  city. 
Go  to  the  A ventine,  whence  ye  removed.  In  that  auspicioas 
place,  where  ye  took  the  first  ^tep  towards  liberty,  ye  shall 
elect  tribunes  of  the  commons:  the  chief  pontiff  will  attmid 
and  preside  in  the  assembly.”  Great  were  the  applauses  given, 
and  the  checrfullcst  approbation  was  shown  of  every  thing 
which  was  done.  They  then  hastily  raised  the  standards;  and, 
they  inarched  towards  Rome,  vied  with  such  as  they  met 
in  expressions  of  joy.  They  proceeded  under  arms,  in  si¬ 
lence,  through  the  city  to  the  Aventine.  There,  the  chief 
pontiff  holding  an  Jtesembly,  they  instantly  elected  tribunes 
of  the  commons;  first,  Lucius*Virginius;  then  Lucius  IcUius, 
and  Publius  Numitorius,  uncle  of  Virginia,  the  first  advisers 
of  the  secession;  then  Caius  Sicinius,  a  descendant  of  that 
map  who  is  recorded  as  the,  first  tribune  of  the  commons, 
elected  on  the  sacred  mount;  with  Marcus  Duilius,  who  had 
distinguished  himself  by  his  conduct  in  the  tribuneship,  be¬ 
fore  the  creation  of  the  decemvirs,  and  who,  during  the  con¬ 
test  with  them,  had  not  failed  to  exert  himself  in  the  support 
of  the  common  cause.  At  the  same  time  were  elected,  rather 
on  account  of  hopes  entertained  of  their  future  conduct,  than 
of  their  previous  deserts,  Marcus  Tiiinius,  Marcus  Pompo- 
nnis,  Caius  Apronius,  Publius  Villius,  and  Caius  Oppius. 
Lucius  Icilius,  as  soon  as  he  entered  on  the  office  of  tribune, 
proposed  to  the  commons,  and  the  commons  ordered,  that 
no  person  should  suffer  on  account  of  the  secession  ffom  the 
decemvirs.  Immediately  after,  Duilius  carried  a  proposition 
for  electing  consids,  with  privilege  of  appeal.  All  this  was 
transacted  in  an  assembly  of  the  commons  in  the  Flaminian 
meadows,  now  called  the  Flaminian  circus. 
V  LV.  After  this,under  the  directitm  of  an  interrex, 
SvO.  ^  ^ 
B.  C.  446.  consuls  were  elected*  These  were  Lucius  Valerius 
and  Marcus  Horatius,  who  entered  immediately  upon  the  ex¬ 
ercise  of  their  office.  Their  consulate  was  popular.  But  though 

BOOKIIL 

287 

B.  a  44^.] 
imatteiided  by  any  actual  ill  treatment  of  the  patrictans^  it  yet 
ujcurred  then  displei^urei  for  tliey  imagined  that  whatever 
added  to  the  liberty  of  die  commons,  was  necessarily  a'dimi- 
nudoti  of  their  own  power.  Fimt  of  all,  as  if  h  were  a  point  in 
controversy,  whether  the  patricians  were  bound  by  regulations 
enaett^  in  an  assembly  of  the  commons,  a  law  was  passed  in 
an  nssembiy  of  the  centuries,  ‘‘ that  whatever  was  ordered 
by  the  i^nhmons  collectively,  should  bind  the  whole  people.” 
A  law  which  gave  the  keenest  edge  to  such  propositions  as 
might  be  introduced  by  the  tribunes.  Another  law,  intro¬ 
duced  by  a  consul,  concerning  the  right  of  appeal,  (a  s^gular 
security  to  liberty,  and  which  had  been  subverted  by  the 
power  granted  to  the  decemvirs,)  they  not  only  revived,  but 
guarded  for  the  time  to  come,  b}'  further  enacting,  “  Thatno 
magistrate  should  ever  be  chosen,  from  whom  there  should 
not  be  a  right  of  appeal;  and  that  if  any  person  should  cause 
the  election  of  such,  then  it  should  be  lawful  and  right  to 
put  that  person  to  death,  and  the  killing  ef  him  should  not 
be  accounted  a  capital  offence.”  When  they  had  provided 
sufficient  barriers  for  the*  commons,  by  the  right  of  appeal  on 
one  side,  and  the  aid  of  the  tribunes  on  the  other,  they  re« 
newed  to  the  tribupes  themselves  the  privilege  of  being 
decided  sacred  and  inviolable,  a  matter  which  now  had  been 
almost  forgotNn,  reviving  also,  for  the  purpose,  certain  cere¬ 
monies  which  had  been  long  disused;  and  they  not  only  ren¬ 
dered  them  inviolable  by  this  religious  institution,  but  by  a 
law,  enacting,  that  whoever  should  offer  injury  to  the  tri¬ 
bunes  of  the  commons,  the  sediies,  the  judges,  his  person 
should  be  devoted  to  Jupiter, "and  his  property  confiscated 
at  the  temple  of  Ceres,  Liber,  and  Libera.”  Lawyers  deny, 
than  any  one  is  thus  rendered  sacred  and  invidable;  but  ad¬ 
mit,  that  the  person  who  does  injury  to  any  of  the  aboVe- 
named,  is  deemed  to  be  devofed.  Accordingly,  an  sedile  is 
sometimes  seized,  and  put  in  confinement  by  superior  magis¬ 
trates;  which,  though  it  is  not  a  legal  proceeding,  as  offend- 

2BB 

HISTORY  OP  ROME. 

[Y.  tL  306. 

ing  against  a  |ierscm  exempted  by  this  law,  ia  yet  a  sufficient 
proof  that  nmh  perscm  is  not  deemed  sacred  and  iiivk)W>k. 
It  is  alleged,  however,  by  some,  that  die  tribunes  became 
sacred  and  inviolable,  in  consequence  of  the  old  oath  taken 
by  the  commons  when  they  first  created  that  office;  while 
other  expt^itors  have  supposed,  diat,  l^  diis  Horatian  law, 
the  same  exemptions  were  extended  to  the  consuls  also,  the 
cmsuls  being  termed  judges;  and  to  the  prsetors,  as  being 
elected  under  the  same  auspices  with  the  consuls.  But  that 
exposition  is  refuted  by  this  argument,  that  in  those  times, 
it  was  not  the  custom,  as  it  has  since,  «to  call  a  consul, 
judge,  but  praetor.  These  were  the  laws  proposed* by  the 
consuls.  A  regulation  was  also  made  by  the  same  consuls, 
that  the  decrees  of  the  senate  should  be  deposited  with  the 
plebeian  eediles,  in  the  temple  of  Ceres;  they  had  hitherto 
been  frequently  suppressed  and  altered  at  the  pleasure  of  the 
consids.  Marcus  Duilius,  plebeian  tribune,  afterwards  pro¬ 
posed  to  the  commons,  and  the  commons  enacted,  that  who¬ 
ever  should  cause  the  commons  to  be  left  without  tribunes, 
or  any  magistrate  to  be  elected  from  whom  there  was  no  ap¬ 
peal,  should  be  punished  with  striped  and  beheaded.*’  All 
these  transactions,  though  highly  disagreeable  to  the  patri¬ 
cians,  passed  without  opposition  from  them,  because  n^  se¬ 
verity  was  yet  aimed  at  any  particular  person. 
LVL  The  tribunitian  office  and  the  liberty  of  the  com¬ 
mons  being  thus  *  fixed  on  a  solid  foundation,  the  tribunes, 
judging  it  now  seasonable  and  safe  to  attack  individuals, 
singled  out  Virginius  as  the  first  prosecutor,  and  Appius 
defendant.  Virginius,  having  preferred  a  charge  against  Ap¬ 
pius,  and  the  latter  coming  to  the  Forum,  attended  by  a 
crowd  of  j  oung  patricians,  the  sight  of  him  and  his  attend¬ 
ants  instantly  recalled  to  every  mind  his  shocking  abuses  of 
authority.  Virginius  then  said,  Long  speeches  are  only  of 
use  in  cases  of  a  doubtful  nature.  I  shall,  therefore,  neither 
waste  time  in  descanting  before  you  on  the  guilt  of  this  man, 

BOOK  IIL 

B.  C,  446.] 

289 

from  whose  cruelty  ye  ha^e  rescued  yourselves  by  force  of 
arms;  •nor  will  I  suffer  him  to  add  impudence  to  his  crimes, 
in  endeavours  to  exculpate  himself.  Wherefore,  Appius 
Claudius,  I  remit  to  you  all  the  impious  and  flagitious  deeds, 
which,  during  two  years  past  you  have  dared  to  commit  in 
constant  succession.  With  respect  to  one  charge,  unless  you 
name  a  judge,  and  engage  to  acquit  yourself  of  having,  con- 
trary  to  the  laws,  sentenced  a  free  person  to  slavery,  I  order 
that  you  be  taken  into  custody.”  Neither  in  the  protection 
of  the  tribunes,  nor  in  a  sentence  of  the  people,  could  Ap¬ 
pius  place  any  hope:  yet  he  called  on  the  tribunes  for  aid, 
and  when  that  was  disregarded,  and  he  was  seized  by  the 
bailiff,  cried  out,  “  I  appeal.”  This  expression,  the  peculiar 
safeguard  of  liberty,  uttered  from  that  mouth  which  had  so 
lately  threatened  the  subversion  of  liberty,  caused  a  general 
silence;  whilst  all  with  earnestness  observed  one  to  another, 
that  ‘‘  at  length  it  appeared  that  there  were  gods,  and  that  • 
they  did  not  disregard  the  affairs  of  mankind.  That  the 
punishments  which  attended  pride  and  cruelty,  though  they 
might  come  late,  were  not  light.  That  he  now  pleaded  for 
the  right  of  appeal,  who.  had  abolished  that  right:  he  im¬ 
plored  the  protection  of  the  people,  who  had  trodden  under 
foot  all  the  people’s  rights;  and  he,  who  had  so  lately  doom¬ 
ed  a  free  person  to  slavery,  was  himself  refused  the  privilege 
of  liberty,  and  dragged  to  prison.”  Amidst  these  murmurs 
of  the  assembly,  Appius’s  voice  was  also  heard  imploring 
the  protection  of  the  people.  He  enumerated  the  services 
of  his  ancestors  to  the  state,  both  in  peace  and  war;  his  own 
unfortunate  zeal  for  the  interest  of  the  Roman  commons, 
when,  for  the  sake  of  obtaining  equitable  laws,  he  resigned 
the  consulship,  to  the  high  displeasure  of  the  patricians: 
mentioning  his  own  laws;  and  that  while  they  yet  remained 
in  force,  the  .framer  of  them  was  to  be  dragged  to  prison. 
But  the  peculiar  advantages  or  disadvantages  attending  his 
case,  he  would  endeavour  to  set  in  a  proper  light,  when  he 
VOL.  I. — P  p 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  •  [Y.  R.  306. 
•i  * 
should  be  allowed  to  make  his  defence.  At  present,  by  the 
common  right  of  every  member  of  the  state^  he,  a  Roman 
citizen,  accused  of  an  offence,  demanded  liberty  of  speaking 
in  his  own  behalf,  and  the  benefit  of  a  trial  before  the  Ro¬ 
man  people.  That  his  apprehensions  from  the  popular  rage 
were  not  so  great  as  to  deprive  him  of  all  hope  from  the 
equity  and  compassion  of  his  countrymen.  But  if  he  was 
led  to  prison  without  being  heard,  he  again  called  on  .the 
tribunes  of  the  commons,  and  warned  them  not  to  follow  the 
example  of  those  who  were  the  objects  of  their  hatred.  But 
should  the  tribunes  acknowledge  themselves  to  have  com¬ 
bined  in  the  same  kind  of  confederacy,  for  abolishing  the 
right  of  calling  for  their  protection,  which  they  charged  the 
decemvirs  with  having  formed,  then  he  appealed  to  the  peo¬ 
ple,  and  implored  the  benefit  of  the  laws  concerning  appeals, 
passed  that  very  year  at  the  instance  of  the  consuls  and  of 
the  tribunes.  For  who  was  to  appeal,  if  that  privilege  was 
refused  to  a  person  on  whom  no  sentence  was  passed,  and 
who  had  not  been  heard  in  his  defence?  What  plebeian  or 
person  in  a  low  station  could  expect  to  fi  protection  in  the 
laws,  if  Appius  Claudius  found  none?  His  case  would  afford 
a  proof,  whether,  by  the  new  regul^itions,  tyranny  or  liberty 
was  established;  and  whether  appeals  to  the  tribunes  and 
people,  against  the  injustice  of  magistrates,  were  effectually 
granted,  or  only  held  out  in  show,  to  amuse  the  people  with 
empty  words.” 
LVII.  Virginius,  on  the  other  hand,  affirmed,  that  Appius 
Claudius  was  the  only  person  who  was  not  entitled  to  any 
of  the  privileges  of  the  laws,  nor  of  civil  nor  even  of  human 
society:  desired  people  to  look  at  the  tribunal,  that  fortress, 
where  ^very  kind  of  wickedness  had  been  exercised  with 
impunity,  where  that  perpetual  decemvir,  venting  his  fury 
on  the  goods,  the  persons,*  and  lives  of  the  ci|izens,  threat¬ 
ening  all  with  his  rods  and  axes,  showing  an  utter  contempt 
both  of  gods  and  men,  encompassed  with  executioners,  not 

BOOK  III. 

29l 

B.  C.  446.] 
lictors,  changing  at  length  his  pursuits  from  rapines  and  mur¬ 
ders  the  gratifications  of  lust,  had,  }>efore  the  eyes  of  the 
Roman  pe6ple,  tom  a  free-born  maid  from  the  embraces  of 
her  father,  as  if  she  had  been  a  captive  taken  in  war,  and 
given  her  as  a  present  to  one  of  his  clients,  the  pander  of  his 
secret  pleasures;  where,  by  a  cru^  decree,  and  a  decision 
dictated  by  the  blackest  villainy,  he  armed  the  hand  of  a 
father  against  his  child;  where,  more  strongly  affected  by  the 
disappointment  of  his  unruly  passion  than  by  her  untimely 
death,  he  had  ordered  the  uncle  and  spouse  of  the  maid, 
while  employed  in  raising  her  lifeless  body,  to  be  dragged  to 
prison.  The  prison  was  built  for  him  as  well  as  for  others, 
though  he  used  to  call  it  the  mansion  of  the  ’Roman  com¬ 
mons.  Wherefore,  however  frequently  he  might  appeal,  he 
would  as  frequently  insist  on  his  abiding  the  decision  of.  a 
judge,  on  the  charge  of  his  having  sentenced  a  free  person 
to  slavery.  And  if  he  declined  appearing  before  a  judge, 
would  now  order  him,  as  convicted,  to  be  carried  into  confine¬ 
ment.”  Accordingly  he  was  thrown  into  prison,  a  step,  which, 
though  disapproved  by  none  in  point  of  ju^ice,  yet  gave  oc¬ 
casion  to  much  serious  reflection;  the  commons  themselves 
considering  their  power  as  carried  rather  too  far,  in  the  pu¬ 
nishment  inflicted  on  a  person  of  such  consequence.  The  tri¬ 
bune  deferred  the  trial  to  a  distant  day.  Meanwhile  ambas¬ 
sadors  came  to  Rome  from  the  Latines  and  Hemicians,  with 
congratulations  on  the  re-establishment  of  concord  between 
the  patricians  and  commons,  and,  as  an  offering  on  that  ac¬ 
count  to  Jupiter,  supremely  good  and  great,  carried  to  the 
Capitol  a  golden  crown,  of  small  weight,  as  riches  at  that 
time  did  not  abound,  and  the  worship  of  the  gods  was  per¬ 
formed  with  greater  piety  than  magnificence.  I’he  same  per¬ 
sons  also  brought  information  that  the  Mq\ians  and  Vol- 
scians  were  preparing  for  war  with  the  utmost  vigour.  The 
tonsuls  were,  therefore,  ordered  to  divide  the  provinces  be» 
tween  them-  The  Sabines  fell  to  Horatius,  the  >E^uans  and 

292 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  3G6. 

Volscians  to  Valeriiis:  aiid  so  highly  were  they  regarded  by 
the  commons,  that,  on  proclaiming  a  levy  of  troops  for  those 
wars,  not  only  the  younger  men,but  even  a  great  number  of 
those  who  had  served  out  the  legal  time,  attended,  mostly 
as  volunteers,  to  give  in  their  names.  Thus  the  strength  of 
the  army  was  increased  Wyond  what  was  usual,  not  only  in 
respect  of  number,  but  ^o  of  the  kind  of  soldiers  that  com¬ 
posed  it:  a  considerable  proportion  of  them  being  veterans. 
Before  they  marched  out  of  the  city,  they  engraved  on  brass, 
and  fixed  up,  in  public  view,  the  laws  of  the  decemvirs, 
which  are  Called  the  “  Twelve  Tables;”  some  writers,  how¬ 
ever  say,  that  this  business  was  performed  by  the  cediles,  in 
pursuance  of  orders  from  the  tribunes. 
LVIII.  Caius  Claudius,  uncle  to  Appius,  detesting  the 
iniquitous  proceedings  of  the  decemvirs,  and,  above  all,  dis¬ 
gusted  at  the  arrogant  conduct  of  his  nephew,  had  retired  to 
Begillura,  the  country  of  his  ancestors.  Alarmed,  however, 
at  the  danger  which  now  threatened  the  man  whose  vices  he 
had  fled  to  avoid  the  sight  of,  old  as* he  was,  he  returned,  in 
hopes  of  deprecating  the  impending  mischief.  He  appeared 
in  the  Forum,  clad  in  a  mourning  h^bit,  and  surrounded  by 
his  relations  and  dependants,  implored  the  favour  and  pro¬ 
tection  of  every  individual  citizen  he  met  with,  and  besought 
them,  not  to  throw  such  a  stain  upon  the  Claud ian  family, 
as  to  show  that  they  thought  them  deserving  of  imprison¬ 
ment  and  chains;  represented  to  them,  that  a  person,  whose 
image  would  be  revered  among  posterity,  as  distinguished 
by  the  highest  honours,  the  framer  of  their  laws,  the  founder 
of  the  Roman  jurisprudence,  lay  in  fetters  among  common 
thieves  and  robbers.  He  begged  that  they  would  for  a  while 
suspend  resentment,  and  employ  their  thoughts  in  candid  ex¬ 
amination  and  cool  reflection;  and  grant  to  the  intercession 
of  such  a  number  of  Claudii,  the  pardon  of  one  individual, 
rather  than  through  hatred  towards  that  one,  reject  the  pray| 
ers  of  a  multitude:  declaring,  that  he  himself,  in  his  present 

BOOK  IIL 

B.  C,  446.] 

,  conduct,  was  actuated  merely  by  a  regard  to  the  race  and  to 
the  name:  for  he  had  not  renewed  any  friendly  intercourse 
with  him  for  whose  wretched  situation  he  wished  to  find  a 
remedy;  that,*by  fortitude,  liberty  had  heen  recovered;  VQxd 
by  clemency,  harmony  might  be  established  among  the  seve- 
ral  orders  of.  the  state.^’  He  brought  several  to  incline  to 
his  side,  rather  in  consideration  of  sucR  laudable  attach¬ 
ment  to  his  family,  tl\au  o£  the  merits  of  him  whose  cause 
he  espousecf.  On  the  other  hand,  Virginius  besought  them, 
rather  to  bestow  their  con^iassion  on  himself  and  daugh¬ 
ter.  He  prayed  them  not  to  listen  to  the  supplications  of 
the  Claudian  family,  but  to  those  of  the  near  relations  of 
Virginia,  the  three  tribunes;  who,  having  been  elected  for 
the  protection  of  the  commons,  now,  in  their  own  cause, 
implored  from  those  commons  favour  and  protection/’  The 
tears  of  the  latter  seemed  the  more  entitled  to  pity.  Where¬ 
fore  Appius,  precluded  from  all  hope,  voluntarily  fut  an 
end  to  his  life,  before  the  day  arrived  to  which  the  trial  had 
been  adjourned.  Immediately  after,  PubliiiS  Numitorius  ar¬ 
raigned  Spurius  Oppius,  who  stood  next  in  the  way  of  the 
public  indignation,  as  having  been  present  in  the  city  when  the 
unjust  sentence  was  pronounced  by  his  colleague.  However, 
an  act  of  injustice,  committed  by  himself,  drew  on  Oppius 
greater  weight  of  resentment  than  his  conduct  in  regard  to 
Appius.  A  soldier  stood  forward,  who  reckoned  up  twenty- 
sevea  campaigns,  in  which  he  had  served;  during  which  ser¬ 
vice,  he  proved  that  he  had  been  eight  times  particularly 
distinguished  by  honourable  rewards.  These  rewards  he  pro¬ 
duced  to  the  view  of  the  people;  and  then,'throwingopen  his 
garment,  he  showed  his  back  mangled  with  stripes;  begging 
no  other  terms  of  favour,  than  that  unless  the  accused  {"Spu¬ 
rius  Oppius)  could  name  any  one  offence  of  which  he  (xhe 
soldier)  had  ever  been  guilty,  he  then  should  have  liberty, 
though  a  private  citizen,  to  repeat  the  same  cruel  treatment 
towards  him.’^  Oppius  was  thrown  into  prison,  and  before 

294 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  306. 

the  day  of  trial  piu  aa  end  to  his  life*  Th&  tribunes  con* 
fiscated  the  property  of  Appius  and  Oppius.  Their  col¬ 
leagues  went  ifi^o  exile,  and  .their  property  was  ccmfisca^d. 
Then  Marcus  <  Claudius,  who  laid  claim  to»  Virginia,  was 
brought  to  trial  and  condemned;  but  Virginius  himself  agree¬ 
ing  to  a  mitigation  of  the  sentence,  so  far  as  it  affected  his 
life,  he  was  discharged,  and  also  went  into  exile  to  Tibur. 
And  now  the  shade  of  Virginia,  whgse  cause  was  best  sup¬ 
ported  after  her  death,  having  roamed  through  lo  many  fa¬ 
milies  in  quest  of  vengeance,  rested  in  peace,  none  of  the 
guilty  being  left  unpunished. 
LIX.  The  patricians  were  now  filled  with  dreadful  ap¬ 
prehensions,— -for  the  tribimes  seemed  to  wear  the  same 
countenance  which  had  formerly  marked  the  decemvirs, — 
when  Marcus  Doilius,  tribune  of  the  commons,  imposed  a  sa¬ 
lutary  restraint  on  their  power,  tending,  as  it  was,  to  excess, 
by  telling  them,  We  have  proceeded  to  a  sufficient  length, 
both  in  asserting  our  liberty,  and  in  punishing  our  enemies. 
Wherefore,  during  the  remainder  of  this  year,  I  will  not 
suffer  any  person  either  to  be  brought  to  trial,  or  to  be  put  into 
confinement.  For  I  think  it  highly  improper,  that  old  crimes, 
now  buried  in  oblivion,  should  be  again  dragged  forth  to 
notice,  and  after  recent  ones  have  been  expiated  by  the  pu¬ 
nishment  of  the  decemvirs.  Add  to  this,  that  we  have  suf¬ 
ficient  security,  in  die  unremitting  attention  ever  shown  by 
both  our  consuls  to  the  interests  of  liberty,  that  no  iimtance 
of  ‘misconduct  will  henceforth  occur,  which  can  require  the 
interposition  of  the  tribunitian  power.’’  This  moderation 
of  the  tribimc  first  dissipated  the  fears  of  the  patrkians; 
and,  at  the  same  time,  increased  their  ill-will  towards  the 
consuls;  for  they  had  been  so  entirely  devoted  to  the  interest 
of  the  commons,  that  even  a  plebeian  magistrate  had  shown 
more  readiness  to  consult  the  liberty  and  safety  of  the  pa¬ 
tricians,  than  they  who  were  themselves  of  that  order.  In¬ 
deed  their  enemies  were  weary  of  iaflictmg  punishments  on 

BOOK  III. 

295 

B.  C.  446.] 
them,  before  the  consuls  showed  my  intention  of  opposing 
the  violence  of  those  measures;  md  many  said,  that  the  se^ 
aate  had  betrayed  a  want  of  firiimess  in  giving  their  appro* 
bation  to  the  laws  proposed:  in  fact,  there  was  not  a  doubt, 
but  that  in  this  troubled  state  of  tbe  public  affairs,  they  had 
yielded  to  the  times. 
LX.  After  all  business  in  the  city  was  adjusted,  and  the 
rights  of  the  commons  firmly  established,  the  consuls  de¬ 
parted  to  their  respective  provinces.  Valerius  prudently  de¬ 
layed  engaging  with  the  armies  of  the  iEquans  and  Vol- 
scians,  who  had  by  this  time  formed  a  junction  in  the  dis¬ 
trict  of  Algidum.  Had  he  attempted  to  bring  the  matter 
to  an  immediate  decision,  such  was  the  state  of  .mind,  bodi 
of  the  Romans  and  of  their  enemies,  in  consequence  of  the 
misfortunes  which  had  attended  the  auspices  of  the  decem¬ 
virs,  that  1  know  not  whether  the  contest  could  have  been 
decided  without  a  heavy  loss.  Pitching  his  esmsp  at  the 
distance  of  a  mile  from  that  of  the  united  army,  he  kept  hts 
men  quiet.  The  enemy  filled  the  middle  space,  between  die 
two  camps,  with  their  troops,  in  order  of  battle,  and  gave 
several  challenges  to  fight,  to  which  no  Roman  returned  an 
answer.  Fatigued  at  length  with  standing,  and  waiting  in 
vain  for  an  engagement,  the  iEquans  and  Volscians,  consi¬ 
dering  this  as  almost  equivalent  to  an  acknowledgment 
of  the  victory  in  their  favour,  detached  several  parties^  to 
make  depredations,  some  against,  the  Hemicians,  others 
against  the  Latines;  leaving  rather  a  guard  to  the  camp, 
than  such  a  force  as  could  contend  with  the  Romans.  As 
soon  as  the  consul  understood  this,  he  retorted  the  menaces 
which  they  had  before  used  to  him,  and  drawing  up  his  troops, 
advanced  to  provoke  them  to  battle:  and  when,  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  so  great  a  part  of  their  force  being  absent,  they 
declined  to  fight,  the  Romans  instantly  assumed  fresh  coumge, 
and  looked  upon  those  troops  as  already  vanquished,  who, 
through  fear,  kept  within  their  rampart.  After  remaining  the 
'J I,  USX 
1.;^  . 

2% 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R*  m. 

whole  day  in  r^diness  for  action,  they  retired  at  the  clos^of 
it.  The  Romans,  on  their  part,  full  of  confidence,  empk>ycd 
the  night  in  refreshing  themselves,  while  the  enemy,  very  dif¬ 
ferently  affected,  despatched  messengers  in  the  utmost  htirry 
to  every  quarter,  to  call  in  the  plundering  parties*  Such  as 
were  in  the  nearest  places  returned  with  speed;  those  who  had 
gone  to  a  greater  distance  could  not  be  found#  At  die  first 
dawn,  the  Romans  marched  out  of  their  camp,  resolved  to  as- 
sault  the  enemy rampart,  if  they  should  refuse  to  fi^t,  and, 
when  a  great  part  of  the  day  had  passed,  and  no  movement 
was  made  by  the  enemy,  the  consul  ordered  the  troops  to  ad¬ 
vance.  On  the  army  beginning  to  march,  the  ^quaAs  and  Vol- 
scians,  indignant  that  victorious  troops  Were  to  be  defended 
by  a  rampart,  rather  than  by  valour  and  arms,  demanded  the 
signal  for  battle,  in  which  they  were  gratified  by  their  lead¬ 
ers*  And  now,  half  of  them  had  got  out  of  the  gates,  and 
the  rest  followed  in  regular  order,  marching  down  each  to 
his  own  post,  when  the  Roman  consul,  before  the  enemy’s 
line  could  be  completed,  and  strengthened  with  their  whole 
force,  advancing  to  the*  engagement,  frll  on  them,  and  thus 
encountering  an  unsteady  multitude,  who  were  hurrying 
from  one  place  to  another,  and  throwing  their  eyes  about  on 
themselves  and  their  friends,  he  added  to  their  confusion  by 
a  shout,  and  a  violent  onset.  They  at  first  gave  ground,  but 
afterwards  collected  their  spirits,  their  leadeVs  on,  every  side 
asking  them  in  reproach,  if  they  intended  to  yield  to  van¬ 
quished  enemies;  and  the  fight  was  renewed. 
LXI.  On  the  other  sjde,  the  Roman  consul  ^desired  his 
troops  to  reflect,  that,  “  on  that  day,  fur  the  first  time,  they 
as  free  men,  fought  for  Rome,  as  a  free  city;*  that  they  were 
to  conquer  for  themselves,  and  not  in  order  to  become  a 
prize  to  the,  decemvirs;  that  they  were  not  acting  under  the 
orders  of  Appius,  but  of  their  consul  Valerius,  descended 
from  the  deliverers  of  the  Roman  people,  and,  himself,  one 
of  their  deliverers.  He  bade  them  show,  that  in  the  former 

BOOK  III. 

9- C.  44^0 

die  fsulure  of  victory  hud  been  owing  to  the  leaders, 
not  to  the  sdidiers.  He  told  them,  it  would  be  sc^c^ou^ 
to  .evince  a  greater  courage  against  tl^ir  countrymen  than 
agaimt  their  enemies,  and  to  be  more  afraid  of  slavery  at 
home^  dian  aiwcmd;  that  Virginia  had  not,  perhaps,  been  the 
only  pmon  whose  chastity  was  in  danger  in. time  of  peace; 
but  that  Appius,  their  countryman,  the  only  one  from 
whe^e  lust  danger  was  to  be  dreaded;  and  that,  should  the 
fortune  dF  war  turn  against  them,  the  children  of  every  one 
of  them  would  he  in  like  hazard,  from  so  many  diousmids  of 
eneihies.  That  he  was  unwilling,  cm  account  of  the  omen, 
to  mention  such  things,  as  neither  Jupiter,  nor  Father  Mars, 
would  suffer  to  happen  to  a  city  built  under  such  auspices,’^ 
He  put  them  in  mind  of  the  Aventine  and  sacred  mounts, 
and  that  they  ought  to  bring  back  dominion  unimpaired  to 
that  spot,  where  a  few  months  ago  they  had  obtained  liber* 
tyi  to  show  that  the  Roman  soldiers  retained  the  same  abili¬ 
ties  after  the  expulsion  of  the  decemvirs,  which  they  had  pos¬ 
sessed  before  their  appointment,  and  that  the  valour  of  the 
Roman  people  was  not  diminished  by  the  establishment  of 
laws  which  equalized  their  rights,”  After  speaking  to  this 
purpose  among  the  battalions  of  the  infantry,  he  flew  from 
thence  to  the  cavalry*  “  Come  oa  young  men,”  said  he, 
“  show  that  ye  excel  the  infantry  in  valour,  as  ye  excel 
them  In  honour  and  in  rank*  The  infantry  at  the  first  on¬ 
set  have  made  the  enemy  give  way;  before  they  recover  the 
shock,  give  the  reins  to  your  horses,  mid  drive  them  out  of 
the  field;  they  will  not  stand  against  your  charge,  and  even 
now  they  rather  hesitate  than  resist*”  They  spurred  on 
their  horses,  md  drove  furiously  against  the  enemy,  alrea¬ 
dy  disordered  by  the  attack  of  the  foot;  and  after  they  had 
broken  through  the  ranks,  and  pushed  on  to  the  rear  of  their 
line,  a  part,  wheeling  round  in  the  open  space,  cut  off  their 
retreat  to  the  camp,  towards  which  the  greater  number  now 
began  to  fly  on  aU  sides;  and,  by  riding  on  before,  compelled 
VOL.  I. — Q  q 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

(Y.  R.  306. 
them,  trough  feo*,  to  take  coame.  The  Unc  of  inr 
faiitry,  witii  iht  comvl  kio^lf,  and  tJ^  body  of  the 
miy^  t^iAed  mto  the  camp,  and  m»dc  d^msdves  masters 
of  ft,  kiUing  a  v^t  number,  and  getting  pos^saion  of  consi* 
derable  bo^.  The  news  of  this  victory  ws^  carried  bodi 
to  Ac  city,  void  to  the  camp  in  Ac  country  of  tlw  Sabines: 
hi  tte  city  it  excited  only  gcneial  joy;  in  the  camp  it  fired 
the  minds  of  the  soldiers  wiA  emulation  of  the  gloiy 
dieir  fellow  soldiers  had  acquired.  Horatius  had  already 
mured  them  to  the  field^  by  excursions  and  skirmishes,  so 
that  Aey  began  nuher  to  place  confidence  in  themselves,  than 
to  Alnk  of  Ae  ignmainy  which  had  been  incurred  under  Ac 
command  of  Ae  decemvirs;  while  these  alight  engagements 
had  strengAened  Aeir  hopes  with  regard  tx>  a  geneial  one. 
The  Sabines,  at  the  same  time,  who  were  rendered  presump- 
tuous  by  their  successes  in  Ae  last  year,  ceased  not  to  pro¬ 
voke  and  urge  them  to  fight;  asking,  ‘‘why  they  wasted 
time  in  excursions  and  ret^ats  like  marauders;  and,  instead 
of  making  one  main  effort  to  decide  a  single  wm*,  multiply 
Aeir  operations  into  a  number  of  insignificant  skirmishes. 
Why  not  come  to  a  general  engagement  in  the  field,  and  let 
fortune  determine  Ae  victory  at  once!” 
LXII.  The  Romans,  besides  Aat  they  bad  now  acquired 
a  high  degree  of  courage,  were  exasperated  at  the  diAonour 
which  it  would  reflect  on  them,  if  Ae  oAer  army  wpre  to 
return  victorious  to  Rome,  while  Acy  lay  expired  to  the 
abuse  and  insults  of  Ae  enemy;  “  and  when,”  said  Acy, 
“  shall  we  ever  be  a  match  for  that  enemy,  if  ,wc  are  not  at 
present?”  When  the  consul  understood  that  such  were  the 
sentiments  generally  expressed  by  Ae  soMiers  in  Ac  camp, 
he  cAed  them  to  an  assembly  and  said,  “  Scidiers,  I  suj^^ose 
ye  have  heard  Ae  issue  of  Ae  campaign  in  Algidum;  Ae  ar* 
my  have  behaved  as  bec^se  Ae  army  a  free  peo{de. 
Through  judicious  conduct  of  my  colkagim,  and  Ae 
bmvery  of  Ae  solAers,  victcny  has  been  obmined*  For  my 

BOOK  111. 

0*  C.  446*3 

pairtf  what  I  am  to  adopt,  oat  degree  ^  retol^km 
I  am  to  maimi^  depends  npw  you*  The  war  may  eit^r 
be  i^okmged  wkh  advantage,  or  k  may  brought  to  a 
speedy  cmKrlusion*  If  it  b  to  be  prolonged,  I  ^all  taS« 
caie,  that,  through  means  of  the  smno^  disctpUne  with  which 
I  began,  ymxr  hopes  and  your  valour  shall  every  day  increase. 
If  ye  have  already  sufficient  courage,  and  wish  for  a  spi^dy 
deciMon,  come  <m,  raise  here  a  shout,  such  as  ye  would  rabe 
in  the  field.  That  will  demonstrate  at  once  your  inclinations 
and  ydur  spirit.”  The  shout  being  given  with  uncommon 
sdacrity,  he  assured  them,  that,  with  the  good  favour  of 
fortune,  he  would  comply  with  their  desire,  and  next  morn¬ 
ing  lead  them  to  the  field.”  The  remainder  of  that  day  was 
spent  in  putting  their  arms  in  order.  On  the  following, 
soon  as  the  Sabines  perceived  that  the  Romans  were  forming 
their  line  of  batdc,  they  also  marched  out,  having  for  a  l^g 
time  ardently  wished  for  an  opportunity  of  fighdng*  The 
battle  was  such  as  might  be  expected,  between  armies  both 
of  whom  were  assured  of  their  own  courage;  the  one  anima¬ 
ted  by  a  long  and  uninterrupted*  career  of  glory,  the  other 
lately  elevated  by  unusual  success*  The  Sabiim  added  to 
aheir  strength  the  advantage  of  a  stratagem;  for,  after  form¬ 
ing  a  line  equal  to  that  of  the  enemy,  they  kept  two  thou^md 
men  in  reserve,  who  were  to  make  a  pmdi  during  the  heattd 
the  engagement  on  the  left  wing  of  die  Romans*  These,  by 
attacking  their  flank,  were  likely  to  overpower  diat  wing, 
which  was  thus,  in  a  manner,  surrounded,  when  the  cavahry 
of  two  legions,  amounting  to  about  sm  hundred,  leaped  from 
their  horses,  and  rushing  forward  toxhe  front  of  their  party 
who  were  giving  way,  stopped  foe  progp-ess  of  the  enemy, 
and  at  the  same  time  roused  tl^  courage  of  foe  infantry,  both 
by  taking  an  equal  share  of  the  and  by  exciting  their 
emubtion;  for  they  reflected,  that  it  wmdd  be  shameful  that 
foe  horse  should  incur  double  darker,  by  dischmging  both 

300 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

[Y.  R. 

their  own  duty  and  that  of  otfaei^;  md  that  die  foot  ahould 
not  he  equal  to  tlto  hoiac,  even  when  they  were  dismountod. 
EXIIL  They  pree^d  forward  therefore  to  the  fights 
which  on  their  part  had  been  suspended^  and.  endeavoured 
to  recover  the  ground  which  they  had  lost.  In  a  aaomafit 
they  were  on  an  equality^  while  one  wing  of  the  Sabines  was 
cbqipdkd  to  give  way.  The  horsemen  then,  covered  be¬ 
tween  the  ranks  of  the  foot,  returned  to  their  holies,  and 
galloped  across  to  the  other  division;  they  carried  with  them 
an  account  of  this  success;  and,  at  the  same  time,  made  a 
charge  on  the  enemy,  disheartened  by  the  ifefeat  of  their 
stronger  wing.  None  displayed  in  that  battle  more  coo- 
spicuous  bravery  than  themselves.  The  consul’s  attention 
was  every  where  employed.  He  commended  the  active,  and 
Improved  the  remiss.  These  immediately,  on  being  rebuked, 
caerted  diemstlves  ^ith  spirit;  shame  stimulating  them  as 
powerfully,  as  commendation  had  done  the  others.  The 
shout  being  raisetj  anew,  and  all  uniting  their  efforts,  they 
drove  the  enemy  from  their  ground,  and  then  the  force  of 
the  Romans  could  no  loag^  be  resisted;  the  Sabines  abandon¬ 
ed  their  cansp,  and  were  dispersed  all  over  the  country.  The 
Romans  here  recovered  not  the  property  of  their  allies,  aa 
wa$  the  case  in  Algidum,  but  theit  own,  which  they  had 
lost  in  the  devastatmnof  the  country.  For  this  victory,  ob¬ 
tained  in  two  battles,  ,  and  in  different  places,  the  senate,  so 
un|villing-  were  they  to  gratify  the  consuls,  decreed  a  sup¬ 
plication,  in  their  name,  of  one  day  only.  The  people,  how¬ 
ever,  went  in  great  numbers  on  the  second  day  also,  to  offer 
thanksgivings,  and  which  they  did  with  rather  greater  zeal 
than  before.  The  consuls  by  concert  came  to  the  city  within 
a  day  of  each  other,  and  called  out  the  senate  to  the  field  of' 
Mars;  where,  whUe  they  were  relattng  the  services  which 
they  had  performed,  the  principal  members  began  to  com¬ 
plain,  that  die  senate  was  purposely  held  in  the  midst  of  the 
soldiers,  to  keep  them  in  terror.  The  consuls  therefore,  to 

BX.  446,j 

BOOK  IIL 

301 

take  atimy  all  ground  for  such  a  charge,  removed  the  assem¬ 
bly  into  the  Piamlntan  meadows,  to  a  place  where  the  tem¬ 
ple  of  Apollo  now  stands,  csdled,*  even  at  that  time,  the  Cir¬ 
cus  of  Apollo.  Here,  a  vast  majority  of  the  senators  con¬ 
curring  in  refusing  a  triumph  to  the  consul,  Lucius  Icilius, 
tribune  of  the  commons,  proposed  to  the  people,  that  they 
should  take  on  them  the  ordering  of  it.  Many  stood  forth 
to  argue  against  this  proceeding;  particularly  Caius  Claudius 
exclaimed,  that  ‘‘  it  was  over  the  patricians,  not  over  the 
enemy,  that  the  consuls  sought  to  triumph;  and  that  more  as 
a  return  for  their  private  kindness  to  a  tribune,  not  as  an 
honour  due  to  valour.  That  a  triumph  was  a  matter  which 
had  never,  hitherto,  been  directed  by  the  people;  but  that  the 
judgment  on  the  merit,  aud  the  disposal  of  it,  had  always 
been  in  the  senate.  That  even  the  kings  had  not  in  this  re¬ 
spect  derogated  from  that  order,  the  principal  one  in  the 
state.  He  charged  the  tribunes  not  to  occupy  every  depart¬ 
ment  so  entirely  wkh  their  own  authority,  as  to  4eave  no 
room  for  the  deliberation  of  the  public;  and  asserted,  that  by 
no  other  memis  could  the  state  be  free,  or  the  laws  equalized, 
than  by  each  dass  maintaining  its  own  rights,  and  its  own 
dignity.”  Though  many  arguments  were  used  to  the  same 
purpose  by  the  other  and  elder  senators,  yet  every  one  of 
the  tribes  approved  of  the  proposition.  This  was  the  first 
instance  of  a  triumph  celebrated  by  order  of  the  people, 
without  the  approbation  of  the  senate. 
LXIV.  This  .victory  of  the  tribunes  and  commons  was 
very  near  terminating  in  a  wanton  irregularity  of  pernicious 
tendency,  a  con^iracy  being  formed  among  the  tribunes  to 
procure  the  re-election  of  the  same  persons  to  that  office; 
and,  in  or^er  that  their  own  ambition  might  be  the  less  con¬ 
spicuous  or  Objectionable,  to  re-elect  also  the  same  consuls. 
They  alleged,  as  a  pretext,  a  combination  of  the  patricians 
to  sap  the  foundation  of  die  rights  of  the  commons,  by  the 
affronts  which  they  thi*ew  upon  the  consuls.  “  What  would 

3«  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  fT.  IL  SOS. 
be  tbc  consef|ii€iiC€,^’  they  siati,  ^  i€>  befero  dste  laws  wete 
firmly  es^ltriiedf  coiisub  sbotdd,  with  ^  power  of  ^ehr 
faction,  misdte  mi  cm  ^  new  tribml^^  For  they 
cemidiaot  always  have  Valerii  and  Horatii  kar  consols,  wfam 
wtmld  postpeme  their  own  intei^sty  when  the  Kbejrty  of  the 
commons  was  in  question,”  a  concurrence  of  circum* 
stances,  fortunate  at  this  juncture,  the  charge  of  presiding 
at  the  election  fell  to  the  lot  of  Marcus  Dutlius,  a  sami  of 
prudence,  and  whd  clearly  perceived  what  a  heavy  load  of 
public  dispkasi^te  they  would  probably  have  to  sustain,  if 
they  should  be  continued  in  office.  He  declared,  that  he 
would  admit  no  vote  for  miy  of  the  former  tribimcs;  while 
his  colleagues  strenuously  insisted,  that  be  should  leave  the 
tribes  at  liberty  to  vote  as  th^  thou^^t  proper;  or  ei^, 
should  give  up  his  turn  of  presiding  to  hk  colleague  who 
would  hold  the  election,  according  to  the  laws,  rather  thmi 
according  ^  the  pleasure  of  the  pametans.  Duilius,  cm 
finding  axontest  thus  forced  upon  him,  ^Ued  the^cemsuk  to 
his  seat,  and  asked  them  what  was  their  intention  with  re* 
spect  to  the  consular  election.  To  which  they  answered; 
that  they  were  resolved  to  appoint  new  consuls.  Having 
thus  gained^  popular  supporters  of  his  unpopular  measure, 
he  advanced  together  with  them  into  the  assembly.  The 
consuls  being  there  brought  forward,  and  asked,  in  what 
manner  they  would  act,  should  the  Roman  people,  out  of 
gratitude  for  having,  by  their  means,  recovered  their  liberty 
and  for  their  meritorious  and  successful  services  in  war,  ap* 
point  them  a, second  time  to  the  consulship,  declared  the 
same  resolution  as  before.  On  whkh,  Duilius,  after  many 
eulogiums  paid  to  theni  for  persevering  in  a  line  of  conduct 
quite  different  from  that  of  tbr  decemvirs,  proceeded  to  ^e 
election;  and  when  five  tribunes  of  die  commons  were  elec¬ 
ted,  the  other  candidates  not  being  able  to  make  up  the  rcr 
quisite  nundier  of  tribes,  on  acemmt  of  the  eagerness  with 
which  the  nine  tribunes  openly  pushed  for  the  office,  he 

BOOK  UL 

303 

B.‘C.446,3 
dismissed  the  jmembly^  and  did  not  aiterwards  caii  one.  He 
smd,  thm  he  liad  fnl&Ued  the  la?y;  which^  withont  any  where 
sp^ifying  liie  tmmber  of  mbuaes,  mdy  enacted,  th^t  tri* 
hones  should  he  left;  and  he  recited  the  terns  of  die  law, 
in  whidi  it  is  mid,  ^  if  I  propose  ten  tribunes  of  the  com* 
mons,  and  if  diere  should  at  that  time  be  found  a  less  num¬ 
ber  thim  ten  tribunes,  then  the  persons  whom  these  shall 
assume  as  coHeagues,  shall  be  legal  tribunes  of  die  commons, 
with  die  same  privileges  as  those  whom  ye  on  that  day  made 
tribunes  of  the  commons.^  ’  Dutiius,  persevering  to  the  last, 
and  declaring  the  commonwealth  could  not  have  fifteen 
tribunes,  after  bafBtng  the  andiitimi  of  his  coUeagaes,  resign* 
ed  his  office,  with  high  appr€43ation  both  from  the  patriciaas 
and  tl^  plebeisms. 
LXV.  The  newtribmiesof  the  commcms show-  ^  ^ 
ed,  in^hetr  electtonof  colleagues,  an  incUnation  to  B.  C.  445. 
gratify  the  patricians.  They  chose  two,*  who  were  patri- 
cimis  imd  even  consulars,  Spurius  Tarpcius  and  Aulus  Ate- 
rim.  The  consuls,  then  elected,  wtare^  Largius  Herminius 
and  Titus  Virginius  Codimonmnus,  men  not  warmly  attach¬ 
ed  to  either  party,  patricians  or  plebeians.  They  had  a 
peaceful  year  both  at  home  and  abroad.  Lucius  Tretonius, 
tribune  of  die  commons,  a  bitter  enemy  to  the  patricians, 
because^  as  he  said,  he  had  been  imposed  on  by  them,  and 
betrayed  in  the  affair  of  clmori^g  colleagues,  carried  a  pro¬ 
posal  that  whoever  took  die  of  the  commons  on  the 
eketion  of  plebeian  tribunes,  should  continue  the  proceed¬ 
ings  untU  he  should  return  ten  of  that  order.  The  whole 
time  of  being  in  office  w^  passed  in  creating  macasiness  to 
the  patricians,  from  whence  the  surname  of  Asper  (harsh) 
was  given  him.  fitarcus  Geganius  Macerinus  y  ^ 
and  Caius  Julius,  the  next  consuls  chosen,  pre- 
vented  the  ill  effects  of  some  combinations,  formed  by  the 
tribunes  against  the  young  mdiies,  without  taking  any  violent 
steps  against  those  magktrates,  and,  at  the  same  time  pre- 

304  -  HISTORY  OF  mmE.  [Y.R.  SOt. 
serving  ^  dignity  of  the  patrkmos.  Wishing  to 
give  time  matter  to  cool^  they  restrauied  die  cmnr 
mons  from  nai^  in  sedidmi  by  a  prodatpaation  for  a 
of  troopSy  to  aet  against  the  ^quans  and  Vokcians;  giving, 
as  ;a  sufficient  x^son,  that  while  harmony  |>revailed  in  the 
city,  every  tWng  abroad  Was  also  quiet,  bnt  whenever  civil 
discord  broke  out,  their  foreign  enraiies  assumed  new  cou¬ 
rage.  This  care  to  preserve  peace  abroad,  proved  the  cause 
of  domestic  coTOord.  But  each  of  the  orders  always  took  an 
improper  advantage  of  naoderation  in  the  other.  As  soon 
as  the  commons  grew  ^anqui4  the  younger  patridans  began 
to  insult  them.  When  the  tribunes  attempted  protect 
the  wedeer  party,  even  at  first  they  were  of  litde  use;  after¬ 
wards,  they  themselves  incurred  Ul-treatmeiU,  particularly 
in  the  latter  months,  because  the  combmations,  dien  formed 
among  the  more  powerful,  encouraged  them  to  it,  while  the 
rigour  of  every  i^gistracy  generally  relaxes  somewhat  at 
that  time.  And  now  the  commons  began  to  think  that  they 
had  nothing  to  hope  from  their  tribunes,  unless  they  pro¬ 
cured  such  as  Iciiius,  for  those  wlnun  they  had  for  two  years 
past  were  but  nominal  tribunes.  On  die  other  side,  the  eU' 
der  patricians,  although  they  were  cmivinced  that  the  young¬ 
er  part  of  their  body  carried  dieir  presumpf ion  ^too  for,  yet 
were  better  pleased,  if  the  bounds  of  moderation  were  to  be 
exceeded,  that  those  of  their  ^  own  order  should  possess  a 
redundancy  of  spirit,  than  should  their  adversaries.  So  dif¬ 
ficult  it  is  to  preserve  moderation  in  the  averting  of  liberty, 
while,  under  the  pretence  of  a  desire  to  balance  rights,  each 
elevates  himself  in  such  a  manner,  as  to  depress  another;  for 
men  are  apt,  by  the  very  measures  which  they  adopt  to  free 
themselves  from  fear,  to  become  the  c^jects  of  fear  to  others; 
and  to  fasten  upon  them  the  burthen  of  injusdee,  which  they 
have  thrown  off  from  their  own  shoulders:  as  if  there  exist¬ 
ed  in  nature  a  perpetual  necessity,  either  of  doing  or  of  sufr 
fering  injury.  * 

BOOK  III 

305 

B.  C.  444.3 
LXVI.  The  next  consiils  elected  were  Titus  y.  R.  309. 
Quintius  Capitolinas  a  fourth  time^  and  Agrippa 
Furius,  who  fpund,  at  the  commencement  of  their  year,  nei¬ 
ther  sedition  at  home,  nor  war  abroad,  but  reason  suihcient 
to  apprehend  both.  The  citizens  could  no  longer  be  kept 
within  bounds,  both  tribunes  and  commons  being  highly  ex* 
asperated  against  the  patricians,  and  every  charge  brought 
against  any  of  the  nobility  constantly  embroiling  the  assem¬ 
blies  and  creating  new  contests.  As' soon  as  these  were 
noised  abroad,  the  iEquans  and  Volscians,  as  if  they  had 
waited  for  this  signal  immediately  took  up  arms;  being,  at 
the  same  time,  persuaded  by  their  leaders,  who  were  eager 
for  plunder,  that  the  levy  which  had  been  proclaimed  the 
last  year  had  been  found  impracticable,  the  commons  refus¬ 
ing  obedience;  and  that,  for  that  reason,  no  army  had  been 
sent  against  them;  that  their  military  discipline  was  subvert¬ 
ed  by  licentiousness,  and  that  Rome  was  no  longer  consi¬ 
dered  as  their  common  country;  that  all  the  resentment  and 
animosity  which  they  had  entertained  against  foreigners,  was 
now  turned  against  each  other,  and  that  there  was  a  favoura¬ 
ble  opportunity  of  destroying  those  wolves,  while  they  were 
blinded  by  intestine  rage.  Having  therefore  united  their 
forces,  they  laid  waste  the  country  of  Liatium;  where,  none 
attempting  to  obstruct  them,  and  the  promoters  of  the  war 
highly  exulting,  they  advanced  to  the  very  walls  of  Rome, 
carrying  on  their  ravages  opposite  to  the  Esquiline  gate,  and 
insulting  the  city.  From  thence,  they  marched  back  without 
molestation,  in  regular  order,  driving  the  prey  before  them 
to  Corbio.  Qumtius  the  consul  then  summoned  the  people 
to  an  assembly. 
LXVI  I.  There,  as  we  are  told,  he  spoke  to  this  purpose: 
Although  unconscious  of  any  misconduct  on  my  part,  yet 
it  is  with  the  utmost  shame,  Romans,  that  I  am  come  here, 
to  meet  you  in  assembly.  That  ye  should  be  witnesses  of 
such  an  event,  that  it  should  be  handed  down,  on  record,  to 
VOL  T. — R  r 

306 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  309, 
posterity;  that,  in  the  fourth  consulate  of  Titus  Quintius, 
the  ^quans  and  Volscians,  who,  a  short  time  ago,  were 
barely  a  match  for  the  Hernicians,  should  have  marched  in 
arms,  without  molestation,  to  the  walls  of  the  city  of  Rome! 
Could  I  have  foreseen  that  this  ignominy  was  reserved  for 
this  particular  yea»-,  though  such  is  the  general  state  of  man¬ 
ners  for  a  long  time  past,  such  the  condition  of  affairs,  that 
my  mind  could  presage  no  good,  I  would  yet  have  avoided 
this  honourable  post,l>y  exile  or  by  death,  if  there  had  been 
no  other  way  of  escaping  it.  Could  Rome  then  have  been 
taken  in  my  consulship,  if  those  arms,  ^at  were  at  our  gates, 
had  been  in  the  hands  of  men  of  courage?  I  had  enjoyed 
enough  of  honours,  more  than  enough  of  life;  I  ought  not  to 
have  outlived  my  third  consulship.  But,  of  whom  have  those 
once  dastardly  enemies  dared  to  show  such  contempt;  of  us 
consuls?  or  of  you  Romans?  If  the  fault  lies  in  us,  we  should 
be  deprived  of  the  command,  as  unworthy  of  it,  and  if  that 
be  not  enough,  inflict  some  fartlfer  punishment:  if  in  you, 
may  no  divine,  or  human  being  chastise  your  transgressions* 
only  may  ye  yourselves  gain  a  proper  sense  of  them.  They 
have  not  been  actuated  to  this  conduct,  as  supposing  you 
void  of  spirit,  nor  from  confidence  in  their  own  valour. 
After  being  so  often  routed  and  put  to  flight,  beaten  out  of 
their  camps,  stripped  of  their  territories^  and  sent  under  the 
yoke,  they  well  know  both  themselves  and  you.  Party  dis¬ 
sensions  are  the  bane  of  this  city;  the  struggles  between  the 
patricians  and  the  plebeians,  while  neither  we  fix  due  limits 
to  uur  authority,  nor  ye  to  your  liberty;  while  ye  wish  to 
get  rid  of  patrician,  we  of  plebeian  magistrates,  they  have 
assumed  unusual  courage.  In  the  name  of  the  gods,  what 
would  ye  have?  Ye  wished  for  tribunes  of  the  commons; 
for  the  sake  of  concord,  we  granted  them  to  you.  Ye  longed 
for  decemvirs;  we  allowed  them  to  be  created.  Ye  grew 
weary  of  decemvirs;  we  compelled  them  to  resign  the  office. 
Your  resentment  against  them  continuing,  even  after  they 

B.  C.  443. j 

BOOK  III. 

307 

were  devested  of  their  public  character,  we  suffered  men  of 
the  most  distinguished  families  and  stations,  some  to  perish, 
and  others  to  go  into  exile.  Ye  wished  again  to  create  tri¬ 
bunes  of  the  commons;  ye  created  them.  Although  we  saw 
manifest  injustice  to  the  nobles  in  electing  men  of  your  or¬ 
der  to  the  consulship;  yet  have  we  beheld  patrician  magis¬ 
tracy,  along  with  the  rest,  conceded  to  the  commons.  The 
tribunes’  power  of  protecting  the  privilege  of  appeal  to  the 
people;  the  acts  of  the  commons  rendered  binding  on  the 
patricians;  our  own  rights  subverted,  under  the  pretext  of 
equalizing  the  laws;  all  this  we  have  endured,  and  still  en¬ 
dure.  Where,  then,  will  be  the  end  of  our  dissensions?  Shall 
we  never  be  allowed  to  have  an  united  city  and  one  common 
country?  We,  the  party  vanquished,  sit  down  in  quiet,  with 
greater  composure,  than  ye  who  have  gained  the  victory. 
Do  ye  think  it  enough,  that  to  us  ye  are  objects  of  terror? 
The  Aventine  is  taken  from  us;  the  sacred  mount  is  seized. 
But  when  the  Esquiline  is  almost  in  the  hands  of  the  ene¬ 
my,  no  one  appears  in  its  defence.  The  Volscian  foe  scales 
vour  rampart,  and  not  a  man  drives  him  back.  Against  us 
ye  exert  your  courage,  against  us  ye  readily  take  arms.” 
LXVIII.  Now  then  that  ye  have  blockaded  the  senate- 
house,  rendered  the  Forum  the  seat  of  hostilities,  and  filled 
the  prison  with  the  principal  citizens,  show  an  equal  de¬ 
gree  of  valour,  and  march  out  through  the  Esquiline  gate; 
or  if  ye  have  not  courage  for  that,  view  from  the  walls  your 
lands  desolated  with  fire  and  sword,  your  own  property 
carried  off,  and  the  burning  houses  smoking  all  round.  But 
ye  will  say,  it  is  the  public  interest  that  Suffers  by  these 
means,  by  the  country  being  wasted  with  fire,  the  city  be¬ 
sieged,  and  the  enemy  enjoying  the  honour  of  the  war.  Be 
it  so;  but  I  will  ask  in  what  situation  are  your  private  affairs? 
Soon  will  you  hear  from  the  country  accounts  of  your  lossest 
and  what  means  have  ye,  at  hoipe,  of  procuring  a  compensa¬ 
tion  for  them?  Will  the  tribunes  bring  back,  will  they  restore 
what  ye  have  lost?  Words  they  will  load  you  with,  until  ye 

30« 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  309. 

are  tired,  and  accusations  against  the  principal  citizens,  and 
laws  upon  laws,  and  public  meetings;  but,  from  these,  never 
did  one  of  you  return  home  with  an  increase  of  substance  or 
fortune.  Let  me  see  any,  who  ever  carried  thence  aught  to 
his  wife  and  children,  except  hatreds,  quarrels,  animosities, 
public  and  private;  from  the  ill  effects  of  which,  indeed,  ye 
have  always  been  screened,  not  however  by  your  own  merit 
and  innocence,  but  by  the  protection  of  others.  But  I  will 
affirm,  that,  when  ye  used  to  make  your  campaigns,  under 
the  command  of  consuls,  not  of  tribunes,  in  the  camp,  not  in 
the  Forum;  when  your  shout  used  to  strike  terror  into  the 
enemy  in  the  field,  not  into  the  Roman  nobles  in  an  assem¬ 
bly;  after  enriching  yourselves  with  plunder,  taking  posses¬ 
sion  of  your  adversaries’  lands,  and  acquiring  a  plentiful 
stock  of  wealth  ,  and  glory,  both  to  the  public  and  to  your¬ 
selves;  then,  I  say,  ye  returned  home  in  triumph  to  your 
families;  now,  ye  suffer  these  invaders  to  depart  laden  with 
your  property.  Continue  immoveably  tied  to  your  assem¬ 
blies,  and  live  in  the  Forum;  still  the  necessity  of  fighting, 
which  ye  so  studiously  avoid,  attends  you.  Was  it  too  great 
a  hardship  to  march  out  against  the  iEquans  and  Volscians? 
The  war  is  at  your  gates.  If  not  repelled  from  thence,  it 
will  shortly  be  within  the  walls.  It  will  scale  the  citadel  and 
the  capitol,  and  will  pursue  you,  even  into  your  houses.  A 
year  ago,  the  senate  ordered  a  levy  to  be  made,  and  an  army 
to  be  led  into  Algid um.  Yet  we  sit  at  home  in  listless  inac¬ 
tivity,  delighted  with  the  present  interval  of  peace,  scolding 
each  other  like  women,  and  never  perceiving,  that,  after  that 
short  suspension,  wars  double  in  number  must  return  upon 
us.  I  know  that  I  might  find  mor^  agreeable  topics  to  dwell 
upon;  but  even  though  my  own  disposition  did  not  prompt 
to  it,  necessity  compels  me  to  speak  what  is  true,  instead  of 
what  is  agreeable.  I  sincerely  wish,  Romans,  to  give  you 
pleasure;  but  I  feel  wishes,  much  more  ardent,  to  promote 
vour  safety,  let  your  sentiments  respecting  me  afterwards  be 

BOOK  IIL 

309 

B.  C.  443.]  ] 
what  they  may.  It  results  from  the  nature  of  the  human 
mind,  that  he  who  addresses  the  public  with  a  view  to  his 
own  particular  benefit,  is  studious  of  rendering  himself  more 
generally  agreeable  than  he  who  has  no  other  object  but  the 
advantage  of  the  public.  But  perhaps  ye  imagine  that  it  is 
out  of  regard  to  your  individual  interests,  that  those  public 
sycophants,  those  artful  flatterers  of  the  commons,  who  nei* 
ther  sufler  you  to  carry  arms,  nor  to  live  in  peace,  excite  and 
stimulate  your  passions.  When  they  have  once  raised  you 
in  a  ferment,  the  consequence  to  them  is,  either  honour  or 
profit.  And  because  they  see  that,  while  concord  prevails 
between  the  orders  of  the  state,  they  are  of  no  consequence 
on  any  side,  they  wish  to  be  leaders  of  a  bad  cause,  rather 
than  of  none,  of  tumults  even,  and  seditions.  Which  kind  of 
proceedings,  if  ye  can  at  length  be  prevailed  on  to  renounce; 
and,  if  ye  are  willing,  instead  of  these  new  modes  of  acting, 
to  resume  those  practised  by  your  fathers,  and  formerly  by 
yourselves,  I  am  content  to  undergo  any  punishment,  if  I  do 
not  within  a  few  days  rout  and  disperse  those  ravagers  of 
our  country,  drive  them  out  of  their  camp,  and  transfer  from 
our  gates  and  walls,  to  their  own  cities,  the  whole  terror  of 
the  war,  which  at  present  fills  you  with  consternation.” 
*  LX  IX,  Scarcely  ever  was  the  speech  of  a  popular  tribune 
more  acceptable  to  the  commons,  than  was  this  of  a  consul 
remarkable  for  strictness.  Even  the  young  men  who  were 
accustomed  to  consider  a  refusal  to  enlist,  in  such  times 
of  danger,  as  their  most  effectual  weapon  against  the 
patricians,  began  to  turn  their  thoughts  towards  war  and 
arms.  At  the  same  time  the  inhabitants  flying  from  the 
country,  and  several,  who  had  been  robbed  there  and  wound* 
ed,  relating  facts  still  more  shocking  than  what  appeared  to 
view,  filled  the  entire  city  with  a  desire  of  vengeance. 
When  the  senate  assembled,  all  men  turned  their  eyes  on 
Quintius,  regarding  him  as  the  only  champion  for  the  majes¬ 
ty  of  Rome;  and  the  principal  senators  declared,  ‘^that  his 

310 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y,  R.  309. 

discourse  had  been  worthy  of  the  consular  command^  worthy 
of  his  former  administration  in  so  many  consulships,  worthy 
of  his  whole  life,  which  had  been  filled  up  with  honours, 
often  enjoyed,  and  oftener  merited.  That  other  consuls 
either  flattered  the  commons,  so  far  as  to  betray  the  dignity 
of  the  senate,  or  through  the  harshness  of  their  measures, 
in  support  of  the  rights  of  their  order,  exasperated  the  po¬ 
pulace  by  their  attempts  to  reduce  them;  but  that  Titus  Quin- 
tius,  beyond  all  others,  had  delivered  sentiments  suitable,  at 
once,  to  the  dignity  of  the  senate,  to  the  harmony  which 
ought  to  subsist  between  the  several  orders,  and  to  the  junc¬ 
ture  of  the  times:  and  they  entreated  him  and  his  colleague, 
to  exert  themselves  in  behalf  of  the  commonwealth.  The 
tribunes  they  intreated  to  unite  cordially  with  the  consuls  in 
repelling  the  enemy  from  their  walls,  and  to  bring  the  com¬ 
mons  to  submit,  at  this  perilous  juncture,  to  the  direction  of 
the  senate.  Their  common  country,  they  told  them,  at  that 
crisis,  when  the  lands  were  laid  waste,  and  the  city  besieged, 
called  on  them  as  tribunes,  and  implored  their  protection.’’ 
With  universal  approbation,  a  levy  of  troops  was  decreed. 
The  consuls  gave  public  notice  in  assembly,  that  they 
could  not  now  admit  excuses,  but  that  all  the  young  men  must 
attend  next  day  at  the  first  light,  in  the  field  of  MarS:  that/ 
when  the  war  should  be  brought  to  a  conclusion,  they  would 
appoint  a  time  ibr  considering  such  matters,  and  that  he 
whose  excuse  was  not  satisfactory  should  be  treated  as  a  de<- 
serter.”  All  the  young  men  attended  accordingly.  The  co¬ 
horts  chose  each  its  own  centurions,  and  two  senators  were 
appointed  to  command  each  cohort.  We  are  told,  that  all 
these  measures  were  executed  with  such  expedition,  that  the 
standards  brought  out  from  the  treasury  on  that  same 
day  by  the  quaestors,  and  carried  down  to  the  field  of  Mars, 
began  to  move  from  thence  at  the  fourth  hour;  and  that  this 
new-raised  army,  with  a  few  cohorts  of  veterans  who  follow¬ 
ed  as  volunteers,  halted  at  the  tenth  stone.  The  following 

B.  C.  4430- 

BOOK  III. 

311 

morning  brought  them  within  view  of  the  enemy,  and  they 
pitched  their  camp  close  to  theirs,  near  Corbio,  On  the 
third  day  they  came  to  an  engi^ement;  the  Romans  being 
hurried  on  by  desire  of  revenge,  and  the  others  by  conscious* 
ness  of  guilt,  and  despair  of  pardon,  after  so  many  rebellions. 
LXX.  In  the  Roman  army,  although  the  two  consuls  were 
invested  with  equal  powers,  yet  they  adopted  a  measure  ex¬ 
ceedingly  advantageous  in  all  important  exigences.  The 
supreme  command  was,  with  the  consent  of  Agrippa,  lodged 
in  the  hands  of  his  colleague,  who  being  thus  raised  to  a  su¬ 
periority,  made  the  politest  return  for  the  other’s  cheerful 
condescension  to  act  in  a  subordinate  capacity;  making  him 
a  sharer  in  all  his  counsels  and  honf)urs.  In  the  line  of  bat¬ 
tle,  Quint! us  commanded  the  right  wing,  Agrippa  the  left; 
the  care  of  the  centre  they  entrusted  to  Spurius  Postumius 
Aibus,  lieutenant-general;  and  that  of  the  cavalry  to  another 
lieutenant-general,  Servius  Sulpicius.  The  infantry,  in  the 
rip;ht  wing,  fought  with  extraordinary  valour,  and  met  with 
a  stout^  resistance  from  the  Volscians,  Servius  Sulpicius, 
with  the  cavalry,  broke  the  centre  of  the  enemy’s  line,  and 
when  he  might  have  returned  to  his  own  station,  he  thought 
it  more  adviseabie  to  make  an  attack  on  the  rear  of  the  ene¬ 
my,  before  they  could  recover  from  the  disorder  into  which 
their  ranks  had  been  thrown.  By  his  charge  on  their  rear, 
the  enemy,  being  assailed  on  both  sides,  must  have  been  in¬ 
stantly  dispersed,  had  not  the  cavalry  of  the  Volscians  and 
^quans,  throwing  themselves  in  his  way,  given  him  employ¬ 
ment  for  a  considerable  time,  opposing  him  with  forces  the 
same  as  his%wn.  On  this  Sulpicius  told  his  men,  that  there 
was  no  time  to  hesitate;  and  called  out  that  they  were  sur¬ 
rounded  and  cut  off  from  their  friends,  if  they  did  not  unite 
their  most  vigorous  efforts,  and  rout  the  enemy’s  cavalry: 
nor  was  it  enough  to  drive  them  off  the  ground,  without  dis¬ 
abling  them;  they  must  kill  both  horses  and  riders,  lest  any 
should  return  and  renew  the  fight.  The  enemy,  he  said. 

312 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  {Y.  R.  m 

were  not  able  to  withstand  them,  to  whom  a  compact  body 
of  infantry  had  been  obliged  to  give  way*  His  orders  were 
obeyed  with  alacrity.  By  one  charge  they  routed  the  whole 
body  of  cavalry,  dismounted  vast  numbers,  and  killed  with 
their  javelins,  both  the  men  and  horses.  They  met  no  far¬ 
ther  obstruction  from  the  cavalry.  And  now  falling  on  the 
line  of  infantry,  they  despatched  an  account  of  their  success 
to  the  consuls,  before  whom  the  enemy's  line  was  beginning 
to  give  ground.  The  news  gave  fresh  spirit  to  the  Romans, 
to  pursue  their  advantage;  while  it  dismayed  the  iBquans, 
who  were  already  wavering.  Victory  began  to  declare  against 
them,  first  in  the  centre,  where  the  charge  of  the  cavalry  had 
disordered  their  ranks:  their  left  wing  next  began  to  retreat 
beforb  the  consul  Quintius;  the  greatest  struggle  was  made 
by  their  right:  there  Agrippa,  full  of  the  ardour  inspired  by 
youth  and  vigour,  when  he  saw  every  part  of  the  Roman 
line  more  successful  than  his  own,  snatched  some  of  the  en¬ 
signs  from  the  standard-bearers^  and  carried  them  forward 
himself:  some  he  even  threw  into  the  thick  of  the.enemyj 
and  the  dread  of  the  disgrace  to  which  this  might  expose 
them,  so  animated  the  soldiers,  that  they  instantly  rushed  on. 
This  rendered  the  victory  equally  decisive  in  every  quarter. 
At  this  juncture,  a  message  was  brought  to  him  from  Quin¬ 
tius,  that  he  had  defeated  the  enemy,  and  was  ready  to  attack 
their  camp;  but  did  not  choose  to  break  into  it,  until  he 
should  understand  that  the  battle  was  determined  on  the  left 
wing  also;  and  desiring  that  if  he  had  completed  the  discom¬ 
fiture  there,  he  would  march  up  his  troops  to  join  him,  that 
the  whole  army  might  take  possession  of  the  prtke.  Agrippa, 
now  victorious,  met  his  victorious  colleague  with  mutual 
congratulations;  and,  in  conjunction  with  him,  advanced  to 
the  enemy’s  camp;  where,  meeting  very  few  to  oppose  tbem^ 
and  these  being  instantly  routed,  they  forced  their  way 
through  the  fortifications  without  difficulty;  and  the  troops 
having  here  acquired  an  immense  booty,  besides  recovering 

BOOK  III. 

B.  C.443.] 

their  own  effects  which  had  been  lost  in  the  plundering  of 
the  country,  were  then  led  home.  I  do  not  find,  either  that 
the  consuls  sued  for  a  triumph,  or  that  it  was  bestowed  on 
them  by  the  senate:  neither  is  there  any  reason  assigned  why 
they  either  did  not  wish,  or  might  not  hope  to  obtain  that 
honour.  It  might  probably  be,  as  far  as  I  can  conjecture  at 
this  distance  of  time,  that  as  this  mark  of  approbation  had 
been  refused  by  the  senate  to  the  consuls  Valerius  and  Ho- 
ratius,  who,  besides  having  vanquished  the  Volscians  and 
^quans,  had  acquired  the  glory  of  subduing  the  Sabines 
also,  the  consuls  were  ashamed  to  demand  a  triumph  for  ser> 
vices  which  amounted  only  to  the  half  of  theirs;  lest,  even 
if  they  should  obtain  it,  there  might  be  room  to  imagine  that 
the  compliment  was  paid  to  the  persons  rather  than  to  their 
deserts. 
LXXI.  This  honourable  victory  obtained  over  their  ene- 
mies,  the  people  disgraced  at  home,  by  a  scandalous  decision 
of  a  dispute  concerning  the  boundaries  of  their  allies.  The 
people  of  Aricia,  and  those  of  Ardea,  had  often  contended 
in  arms  the  right  of  property  to  a  certain  district  of  land, 
and,  wearied  by  many  losses  on  both  sides,  referred  the  affair 
to  the  arbitration  of  the  Roman  people.  Both  parties  attend* 
ed^to  support  their  claims,  and  an  assembly  was  held  by  the 
magistrates  at  their  request.  Here  the  matter  was  debated 
with  great  vehemence;  and  after  the  witnesses  had  been  pro¬ 
duced,  when  the  tribes  ought  to  have  been  called,  and  the 
assembled  proceed  to  give  their  suffrages,  there  arose  one 
Publius  Scaptius,  a  plebeian,  a  very  old  man,  who  said. 
Consuls,  if  I  may  be  permitted  to  speak  on  a  matter  which  . 
concerns  the  interest  of  the  commonwealth,  I  will  not  suffer 
the  people  to  proceed  in  a  mistake,  with  respect  to  this  affair.” 
The  consuls  saying,  that  he  was  not  worthy  of  attention,  and 
should  not  be  heard,  he  exclaimed,  that  the  cause  uf  the 
public  was  betrayed;  and  on  their  ordering  him  to  be  re¬ 
moved,  called  on  the  tribunes  for  protection.  The  tribunes, 
vohr  X, — S 

314 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  309, 

who  in  almost  every  case  are  rather  ruled  by,  thao  nile  the 
nrultitude,  to  gratify  the  populace,  gave  liberty  to  Scaptius 
to  say  what  he  pleased.  He  then  began  with  informing  them, 
that  ‘‘  he  was  in  his  eighty-third  year,  that  he  had  served  as 
a  soldier  in  the  very  district  in  dispute,  and  was  not  young 
even  then,  that  being  his  twentieth  campaign,  when  the  ope¬ 
rations  against  Corioli  were  carried  on.  He  could,  therefore, 
speak  with  knowledge  of  an  affair,  which,  though  after  such 
a  length  of  time  it  was  generally  forgotten,  was  deeply  fixed 
in  his  memory.  The  lands  in  dispute,  he  said,  had  belonged 
to  the  territory  of  Corioli,  and  when  Corioli  was  taken,  be¬ 
came,  by  the  right  of  war,  the  property  of  the  Roman  peo¬ 
ple.  He  wondered  by  what  precedent  the  Ardeans  and  Ari- 
cians  could  justify  their  expectations,  of  surreptitiously  wrest¬ 
ing  from  the  Roman  state,  by  making  it  an  arbiter  instead  of 
proprietor,  its  right  to  a  tract,  to  which,  while  the  state  of 
Corioli  subsisted,  they  had  never  advanced  any  kind  of  claim. 
For  his  part,  he  had  but  a  short  time  to  live;  yet  he  could 
not  prevail  on  himself,  cdd  as  he  was,  to  decline  asserting  by 
his  voice,  the  only  means  then  in  his  power,  a  title  to  those 
lands,  which,  by  his  vigorous  exertions  as  a  soldier,  he  had 
contributed  to  acquire:  and  he  warmly  recoimnended  it  to 
the  people,  not  to  be  led  by  improper  notions  of  delicacy,^  to 
pass  a  sentence  subversive  of  their  own  rights.” 
LXXII.  The  consuls,  when  they  perceived  that  Scaptius 
was  heard,  not  only  with  silence,  but  with  approbation,  ap¬ 
pealed  to  gods  and  men  against  the  infamy  of  the  proceeding; 
and,  sending  for  the  principal  senators,  went  round  with  them 
to  the  tribes,  beseeching  them  not  to  be  guilty  of  a  crime 
of  the  worst  kind,  which  would  afford  a  precedent  still  more 
pernicious,  by  converting  to  their  own  use  a  matter  in  dis¬ 
pute,  whereon  they  were  to  decide  as  judges.  Especially 
when,  as  the  case  stood,  although  it  were  allowable  for  a 
judge  to  show  regard  to  his  own  emolument,  yet  the  utmost 
advantage  that  could  accrue  from  the  seizure  of  the  lands. 

B.  C.  443.] 

BOOK  IIL 

515 

would  by  no  means  counterbalance  the  loss  which  they  must 
sustain  in  the  alienation  of  the  affections  of  the  allies,  by 
such  an  act  of  injustice:  for  the  loss  of  reputation  and  the 
esteem  of  mankind  are  of  importance  beyond  what  can  be 
estimated.  Must  the  deputies  carry  home  this  account? 
Must  this  be  made  known  to  the  world?  Must  the  allies^ 
must  the  enemy  hear  this?  What  grief  would  it  give  to  the 
former,  what  joy  to  the  latter!  Did  they  imagine,  that  the 
neighbouring  states  would  impute  this  proceeding  to  Scap- 
tius,  an  old  babbler  in  the  assemblies?  This  indeed  would 
serve,  instead  of  a  statue,  to  dignify  the  Scaptian  namej  but 
the  Roman  people  would  incur  the  imputation  of  corrupt 
chicaneiy  and  fraudulent  usurpation  of  the  claims  of  others 
For  what  judge,  in  a  cause  between  private  persons,  ever 
acted  in  this  manner,  adjudging  to  himself  the  property  in 
dispute?  Surely,  even  Scaptius  himself,  dead  as  he  was  to 
all  sense  of  shame,  would  not  act  in  such* a  manner.”  Thus 
the  consuls,  thus  the  senators  exclaimed;  but  covetousness, 
and  Scap^us,  the  instigator  of  that  covetousness,  had  greater 
influence.  The  tribes  being  called,  gave  their  judgment;  that 
the  land  in  question  was  the  property  of  the  Roman  people. 
It  is  not  denied,  that  it  might  with  justice  have  been  so  de¬ 
termined,  had  the  matter  been  tried  before  other  judges:  but, 
as  the  affair  was  circumstanced,  the  infamy  of  the  determi¬ 
nation  was  in  no  degree  lessened  by  the  equity  of  their  title; 
nor  did  it  appear  to  the  Aricians  and  Ardeans  themselves  in 
blacker  or  more  hideous  colours  than  it  did  to  the  Roman 
senate.  The  remainder  of  the  year  passed  without  any  com¬ 
motion  either  at  home  or  abroad. 

THE 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

BOOK  IV. 

A  Hw,  permitting^  the  loterraarriage  of  plebeians  with,  patricians,  carried, 
after  a  violent  struggle  and  strong  opposition  on  the  part  of  the  patri¬ 
cians.  I^Iilitary  tribunes,  with  consular  power,  created.  Censors  created. 
The  lands  which  were  taken  from  the  people  of  Ardea,  by  an  uujust  de¬ 
termination  of  the  Roman  people,  restored.  Spurius  Mselius,  aiming  at 
regal  power,  slain  by  Caius  Servilius  Ahala.  Cornelius  Cossus,  having 
killed  Tolumnius,  king  of  the  Veientians,  oifers  the  second  ^ma  spoiia. 
The  duration  of  the  censorship  limited  to  a  year  and  a  half.  Fidenat 
educed,  and  a  colony  settled  there.  The  colonists  murdered  by  the 
Fidenatiaus,  who  arc  reconquered  by  Mamercus  Ailmilius,  dictator.  A 
conspiracy  of  slaves  suppressed.  Postumius,  a' military  tribune,  slain 
by  the  army,  exasperated  by  his  cruelties.  '  Pay  first  given  to  the  soi“ 
diers  out  of  the  public  treasury.  Military  operations  against  the  Vob 
scians,  Fidenatians,  and  Faliscians. 

Y  R  310  I*  The  next  who  succeeded  in  the  consulship  were 
B.  C.  442.  Marcus  Genucius  and  Caius  Curtius,  whose  year 
was  disturbed  by  commotions,  both  at  ho^ne  and  abroad. 
For,  in  the  beginning  of  it,  Caius  Canuleius,  a  tribune  of  the 
people,  propqsed  a  law,  for  allowing  the  intermarriage  of  pa¬ 
tricians  and  plebeians,  which  the  former  considered  as  tending 
to  contaminate  their  blood,  and  to  confound  all  the  distinctions 
and’  privileges  of  noble  birth.  Some  hints,  too,  suggested  by 
the  tribunes,  that  liberty  ought  to  be  granted  of  choosing  one 

BOOK  IV- 

3ir 
of  the  consuls  from  among  the  commons,  were  afterwards  im¬ 
proved,  to  such  a  degree,  that  the  other  nine  tribunes  proposed 
a  law,  that  the  people  should  have  power  of  electing  consuls, 
either  from  amon^  the  commons  or  the  patricians,  as  they 
should  think  fit*  The  patricians  were  of  opinion,  that  if  this 
took  place,  the  supreme  authority  would  not  only  be  shared 
with  the  very  lowest  ranks,  but  perhaps  be  entirely  removed 
out  of  the  hands  of  the  nobility  into  those  of  the  plebeians. 
With  great  joy,  therefore,  they  received  intelligence,  that 
the  people  of  Ardea,  in  resentment  of  the  injustice  of  the 
sentence  which  had  deprived  them  of  their  land,  had  revolt¬ 
ed;  that  the  Veientians  were  laying  waste  the  Roman  fron¬ 
tiers,  and  that  the  Volscians  and  -^quans  expressed  great 
discontent  on  account  of  the  fortifying  of  Verrugo,  prefer¬ 
ring  even  a  war,  which  promised*  not  success,  to  an  igno¬ 
minious  peace.  These  tidings  being  brought,  with  exag¬ 
gerations,  the  senate,  in  order  to  silence  the  intrigues  of  the 
tribunes  during  the  bustle  of  so  many  wars,  ordered  a  lev\ 
to  be  held,  and  preparations  for  hostilities  to  be  made  with 
the  utmost  diligence,  even  with  more  despatch,  if  possible, 
than  had  been  used  in  the  consulate  of  Titus  Quintius-  On 
which  Caius  Canuleius  declared  aloud  in  the  senate,  that 
the  consuls  would  in  vain  think  of  diverting  the  attention  of 
the  commons  from  the  new  laws,  by  holding  out  objects  of 
terror  to  their  view,  and  that,  while  he  was  alive,  they  should 
never  hold  a  levy,  until  the  people  had  first  ratified  the  laws 
proposed  by  him  and  his  colleagues;”,  and  then  he  instant!} 
called  an  assembly. 
II.  Whilst  the  consuls  were  employed  in  rousing  the  in¬ 
dignation  of  the  senate  against  the  tribune,  the  tribune  was 
as  busy  in  exciting  the  people  against  the  consuls.  The  lat¬ 
ter  asserted  that  the  outrageous  proceedings  of  the  tribunes 
could  not  be  any  longer  endured;  that  matters  were  now 
come  to  a  crisis,  there  being  more  dangerous  hostilities  ex¬ 
cited  at  home  than  abroad;  that  for  this  the  commons  were 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

Jis 

[Y.  R.  310. 

not  more  to  be  blamed  than  the  senate, nor  the  tribunes  more 
than  the  consuls.  In  any  state,  whatever  practices  meet 
with  rewards,  these  are  always  pursued  to  the  greatest  de¬ 
gree  of  proficiency,  and  these  are  the  incitements  which  call 
forth  merit,  both  in  peace  and  war.’  Now,  at  Rome,  there 
was  nothing  so  highly  rewarded  as  sedition;  this  was  in  every 
instance  attended  with  honours  both  to  individuals  and  to 
collective  bodies.  They  ought  therefore  carefully  to  consi¬ 
der,  in  what  condition  they  had  received  the  majesty-  of  the 
senate  frofti  their  fathers,  and  in  what  condition  they’^  were 
likely  to  hand  it  down  to  their  children;  whether  they  could 
make  the  same  boast  which  the  commons  might,  with  re¬ 
spect  to  thoir  privileges,  that  it  was  improved  both  in  degree 
and  in  splendor.  No  end  appeared  of  these  proceedings, 
nor  would,  so  long  as  the  fomenters  of  sedition  were  re¬ 
warded  with  honours  in  proportion  to  the  success  of  their 
projects.  What  were  the  new  and  important  schemes  which 
Caius  Canuleius  had  set  on  foot?  No  less  than  the  prostitu¬ 
tion  of  the  privileges  of  nobility,  and  the  confounding  the 
rights  of  auspices,  both  public  and  private;  that  nothing 
might  be  left  pure  and  unpolluted;  and  that,  every  distinc¬ 
tion  being  renaoved,  no  person  might  know  what  himself 
was,  nor  to  what  order  he  belonged.  For  what  other  ten¬ 
dency  had  such  promiscuous  intermarriages,  than  to  pro¬ 
duce  an  irregular  intercourse  betWen  patricians  and  plebeians, 
not  very  different  from  that  between  brutes?  So  that,  of  their 
offspring,  not  one  should  be  able  to  tell,  of  what  blood  he 
was,  or  in  what  mode  he  was  to  worship  the  gods,  being  in 
liimself  a  heterogeneous  composition,  half  patrician  and  half 
plebeian?  And,  not  content  with  the  confusion  which  this 
would  create  in  every  affair,  divine  and  human,  those  incen¬ 
diaries,  the  tribunes,  were  now  preparing  to  invade  the  con¬ 
sulship  itself.  At  first  they  had  ventured  no  farther  than  to 
sound  people^s  sentiments  in  conversation,  on  a  plan  of  one 
of  the  consuls  being  elected  from  among  the  commons;  now . 

BOOK  IV. 

319 

B.  C.  442.  j 
they  publicly  proposed  a  law,  that  the  people  might  appoint 
consuls,  either  from  among  the  patricians,  or  from  among 
the  plebeians,  as  they  should  think  fit;  and  there  could  be  no 
doubt  that  they  would  appoint  from  among  the  commons  the 
most  seditious  that  could  be  found.  The  Canuleii  and  Icilii 
therefore  would  be  consuls.  But  might  Jupiter  supremelv 
good  and  great  forbid,  that  the  imperial  majesty  of  the  sove- 
reigti  power  should  sink  so  low  as  that,  and  for  their  part, 
they  would  rather  die  a  thousand  deaths,  than  suffer  such 
disgrace  to  be  incurred.  They  were  confident,  that  could 
their  ancestors  have  foreseen,  that,  in  consequence  of  un¬ 
limited  concessions,  the  commons,  instead  of  showing  a  bet¬ 
ter  temper  towards  them,  would  become  more  intractable, 
and,  as  fast  as  they  obtained  their  demands,  would  advance 
others  more  unreasonable  and  exorbitant,  they  would  have 
struggled  at  first  with  any  difficulties  whatever,  rather  than 
have  allowed  such  terms  to  be  imposed  on  them.  Because 
a  concession  was  then  made  to  them  with  respect  to  tribunes, 
it  was  for  the  same  reason  made  a  second  time.  This  would 
be  the  case  for  ever.  Tribunes  of  the  commons,  and  a  senate, 
could  not  subsist  together,  in  the  same  state:  either  the  office 
of  the  former,  or  the  order  of  the  latter,  must  be  abolished, 
and  it  was  better  late  than  never,  to  endeavour  to  put  a  stop 
to  presumption  and  temerity.  Must  they  with  impunity, 
after  they  have,  by  sowing  discord,  encouraged  the  neigh¬ 
bouring  nations  to  attack  us,  prevent  the.  state  afterwards 
from  arming  and  defending  itself  against  the  attack  which 
they  have  brought  on  it?  and,  when  they  had  done  eveiy^ 
thing  but  send  an  invitation  to  the  enemy,  prevent  troops 
from  being  enlisted  to  oppose  that  enemy?  But  Canuleiu& 
has  had  the  audacity  to  declare  openly  in  the  senate,  that  he 
would  hinder  the  making  of  the  levy,  unless  the  senate,  ac¬ 
knowledging  in  a  manner  his  superiority,  allowed  his  laws 
to  be  enacted.  What  else  was  this,  than  to  threaten  that  he 
would  betray  his  country:  that  he  would  suffer  it  to  be  at- 

320 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  |;Y.  R.  310, 
tacked,  and  to  fall  into  the  enemy’s  hands?  What  courage 
must  that  declaration  afford,  not  to  the  Roman  commons,  but 
to  the  Volsdans,  to  the  iEquans,  and  Veientians?  Might  not 
these  hope,  that,  under  the  guidance  of  Canuleius,  they  would 
be  able  to  scale  the  capitol  and  the  citadelj  might  they  not 
hope  this,  if  the  tribunes,  while  they  stripped  the  patricians 
of  their  privileges  and  their  dignity,  robbed  them  also  of 
their  courage?”  The  consuls  concluded  by  saving,  that  they 
were  ready  to  act  as  their  leaders,  first  against  the  wicked 
practices  of  their  countrymen;  and  afterwards,  against  the 
arms  of  their  enemies. 
III.  At  the  very  time  while  such  arguments  as  these  were 
urged  in  the  senate,  Canuleius  was  employed  in  declaiming 
in  favour  of  his  laws,  and  against  the  consuls,  in  the  follow¬ 
ing  manner:  Roman  citizens!  in  many  former  instances  I 
have  seen  enough  to  convince  me  in  what  degree  of  contempt 
the  patricians  hold  you,  how  unworthy  they  esteem  you  to  live 
in  the  same  city,  within  the  same  walls  with  them.  But  this  is 
now  more  clearly  than  ever  demonstrated  by  their  outrageous 
opposition  to  those  propositions  of  ours.  And  this,  for  what? 
unless  for  reminding  them  thereby  that  we  are  members  ol 
the  same  community  with  themselves;  and  that,  though 
possess  not  the  same  degree  of  power,  we  are  yet  inhabitants 
of  the  same  country.  By  the  one,  we  require  the  liberty  ol 
intermarrying  with  them,  a  liberty  usually  granted  to  peo~ 
pie  of  the  neighbouring  states,  and  to  foreigners:  for  we  have 
admitted  even  vanquished  enemies  to  the  right  of  citizen¬ 
ship,  which  is  of  more  importance  than  that  of  intermarriage. 
By  the  other,  we  offer  no  innovation,  we  only  reclaim  and 
enforce  an  inherent  right;  that  the  Roman  people  should 
commit  the" high  offices  of  the  state  to  such  persons  as  they 
think  proper.  And  what  is  there  in  this,  that  can  justify 
the  patriciaivs  in  thus  disturbing  heaven  and  earth?  Their 
treatment  of  me  just  now,  in  the  senate,  very  little  short  of 
personal  violence?  Their  open  declarations  that  they  will 

B.  C.  443.] 

BOOK  IV. 

•  321 

have  recourse^  to  force,  and  their  threatening  to  insult  an  of¬ 
fice  which  has  been  held  sacred  and  inviolable?  Can  the  city 
no  longer  subsist,  if  the  Roman  people  are  allowed  to  give 
their  sxxfFrages  with  freedom,  and  to  intrust  the  consulship  to 
such  persons  as  they  may  approve;  or  must  the  downfall  of 
the  empire  ensue,  if  a  plebeian,  how  worthy  soever  of  the 
highest  station,  is  not  precluded  from  every  hope  of  attain¬ 
ing  to  it?  And  does  the  question,  whether  a  commoner  may 
be  elected  consul,  carry  the  same  import,  as  if  a  person  spoke 
of  a  slave,  or  the  issue  of  a  slave,  for  the  consulship?  Do  ye 
not  perceive,  do  ye  not  feel,  in  what  a  despicable  view  ye 
are  considered?  Were  it  in  their  power,  they  would  hinder 
you  from  sharing  even  the  light  of  the  sun.  That  ye  breathe, 
that  ye  enjoy' the  faculty  of  speech,  that  ye  wear  the  human 
shape,  are  subjects  of  mortification  to  them.  But  then  they 
tell  you,  that  truly  it  is  contrary  to  the  rules  of  religion 
that  a  plebeian  should  be  made  consul.  For  heaven’s  sake 
though  we  are  not  admkted  to  inspect  the  records,*  or  the 
annalsf  of  the  pontiflfs,  are  we  ignorant  of  the  things  which 
even  every  foreigner  knows?  That  consuls  were  substituted  in 
the  place  of  kings;  and  copse quently  have  no  kind  of  privi¬ 
lege  or  dignity  which  was  not  possessed  before  by  kings? 
Do  ye  suppose  that  we  never  heard  it  mentioned,  that  Numa 
Pompiliusf  not  only  no  patrician,  but  not  even  a  citizen  of 
Rome,  was  invited  hither  from  the  country  of  the  Sabines 
and  made  sovereign  at*Rome,  by  the  order  of  the  people,  and 
with  the  approbation  of  the  senate?  That  Lucius  Tarquiniu’s, 
of  a  race  which,  so  far  from,  being  Roman,  was  not  even 
Italian,  the  son  of  Demaratus  a  I^Iorinthian,  having  come 
hither  a  stranger  from  Tarquiuii,  was  raised  to  the  like  high 
^  The  records,  in  which  the  names  of  the  magistrates  in  succession,  and 
the  most  memorable  events  were  recorded. 
f  The  annals  were  a  compendious  registry  of  events,  as  they  occurred, 
made  by  the  pontiffs,  who  likewise  had  the  care  of  the  records,  and  kep^ 
both  carefully  shut  up  from  the  inspection  of  the  lower  order. 
VOL.  I. — T  t 

322  ’ 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y-  R.  310. 
station,  though  the  sons  of  Ancus  mere  That  after 
him  Servius  Tullius,  the  son  of  a  captive  woman  of  Comicu- 
lum,  his  father  not  known  and  his  mother  in  seiyitude,  ob¬ 
tained  the.  crown,  through  his  abilities  and  merit?  Need  I 
speak  of  Titus  Tatius,  the  Sabine,  whom  Romulus  himself, 
the  fcmnder  of  this  city,  admitted  into  partnership  in  the 
throne?  The  consequence  was,  that  while  no  objection  was 
made  to  any  family,  in  which  conspicuous  merit  appeared, 
the  Roman  empire  continually  increased.  It  well  becomes 
you  to  show  disgust,  now,  at  a  plebeian  consul;  though  our  an¬ 
cestors  disdained  not  to  call  foreigners  to  the  throne,  nor  even 
after  the  expulsion  of  the  kings,  ever  shut  the  gates  of  the 
city  against  foreign  merit.  It  is  well  known,  that  we  since 
admitted  the  Claudian  family  from  among  the  Sabines,  not 
only  into  the  number  of  citizens,  but  even  into  that  of  the 
patricians.  May  a  person,  then,  from  a  foreigner,  become  a 
patrician,  and  in  consequence,  consul;  and  shall  a  citizen  of 
Rome,  if  he  be  a  commoner,  be  cut  off  from  every  hope  of 
the  consulship?  Is  it  deemed  impossible-that  a  plebeian  can 
be  a  man  of  fortitude  and  activity,  qualified  to  excel  in  peace 
and  war,  like  Numa,  Lucius  Tarquinius,  and  Servius  Tulli¬ 
us?  Or,  should  such  appear,  shall  we  still  prohibit  him 
from  meddling  with  the  ficlm  of  government?  In  a  word 
shall  we  choose  to  have  consuls  rather  resembling  the  decem¬ 
virs,  the  most  profligate  of  mankind,  who  in  their  time  were 
all  patricians,  than  like  the  best  of  the  kings,  who  were  new 
men?”* 
IV.  But  it  is  argued,  that  since  the  expulsion  of  the 
kings,  there  has  been  no.instance  of  a  plebeian  consuU  What 
then?  Is  no  new  institutiato  ever  to  be  known?  ,  Must  every 
measure  not  heretofore  practised,  (and  in  a  new  state  there 
must  be  many  measures  not*  yet  introduced  into  practice,) 
♦  Tlie  first  in  a  famib’  who  attained  any  of  the  curule  offices,  that  is>  anv 
of  the  surverior  magistracies-  was  called  novas  homO)  a  new  man. 

B*  €•  44^.] 

BOOK  IV. 

323 

be  therefore  rejected,  even  though  it  should  he  evidently  ad¬ 
vantageous?  In  the  reign  of  Romulus,  there  were  neither 
pontiffs  nor  augurs;  Numa  Poiapilius  introduced  them. 
There  was  no  such  thing  in  the  state  as  a  general  survey, 
and  distribution  of  the  centuries  and  classes,  until  instituted 
by  Servius  Tullius.  There  was  a  rime  whcathere  never  had 
been  consuls;  on  the  expulsion  of  tl:^  kings  they  were  crea¬ 
ted.  *Of  a  dictator  neither  the  office  nor  name  had  existed; 
in  the  time  of  our  fathers  it  was  introduced.  There  had 
never  been  tribunes  of  the  commons,  tediles  or  qv^stors;  and 
yet  it  was  resolved  that  those  offices  should  be  created.  The 
office  of  decemvirs  for  compiling  laws,  we  ourselves  have, 
within  the  last  ten  years,  both  created  and  abolished.  Who 
fs  not  convinced  that  in  a  city,  founded  for  eternal  duration, 
and  growing  up  to  an  immense  magnitude,  many  new  offices 
both  civil  and  religious,  mmiy  new  rights,  both  of  families 
and  individuals,  must  necessarily  be  instituted.  This  very 
rule,  prohibiting  the  intermarriage  of  patricians  €ind  plebeians, 
was  it  not  enacted  by  the  decemvirs  within  thfise  few  years, 
wirii  the  utmost  injustice  towards  the  plebeians,  on  a  prin-  * 
ciple  highly  detrimental  to  the  public?  Can  there  be  any  in¬ 
sult  greater  or  more  flagrant,  than  that  one  half  of  the  state, 
as  if  it  were  conUminated,  should  he  held  unworthy  of  in¬ 
termarrying  with  the  other?  What  else  is  this  than,  within 
the  same  walls,  to  suffer  all  the  evils  of  rustication  or  of  ex¬ 
ile?  They  are  anxious  to  prevent  our  being  united  to  them 
by  any  affinity  or  consanguinity;  to  prevent  our  blood  from 
being  mingled  with  theirs.  What!  if  this  would  be  a  stain 
on  that  nobility,  which  the  greater  number  of  you  the  proge¬ 
ny  of  Albans  and  Sabines,  possess  not  in  right  of  birth  or  of 
blood,  but  of  cooptation  into  the  body  of  the  patrician;  hav¬ 
ing  been  elected,  cither  by  the  jkings,  or  after  their  expul¬ 
sion,  by  order  of  the  people,  could  ye  not  preserve  its  purity 
by  regulations  among  yourselves?  ttBy  neither  taking  ple¬ 
beian  wives  nor  suffering  your  daughters  and  sisters  to  mar- 

324 

HISTORY  OF  ROME,  [Y.  R.  310. 
ry  oat  of  the  patrician  line?  No  plebeian  will  offer  violence 
to  a  nobl^  maiden;  such  outrageous  lust  is  to  be  found  only 
among  nobles.  None  of  them  would  compel  any  man  against 
his  will  to  enter  into  a  marriage  contract.  But  it  is  the  pro¬ 
hibition  of  it  by  a  law,  the  intermarriage  of  patricians  apd 
plebeians  being  interdicted;  this  is  what  the  commons  must 
consider  as  an  insult,  *  Why  do  ye  not  procure  a  law  to  be 
passed,  that  the  rich  shall  not  marry  with  the  poor?  A*  mat¬ 
ter  which  in  all  countries  has  been  left  to  the  regulation  of 
people’s  own  prudence;  that  each  woman  should  marry  into 
whatever  family  she  has  been  betrothed  to;  and  each  man 
take  a  wife  from  whatever  family  he  had  contracted  with; 
this  ye  shackle  with  the  restraints  of  a  most  tyrannical  law, 
whereby  ye  tear  asunder  the  bands  of  civil  society,  and  split 
one  state  into  two.  Why  do  ye  not  enact,  that  a  plebeian 
shall  not  dwell  in  the  neighbourhood  of  a  patneian?  that  he 
shall  not  travel  on  the  same  road?  That  he  shall  not  appear 
at  the  same  ehtertainment?  That  he  shall  not  stand  in  the 
same  Forum?  For  what  mOre  material  consequence  can  in  re¬ 
ality  ensue,  should  a  patrician  wed  a  plebeian  woman,  or  a 
plebeian  a  patrician  woman?  What  alteration  is  thereby  made 
in  the  rights  of 'any  person?  Surely  the  children  follow  the 
condition  of  the  father.  So  that  neither  have  we  any  ad¬ 
vantage  in  view,  from  intermarriage  with  you,  except  that  of 
being  considered  on  the  footing  of  human  beings  and  of  fel¬ 
low-citizens;  nor  is  there  any  reason  for  contesting  the  point 
unless  ye  feel  pleasure  in  labouring  to  subject  us  to  scorn 
and  insult,” 
V.  In  fine,  let  me  ask  you,  whether  is  the  supreme 
power  vested  in  the  Roman  people,  or  in  yem?  Was  the  ex¬ 
pulsion  of  the  kings  intended  to  procure  absolute  dominion 
to  yourselves,' or  equal  freedom  to  ail?  Is  it  fitting  that  the 
Roman  people  should  have  the  power  of  enacting  such  laws 
as  they  choose?  or  wAnever  any  matter  of  the  kind  has 
been  proposed  to  their  consideration,  shall  ye,  by  way  of  pu¬ 
nishment,  pass  a  decree  for  a  levy  of  troops?  And  as  soon 

BOOK  IV. 

325 

B.  C.  442.] 
as,  in  capacity  of  tribune,  I  shall  begin  to  call  the  tribes 
to  give  their  sufirages,  will  you,  in  the  office  of  consul, 
compel  the  younger  citizens  to  take  the  military  oath,  and 
lead  them  out  to  camp?  Will  you  menace  the  commons? 
Will  you  menace  their  tribune?  As  if  ye  had  not  already 
experienced,  on  two  several  occasions,  how  little  such  mena¬ 
ces  avail  against  the  united  sense  of  the  people.  I  suppose 
it  was  but  of  regard  to  our  interests,  that  ye  did  not  proceed 
to  force;  or  was  the  avoiding  of  extremities  owing  to  this 
that  the  party  which  possessed  the  greater  share  of  strength, 
possessed  also  a  greater  degree  of  moderation?  Romans, 
there  will  now  be  no  occasion  for  force.  Those  men  will  on 
every  occasion  make  trial  of  your  patriot  spirit:  your  strength 
at  home  they  will  never  try.  Wherefore,  consuls,  to  those 
wars,  whether  real  or  fictitious,  the  commons  are  ready  to 
attend  you,  provided  that  by  restoring  the  right  of  inter¬ 
marriage,  yc  at  length  unite  the  state  into  one  body;  provi- 
ded  they*  are  allowed  to  coalesce,  to  intermix  with  you  by 
the  ties  of  relationship;  provided  the  road  to  honours  shall 
be  laid  open  to  men  of  industry  and  abilities;  provided,  in 
short,  they  are  allowed  t6  stand  on  the  footing  of  partners 
and  associates  in  the  commonwealth;  and,  what  is  the  natural 
result  of  equal  freedom,  be  admitted  in  the  rotation  of  an¬ 
nual  magistracies,  to  obey  and  to  command  in  turn.  If  any 
shall  obstruct  these  measures,  harangue  about  wars,  and 
multiply  them  by  reports,  not  a  man  will  give  in  his  name; 
not  a  man  will  take  arms;  not  a  man  will  fight  for  haughty 
masters,  by  whom  he  is  excluded  as  an  alien,  both  from  the 
participation  of  public  honours,  and  the  private  connections 
of  marriage. 
VI.  The  consuls  then  came  into  the  assembly,  and,  after 
a  long  series  of  harangues  on  the  subject,  an  altercation  aris¬ 
ing,  and  the  tribune  asking,  for  what  reason  Vas  it  im¬ 
proper  that  a  plebeian  should  be  made  consul?”  one  of  them 
answered,  though  perhaps  with  truth,  yet  unluckily,  with  re- 

326 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  310, 

gml  to  the  pr^ent  dispute,  ‘‘  Because  no  plebeian  had  the 
right  or  power  of  taking  the  auspices;  and,  for  that  reason 
the  decemvirs  had  prohibited  intemarriage,  lest,  from  the 
uncertainty  of  men’s  descent,  the  auspices  might  be  vitiated,” 
This,  above  all,  kindled  the  indignatiem  of  the  commons  in¬ 
to  a  flame;  they  heard  it  affirmed  that  they  were  not  qualified 
to  take  auspices,  as  if  they  were  objects  of  the  aversion  of 
the  immortal  gods.  So  that  the  contest  grew  high,  the  com¬ 
mons  being  headed  by  a  tribune  of  undaunted  resolution, 
and  themselves  vying  with  him  in  steadiness,  until  the  senate 
w^ere  at  length  overpowered,  and  gave  their  consent  to  the 
passing  of  the  law  concerning  intermarriage;  judging,  that 
the  tribunes  might  most  probably  be  thereby  induced,  either 
to  lay  aside  entirely,  or  to  defer  until  the  end  of  the  war,  the 
struggle  for  plebeian  consuls;  and  that,  in  the  mean  time,  the 
commons,  satisfied  with  having  obtained  the  right  in  ques¬ 
tion,  would  be  ready  to  enlist.  On  the  other  hand,  the  high 
degree  of  credit  which  Canuleius  4iad  attained  by  "his  victory 
over  the  senate,  and  the  favour  of  the  commons,  proved  a 
strong  incentive  to  the  other  tribunes  to  exert  their  utmost 
efforts  in  support  of  the  law,  which  they  had  proposed  in  re¬ 
gard  to  the  consulship:  and  whilst  the  accounts  of  the  ene¬ 
my’s  proceedings  grew  every  day  more  alarming,  they  ob¬ 
structed  the  enlisting  of  troops.  The  consuls,  finding  that, 
by  the  continual  protests  of  the  tribunes,  every  proceeding 
of  the  senate  was  rendered  abortive,  held  consultations  at 
dieir  houses  with  the  principal  patricians.  Here  they  saw 
their  dilemma:  they  must  be  vanquished,  either  by  their 
enemies,  or  by  their  countrymen.  The  only  consulars  who 
were  present  at  their  deliberations  were  Valerius  and  H©- 
ratit^.  Cains  Claudius  gave  his  opinion,  that  the  consuls 
should  proceed  against  the  tribunes  by  force  of  arms.  The 
Quindi,  both  Cincinnatus  and  Capitolinus,  declared  them¬ 
selves  averse  from  the  shedding  of  blood,  and  of  offering 
violence  to  those  officers,  whom,  by  the  treaty  concluded 

B.  C.  442*3 

BOOK  IV. 

327 

with  the  commons^  they  had  acknowledged  as  saemi  and 
iavic^ble.  The  result  of  these  cdMultaticaas  *  was,  that 
they  should  allow  military  tribunes,  with  consular  powo", 
to  be  elected  out  of  the  patricians  and  j^ebeians  without  dis¬ 
tinction;  and  that,  with  respect  to  the  election  of  consuls,  no 
change  should  be  made;  and  with  this  the  tribunes  were  sa¬ 
tisfied,  and  the  commons  also.  An  assembly  was  now  pro¬ 
claimed  for  the  election  of  three  tribunes  with  consular  pow¬ 
er;  and,  as  soon  as  this  proclamation  was  issued,  immediate¬ 
ly  every  one,  who  had,  either  by  word  or  deed,  been  a  pro¬ 
moter  of  the  sedition,  particularly  those  who  had  held  the 
office  of  tribune,  began  to  solicit  votes,  and  to  bustle  through 
the  Forirm  as  candidates;  so  that  the  patricians  were  de¬ 
terred,  first,  in  despair  of  attaining  that  dignity,  while  the 
minds  of  the  commons  were  in  such  a  ferment;  and,  after- 
wardsf  from  making  their  appearance,  from  the  indignation 
which  they  felt  at  the  thoughts  of  holding  the  office  in  con¬ 
junction  withauch  colleagues.  At  last,  however,  overcome 
by  the  pressing  instancts  of  the  leading  patricians,  some  of 
them  declared  themselves  candidates,  lest  they  might  seem 
to  have  voluntarily  surrendered  the  administration  of  public 
affairs.  The  issue  of  that  election  afforded  a  proof,  that 
men’s  sentiments  during  the  heat  of  the  contest  for  liberty 
and  dignity,  are  very  different  from  those  which  they  feel  af¬ 
ter  Ihe  contest^has  been  ended,  and  when  the  judgment  is 
unbiassed.  For  the  ^advocates  for  the  plebeians,  satisfied 
with  the  admission  of  their  right,  to  stand  candidates,  elect¬ 
ed  every  oae  of  *the  tribunes  from'  among  the  patricians. 
Never  was  there  found,  even  in  a  single  individual,  such  mo¬ 
deration,  disinterestedness,  and  elevation  of  mind,  as  was 
displayed  on  that  occasion  by  the  whole  body  of  the  people. 
VII*  In  the  year  three  hundred  md  ten  from  the  ^  ^ 
foundation  of  the  city  of  Rome, Jar  the  first  time,  B.  C.  44i! 
military  tribunes  in  the  room  of  consuls  entered*into  office* 
These  were  Aulus  Sempronius  Atratinus,  Lucius  Atilius, 

328  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y,  R.  311. 
^:id  Titus  Csecilius;  and,  during  their  continuance  in  ofEce, 
concord  prevsdling  at  home,  produced  likewise  peace  abroad. 
There  are  some  writers,  who,  without  mentioning  the  prro- 
posid  of  the  law  concerning  the  election  of  plebeian  consuls^ 
affirm,  that  on  account  of  a  war  breaking  out  with  the  Vei- 
entrans,  in  addition  to  those  with  the  dSquans  and  Vol- 
ftcians,  and  the  revolt  of  the  Ardeans,  two  consuls  being  un- 
^|ual  to  the  task  of  conducting  so  many  wars  at  once,  tlu'ee 
military  tribunes  were  created,  and  vested  both  with  the  ai>* 
thority  and  the  badges  of  consuls.  However,  the  establish¬ 
ment  of  this  office  did  not,  at  that  time,  remain  on  a  perma¬ 
nent  footing;  for  in  thei  third  month  from  its  commencement 
they  resigned  their  dignity,  in  pursuance  of  a  decrpe  of  the 
augurs,  alleging  a  defect  in  the  election,  Caius  Curtius,  who 
had  presided  on  that  occasion,  not  having  performed  the  re¬ 
quisite  ceremonies  in  marking  out  the  ground  for  his  tent. 
Ambassadors  came  from  Ardea  to  Rome,  complaining  of 
the  injustice  done  to  them,  and  at  the  jsame  time  professing 
an  intention  of  remaining  in  amity,  and  adhering  to  the  trea¬ 
ty,  provided  that,  by  the  restoration  of  their  lands,  that  in¬ 
justice  were  redressed.  The  senate  answered,  that  “  they 
could  not  rescind  the  sentence  of  the  people,  were  there  no 
other  reason  than  the  preservation  of  concord  between  the 
orders  in  the  state;  but,  besides,  such  a  measure  was  not  jus¬ 
tified  either  by  law  or  precedent.  If  the  Ardeans  would  be 
content  to  wait  until  a  seasonable  conjuncture,  and  leave  it 
entirely  to  the  senate  to  find  a  remedy  for  the  injury  of¬ 
fered  them,  they  would*have  reason  ^ftenfards  Jo  rejoice  for 
having  moderated  their  resentment,  and  should  be  convinced 
that  the  senate  had  ever  been  sincerely  disposed  to  prevent 
any  harm  being  done  to  them;  and  also  that  they  were  not 
less  so  to  hear  that  which  they  now  complained  of.”  On 
which  the  ambassadors  {^daring,  that  they  would  take  the 
sense  of  their  countrymen  anew,  before  they  formed  any  re¬ 
solution,  they  were  dismissed  with  expressions  of  friend- 

BOOK  IV- 

329 

B-  C.  441.] 
ship*  The  commonwealth  being  now  without  any  curule 
magistrate,  the  patricians  assembled  and  created  an  interrex, 
and  the  interregnum  was  prolonged  for  a  great  many  days, 
by  a  contention  whether  consuls  or  military  tribunes  should 
be  appointed*  The  interrex  and  the  senate  warmly  promo¬ 
ted  the  election  of  consuls;  die  plebeian  tribunes  and  the 
commons,  the  election  of  military  tribunes.  The  patricians 
at  length  prevailed,  for  the  commons,  who  had  no  inten¬ 
tion  of  conferring  either  the  one  office  or  the  other  on  any 
but  patricians,  desisted  from  their  fruitless  opposition:  and 
besides,  the  leaders  of  the  commons  were  better  pleased  with 
an  election  where  they  were  not  to  appear  as  candid^es^ 
than  with  one  where  they  would  be  passed  over  as  unwordiy. 
The  plebeian  tribunes  wished  also  that  their  declining  to  press 
the  dispute  to  a  decision  should  be  considered  as  a  compli¬ 
ment  to  the  patricians.  Titus  Quintius  Baibatus,  the  in¬ 
terrex,  elected  consuls  Lucius  Papirius  Mugllanus  and  Lu¬ 
cius  Sempronius  Atratinus.  In  their  consulate,  the  treaty 
with  the  Ardeans  was  renewed;  and  this  serves  as  a  record 
to  prove,  that  they  were  actually  consuls  in  that  year,  though 
they  are  not  to  be  found,  either  in  the  old  annals,  or  in  the 
books  of  the  magistrates,  by  reason,  as  I  imagine,  that  in  the 
beginning  of  the  year  there  were  military  tribunes,  and 
therefore  though  these  consuls  were  afterwards  substituted 
in  their  room,  yet  the  names  of  the  consuls  were  omitted,  as 
if  the  others  had  continued  in  office  through  the  whole  of 
the  appointed  time*  Licinius  MaCer  affirms,  that  they  were 
found  both  in  the  Ardean  treaty,  and  in  the  linen  books  in 
the  temple  of  Moneta.  Tranquillity  prevailed,  not  only  at 
home  but  abroad,  notwithstanding  so  many  alarms  given  by 
the  neighbouring  states. 
VII L  Whether  this  year  had  tribunes  only,  or  ^  ^  ^^2 
consuls  substituted  in  their  room,  is  uncertain,  but  C;  440. 
the  succeeding  one  undoubtedly  had  consuls;  Marcus  Ge|^- 
nius  Macerinus  a  secosKi  time,  and  Titus  Quintius  Ci^toli- 
VOL'.  I. — U  U 

330 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  312. 

DUS  a  fifth  time,  being  invested  with  that  honour.  This  same 
year  produced  the  first  institution  of  the  censorship,  an  ofiSce 
which  sprung  from  an  inconsiderable  origin,  but  grew  up 
afterwards  to  such  a  height  of  importance,  that  it  became 
possessed  of  the  entire  regulation  of  the  morals  and  disci¬ 
pline  of  the  Roman  people*  The  senate,  the  centuries  of  the 
knights,  and  the  distribution  of  honour  and  ignominy,  were 
all  under  the  supreme  jurisdiction  of  these  magistrates.  The 
discrimination  of  public  from  private  property  in  Im^ds  or 
houses,  and  the  entire  revenue  of  the  Roman  people,  were 
finally  adjusted  by  their  sovereign  decision.  A^hat  gave  rise 
to  the  institution  was,  that  as  the  people  had  not,  for  many 
years  past,  undergone  a  survey,  the  census  could  neither  be 
longer  deferred,  nor  could  the  consuls  find  leisure  to  perform 
it,  while  they  were  threatened  with  war  by  so  many  different 
states.  An  observation  was  made  in  the  senate,  that  a  bu¬ 
siness,  so  laborious  and  ill  suited  to  the  office  of  consul, 
would  requite  officers  to  be  appointed  for  that  particular 
purpose,  to  whose  management  should  be  committed  the 
business  of  the  public  secretaries,  the  superintendance  and 
custody  of  the  records,  and  the  ac^justment  of  the  form  of 
proceeding  in  the  census.  This  proposal,  though  deemed  of 
little  consequence,  yet,  as  it  tended  to  increase  the  number 
of  patrician  magistrates  in  the  commonwealth,  the  senate,  on 
their  part,  received  with  great  pleasure;  foreseeing  also,  I 
suppose,  what  really  happened,  that  the  influence  of  those 
who  should  be  raised  to  that  post,  would  derive  additional 
authority  and  dignity  oh  the  office  itself.  And,  on  the  other 
side,  the  tribunes,  looking  on  the  employment  rather  as  ne¬ 
cessary,  which  was  the  case  at  the  time,  than  as  attended 
with  any  extraordinary  lustre,  did  not  choose  to  oppose  it, 
lest  they  should  seem,  through  perverseness,  to  carry  on  their 
opposition  even  in  trifles.  The  leading  men  in  the  state 
showing  a  dislike  of  the  office,  the  people  by  their  suffrages 
conferred  the  employment  of  performing  the  census  on  Pa- 

BOOK  IV. 

331 

B,  C.  440.] 
pirius  and  Scmpronms,  the  persons  whose  consulate  is  doubt* 
ed,  in  order  to  recompense  them,  by  that  office,  for  having 
enjoyed  the  consulship  only  for  a  part  of  the  usual  period. 
From  the  basinet  of- their  office  they  were  called  Censors. 
IX.  During  these  transactions  at  Rome,  ambassadors  came 
from  Ardea,  imploring,  in  regard  of  the  alliance  subsisting 
between  them  from  the  earliest  times,  and  of  the  treaty  late¬ 
ly  renewed,  relief  for  their  city,  now  on  the  brink  of  ruin. 
The  peace  with  Rome,  which  they  had,  by  the  soundest  po¬ 
licy,  preserved,  they  were  prevented  from  enjoying  by  intes* 
tine  war,  the  cause  and  origin  of  which  is  said  to  have  arisen 
from  a  struggle  between  factions,  which  have  proved,  and 
will  ever  continue  to  prove,  a  more  deadly  cause  of  down¬ 
fall  to  most  states,  than  either  foreign  wars,  or  famine,  or 
pestilence,  or  any  other  of  those  evils,  which  men  are  apt  to 
consider  as  the  severest  of  public  calamities,  and  the  effects 
of  the  divine  vengeance.  Two  young  men  courted  a  maiden 
of  a  plebeian  ^mily,  highly  distinguished  for  beauty:  one  of 
them,  on  a  level  with  the  maid,  in  point  of  birth,  and  fa¬ 
voured  by  her  guardians,  who  were  themselves  of  the  same 
rank;  the  other  of  noble  birth,  captivated  merely  by  her 
beauty.  The  pretensions  of  the  latter  were  supported  by  the 
interest  of  the  nobles,  which  proved  the  means  of  introducing 
party  disputes  into  the  damseFs  family;  for  the  nobleman’s 
wishes  were  seconded  by  her  mother,  who  was  ambitious  of 
securing  the  more  splendid  match  for  her  daughter,  while 
the  guardians,  actuated  even  in  a  matter  of  that  sort,  by  a 
spirit  of  party,  exerted  themselves  in  favour  of  the  person  of 
their  own  order.  Not  being  able  to  come  to  any  conclusion 
on  the  point  in  domestic  conferences,  they  had  recourse  to 
a  court  of  justice,  where  the  magistrates  having  heard  the 
claims  of  the  mother  and  of  the  guardians,  decreed,  that  she 
should  marry  according  to  the  direction  of  her  parent:  but 
this  was  prevented  by  violence;  for  the  guardians,  after  ha¬ 
ranguing  openl}  in  the  Forum,  among  people  of  their  own 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  312. 

Action,  on  the  iniquity  of  the  decree,  collected  a  party  in 
arms,  and  forcibly  caftied  off  the  maiden  from  her  mother^s 
house:  whtk  the  nc^lcs,  more  highly  incensed  against  them 
than  ever,  united  in  a  body,  and  in  military  array  followed 
their  young  friend,  who  was  rendered  furious  by  this  out¬ 
rage.  A  desperate  battle  was  fought,  in  which  the  commons 
were  worsted;  and,  being  incapable  of  imitating,  in  any  par¬ 
ticular,  those  of  Rome,  they  marched  out  of  the  city,  seized 
on  a  neighbouring  hill,  and  from  thence  made  excursions 
with  fire  and  sword  on  the  lands  of  the  nobles.  Even  the 
city  Itself,  which  had  hitherto  escaped  the  effects  of  their 
dispute,  they  prepared  to  besiege,  having,  by  the  hopes  of 
plunder,  allured  a  great  number  of  the  artizans  to  come  out 
and  join  them:  nor  is  there  any  shocking  form  or  calamity  of 
war  which  was  not  experienced  on  the  occasion,  as  if  the 
whole  state  were  infected  with  the  mad  rage  of  two  youths, 
who  sought  the  accomplishment  of  that  fatal  match  through 
the  means  of  their  country’s  ruin.  Both  parties  thinking  that 
they  had  not  enough  of  hostilities  among  themselves,  the 
nobles  called  upon  the  Romans  to  relieve  their  city  from  a 
siege;  while  the  commons  besought  the  Volscians  to  join 
them  in  the  storming  of  Ardea.  The  Volscians,  under  the 
command  of  Cluilius,  an  iEquan,  arrived  first  at  Ardea,  and 
drew  a  line  of  circumvallation  round  the  enemy’s  walls.  An 
account  of  this  being  conveyed  to  Rome,  Marcus  Geganius, 
consul,  instantly  set  out  with  an  army,  chose  ground  for  his 
camp,  at  the  distance  of  three  miles  from  the  enemy;  and,  as 
the  day  was  now  far  spent,  ordered  his  men  to  refresh  them¬ 
selves:  then,  at  the  fourth  watch,  he  put  his  troops  in  motion. 
They  were  soon  set  to  work,  and  made  such  expedition,  that 
at  sun-rise  the  Volscians  saw  themselves  inclosed  by  the 
Romans  with  stronger  works  than  those  with  which  they  had 
surrounded  the  city.  The  consul  had  also,  on  one  side,  drawn 
a  line  across,  to  the  wall  of  Ardea,  to  open  a  communication 
with  his  friends  in  the  city. 

BOOK  IV. 

333 

B.  C  440.3 
X.  The  general  of  the  VoUcians,  who  had  hitherto  main¬ 
tained  his  troops,  not  out  of  maga^unes  provided  for  the  pur¬ 
pose,  but  by  com  brought  in  daily  from  the  plunder  of  the 
country,  finding  himself  cut  off  at  once  from  every  resource, 
by  being  shut  up  .within  the  enemy’s  lines,  requested  a  con¬ 
ference  with  the  consul,  and  told  him,  that  if  the  intention 
of  the  Romans  in  coming  thither  was  to  raise  the  siege,  he 
was  willing  to  withdraw  the  troops  of  the  Volscians  from 
the  place.”  To  this  the  consul  answered,  that  it  was  the 
part  of  the  vanquished  to  receive  terms,  not  to  dictate  them; 
and  that  the  Volscians  should  not  have  the  making  of  their 
own  conditions  for  departure,  as  they  had  for  coming  to  at¬ 
tack  the  allies  of  the  Roman  people.”  He  insisted,  that  “  they 
should  deliver  up  their  general  into  his  hands,  lay  dowp  their 
arms,  and  acknowledging  themselves  vanquished,  submit  to 
his  farther  orders;”  declaring,  that  if  these  terms  were  not 
complied  with,  whether  they  remained  there,  or  retired,  he 
would  proceed  against  them  as  a  determined  enemy;  and 
would  be  better  pleased  to  carry  home  a  victory,  over  the 
Volscians,  than  an  insidious  peace.”  The  Volscians,  resolving 
to  make  trial  of  the  small  remains  of  hope,  which  they  could 
place  in  their  arms,  as  they  were  utterly  destitute  of  every 
other,  came  to  an  engagement;  in  which,  besides  other  dis¬ 
advantages,  the  ground  rendered  it  difficult  for  them  to  fight, 
and  still  more  so  to  retreat.  When,  finding  themselves  re¬ 
pulsed  on  all  sides,  with  much  slaughter,  from  fighting  they 
had  recourse  to  intreaties;  and,  having  delivered  up  their 
general,  and  surrendered  their  arms,  they  were  sent  under 
the  yoke,  each  with  a  single  garment,  loaded  with  ignominy 
and  sufferings;  and,  having  afterwards  halted  near  the  city 
of  Tusculum,  the  inhabitants  of  that  city,  out  of  the  invete¬ 
rate  hatred  which  they  bore  them,  attacked  them  unarmed 
as  they  were,  and  executed  severe  vengeance  on  them;  leav¬ 
ing  scarcely  any  to  carry  home  the  news  of  their  defeat.  The 
Roman  general  re-established  tranquillity  in  the  affairs  of 

334 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.313. 

Ardea,  which  had  been  thrown  into  great  confiisicm  by  the 
sedition,  beheading  the  principal  authors' of  the  disturbances, 
and  confiscating  their  effects  to  the  public  treasury*  These 
now  considered  the  injustice  of  the  former  sentence  against 
them,  as  sufficiently  repaired  by  such  an  important  act  of 
kindness:  the  senate,  however,  were  of  opinion  that  some¬ 
thing  still  remained  to  be  done,  to  obliterate,  if  possible,  all 
remembrance  of  the  Roman  people’s  avarice.  The  consul 
returned  into  the  city  in  triumph,  Cluilius  the  general  of  the 
Volscians  being  led  before  his  chariot,  and  the  spoils  borne 
before  him,  of  which  he  had  stripped  the  enemy  when  he 
disarmed,  and  sent  them  under  the  yoke.  The  other  consul, 
Quintius,  had  the  singular  felicity  of  acquiring  by  his  ad¬ 
ministration  in  the  civil  department,  a  share  of  glory  equal 
to  what  his  colleague  had  acquired  by  his  military  achieve¬ 
ments:  for  so  steadily  did  he  direct  his  endeavours  for  the 
preservation  of  internal  peace  and  harmony,  dispensing  justice 
tempered  with  moderation,  equally  to  the  highest  and  the 
lowest,  that  while  the  patricians  approved  of  his  strictness  in 
the  execution  of  his  office,  the  commons  were  highly  satis¬ 
fied  with  his  lenity.  Even  against  the  schemes  of  the  tri¬ 
bunes,  he  carried  his  measures  more  by  means  of  the  respect 
universally  paid  to  him,  than  by  exertions  of  authority.  Five 
consulships  administered  with  the  same  tenor  of  conduct,  and 
every  part  of  his  life  being  suited  to  the  consular  dignity, 
attracted  to  his  person  almost  a  greater  degree  of  veneration 
than  was  paid  even  to  the  high  office  which  he  bore.  There 
wa^  therefore,  no  mention  of  military  tribunes  in  this  con¬ 
sulate. 
y  R  SIS  were  chosen,  to  succeed  them,  Marcus 
B.  C.  439,  Fabius  Vebulanus  and  Postumius  JSbutius  Comi- 
cen.  These  consuls  were  emulous  of  the  high  renown,  which 
they  observed  their  predecessors  had  attained  by  their  ser¬ 
vices  at  home  and  abroad,  that  year  having  been  rendered 
very  remarkable  among  all  the  ri^ghbouring  states,  both 

BOOK  IV. 

335 

B.  C.439.] 

friends  and  enemies,  by  the  very  zealous  support  afforded  to 
the  Ardeans  in  their  extreme  distress.  They  exerted  them¬ 
selves  then  the  more  earnestly,  with  the  view  of  erasing  en¬ 
tirely  from  the  minds  of  men  the  infamy  of  the  former  sen¬ 
tence  of  the  people  in  respect  of  the  appropriation  of  the 
lands:  and  sought  to  procure  a  decree  of  the  senate,  that 
whereas  the  Ardeans  had  by  intestine  war  been  reduced  to 
an  inconsiderable  number,  therefore  a  colony  should  be  con¬ 
ducted  thither,  to  serve  as  a  barrier  against  the  Volscians. 
These  were  the  expressions  made  use  of  in  the  tables  exhi¬ 
bited  to  public  view,  in  order  to  conceal  from  the  tribunes  and 
commons  the  design  which  they  had  formed  of  rescinding 
the  sentence.  But  they  had  agreed  among  themselves,  to 
enrol  for  the  colony  a  much  greater  number  of  Rutulians 
than  of  Romans;  and  then,  that  no  other  land  should  be  dis¬ 
tributed,  but  that  which  had  been  fraudulently  obtained  by 
the  infamous  sentence  of  the  people;  and  that  not  a  sod  of 
it  should  be  assigned  to  any  Roman  until  every  one  of  the 
Rutulians  should  have  received  his  share:  by  these  means 
the  land  returned  to  the  Ardeans.  The  commissioners  ap¬ 
pointed  to  conduct  the  colony  to  Ardea,  were  Agrippa  Mc- 
nenius,  Titus  Clselius  Siculus,  and  Marcus  j^butius  Elva; 
who,  in  the  execution  of  their  very  unpopular  employment, 
having  given  offence  to  the  commons,  by  assigning  to  the 
allies  that  land  which  the  Roman  people  had  by  their  sen¬ 
tence  pronounced  to  be  their  own;  and  not  being  much  fa¬ 
voured  even  by  the  principal  patricians,  because  they  had 
shown  no  difference  to  the  influence  of  any  of  them,  were  by 
the  tribunes  cited  before  the  people,  to  answer  a  charge  of 
misconduct;  hut  they  evaded  all  vexatious  attacks,  by  en¬ 
rolling  themselves  as  settlers,  and  remaining  in  that  colony, 
which  would  ever  bear  testimony  to  their  justice  and  integ¬ 
rity. 
XII.  Tranquillity  continued  at  home  and  abroad  y.  R.  314. 
during  both  this  and  tte  following  year,  in  which 

336 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  ^15. 

Caius  Furius  Pacilus,  and  Marcus  Papiiius  Cras^tis  were 
consuls.  The  games  vowed  by  the  decemvirs  hi  pmnnamt 
of  a  decree  of  the  senate,  on  occasion  of  the  secessiem  of  tdbe 
commons  from  the  patricians  were  this  year  perfors^d.  An 
occasion  of  sedition  was  sought  in  vain  by  Petilius;  who, 
though  he  was  elected  tribune  of  the  commons  a  second 
time,  merely  out  of  people’s  reliance  on  the  strength  of  his 
declaration,  which  was,  that  the  consuls  should  propose  to 
the  senate  a  distribution  of  lands  to  be  made  to  the  commons; 
yet  he  was  neither  able  to  carry  this  point,  nor  when,  after 
a  great  struggle,  he  had  prevailed  so  far  as  that  the  senate 
should  be  consulted,  whether  it  was  their  pleasure  that  con- 
suls  slmuld  be  elected,  or  tribunes,  could  he  prevent  an  or¬ 
der  for  the'  election  of  consuls;  and  the  tribune  made  him¬ 
self  still  more  ridiculous  by  threatening  to  hinder  a  levy  of 
troops,  at  a  time  when,  all  their  neighbours  remaining  in 
quiet,  there  was  no  occasion  either  for  war  or  any  prepara- 
Y.  R.  315.  tionfor  it.  This  tranquillity  was  succeeded  by  a 
B.  C.  437.  year,  wherein  Proculus  Geganius  Macerinus 
and  Lucius  Menenius  Lanatus  were  consuls;  a  year  re» 
markable  for  a  variety  of  dangers  and  disasters;  for  sedi¬ 
tions,  for  famine,  and  for  the  people  having  almost  bowed 
their  necks  to  the  yoke  of  arbitrary  government,  seduced  by 
allurements  of  largesses.  One  calamity  they  were  exempt 
from,  foreign  war:  had  d;is  aggravation  b^n  added  to  their 
condition,  the  aid  of  all  the  gods  could  scarcely  have  pre¬ 
served  them.  Their  misfortune  began  with  a  famine;  whe¬ 
ther  owing  to  the  season  being  unfavourable  to  the  produc¬ 
tions  of  the  earth;  or,  from  more  attention  being  paid  to  the 
pleasures  of  the  city  and  the  assemblies  than  to  agriculture; 
for  both  causes  are  mentioned.  The  patricians  laid  the 
blame  on  the  idleness  of  die  commons;  the  tribunes  some¬ 
times  on  the  evil  designs,  sometimes  on  the  negligence  of 
the  consuls.  At  length  the  plebeians  prevailed,  the  senate 
giving  no  opposition,  that  Lucius  Minucius  should  be  creat- 

BOOK  IV. 

337 

B.C.  4370 
ed  president  of  the  market,  who  proved,  in  the  coui:tte  of  that 
employment,  more  successful  in  guarding  the  public  liberty, 
than  in  die  immediate  business  of  his  own  department;  al¬ 
though  in  the  end,  he  obtained  the  honour  of  having  relieved 
the  people  in  regard  to  the  scarcity,  and  also  their  gratitude 
for  that  important  service.  He  first  proceeded  as  follows; 
Finding  little  addition  to  the  markets  from  several  embas¬ 
sies  which  he  "sent,  by  land  and  sea,  to  all  the  neighbouring 
nations,  except  that  some  corn  was  brought,  though  in  no 
great  quantity,  from  Etruria,  he  had  recourse  to  the  expe¬ 
dient  of  dealing  out,  ki  shares,  the  scanty  stock  of  provi¬ 
sions,  at  the  same  rime  compelling  all  to  discover  their  stores 
of  corn,  and  to  sell  whatever  they  had  beyond  a  month’s  al¬ 
lowance.  He  took  from  the  slaves  one  half  of  their  daily 
portion  of  food;  passed  censures  on  the  hoarders  of  corn, 
and  exposed  them  to  the  rage  of  the  people.  So  strict  a 
scrutiny,  however,  served  rather  to  make  known  the  great¬ 
ness  of  the  scarcity,  than  to  remedy  it;  so  that  many  of  the 
commoners  abandoning  themselves  to  despair,  rather  than 
drag  on  their  lives  in  torment,  covered  their  heads,  and 
threw  themselves  into  the  Tiber. 
XIII.  While  things  were  in  this  situation,  Spurius  Maeli- 
us,  a  man  of  equestrian  rank,  and  possessed  of  extraor¬ 
dinary  wealth  for  those  times,  engaged  in  a  plan,  which, 
though  useful  for  the  present,  was  pernicious  in  its  tenden¬ 
cy;  and  was  in  fact  suggested  by  designs  stUl  more  perni¬ 
cious;  for  having  by  means  of  his  connections  and  depen¬ 
dents  bought  in  a  quantity  of  corn  from  Etruria  f  which  very 
proceeding,  I  suppose,  obstructed  the  endeavours  of  the 
magistrates  to  lower  the  price  of  provisions,)  he  began  the 
practice  of  bestowing  largesses  of  corn;  and,  having  gained 
the  hearts  of  the  commons  by  this  munificence,  became  the 
object  of  general  attention.  A^uming  thence  a  degree  of 
consequence,  beyond  what  belonged  to  a  private  citizen, 
wherever  he  went,  he  drew  them  after  him  in  crowds;  and 
VOL.  I. —  X  X 

338 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y. ».  ^16* 

they,  by  the  favour  which  they  expressed  towards  him,  en¬ 
couraged  him  to  look  up  to  the  consulship  with  a  certain 
prospect  of  success.  As  men’s  desires  are  never  satiated, 
while  fortune  gives  room  to  hope  for  more,  he  beg^n  to  aim 
at  higher  and  less  justifiable  objects.  And  since  even  the 
consulship  must  be  obtained  by  violent  efforts,  in  opposition 
to  the  inclinations  of  the  patricians,  and  be,  at  the  same  time, 
a  contest  attended  with  such  difficulties  as  Would  cost  infi¬ 
nite  labour  to  surmount,  he  directed  his  views  to  regal  pow¬ 
er*  The  election  of  consuls  drew  nigh;  and  the  circum¬ 
stance  of  its  coming  on  before  his  schemes  were  sufficiently 
digested,  and  ripe  for  execution,  was  the  cause  of  their  be¬ 
ing  entirely  disconcerted.  To  the  consulship  was  elected, 
Titus  Quintius  Cincinnatus  a  sixth  time,  a  man  not  at  all 
Y.  R.  316.  calculated  to  encourage  the  views  of  one  who  aim- 
B.  C.  436.  innovation ts:  his  colleague  was  Agrippa  Me- 
nenius,  sumamed  Lanatus.  Minucius,  too,  was  either  re¬ 
elected  president  of  the  market,  or  was  originally  appointed 
for  an  unlimited  term,  as  long  as  occasion  should  require; 
for  there  is  nothing  certain  on  this  head,  only  that  his  name, 
as  president,  was  entered  in  the  linen  books  among  the 
other  magistrates  for  both  years.  This  Minucius  transact¬ 
ing,  in  a  public  character,  the  same  kind  of  business  which 
Meelius  had  undertaken  in  a  private  capacity,  the  houses  of 
both  were  consequently  frequented  f)y  the  same  sort  of 
people;  which  circumstance,  having  led  to  a  discovery  of 
the  designs  of  the  latter,  Minucius  laid  the  information  be¬ 
fore  the  senate:  that  arms  were  collected  in  the  dwelling  of 
Mselius;  that  he  held  assemblies  in  his  house;  and  that  there 
remained  not  a  doubt  of  his  having  formed  a  design  to  pos¬ 
sess  himself  of  absolute  power:  that  the  time  for  the  cxecu- 
tion  of  that  design  was  not  yet  fixed,  but  every  other  parti¬ 
cular  had  been  settled:  that  tribunes  had  been  con-upted,  by 
bribes,  to  betray  the  public  liberty;  and  that  the  leadeis  erf 
the  multitude  had  their  several  parts  assigned  them.  That 
he  had  deferred  laying  this  matter  before  the  senate,  rathei 

B.C.4360 

BOOK  IV. 

longer  than  was  consistent  with  safety,  lest  he  mi^t  offer 
any  information  which  was  ill'^rounded  or  uncertain.”  On 
hearing  this,  the  principal  patricians  highly  blamed  the  con¬ 
suls  of  the  former  year,  for  suffering  such  largesses,  and  such 
meetings  of  the  commons  in  a  private  house;  and  also,  tl^ 
new  ones  for  their  supineness,  while  the  president  of  the  mar¬ 
ket  reported  to  the  senate  an  affair  of  such  importance,  and 
which  it  was  the  duty  of  a  consul  both  to  discover  and  to 
punish.  To  this  Quintius  replied,  that  it  was  unfair  to 
blame  the  consuls,  who  being  tied  down  by  the  laws  concern¬ 
ing  appeals,  enacted  for  the  purpose  of  weakening  their  au¬ 
thority,  had  not,  in  their  office,  the  ability,  however  much 
they  might  have  the  will,  to  inflict  condign  punishment  on 
such  atrociouyproceedings:that  the  business  required  not  only 
a  man  of  resolution,  but  one  who  should  be  free  and  unshack¬ 
led  by  the  fetters  of  those  laws:  that  therefore  he  would 
name  Lucius  Quintius  dictator:  in  him  would  be  found  a  spi¬ 
rit  equal  to  so  great  a  power.”  Every  one  expressed  his  ap¬ 
probation,  Quintius  at  first  refused  the  office,  and  asked 
them,  what  they  meant  by  exposing  him  in  the  extremity  of 
age  to  such  a  violent  contest.  On  which  they  4tll  joined  in 
asserting,  that  his  aged  breast  was  fraught  not  only  with  more 
wisdom,  but  with  more  fortitude  also,  than  was  to  be  found 
in  all  the  rest,  loading  him  with  deserved  praises,  while  the 
consul  persisted  in  his  intention:  so  that  at  length  Cincinnatus, 
after  praying  to  the  immortal  gods  that  his  declining  years 
might  not,  at  a  juncture  so  dangerous,  be  the  cause  of  detri¬ 
ment  or  dishonour  to  the  commonwealth,  was  appointed  dic¬ 
tator  by  the  consul,  and  he  then  named  Caius  Servilius  Ahala 
his  master  of  the  horse. 
XIV.  Next  day,  after  fixing  proper  guards,  the  dictator 
went  down  to  the  Forum,  the  whole  attention  of  the  com 
mons  being  turned  towards  him  by  the  surprise  and  noveltv 
of  the  affair;  and  whilst  the  partizans  of  Melius,  and  also 
himself,  perceived  that  the  power  of  this  high  authority  wa^ 

340 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.316. 

aimed  against  them;  others,  who  were  ignorant  of  their  de¬ 
signs,  were  wholly  at  a  loss  to  discover  what  tumult,  what 
sudden  war,  required  either  the  majesty  of  a  dictator,  or-the 
appointment  of  Quintius,  after  his  eightieth  year,  to  the 
administration  of  aifairs.  1  he  master  of  the  horse,  by  order 
of  the  dictator,  then  came  to  Mselius,  and  said  to  him,  the 
dictator  calls  you.’’  Struck  with  apprehension,  he  asked  the 
reason,  and  was  informed  by  Servilius,  that  he  must  stand  a 
trial,  and  acquit  himself  of  a  charge  made  against  him  in  the 
senate  by  Minucius.  Mselius  then  drew  back  into  the  band 
of  his  associates;  and,  at  first,  cautiously  looking  round,  at¬ 
tempted  to  skulk  away;  and  when,  at  length,  a  serJeant,  by 
order  of  the  master  of  the  horse,  laid  hold  on  him,  he  was 
rescued  by  the  by-standers,  and  betook  himself  to  flight,  im¬ 
ploring  the  protection  of  the  commons  of  Rome;  affirming 
that  he  was  persecuted  by  a  conspiracy  of  the  patricians,  for 
having  acted  with  kindness  toward  the  people;  and  beseech¬ 
ing  them  to  assist  him  in  this  extremity  of  danger,  and  not 
to  suffer  him  to  be  murdered  before  their  eyes.  Whilst  he 
exclaimed  in  this  manner,  Ahala  Servilius  overtook  and  slew 
him,  and  besmeared  with  the  blood  which  flowed  from  the 
wounds,  and  surrounded  by  a  band  of  young  patricians, 
carried  back  an  account  to  the  dictator,  that  Mselius,  on 
being  summoned  to  attend  him,  had  driven  back  the  serJeant, 
and  endeavoured  to  excite  the  multitude  to  violence,  for 
which  he  had  received  condign  punishment.  I  applaud,” 
said  the  dictator,  your  meritorious  conduct;  Caius  Ser¬ 
vilius,  you  have  preserved  the  commonwealth,” 
XV.  He  then  ordered  the  multitude,  who,  not  knowing 
what  judgment  to  form  of  the  deed,  were  in  violent  agita¬ 
tion,  to  be  called  to  an  assembly;  there  he  publicly  declared, 
that  Mselius  had  been  legally  put  to  death,  even  supposing 
him  to  have  been  innocent  of  the  crime  of  aspiring  at  regal 
power,  for  having  refused  to  attend  the  dictator,  when  sum- 
mone4  by  the  master  of  the  horse.  That  he  himself  had 

BOOK  IV. 

34t 

B.  C.  436.] 

resolved  to  examine  into  the  charge;  and  that,  when  the  trial 
should  have  been  finished,  Mselius  would  have  met  such 
treatment  as  his  cause  merited:  but  when  he  attempted  by 
force  to  elude  a  legal  decision,  force  was  employed  to  stop 
his  proceedings.  Nor  would  it  have  been  proper  to  treat 
him  as  a  citizen,  for  though  born  in  a  free  state,  under  the 
dominion  of  the  laws  divine  and  human,  in  a  city  from 
which  he  knew  that  kings  had  been  expelled;  and  that  in 
the  same  year  the  offspring  of  the  hinge's  sister,  and  the  sons 
of  the  consul  the  deliverer  of  his  country,  on  discovery  of 
their  engaging  in  a  plot  for  re-admitting  the  kings  into  the 
city,  where  by  their  father  publicly  beheaded;  from  which, 
Collatinus  Tarquinius,  consul,  was  ordered,  through  the 
general  detestation  of  the  name,  after  resigning  his  office, 
to  retire  into  exile;  in  which  Spurius  Cassius  was,  several 
years  after,  capitally  punished,  for  having  formed  a  design 
of  assuming  the  sovereignty;  in  which,  not  long  ago,  the 
decemvirs,  on  account  of  their  regal  tyranny,  had  been 
punished  with  confiscations,  exile,  and  death;  in  that  very 
city  Spurius  Mselius  had  conceived  hopes  of  possessing  him¬ 
self  of  regal  power.  And  who  was  this  man?  Although  no 
nobility,  no  honours,  no  merits,  could  open  to  any  man  the 
way  to  tyranny;  yet  still  the  Claudii  and  Cassii,  when  they 
raised  their  views  to  an  unlawful  height,  were  elated  by 
consulships,  by  decemvirates,  by  honours  conferred  on  them¬ 
selves  and  their  ancestors,  and  by  the  splendor  of  their 
families.  But  Spurius  Mselius,  to  whom  a  plebeian  tribune- 
ship  should  have  been  an  object  rather  of  wishes,  than  of 
hope,  a  wealthy  corn-merchant,  had  conceived  the  design  of 
purchasing  the  liberty  of  his  countrymen,  for  a  few  measures 
of  corn;  had  supposed,  that  a  people  victorious  over  all  their 
neighbours,  could  be  inveigled  into  slavery  by  being  supplied 
with  a  little  food.  A  person,  whose  elevation  to  the  rank 
of  senator,  the  stale  could  have  hardly  digested,  they  were 
patiently  to  endure  as  king,  possessing  the  ensigns  and  the 

o42 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  316. 
authority  of  Romulus  their  founder,  who  had  descended 
from,  and  returned  to  the,  gods*  This  must  be  deemed  not 
more  criminal  than  it  was  monstrous:  nor  was  it  sufficiently 
expiated  by  his  blood;  it  was  farther  necessary  that  the  roof, 
the  walls,  within  which  such  a  desperate  design  had  been 
conceived,  should  be  levelled  to  the  ground;  and  that  his 
effects  should  be  confiscated,  being  contaminated  by  the  in¬ 
tention  of  making  them  the  price  of  the  people’s  liberty;  and 
that  therefore  he  directed  the  quaestors  to  sell  those  effects, 
and  deposit  the  produce  in  the  public  treasury,” 
XVI.  He  then  ordered  his  house  to  be  immediately  razed, 
and  that  the  vacant  space  should  remain  as  a  monument  of 
the  suppression  of  that  abominable  enterprize.  This  was 
called  iEquimselium.  Lucius  Minucius  was  honoured  with 
a  present  of  an  ox,  with  its  horns  gilded,  and  a  statue,  on 
the  outside  of  the  gate  Trigemina;  and  this  with  the  appro¬ 
bation  of  the  commons,  for  he  distributed  among  them  the 
corn  collected  by  Mselius,  at  the  rate  of  an  as  for  each  peck. 
In  some  authors,  I  find,  that  this  Minucius  had  changed 
sides  from  the  patricians  to  the  commons,  and  that  having 
been  chosen  by  the  plebeian  tribunes,  as  an  eleventh  member 
of  their  body,  he  quieted  the  commotion  which  arose  on  the 
death  of  Mcelius.  But  it  is  hardly  credible,  that  the  patri¬ 
cians  suffered  the  number  of  tribunes  to  be  augmented,  or 
that  the  precedent  should  have  been  introduced  particularly 
in  regard  of  a  man  of  their  own  order;  or  that  the  commons 
did  not  afterwards  maintain,  or  even  attempt  to  maintain,  a 
privilege  once  conceded  to  them.  But  what  above  all  evinces 
the  falsehood  of  that  inscription  on  his  statue,  is,  that,  a  few 
years  before  this,  provision  had  been  made  by  a  law,  that  the 
tribunes  should  not  have  power  to  assume  colleagues  in  theit 
office.  Of  the  college  of  tribunes  Quintus  Ceecilius,  Quin¬ 
tus  Junius,  and  Sextus  Titinius  had  neither  been  concerned  in 
the  law  for  conferring  honours  on  Minucius,  nor  did  they 
cease  to  throw  out  censures  in  presence  of  the  people,  at  one 

BOOK  IV. 

3"43 

B.  C.  436.] 
time  on  Mtnucius,  at  another  on  ScrvHins;  and  to  complain 
of  the  unmerited  death  of  Meelius.  By  anch  methods  they 
accomplished  tiieir  purpose  so  far  as  to  procure  an  order, 
that  military  tribunes  should  be  elected  instead  of  consuls; 
not  doubting,  but  in  the  filling  up  of  six  places,  for  so  many 
were  then  allowed  to  be  elected,  some  plebeians,  who  should 
profess  a  resolution  to  revenge  the  death  of  Mselius,  would 
be  appointed  among  the  rest.  The  commcHis,  though  kept 
in  continual  agitation  during  that  year,  from  many  and  va¬ 
rious  causes,  elected  three  tribunes  only,  with  consular  power, 
and  even  chose  among  these  Lucius  Quintius  the  son  of  Cin- 
cinnatus,  whose  conduct  in  the  dictatorship  those  men  wish¬ 
ed  to  render  odious,  and  thence  to  gain  occasion  of  new  dis¬ 
turbances.  Prior  to  Quintius,  Mamercus  dEmilius  was  voted 
in,  a  man  who  stood  in  the  first  rank  of  merit:  in  the  third 
place,  they  elected  Lucius  Icilius. 
XVII.  While  these  were  in  office,  Fidense,  a  Ro-  Y.  R.  8i7. 
man  colony,  revolted  to  the  Vcientians,  whose  king 
was  Lars  Tolumnius.  To  their  revolt  a  more  heinous  crime 
was  added;  for,  in  pursuance  of  an  order  from  Tolumnius,  they 
put  to  death  Caius  Fulcinius,  Clcelius  Tullus,  Spurius  Ancius, 
and  Lucius  Roscius,  Roman  ambassadors,  who  came  to  in¬ 
quire  into  the  reasons  of  this  change  of  conduct.  Some  palliate 
the  guilt  of  the  king,  alleging,  that  an  ambiguous  expression 
of  his,  on  a  successful  throw  at  dice,  being  misapprehended  by 
the  Fidenatians,  as  an  order  for  their  execution,  occasioned  the 
death  of  the  ambassadors.  But  this  seems  an  incredible  tale; 
for  it  cannot  be  supposed  that  the  thoughts  of  Tolumnius 
would  be  so  intently  employed  upon  his  game,  that  he  should 
be  regardless  of  a  circumstance  of  so  much  consequence,  as 
the  arrival  of  his  new  allies,  the  Fidenatians,  and  who,  if 
this  be  admitted,  must  have  come  to  consult  him  upon  the 
perpetration  of  a  mufQ#,  which  would  violate  all  the  laws 
of  nations;  or  that,  in  such  an  affair,  he  should  feel  no  com¬ 
punction.  It  is  much  more  probable,  that  his  view  was  to 

344 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

tY,  R.  318, 

involve  them  in  such  guilt,  as  to  cut  off  all  hope  of  recon¬ 
ciliation  with  the  Romans.  Statues  of  the  ambassadors  slain 
at  Fidense  were  erected  near  the  rostrum,  at  the  public  ex¬ 
pense.  A  desperate  struggle  was  now  to  be  expected  with 
the  Veientians  and  Fidenatians;  as,  besides  the  circumstance 
of  their  situation,  contiguous  to  the  frontiers,  they  had  stained 
the  commencement  of  the  war  with  an  action  so  abomin^e* 
The  commons,  therefore,  and  their  tribunes,  seeing  the  ne¬ 
cessity  of  attending  to  the  general  welfare,  and  suffering 
other  matters  to  pass  in  quiet,  there  was  no  opposition  to  the 
election  of  consuls,  who  were  Marcus  Geganius  Macerinus  a 
third  time,  and  Lucius  Sergius  Fidenas,  so  called,  I  suppose, 
V.  R.  SIS.  from  his  services  in  the  succeeding  war.  For  he  was 
B.  C.  434.  engaged  in  battle  with  the  king  of  the 
Veientians  on  this  sMe  of  the  Anio,  in  which  he  had  the,  ad¬ 
vantage;  but  he  gained  not  an  unbloody  victory,  so  that  peo¬ 
ple’s  grief  for  the  loss  of  their  countrymen  exceeded  their 
joy  for  the  defeat  of  the  enemy;  and  the  senate,  as  in  a  case 
particularly  alarming,  ordered  Mamercus  .^milius  to  be 
named  dictator.  He  chose  his  master  of  the  Imrse  from 
among  bis  colleagues  of  the  former  year,  in  the  office  of 
military  tribunes  with  consular  power,  Lucius  Quintius  Cin- 
cinnatus,  a  young  man  worthy  of  the  father  from  whom  he 
sprung.  To  the  troops  levied  by  the  consuls,  were  added 
many  veteran  centurions,  skilled  in  the  business  of  war,  and 
the  number  of  men  lost  in  the  last  battle  was  replaced.  The 
dictator  ordered  Quintius  Capitolinus  and  Marcus  Fabius 
Vibulanus  to  attend  him  in  quality  of  lieutenant-general. 
The  appointment  of  a  magistrate  with  extraordinary  power, 
and  the  character  of  the  person  appointed  being  fully  suited 
to  those  powers,  both  together  so  affected  the  enemy,  that 
they  withdrew  from  the  Roman  territory  to  the  other  side  of 
the  Anio:  ^nd  continuing  to  retre^  iook  possession  of  the 
hills  between  Fidense  and  the  Anio,  Nor  did  they  descend 
into  the  plains,  until  the  legions  of  the  Faliscians  came  to 

BOOK  IV. 

345 

B.  C.  434.3 
their  aid:  then,  indeed,  the  camp  of  the  Etrurians  was  pitch¬ 
ed  under  the  walls  of  Fidense.  The  Roman  dictator  took 
his  post  at  a  little  distance  from  thence,  at  the  conflux  and 
on  the  banks  of  the  two  rivers,  drawing  lines  across  froi|i 
one  to  the  other,  where  the  length  of  ground  between  them 
was  not  greater  than  he  was  able  to  fortify.  On  the  day 
following,  he  led  out  his  forces,  prepared  for  battle. 
XVII 1.  Among  the  enemy  there  were  various  opinions. 
The  Faliscians,  finding  it  very  distressing  to  carry  on  war  at 
such  a  distance  from  home,  and  being  full  of  confidence  in 
their  own  prowess,  were  urgent  for  fighting.  The  Veien- 
tians  and  Fidenatians  foresaw  greater  advantages  in  protract¬ 
ing  the  war.  -  Tolumnius,  although  the  advice  of  his  coun¬ 
trymen  was  more  agreeable  to  his  own  sentiments,  yet  fear¬ 
ing  lest  the  Faliscians  should  grow  weary  of  a  distant  war, 
gave  notice  that  he  would  fight  on  the  following  day.  This, 
however,  being  still  deferred,  added  to  the  confidence  of  the 
dictator  and  the  Romans;  so  that  the  soldiers,  openly  threat¬ 
ening  that  they  would  assault  the  camp  and  the  city,  if  the 
enemy  did  not  come  to  an  engagement,  both  armies  marched 
forth  into  the  middle  of  a  plain  which  lay  between  the  two 
camps.  The  Veientians,  being  superior  in  numbers,  sent  a 
party  round  behind  the  mountains,  who  were  to  attack  the 
Roman  camp  during  the  heat  of  the  battle.  The  army  of  the 
three  states  was  drawn  up  in  such  a  manner,  that  the  Veken- 
tians  formed  the  right  wing,  the  Faliscians  the  left,  and  the 
Fidenatians  the  centre.  The  dictator  charged  on  the  right 
wing  against  the  Faliscians;  Quintius  Capitolinus  on  the  left 
against  the  Veientians;  and  the  master  of  the  horse,  with  the 
cavalry,  advanced  in  the  centre.  For  a  short  time  all  was 
silence  and  quiet;  the  Etrurians  being  resolved  not  to  engage 
unless  they  were  compelled,  and  the  dictator  keeping  his 
eyes  fixed  on  a  Roman  fort  in  the  rear,  until  a  signal  which 
had  been  concerted  should  be  raised  by  the  augurs,  as  soon 
VOL.  1. — Y  y 

S46 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  318. 
.  as  the  birds  gave  a  favourable  omen;  on  perceiving  which,  he 
ordered  the  cavalry  first  to  charge  the  enemy  with  a  loud 
shout:  the  line  of  infantry  following,  began  the  conflict  with 
^reat  fury.  The  Etrurian  legions  could  not  in  any  quarter 
withstand  the  attack  of  the  Romans*  The  cavalry  made  the 
greatest  resistance;  but  the  king  himself,  distinguished  in 
valour  far  beyond  even  these,  by  frequent  charges  on  the 
Romans,  while  they  were  pursuing  in  disorder,  in  all  parts 
of  the  field,  prolonged  the  contest. 
XIX.  There  was  at  that  time  among  the  Roman  cavalry, 
a  military  tribune  called  Aulus  Cornelius  Cossus,  remarka¬ 
ble  for  the  extraordinary  beauty  of  his  person,  as  well  as  for 
his  spirit  and  bodily  strength,  and  for  attention  to  the  ho¬ 
nour  of  his  family,  which  having  descended  to  him  with 
great  degree  of  lustre,  he  conveyed  to  his  posterity  with  ’a 
large  increase,  and  with  additional  splendor.  Perceiving 
that  wherever  Tolumnius  directed  his  course,  the  troops  of 
Roman  cavalry  shrunk  from  his  charge,  and  knowing  him  by 
his  royal  apparel,  as  he  flew  through  every  part  of  the  army, 
he  cried  out,  Is  this  he  who  breaks  the  bands  of  human 
society,  and  violates  the  law  of  nations?  This  victim  will  I 
quickly  slay,  provided  it  is  the  will  of  the  gods  that  any 
thing  should  remain  sacred  on  earth,  and  will  offer  him  to 
the  manes  of  the  ambassadors.”  With  these  words,  he  clap¬ 
ped  spurs  to  his  horse,  and  with  his  spear  presented,  rushed 
against  him.  Having  unhorsed  him  with  a  stroke,  and  press¬ 
ing  him  down  with  his  spear,  he  instantly  sprung  down  on 
the  ground;  where,  as  the  king  attempted  to  rise,  he  struck 
him  back  with  the  boss  of  his  shield,  and  with  repeated 
thrusts  pinned  him  to  the  earth.  He  then  stripped  off  the 
spoils  from  the  lifeless  body,  and  having  cut  off  the  head, 
and  carrying  it  about  on  the  point  of  his  spear  as  a  trophy 
of  the  victory,  he  put  the  enemy  to  rout,  through  the  dismay 
which  struck  them  on  the  death  of  their  king-  Their  body 
of  cavalry  likewise,  which  alone  had  kept  the  victory  in  sus- 

BOOK  IV. 

34r 

B.  C.  434.3 
pense,  was  defeated  with  the  rest.  The  dictator  pursued 
close  on  the  flying  legions,  snd  drove  them  to  their  camp 
with  great  slaughter.  The  greater  nurnber  of  the  Fidentians, 
through  their  knowkdge  of  the  country,  made  their  escape 
into  the  mountains.  Cossus,  having  crossed  the  Tiber  with 
the  cavaky,  brought  to  the  city  an  immense  booty,  from  the 
lands  of  the  Veientlans,-*  During  this  battle,  there  was  an¬ 
other  fight  at  the  Roman  camp,  against  the  party  which  To- 
lumnius,  as  was  mentioned  above,  had  sent  against  it:  Fa- 
bius  Vibulanus,  manning  the  rampart  all  round,  stood  at 
first  on  the  defensive;  then,  when  the  enemy  were  earnestly 
engaged  against  the  rampart,  sallying  out  with  the  veterans 
from  the  principal  gate  on  the  right,  he  made  a  sudden  at¬ 
tack  on  them,  which  struck  such  terror,  that  though  the 
slaughter  was  less,  they  being  fewer  in  number,  yet  the  rout 
was  not  less  disorderly  than  that  of  their  grand  army. 
XX,  Crowned  with  success  in  every  quarter,  the  dictator, 
in  pursuance  of  a  decree  of  the  senate  and  an  order  of  the 
people,  returned  into  the  city  in  triumph.  By  far  the  most 
distinguished  object  in  this  procession  was  Cossus,  carrying 
the  spolia  opima  (grand  spoils)  of  the  king  whom  he  had 
slain,  while  the  soldiers  chanted  their  uncouth  verses,  extol¬ 
ling  him  as  equal  to  Romulus.  With  the  usual  form  of  de¬ 
dication  he  presented  and  hung  up  the  spoils  in  the  temple 
of  Jupiter  Feretrius,  near  to  those  dedicated  by  Romulus, 
and  first  denominated  opima,  which  were  the  only  ones  then 
existing.  He  drew  off  the  people’s  attention  from  the  cha¬ 
riot  of  the  dictator  to  himself,  and  enjoyed  almost  solely  the 
honour  of  that  day’s  solemnity.  The  former,  by  order  of  the 
people,  deposited  in  the  capitol,  as  an  offeling  to  Jupiter,  a 
golden  crown  of  a  pound  weight,  at  the  expense  of  the  pub¬ 
lic.  Following  all  the  Roman  authors,  1  have  represented 
Aulus  Cornelius  Cossus,  as  a  military  tribune,  when  he  car¬ 
ried  the  second  spolia  opima  into  the  temple  of  Jupiter  Fe¬ 
retrius:  but,  besides  that  those  spoils  only  are  properly  deem- 

348 

HISTORY  Of  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  318. 

ed  opima,  which  one  general  has  taken  from  another,  and 
wc  know  no  general  but  the  person  umier  whose  auspices  the 
war  is  carried  on,  the  inscription  itself,  written  oh  the  spoils 
proves  against  both  them  and  myself,  that  Cossus  was  con¬ 
sul  when  he  took  them.  Having  once  heard  Augustus  Caesar 
the  founder  or  restorer  of  all  our  temples,  on  entering  the 
temple  of  Jupiter  Feretrius,  which *from  a  ruin  he  had  re¬ 
built,  aver,  that  he  himself  had  read  the  said  inscription  on 
the  linen  breast  plate,  I  thought  it  would  be  next  to  sacrilege, 
to  rob  Cossus  of  such  a  testimony  respecting  his  spoils,  as 
that  of  Caesar,  to  whom  the  temple  itself  owed  its  renovation. 
Whether  the  mistake  is  chargeable  on  the  very  sclent  an¬ 
nals  and  the  books  of  the  magistrates,  written  on  linen  and 
deposited  in  the  temple  of  Moneta,  and  continually  cited  as 
authority  by  Licinius  Macer,  which  have  Auius  Cornelius 
Cossus,  consul,  with  Titus  Quintius  Penius,  in  the  ninth 
year  after  this,  every  one  may  form  his  own  judgment.  For» 
that  so  Celebrated  a  battle  could  not  be  transferred  to  that  year, 
there  is  this  farther  proof:  that  for  three  years  before  and 
after  the  consulship  of  Auius  Cornelius,  there  was  an  al¬ 
most  entire  cessation  from  war  on  account  of  a  pestilence, 
and  a  scarcity  of  the  fruits  of  the  earth;  so  that  several  an¬ 
nals,  as  if  they  had  no  other  transactions  but  those  of  mourn¬ 
ing  to  relate,  mention  nothing  more  than  the  names  of  the 
consuls.  Cossus,  indeed,  is  mentioned  as  military  tribune, 
with  consular  power,  in  the  third  year  before  his  consulate; 
and  in  the  same  year  as  master  of  the  horse,  in  which  post 
he  fought  another  remarkable  battle  with  cavalry.  In  re¬ 
spect  to  this  there  is  room  for  conjecture:  but  in  my 
opinion,  surmises  are  not  to  be  brought  in  support  of  any 
matter  whatsoever;  when  the  person  concerned  in  the  fight, 
on  placing  the  recent  spoils  in  the  sacred  repositoiy’,  and 
having  in  a  manner  before  his  eyes  Jupiter,  to  whom  they 
were  consecrated,  and  Romulus,  as  witnesses;  and,  as  would 
be  the  case  in  falsifying  the  inscription,  who  were  not  to  be 

349 

B.  C.  434]  BOOK  IV. 
treated  with’tontempt,  entitled  himself  Aulus  Cornelius  Cos- 
sus^  consul. 
XXI.  During  the  next  year,  wherein  Marcus  Cor-y 
nelius  Maiuginensis  and  Lucius  Papirius  Crassus 
were  consuls,  armies  were  led  into  the  territories  of  the  Vei- 
entians  and  of  the  Falist  ians,  and  numbers  of  men  and  cattle 
were  carried  off  as  spoil,  but  the  enemy  did  not  show  them¬ 
selves,  nor  ^ve  any  opportunity  of  fighting.  However,  no 
attempt  was  made  on  their  towns,  the  people  at  Rome  being 
attacked  by  a  pestilential  disorder.  Endeavours  were  also 
used  at  home  to  excite  disturbances,  but  without  effect,  by 
Spurius  M  sell  us,  a  plebeian  tribune,  who,iimagining  that,  by 
the  popularity  of  his  name,  he  should  be  able  to  raise  some 
commotion,  had  commenced  a.prosecution  against  Minucius; 
and  also  proposed  a  law  for  confiscating  the  effects  of  Servi- 
lius  Ahala,  alleging  that  Mselius  had  been  insidiously  crush¬ 
ed  under  false  charges  by  Minucius;  and  objecting  to  Servi- 
lius  his  having  put  to  death  a  citizen  who  was  under  no  le¬ 
gal  sentence.  I’hese  charges,  however,  when  canvassed  be¬ 
fore  the  people,  were  found  entitled  to  as  little  credit  and  at¬ 
tention  as  the  promoter  of  them.  But  they  found  greater 
cause  for  anxiety  in  the  increasing  violence  of  the  pestilence, 
attended  with  other  alarming  occurrences  and  prodigies;  par- 
.ticularly  in  the  accounts  which  were  received,  of  many  houses 
in  the  country  being  thrown  down  by  frequent  earthquakes. 
A  general  supplication  to  the  gods  was  therefore  performed  by 
the  people,  who  repeated  it  in  form  after  the  decemvirs.*  The 
disorder  increasing  during  the  following  year,  in  which  Caius 
Julius  a  second  time,  and  Lucius  Virginius  were  y  22^ 
consuls,  occasioned  such  dreadful  apprehensions  of  B*  C,4S2 
total  desolation,  both  in  the  city  and  the  country,  that  not 
*  In  the  performance  of  such  rites,  the  slightest  mistake  of  a  word  or 
syllable  was  deemed  highly  inauspjciousj  to  prevent  which,  the  regular 
form  of  words  was  pronounced  by  a  priest,  and  repeated  afYer  him 
the  persons  officiating. 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y^  R.  320. 

350 
only  an  entire  stop  was  put  to  predatory  excur^ons  from  the 
Roman  territories,  but  every  thought  of  offensive  operations 
laid  aside  both  by  patricians  and  commons.  The  Fidenatians, 
who  had  at  first  shut  themselves  up  within  their  towns  or 
forts,  or  among  the  mountains,  now  ventured  to  come  down 
into  the  lands  of  the  Romans,  and  commit  depredations. 
Then  the  army  of  the  Veientians  being  called  to  their  aid, 
(For  the  Fallscians  could  not  be  prevailed  on,  either  by  the 
calamities  of  the  Romans,  or  the  intreaties  of  their  allies,  to 
renew  hostilities,)  the  two  nations  crossed  the  Anio,  and  dis¬ 
played  their  ensigns  at  a  little  distance  from  the  Colline  gate. 
This  occasioned  g»eat  consternation  as  well  in  the  city  as  in 
the  country.  The  consul  Julius  drew  up  the  troops  on  the 
rampart  and  the  walls,  whilst  .Virginias  held  a  consultation 
of  the  senate  in  the  temple  of  Quirinus.  Here  it  was  resolv¬ 
ed  to  create  for  dictator  Quintus  Servilius,  to  whom  some 
gave  the  surname  of  Priscus,  others  that  of  Structus.  Vir¬ 
ginias  delayed  no  longer  than  till  he  had  conferred  with  his 
colleague,  and  having  obtained  his  consent,  named  the  dicta¬ 
tor  that  night.  He  appointed  Postumius  iEbutius  Elva  his 
master  of  the  horse. 
XXI L  The  dictator  issued  an  order  that  all  should  ap 
pear  at  the  first  light,  outside  the  Colline  gate;  and  that  the 
ensigns  from  the  treasury  should  be  brought  to  him.  Every, 
one,  whose  strength  enabled  him  to  carry  arms,  attended  ac¬ 
cordingly.  In  the  mean-time,  the  enemy  withdrew  to  the 
higher  grounds;  thither  the  dictator  followed,  and  coming 
to  a  general  engagement  near  Nomentum,  defeated  the  Etru¬ 
rian  legions,  drove  them  from  thence  into  the  city  of  Fide- 
nse,  and  inclosed  them  with  lines  of  circumvallation.  But 
neither  could  the  city  be  taken  by  storm,  by  reason  of  its 
high  situation  and  the  strength  of  its  works,  nor  could  a 
blockade  turn  to  any  effect,  because  they  had  such  abundant 
stores  of  corn  laid  up  in  their  magazines,  as  to  be  more  than 
sufficient  for  necessary  consumption.  The  dictator,  there- 

BOOK  IV. 

B.  C.  432.] 

o5 1 

fore,  having  no  hopes,  either  of  taking  the  place  by  assault, 
or  of  reducing  it  to  a  surrender,  being  thoroughly  acquainted 
with  the  same,  resolved  to  carry  a  mine  into  the  citadel,  on 
the  opposite  side  of  the  city;  which,  being  the  best  secured 
by  its  natural  strength,  was  the  least  attended  to*  He  carried 
on  his  approaches  to  the  walls,  in  the  parts  most  distant  from 
this;  and,  having  formed  his  troops  into  four  divisions,  who 
were  to  relieve  each  other  successively  in  the  action,  by  con¬ 
tinuing  the  fight  night  and  day,  without  intermission,  he  so 
engaged  the  attention  of  the  enemy,  that  they  never  perceiv¬ 
ed  the  work  which  was  carrying  on  until,  a  ’way  being  dug 
from  the  camp  through  the  mountain,  a  passage  was  opened 
up  into  the  citadel,  and  the  Etrurians,  whose  thoughts  were 
diverted  from  their  real  danger  by  false  alarms,  discovered, 
from  the  shouts  of  the  enemy  over  their  heads,  that  their 
city  was  taken.  In  this  year  the  censors,  Caius  Furius  Pa- 
cilus  and  Marcus  Geganius  Macerinus,  pronounced  that  the 
undertakers  had  fulfilled  their  contract  for  finishing  the  court¬ 
house*  in  the  field  of  Mars,  and  the  survey  of  the  people 
was  performed  there  for  the  first  time. 
XXIII.  I  find,  in  Licinius  Macer,  the  same  con-  y 
suls  re-elected  for  the  following  year:  yet  Valerius  B.  C.  43i. 
Quintius  and  Quintus  Tubero  mention  Marcus  Manlius  and 
Quintus  Sulpicius  as  consuls.  In  support  of  representations 
so  widely  different,  both  Tubero  and  Macer  cite  the  linen 
books  as  their  authority:  but  neither  of  them  deny  the  re 
cord  of  ancient  writers,  who  maintain  that  there  w^ere  milita¬ 
ry  tribunes  in  that  year.  Lucinius  is  of  opinion,  that  the 
linen  books  ought  to  be  implicitly  followed,  Tubero  cannot 
determine  positively  on  either  side.  But  this  is  a  point 
which,  among  others,  involved  in  obscurity  by  length  of  time, 
must  be  left  unsettled.  The  capture  of  Fiden^e  spread  great 

*  Villa  'pvblica.  It  was  destined  to  public  uses,  such  as  holding  the 
census  or  survey  of  the  people,  the  reception  of  ambassadors,  &c. 

352 

HISTORY  OF  ROME* 

[Y,  R*  321* 

alarm  in  Etruriai  for  not  the  Veientians  only  were  terrified 
with  apprehensions  of  similar  ruin,  but  the  Faliscians  also, 
conscious  of  having  commenced  the  war  in  conjunctitm  with 
them,  although  they  had  not  joined  them  in  the  renewing  of 
hostilities.  Those  two  nations  therefore,  having  sent  am¬ 
bassadors  to  all  the  twelve  states,  and  procured  an  order  for 
a  general  meeting  at  the  temple  of  Voltumna,  the  senate,  ap¬ 
prehensive  of  a  powerful  attack  from  that  quarter,  ordered 
Mainercus  ^Emilius  to  be  a  second  time  appoinied  dictator. 
He  named  Aulus  Postumius  Tubertus  master  of  the  horse, 
making  more  powerful  preparations  for  this  campaign  than 
for  the  last,  in  proportion  as  the  danger  was  greater  from 
the  whole  body  of  Etruria,  than  it  had  been  from  two  of  its 
states. 
XXIV.  That  business  ended  more  quietly  than  could  have 
been  expected.  For  accounts  were  received  from  some 
itinerant  traders,  that  the  Veientians  had  met  with  a  refusal 
of  aid,  and  had  been  desired  to  prosecute  with  their  own 
strength,  a  war  in  which  they  had  engaged  on  their  own  se¬ 
parate  views,  and  not  endeavour  to  bring  others  to  partake 
in  their  distresses,  to  whom  they  had  imparted  no  share  of 
their  prospects,  when  they  were  favourable.  The  dictator, 
thus  robbed  of  the  harvest  of  glory  which  he  expected  to 
have  reaped  from  military  affairs,  in  order  that  his  appointment 
might  not  be  altogether  without  effect,  conceived  a  desire  of 
performing  some  exploit  in  the  civil  line  of  business,  and 
which  should  remain  as  a  monument  of  his  dictatorship.  He 
undertook  therefore  to  limit  the  censorship;  either  judging 
its  powers  excessive,  or  disapproving  of  their  duration  more 
than  of  their  extent.  In  pursuance  of  this  design,  having 
summoned  an  assembly  of  the  people,  he  told  them,  that, 
with  regard  to  foreign  affairs,  and  the  establishing  of  se¬ 
curity  on  every  side,  the  immortal  gods  had  taken  the  ad¬ 
ministration  on  themselves.  That  as  to  what  was  fitting  to 
be  done  within  the  walls  he  would  zealously  maintain  the 

B.  C.  431.] 

BOOK  IV. 

353 

liberty  of  the  Roman  people;  now  there  was  no  method  of 
guarding  it  so  effectual,  as  the  taking  care  that  offices  of 
great  power  should  not  be  of  long  continuance;  and  that 
those,  whose  jurisdiction  could  not  be  limited,  should  be 
limited  in  point  of  duration; — that  while  other  magistracies 
were  annual,  the  censorship  was  of  five  years  continuance; 
and  it  was  grievous  to  people  to  have  the  greater  part  of 
their  actions  subjected  to  the  control  of  the  same  persons  for 
such  a  number  of  years;  he  would  therefore  propose  a  law, 
that  the  censorship  should  not  last  longer  than  a  year  and  a 
half/’  Next  day,  the  law  was  passed,  and  with  the  univer¬ 
sal  approbation  of  the  people.  He  then  said,  To  convince 
you  by  my  conduct,  Romans,  how  much  I  disapprove  of 
long  continuance  in  office,  1  here  resign  the  dictatorship.” 
Having  thus  put  an  end  to  one  office,  and  limits  to  another, 
he  was,  upon  his  resignation,  escorted  by  the  people  to  his 
house  with  the  warmest  expressions  of  gratitude  and  affec¬ 
tion.  The  censors,  highly  offended  at  his  having  imposed 
a  restriction  on  a  public  office  of  the  Roman  state,  degra¬ 
ded  Mamercus  into  a  lower  tribe,*  and,  increasing  his  taxes 
eight  Told,  disfranchised  him.j  We  are  told,  that  he  bore 
*  The  division  of  the  people  into  tribes,  made  by  Romulus,  regarded  the 
<itock,  or  origin,  of  the  constituent  members;  the  subsequent  one,  by  Ser- 
vius,  was  merely  local,  and  a  tribe  then  signified  nothing  more  than  a 
certain  space  of  ground  with  its  inhabitants:  but  as  tbe  tribes  increased  in 
number,  which  they  did  at  last  to  thirty-five,  this  kind  of  division  was  set 
aside,  and  a  tribe  became,  not  a  quarter  of  the  city,  but  a  fraternity  of 
citizens,  connected  by  a  participation  in  tbe  common  rights  of  the^ribe, 
without  any  reference  to  their  places  of  residence.  The  rustic  tribes 
were  always  reckoned  more  honourable  than  the  city  tribes,  because  the 
business  of  agriculture  was  held  in  the  highest  estimation,  and  because  the 
lowest  of  the  people  were  enrolled  in  the  latter.  The  difference  of  rank, 
among  the  rustic  tribes,  depended,  partly  on  their  antiquity,  and,  partly, 
on  the  number  of  illustrious  families  contained  in  each.  In  many  cases, 
the  tribes  took  tlieir  names  from  some  of  those  distinguished  families. 
\  ’<Mrarium  facer signifies  to  strip  a  person  of  all  the  privileges  of  a 
VOL,  I. - z  7 

354 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  323. 

this  treatment  with  great  magnanimity,  regarding  the  cause 
of  the  disgrace  rather  than  the  disgrace  itselfi  and  that  the 
principal  patricians,  though  they  had  been  averse  from  a 
diminution  of  the  privileges  of  the  censorship,  were,  nevcr- 
theh  ss,  highly  displeased  at  this  instance  of  harsh  severity 
in  the  censors;  every  one  perceiving,  that  he  must  be  oftener 
and  for  a  longer  time  subject  to  others  in  the  office  of  cen¬ 
sor,  than  he  could  hold  the  office  himself.  The  people’s  in¬ 
dignation  certainly  rose  to  such  a  height,  that  no  other  in¬ 
fluence  than  that  of  Mamercus  himself  could  have  deterred 
them  from  offering  violence  to  the  censors. 
Y.  R.  322.  XXV.  The  plebeian  tribunes,  by  constantly  ha- 
B.  C.  430.  ranguing  the  people  against  the  election  of  consuls, 
prevailed  at  last,  after  bringing  the  affair  almost  to  an  in¬ 
terregnum,  that  military  tribunes,  with  consular  power, 
should  be  elected.  In  the  prize  of  victory  which  they  aimed 
at,  the  procuring  a  plebeian  to  be  elected,  they  were  entirely 
disappointed-  The  persons  chosen  were  all  patricians,  Mar¬ 
cus  Fabius  Vibulanus,  Marcus  Foslius,  and  Lucius  Sergius 
Fidenas.  During  that  year,  the  pestilence  kept  other  mat¬ 
ters  quiet.  For  the  restoration  of  health  to  the  people,  a 
temple  was  vowed  to  Apollo,  and  the  decemvirs,  by  direc¬ 
tion  of  the  books,  performed  many  rites  for  the  purpose  of 
appeasing  the  wrath  of  the  gods,  and  averting  the  pestilence. 
The  mortality,  notwithstanding,  was  great  among  men  and 
cattle,  both  in  the  city  and  the  countr}^  Dreading  a  famine, 
in  consequence  of  the  death  of  the  husbandmen,  they  sent 
for  cprn  to  Etruria,  and  the  Pomptine  district,  to  Cumse, 
and  at  last  to  Sicily  also.  No  mention  was  made  of  electing 
y  323^  consuls.  Military  tribunes  with  consular  power 
B.  C.429.  ^vere  appointed,  all  patricians,  Lucius  Pinarius 
Mamercinus,  Lucius  Furius  Medullinus,  and  Spurius  Postu- 
mius  Albus.  In  this  year,  the  violence  of  the  disorder  aba- 
citizen,  on  which  be  became  dvis  cerariusy  a  citizen  so  far  only  as  he  paid 
taxes. 

BOOlt  IV. 

355 

B.  C.  429.] 
ted,  nor  were  there  any  apprehensions  of  a  scarcity  of  corn, 
care  having  been  taken  to  provide  against  it.  Schemes  for 
exciting  wars  were  agitated  in  the  meetings  of  the  ^qukns 
and  Volscians,  and  in  Etruria  at  the  temple  of  Voltumna. 
Here  the  business  was  adjourned  for  a  year,  and  a  decree 
passed,  forbidding  any  assembly  to  be  held  before  that  time, 
while  the  nation  of  the  Veicntians  in  vain  complained,  that 
the  same  misfortunes  hung  over  Veii,  which  had  destroyed 
Fidense.  Meanwhile  at  Rome  the  leaders  of  the  commons^ 
who  had  for  a  long  time  in  vain  pursued  the  hopes  of  attain- 
ing  higher  dignity  during  this  interval  of  tranquillity  abroad, 
called  the  people  together  in  the  houses  of  the  tribunes,  and 
there  concerted  their  plans  in  secret.  They  complained  that 
“  they  were  treated  with  such  contempt  by  the  commons, 
that,  notwithstanding  military  tribunes  with  consular  power 
had  been  elected  for  so  many  years,  no  plebeian  had  ever 
yet  been  allowed  to  attain  that  honour.  Their  ancestors, 
they  said,  had  shown  great  foresight  in  providing  that  the 
plebeian  magistracies  should  not  lie  open  to  any  patrician, 
otherwise  they  would  have  had  patrician  tribunes  of  the 
commons;  so  despicable  are  we  even  in  the  eyes  of  our  own 
party,  and  not  less  contemned  by  the  commons  than  by  the 
patricians  themselves.”  *  Others  took  off  the  blame  from  the 
commons,  and  threw  it  on  the  patricians:  “  It  was  through 
their  arts  and  intrigues,”  they  said,  that  the  access  to  honours 
was  barred  against  the  plebeians.  If  the  commons  were 
allowed  time  to  breathe  from  their  intreaties  mixed  with 
menaces,  they  would  come  to  an  election  with  a  due  regard 
to  the  interest  of  their  own  party,  and  as  they  had  already 
secured  protection  to  themselves,  would  assume  also  the 
administration  of  the  government.”  It  was  resolved,  that, 
for  the  purpose  of  abolishing  the  practice  of  those  intrigues, 
the  tribunes  should  propose  a  law,  that  no  person  should  be 
allowed,  on  applying  for  an  office,  to  add  any  white  his 

356 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  324 

garment.*  This  may  appear  at  present  a  trivial  matter, 
scarcely  fit  to  be  seriously  mentioned,  yet  it  then  kindled  a 
rei*y  hot  contention  between  the  patricians  and  plebeians. 
The  tribunes,  however,  got  the  better,  and  carried  the  law; 
and  as  it  was  evident  that  the  commons,  in  their  present 
state  of  ill-humour,  would  give  their  support  to  persons  of 
their  own  party,  in  order  to  put  this  out  of  their  power,  a 
decree  of  the  senate  was  passed,  that  the  election  should  be 
held  for  consuls. 
Y.  R.  324.  XXVI.  The  reason  assigned  was,  intelligence  re- 
B.  C.  428.  ceived  from  the  Latines  and  Hernicians  of  the 
^quans  and  Volscians  having  suddenly  commenced  hostili¬ 
ties.  Titus  Quintius  Cincinnatus,  who  had  also  the  surname 
of  Pennus,  son  of  Lucius,  and  Cains  Julius  Mento,  were 
made  consuls.  Nor  were  they  kept  in  suspense  with  respect 
to  the  danger  apprehended  from  their  enemies.  The  ^quans 
and  Volscians  having  held  a  levy  of  troops  under  their 
devoting  law,  which  is  their  most  powerful  instrument  for 
forcing  men  into  the  service,  marched  a  numerous  company 
from  each  nation  to  Algidum,  where  they  met,  and  formed 
separate  camps;  the  generals  taking  extraordinary  pains, 
beyond  what  had  ever  been  practised  before,  in  fortifying 
their  posts,  and  exercising  their  mfcn;  which  rendered  the 
accounts  brought  to  Rome  still  more  alarming.  The  senate 
resolved  that  a  dictator  should  be  appointed,  because,  though 
these  were  nations  often  vanquished,  yet,  in  the  present  revi¬ 
val  of  hostilities,  they  had  used  more  vigorous  eflPorts  than 
before;  and  no  small  number  of  the  Roman  youih  had  been 
cut  off  by  the  sickness.  Above  all,  they  were  alarmed  by 
the  perverseness  of  the  consuls,  the  disagreement  between 
*  To  mb  it  with  cbalk,  in  order  to  increase  its  whiteness,  and  render 
themselves  more  conspicuous.  It  was  the  practice  of  those  who  solici¬ 
ted  any  public  office,  thus  to  make  their  garments  more  white,  candidam: 
hence*  they  were  called  candidaii;  candidates,  a  word  still  in  use. 

BOOK  IV, 

357 

B.  C  428.J 

themselves,  and  the  opposition  which  they  gave  each  other 
in  every  measure.  Some  writers  say,  chat  these  consuls  were 
defeated  in  a  battle  at  Algidum,  and  that  this  was  the  reason 
for  appointing  a  dictator.  Thus  much  is  certain,  that  though 
they  differed  in  every  thing  else,  they  perfectly  agreed  in 
the  one  point,  that  of  opposing  the  will  ol  the  senate,  and 
refusing  to  name  a  dictator,  until  Quintus  Servilius  Priscus, 
a  man  who  had  passed  through  the  highest  dignities  with 
singular  honour,  finding  the  intelligence  which  arrived  grow” 
more  and  more  alarming,  and  that  the  consuls  would  not  be 
directed  by  the  senate,  expressed  himself  thus:  “  Tribunes 
of  the  commons,  matters  having  come  to  extremity,  the  se¬ 
nate  appeals  to  you,  that,  in  the  present  state  of  public  affairs, 
ye  may,  by  the  authority  vested  in  you,  oblige  the  consuls 
to  name  a  dictator.”  This  application  seemed  to  the  tri¬ 
bunes  to  afford  them  a  good  opportunity  of  extending  their 
power;  wherefore,  after  retiring  together,  they  declared,  by 
the  authority  of  their  body,  that  ‘‘  it  was  their  determina¬ 
tion  that  the  consuls  should  follow  the  directions  of  the  se¬ 
nate,  and  that  if  they  persisted  in  their  opposition  to  the  senti¬ 
ments  of  that  most  illustrious  body,  they  would  order  them- 
to  be  carried  to  prison,”  The  consuls  'were  better  pleased 
to  be  overcome  by  the  tribunes  than  by  the  senate,  at  the 
same  time  remonstrating,  that  the  prerogatives  of  the  chief 
magistracy  were  betrayed  by  the  senators,  and  the  consul¬ 
ship  subjugated  to  the  tribunitian  power.  If  the  consuls 
were  liable  to  be  over-ruled  by  a  tribune,  by  virtue  of  his 
office,  in  any  particular,  they  were  liable  also  to  be  sent  to 
prison.  And  what  greater  hardship  could  any  private  per¬ 
son  apprehend?  It  fell  by  lot,  for  even  on  that  point  the 
colleagues  could  not  agree,  to  Titus  Quintius  to  name  the 
dictator,  and  he  made  choice  of  Aulus  Postumius  Tubertus, 
his  own  father-in-law,  a  man  of  remarkable  strictness  in 
command.  Lucius  Julius  was  by  him  nominated  master  of 
the  horse.  At  the  same  time,  a  proclamation  was  issued 

S58 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  lY.  R.  324. 

for  a  vacation  from  civil  business,  and  that  nothing  should 
be  attended  to,  in  any  part  of  the  city,  but  preparations  for 
hostilities.  The  examinatioir  cff  the  cases  of  those  who 
claimed  immunity  from  service,  was  to  be  made  at  the  con¬ 
clusion  of  the  war,  which  induced  even  those  whose  claims 
were  doubtful,  to  give  in  their  names.  The  Hemicians  and 
Latines  also  were  ordered  to  send  a  supply  of  forces,  and 
they  both  exerted  themselves  with  zeal,  in  obedience  to  the 
dictator’s  will. 
XXVII.  All  these  measures  were  executed  with  the  ut¬ 
most  despatch,  the  consul  Caius  Julius  being  left  to  guard 
the  cit}",  while  Lucius  Julius,  master  of  the  horse,  was  to 
answer  the  exigences  of  the  camp;  and  that  there  should  be 
no  delay  with  respect  to  any  thing  which  might  there  be 
wanted,  the  dictator,  repeating  the  form  after  the  chief  pon¬ 
tiff  Aulus  Cornelius,  vowed  to  celebrate  the  great  games  on 
the  occasion  of  this  sudden  war.  Then,  dividing  his  troops 
with  the  consul  Quintius,  he  began  his  march  from  the  city, 
and  quickly  came  up  with  the  enemy.  Having  observed  that 
these  had  formed  two  camps  at  a  little-  distance  from  each 
other,  they  in  like  manner  encamped  separately  at  about  a 
mile  from  them,  the  dictator  towards  Tusculum,  and  the 
consul  towards  Lanuvium.  Thus  there  were  four  armies, 
and  so  many  fortified  posts,  having  between  them  a  plain  of 
sufficient  extent  not  only  for  the  skirmishes  of  small  parties, 
but  even  for  drawing  up  the  armies,  on  both  sides,  in  battle 
array.  From  the  time  when  the  camps  were  pitched  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  each  other,  there  was  continual  skirmish¬ 
ing,  the  dictator  readily  allowing  his  men  to  compare  strength, 
.and  from  the  success  of  these  combats  he  gradually  formed 
a  confident  expectation  of  future  victory  in  a  regular  fight. 
The  enemy,  therefore,  finding  no  hopes  left  of  succeeding  in 
a  general  engagement,  made  an  attack  by  night  on  the  camp 
of  the  consul,  on  the  issue  of  which  the  final  decision  of  the 
dispute  would  probably  depend.  Their  shout,  which  they  set 

B.  C.  428.] 

BOOK  IV. 

359 

up  on  a  sudden,  roused  from  sleep,  not  only  the  consul’s 
watch  guards,  and  afterwards  all  his  troops,  but  die  dictator 
also.  .The  conjuncture  requiring  instant  exertion,  the  consul 
showed  no  deficiency  either  of  spirit  or  of  judgment.  One 
part  of  the  troops  reinforced  the  guards  at  the  gates,  while 
another  manned  the  rampart  around.  In  the  other  camp 
where  the  dictator  commanded,  as  there  was  less  tumult,  so 
it  was  easier  to  perceive  what  was  necessary  to  be  done. 
Despatching,  then,  a  reinforcement  to  the  consul’s  camp,  un¬ 
der  the  command  of  Spurius  Postumius  Albus,  lieutenant- 
general,  he  himself,  with  a  body  of  forces,  making  a  small 
circuit,  proceeded  to  a  place  quite  retired  from  the  hurry  of 
action,  whence  he  proposed  to  make  an  unexpected  attack  on 
the  enemy’s  rear.  To  Quintus  Sulpicius.  lieutenant-general, 
he  gave  the  charge  of  the  camp;  to  Marcus  Fahius,  lieu¬ 
tenant-general,  he  assigned  the  cavalry,  with  orders  that 
those  troops,  which  it  would  be  hardly  possible  to  manage 
in  the  confusion  of  a  conflict  by  night,  should  not  stir  until 
day -light.  Every  measure,  which  any  other  general,  how¬ 
ever  skilful  and  active,  could  at  such  a  juncture  order  and 
execute,  he  ordered  and  executed  with  perfect  regularity. 
But  it  was  a  singular  instance  of  judgment  and  intrepidity, 
and  entitled  to  more  than  ordinary  praise,  that,  not  content 
with  defensive  plans,  he  despatched  Marcus  Geganius,  with 
some  chosen  cohorts,  to  attack  that  camp  of  the  enemy,  from 
which,  according  to  the  intelligence  of  his  scouts,  they  had 
marched  out  the  greater  number  of  troops.  Falling  upon 
men  whose  whole  attention  was  engrossed  by  the  danger  of 
their  friends,  while  they  were  free  from  any  apprehension  for 
themselves,  and  had  neglected  posting  watches  or  advanced 
guards,  he  made  himself  master  of  the  camp,  sooner  almost 
than  they  knew  that  it  was  attacked.  A  signal  being  then 
given  by  smoke,  as  had  been  concerted,  the  dictator  perceiv¬ 
ing  it,  cried  out,  that  the  enemy’s  camp  was  taken,  and  or¬ 
dered  tjae  news  to  be  conveyed  to  all  the  troops. 

360 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  324. 

XXVIII.  By  this  time  day  appeared,  and  every  tMng  lay 
open  to  view.  Fabius  had  already  charged  with  the  cavalry, 
and  tlie  consul  had  sallied  from  the  camp  on  the  enemy,  who 
were  now  much  disconcerted,  when  the  dictator  on  another 
side,*  having  attacked  their  reserve  and  second  line,  threw 
his  victorious  troops,  both  horse  and  foot,  in  the  way  of  all 
their  efforts,  as  they  turned  themsMves  about.to  the  dissonant 
shouts,  and  the  various  sudden  assaults.  Being  thus  hem¬ 
med  in  on  every  side,  they  would,  to  a  man,  have  undergone 
the  punishment  due  to  their  infraction  of  the  peace,  had  not 
Vectius  Messius,  a  Volscian,  a  man  more  renowned  for  his 
deeds  than  his  descent,  upbraiding  his  men  as  they  were 
forming  themselves  into  a  circle,  called  out  with  a  loud  voice, 
Do  ye  intend  to  offer  yourselves  to  the  weapons  of  the 
enemy  here,  where  ye  can  neither  make  defence  nor  obtain 
revenge?  To  what  purpose,  then,  have  ye  arms  in  your  hands? 
Or  why  did  ve  undertake  an  offensive  war,  ever  turbulent  in 
peace  and  dastardly  in  arms?  What  hopes  do  ye  propose  in 
standing  here?  Do  ye  expect  that  some  god  will  protect  and 
carry  you  from  hence?  With  the  sword  the  way  must  be 
opened.  Come  on,  ye  who  wish  to  see  your  houses  and 
your  parents,  your  wives  and  children,  follow  wherever  ye 
see  me  lead  the  way.  There  is  neither  wall  nor  rampart, 
nothing  to  obstruct  you,  but  men  in  arms,  with  which  ye  are 
as  well  furnished  as  they.  Equal  in  bravery,  ye  are  superior 
to  them  in  point  of  necessity,  the  ultimate  and  most  forcible 
of  weapons.’’  No  sooner  had  he  uttered  these  words,  than 
he  put  them  in  execution,  and  the  rest  raising  the  shout 
anew,  and  following  him,  made  a  violent  push  on  that  part 
where  Postumius  Albus  had  drawn  up  his  forces  in  their 
way,  and  made  the  conqueror  give  ground,  until  the  dictator 
came  up,  just  as  his  men  were  on  the  point  of  retreating. 
Thus  the  whole  weight  of  the  battle  was  turned  to  that  quar- 
ter.  Messius  alone  supported  the  fortune  of  the  enemy, 
while  many  wounds  were  received,  and  great  slaughter  was 

B.  C.  428.] 

BOOK  IV. 

361 

made  on  both  sides.  By  this  time  the  Roman  generals  them¬ 
selves  were  not  unhurt  in  the  fight:  one  of  them,  Postumius, 
retired  from  the  field,  having  his  skull  fractured  by  the  stroke 
of  a  stone;  but  neither  could  the  dictator  be  prevailed  on,  by 
a  wound  in  his  shoulder,  nor  Fabius,  by  having  his  thigh 
almost  pinned  to  his  horse,  nor  the  consul  by  his  arm  being 
cut  off,  to  withdraw  from  this  perilous  conflict. 
XXIX.  Messius,  at  the  head  of  a  band  of  the  bravest 
youths,  charged  the  enemy  with  such  impetuosity,  that  he 
forced  his  way  through  heaps  of  slaughtered  foes  to  the  camp 
of  the  Volscians,  which  was  still  in  their  possession,  and  the 
whole  body  of  the  army  followed  the  same  route.  The  con¬ 
sul,  pursuing  their  disordered  troops  to  the  very  rampart, 
assaulted  the  camp  itself,  and  the  dictator  brought  up  his 
forces  with  the  same  purpose  on  the  other  side.  There  was 
no  less  bravery  shown  on  both  sides  in  this  assault  than  had 
been  seen  in  the  battle.  We  are  told  that  the  consul  even 
threw  a  standard  within  the  rampart,  to  make  the  soldiers 
push  on  with  more  briskness,  and  that  the  first  impression 
was  made  in  recovering  it.  The  dictator,  having  levelled 
the  rampart,  had  now  carried  the  fight  within  the  works,  on 
which  the  enemy  every  where  began  to  throw  down  their 
arms  and  surrender;  and  on  giving  up  themselves  and  their 
camp,  the/ were  all,  except  the  members  of  their  senate,  ex¬ 
posed  to  sale.  Part  of  the  spoil  was  restored  to  the  Latines 
and  Hernicians,  who  claimed  it  as  their  property;  the  rest 
the  dictator  sold  by  auction;  and  having  left  the  consul  to 
command  in  the  camp,  after  making  his  entry  into  the  city 
in  triumph,  he  resigned  the  dictatorship.  Some  historians 
have  thrown  a.  gloom  on  the  memory  of  this  glorious  dicta¬ 
torship;  they  relate  that  Aulus  Postumius  beheaded  his  son, 
after  a  successful  exploit,  because  he  had  left  his  post,  with¬ 
out  orders,  tempted  by  a  favourable  opportunity  of  fighting 
to  advantage.  While  we  feel  a  reluctance  against  giving  credit 
VOL  I. — 3  A 

362 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  325, 

to  dm  Mjary^  wc  are  also  at  liberty  to  reject  it^  there  beiag 
a  variety  of  opinions  on  the  sul^ect;  and  there  is  this  argu¬ 
ment  a^inst  it,  that  such  orders,  by  those  who  believe  in 
the  circumstance,  have  been  denominated  Manlian,  not  Pos- 
tumian;  while  the  person  who  first  set  an  example  of  such 
severity  would  surely  have  acquired  the  disgraceful  title  of 
cruel.  Besides,  the  surname  of  Imperiosus  has  been  imposed 
on  Manlius,  and  Postumius  has  not  been  marked  by  any 
hateful  appellation.  Th$  consul  Caius  Julius,  in  the  abslbnce 
of  his  colleague,  without  casting  lots  for  the  employment, 
dedicated  the  temple  of  Apollo;  at  which  Quintius  being  of¬ 
fended  on  his  return  to  the  city,  after  disbanding  the  army, 
made  a  complaint  to  the  senate,  but  without  any  effect.  To 
the  great  events  of  this  year  was  added  a  circumstance, 
which,  at  that  time,  did  not  appear  to  have  any  relation  to 
the  interests  of  Rome.  The  Carthaginians,  who  were  to  be¬ 
come  such  formidable  enemies,  then  for  the  first  time,  on 
occasion  of  some  intestine  broils  among  the*  Sicilians,  trans¬ 
ported  troops  into  Sicily,  in  aid  of  one  of  the  parties. 
Y.  R.  ^25.  XXX.  In  the  city,  endeavours  were  used  by  the 
B.  c.  427.  tribunes  of  the  commons  to  procure  an  election  of 
military  tribunes  with  consular  power,  but  they  were  not 
able  to  effect  it.  Lucius  Papirius  Crassus  and  Lucius  Julius 
were  made  consuls.  Ambassadors  from  the  ^Equnns  having 
requested  of  the  senate  that  a  treaty  of  peace  might  be  con¬ 
cluded,  it  was  required  of  them,  that  instead  of  a  treaty  they 
should  make  a  surrender  of  themselves.  In  the  end  they 
obtained  a  truce  of  eight  years.  The  affairs  of  the  Volscians, 
besides  the  loss  sustained  at  Algidum,  were  Involved  in  se¬ 
ditions,  arising  from  an  obstinate  contention  between  the  ad¬ 
vocates  for  peace  and  those  for  war.  The  Romans  enjoyed 
tranquillity  on  all  sides.  The  consuls  having  obtained  infor¬ 
mation  from  one  of  the  tribunes,  who  betrayed  the  secret, 
that  those  officers  intended  to  promote  a  law  concerning  the 

B.  C.  427.] 

BOOK  IV. 

363 

commutation  of  fines,*  which  would  be  highly  acce^sdUe  to 
the  people,  they  themselves  took  the  lead  in  pro-  y.  E.  32S. 
posing  it.  The  next  consuls  were  Lucius  Sergius  ^ 
Fidenas,  a  second  time,  and  Hostus  Lucretius  Tricipitinus,  • 
in  whose  consulate  nothing  worth  mention  occurred.  They 
were  succeeded  by  Aulus  Cornelius  Cossus  and  y.  R.  327. 
Titus  Quintius  Pennus,  a  second  time.  The  Veien- 
tians  made  inroads  on  the  Roman  terrkories,  and  a  report 
prevailing,  that  some  of  the  youth  of  Fidense  were  concerned 
in  those  depredations,  the  cognizance  of  that  matter  was 
comnutted  to  Lucius  Sergius,  Quintius  Servilius,  and  Mat- 
mercus  iEmilius.  Some  of  them,  who  could  not  give  satis* 
factory  reasons  for  their  being  absent  from  Fidense  at  the 
time,  were  sent  into  banishment  to  Ostia.  A  number  of  new 
settlers  were  added  to  the  colony,  to  whom  were  assigned 
the  lands  of  those  who  had  fallen  in  war.  There  was  very 
great  distress  that  year,  occasioned  by  drought;  for,  besides 
a  want  of  rain,  the  earth,  destitute  of  its  natural  moisture, 
scarcely  enabled  the  rivers  to  continue  their  course;  in  some 
places,  the  want  of  water  was  such,  that  the  cattle  died  of 
thirst,  in  heaps,  about  the  springs  and  rivulets,  which  had 
ceased  to  flow;  in  others,  they  were  cut  off  by  the  mange,  and 
their  disorders  began  to  spread  by  infection  to  the  human 
species.  At  first  they  fell  heavy  on  the  husbandmen  and 
f  slaves;  soon  after  the  city  was  filled  with  them:  and  not  only 
men’s  bodies  were  afflicted  by  the  contagion,  but  supersti¬ 
tions  of  various  kinds,  and  mostly  of  foreign  growth,  took 
possession  also  of  their  minds;  while  those  who  converted 
this  weakness  to  their  own  emolument,  introduced  into  peo¬ 
ple’s  families,  through  their  pretences  to  the  art  of  divina¬ 
tion,  new  modes  of  worship,  until  at  length  the  principal  men 
*  The  fines  imposed  in  early  times  were  certain  numbers  of  sheep  or 
oxen;  afterwards  it  was  ordered  by  law  that  these  fines  might  be  apprais¬ 
ed,  and  the  value  paid  in  money.  Another  law  fixed  a  certain  rate  at 
which  the  cattle  should  be  estimated,  100  for  an  ox,  10  for  a  sheep. 

364 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  329, 

of  the  state  were  touched  with  shame  for  the  dishonor 
brought  on  the  public^  seeing  in  every  street  and  chapel  ex¬ 
traneous  and  unaccustomed  ceremonies  of  expiation  prac- 
#tised,  for  obtaining  the  favour  of  the  gods.  A  charge  was 
then  given  to  the  sediles,  to  see  that  no  other  deities  should  be 
worshipped  than  those  acknowledged  by  the  Romans;  nor  they, 
in  any  other  modes  than  those  established  by  the  custom  of 
the  country.  The  prosecution  of  their  resentment  against  the 
y.  R.  328.  Veientians  was  deferred  to  the  ensuing  year,  where- 
B.  c.  424.  jjj  Caius  Servilius  Ahala  and  Lucius  Papirius  Mu- 
gillanus  were  consuls:  even  then,  an  immediate  declaration  of 
war  and  the  march  of  the  army  were  prevented  by  superstition. 
It  was  deemed  necessary  that  heralds  should  first  be  sent  to 
demand  restitution.  There  had  been  open  war,  and  battles 
fought,  with  the  Veientians,  not  long  before,  at  Nomentum  and 
Fidense,  since  which,  not  a  peace  but  a  truce,  had  been  con¬ 
cluded,  the  term  of  which  had  not  yet  expired,  yet  they  had 
renewed  hostilities.  Nevertheless,  the  heralds  were  sent,  and 
when,  after  taking  the  customary  oath,  they  demanded  satis¬ 
faction,  no  attention  was  paid  to  them.  Then  arose  a  dispute 
whether  the  war  should  be  declared,  by  order  of  the  people, 
or  whether  a  decree  of  the  senate  were  sufficient.  The  tri¬ 
bunes,  by  threatening  openly  that  they  would  hinder  any  levy 
of  soldiers,  carried  the  point  that  the  consuls  should  take  the 
sense  of  the  people  concerning  it.  All  the  centuries  voted 
for  it.  In  another  particular  too,  the  commons  showed  a  su¬ 
periority,  for  they  carried  the  point  that  consuls  should  not 
be  elected  for  the  next  year. 
y  R  329.  XXXI.  Four  military  tribunes,  with  consular 
B.  C.  423.  power,  were  elected,  Titus  Quintius  Pennus  from 
the  consulship,  Caius  Furius,  Marcus  Postumius,  and  Aulus 
Cornelius  Cossus.  Of  these,  Cossus  held  the  command  in 
the  city.  The  other  three,  after  enlisting  forces,  marched  to 
Veil,  and  there  exhibited  an  instance  of  the  pernicious  ef¬ 
fects  on  military  operations  resulting  from  a  divided  com¬ 
mand:  for  while  each  maintained  an  opinion  different  from 

BOOK  IV. 

365 

B.  C.423.] 

the  rest,  and  endeavoured  to  enforce  his  own  plans,  they 
gave  an  opportunity  to  the  enemy  to  take  them  at  advantage* 
Accordingly,  the  Veientians,  seizing  a  critical  moment, 
made  an  attack  on  their  troops*,  who  knew  not  how  to  act, 
one  of  their  generals  ordering  the  signal  for  retreat  to  be 
given,  another  the  charge  to  be  sounded.  They  were  thrown 
into  confusion  consequently,  and  turned  their  backs,  but 
found  safety  in  their  camp,  which  was  nigh  at  hand;  their 
disgrace  therefore  was  greater  than  their  loss.  The  citizens, 
unaccustomed  to  defeats,  were  seized  with  dismal  appre¬ 
hensions,  execrated  the  tribunes,  and  called  aloud  for  a  dic¬ 
tator;  in  him  alone,  they  said,  the  state  could  place  any 
hopes.  Here  again  a  religious  scruple  interfered,  lest  there 
should  be  an  impropriety  in  a  dictator  being  nominated  by 
any  other  than  a  consul;  but  the  augurs  being  consulted,  re¬ 
moved  that  doubt.  Aulus  Cornelius  nominated  Mamercus 
^milius  dictator,  and  was  himself  nominated  by  him  mas¬ 
ter  of  the  horse,  so  little  was  the  effect  of  the  disgrace 
inflicted  by  the  censors;  for  when  the  state  once  came  to 
stand  in  need  of  a  person  of  real  merit,  it  would  not  be 
prevented  from  seeking  a  supreme  director  of  its  affairs  in 
a  house  undeservedly  censured.  I'he  Veientians,  puffed  up 
by  their  success,  sent  ambassadors  to  all  the  states  of  Etruria, 
boasting,  that  they  had  in  one  battle  defeated  three  Roman 
generals;  and  though  they  could  not  thereby  prevail  on  the 
general  confederacy  to  embark  publicly  in  their  cause,  yet 
they  procured  from  all  parts  a  number  of  volunteers  allured 
by  the  hopes  of  plunder.  The  Fidenatians  were  the  only 
state  Avhich  resolved  to  renew  hostilities;  and,  as  if  there 
were  some  kind  of  impiety  in  commencing  war,  otherwise 
than  with  some  atrocious  deed,  staining  their  arms  now 
with  the  blood  of  the  new  colonists,  as  they  had  formerly 
done  with  that  of  the  ambassadors,  they  joined  themselves 
to  the  Veientians.  The  leaders  of  the  two  nations  then 
consulted  together,  whether  they  should  choose  Veil  or 
Fidense,  for  the  seat  of  the  war:  Fidenfe  appeared  the  more 

^66 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R,  329, 

convenient*  The  Veientians,  therefore,  crossing  the  Ti¬ 
ber,  removed  it  diither.  At  Rome  the  sflarm  was  excessive: 
the  troops  were  recalled  frema  Veil,  very  much  dispirited  by 
their  defeat,  and  encamped  before  the  Colhnc  gate:  c^ers 
were  armed  and  pc»ted  on  die  walls.  Business  was  stu¬ 
ped  in  the  courts  of  justice,  the  shops  were  shut  up,  smd 
every  thmg  bore  the  ap^ar^ce  of  a  camp  rather  than  of  a 
city. 
XXXII.  The  dictator  then,  sending  criers  through  the 
streets  called  the  alarmed  people  to  an  as^mbly,  and  rebuked 
them  sharply  for  suffering  their  courage  to  depend  so  entirely 
on  eveiy  trifling  incident  in  the  course  of  fortune,  that  oa 
meeting  with  an  inconsiderable  loss,  and  that  not  owing  to 
the  bravery  of  the  enemy,  or  to  wsmt  of  courage  m  the  Ro¬ 
man  army,  but  to  a  disagreement  between  their  commanders, 
they  should  be  seized  with  dread  of  their  enemies  of  Veil, 
whcrni  they  had  six  times  vanquished,  and  of  Fidcnee,  a  town 
as  often  taken  as  attacked.  He  reminded  them,  that  both  the 
Romsms  and  their  enemies  were  the  same  that  they  Imdha^ 
for  so  many  centuries  past,  their  courage  the  same;  ^eir 
strength  of  body  the  same;  and  the  same  the  arms 
they  wore.  That  he  himself,  Mamercus  Jtoitius,  was  abo 
the  same  dictator  who  formerly  at  Ftden»  routed  die  armies 
of  the  Veientians  smd  Fidenatians,  when  they  had  the  a^i- 
tionad  support  of  the  F^iscians;  and  his  master  of  the  horse 
was  the  same  Aulus  Cornelius,  who  m  a  former  war,  vdien 
he  ranked  as  milirnry  tribune,  slew  Lars  Tolumnius,  the  king 
of  these  V eientians^  in  the  sight  of  both  armies,  and  carried 
his  spolia  opima  to  the  ^mplc  of  Jupiter  Feretrius,  He  ex¬ 
horted  them  therefore  m  mke  arms,  reflecting  that  on  their 
side  were  triumphs,  on  their  side  spoils,  on  their  side  victory; 
on  the  side  of  die  enemy,  the  guilt  of  violating  the  laws  of 
nations  by  the  murder  of  ambassadors,  the  massacre  of  the 
Fidenariam  colonists  in  time  of  peace,  the  infraction  of  truces, 
and  a  ^venth  unsuccessful  revolt;  assuring  them,  he  was  ful- 

BOOK  IV. 

367 

B.  C.  4£3J 
ly  coDEdeBt,  that  when  they  should  have  once  encamped 
within  reach  of  the  foe,  . the  joy  of  diose  enemies,  so  deeply 
plunged  in  guilt,  for  the  late  disgraoe  of  the  Roman  army, 
would  soon  be  at  an  end;  and  also  that  a  demonstration 
would  be  given  to  die  Roman  pe«^le,  how  much  better  these 
persons  merited  of  the  commonwealth,  who  nominated  him 
dictator  a  third  time,  than  those,  wlm,  out  of  malice,  on  ac-  , 
count  of  his  having  snatched  arbitrary  power  out  of  the 
hands  of  the  censors,  threw  a  blot  on  his  second  successful 
dictatorship.”  Having  offered  up  vows  to  the  ^xis,  he  soon 
begsm  his  march,  and  pitched  his  camp  fifteen  hundred  pa* 
ces  on  this  side  of  Fidense,  having  his  right  covered  by 
mountains,  a3ad  his  left  by  the  river  Tiber.  He  ordered 
Tiuis  Quindus  Pennus,  lieutenant-general,  to  take  possession 
of  the  hills,  and  to  post  himself  privately  on  whatever  emi¬ 
nence  stood  in  the  enemy’s  rear.  Next  day,  when  the  Etruri¬ 
ans  had  marched  out  to  the  field,  full  of  confidence  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  their  success  on  the  former  day,  though  more  in¬ 
debted  for  it  to  accident  than  to  their  prowess  in  fight,  the 
dictad>r,  after  waiting  a  short  dme,  until  he  received  informa¬ 
tion  from  his  scouts  that  Quintius  had  reached  an  eminence 
which  stood  near  the  citadel  of  Fidenae,  put  his  troops  in  mo¬ 
tion,  and  led  on  his  line  of  infantry  in  order  of  battle  in 
their  quickest  pace  against  the  enemy.  The  master  of  the  horse 
he  commanded  not  to  enter  on  action  without  orders,  telling 
him  that  he  would  give  a  signal  when  there  should  be  occa¬ 
sion  for  the  aid  of  the  cavalry,  and  desiring  him  then  to  show 
by  his  behaviour,  that  he  still  bore  in  mind  his  fight  with 
their  king,  the  magnificent  tiering  which  he  had  made,,  and 
the  respect  which  he  owed  to  Romulus  and  Jupiter  Fere- 
trius*  The  legions  began  the  conflict  with  impetuosity.  The 
Romans,  inflamed  with  keen  animosity,  gratified  their  ran¬ 
cour  both  with  deeds  and  words,  upbraiding  the  Fidenatians 
with  impiety,  the  Veientians  as  robbers,  calling  them  tnu:e- 
breakers,  polluted  with  the  horrid  murder  of  ambassadors, 

368 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  329. 
stained  with  the  blood  of  their  own  brethren  of  the  colony, 
perfidious  allies,  and  dastardly  foes*  ,  . 
XXXIIL  Their  very  first  onset  had  made  an  impression  on 
the  enemy,  when,  on  a  sudden,  the  gates  of  Fidense  ‘flying 
open,  a  strange  kind  of  army  sallied  forth,  unknown  and  un¬ 
heard-of  before*  An  immense  multitude,  armed  with  burn- 
•  ing  fire-br«mds,  as  if  hurried  on  by  frantic  rage,  rushed  on 
, gainst  the  Romans.  This  very  extraordinary  mode  of  fight¬ 
ing  filled  the  assailants  for  some  time  with  terror;  on  which 
the  dictator,  who  was  actively  employed  in  animating  the 
fight,  having  called  up  the  master  of  the  horse  with  the  ca¬ 
valry,  and  also  Quintius  from  the  mountains,  hastened  him¬ 
self  to  the  left  wing,  which  being  in  horror  from  the  confla¬ 
gration,  m  it  might  more  properly  be  called  than  a  battle, 
had  retired  from  the  flames,  and  with  a  loud  voice  called 
out,  *^WiU  ye  suffer  yourselves  to  be  driven  from  your 
ground,  and  retreat  from  an  unarmed  enemy,  vanquished 
with  smoke,  like  a  swarm  of  bees?  Will  ye  not  extinguish 
those  fires  with  the  sword?  Or  will  ye  not  each  in  his  post, 
if  we  must  fight  with  fire,  and  not  with  arms,  seize  on  those 
brands,  and  throw  them  back  on  the  foe?  Advance;  recollect 
the  honour  of  the  Roman  name,  your  own  bravery,  and  that 
of  your  fathers:  turn  this  conflagration  on  the  city  of  your 
enemy,  and  with  its  own  flames  demolish  Fiden^e,  which  ye 
could  never  reclaim  by  your  kindness.  This  is  what  the 
blood  of  your  ambassadors  and  colonists,  and  the  desolation 
of  your  frontiers,  ought  to  suggest.”  At  the  command  of 
the  dictator,  the  whole  fine  advanced;  the  firebrands  whidi 
had  been  thrown,  were  caught  up;  others  were  wrested  away 
by  force,  and  thus  the  troops  on  both  sides  were  aimed  alike. 
The  mas^  the  horse  too,  on  his  part,  i^foducal  among 
the  cavalry  a  new  mode  of  fighting;  he  orik^ed  his  men  to 
take  eff  the  bridles  from  their  horses,  white  he  himself  clap¬ 
ping  s^rs  to  his  own,  sprung  forward,  and  was  carried  head¬ 
long^  the  unbridled  animal  into  the  midst  of  the  flames. 

BOOK  IV. 

B.  C.  423.] 

3t)9 

In  like  manner,  the  other  horses,  being  spurred  on  and  freed 
from  all  restraint,  carried  their  riders  with  full  speed  against 
the  enemy.  The  clouds  of  dust  intermixed  with  the  smoke, 
excluded  the  light  from  both  men  and  horses;  so  that  the  lat¬ 
ter  were  consequently  not  affrighted  as  the  former  had  been. 
The  cavalry,  therefore,  wherever  they  penetrated,  bore  down 
every  thing  with  irresistible  force.  A  shout  was  now  heard 
from  a  new  quarter,  which  having  surprised  and  attracted 
the  attention  of  both  armies,  the  dictator  called  out  aloud, 
that  his  lieutenant-general  Quintius  and  his  party  had  at¬ 
tacked  the  enemy’s  rear,  and  then,  raising  the  shout  anew, 
advanced  against  them  with  redoubled  vigour.  The  Etru¬ 
rians,  surrounded  and  attacked  both  in  front  and  rear,  and 
closely  pressed  by  two  armies  in  two  different  battles,  had 
no  room  for  retreat,  either  to  the  camp,  or  to  the  mountains. 
The  way  was  blocked  up  by  the  new  enemy,  ^nd  the  horses, 
freed  from  the  bridles,  having  spread  themselves  with  their 
riders  over  every  different  part,  the  greatest  number  of  the 
Veientians  fled  precipitately  to  the  Tiber.  The  surviving 
Fidenatians  made  towards  the  city  of  Fidense.  The  for¬ 
mer,  flying  in  consternation,  fell  into  the  midst  of  their  foes 
and  met  destruction.  Many  were  cut  to  pieces  on  the  banks 
of  the  river,  some  were  forced  into  the  water  and  swallowed 
in  the  eddies;  even  such  as  were  expert  at  swimming,  were 
weighed  down  by  fatigue,  by  their  wounds,  and  the  fright; 
so  that,  out  of  a  great  number,  few  reached  the  opposite 
bank.  The  other  body  proceeded,  through  their  camp,  to  the 
city,  whither  the  Romans  briskly  pursued  them,  particularly 
Quintius,  and  those  who  had  descended  with  him  from  the 
mountains,  these  being  the  freshest  for  action,  as  having 
come  up  towards  the  end  of  the  engagement. 
XXXIV.  These  entering  the  gate  together  with  the  ene¬ 
my  made  their  way  to  the  top  of  the  walls,  and  from  thence 
gave  a  signal  to  their  friends  of  the  town  being  taken.  The 
dictator,  who  had  by  this  time  taken  possession  of  the  deaer- 
voL.  1. — 3  B 

3/0 

HISTORY  OF  ROME,  [Y.  R.  330. 
ted  camp,  encouraging  his  men,  who  were  eager  to  disperse 
themselves  in  search  of  plunder,  and  with  hopes  of  finding 
the  greater  booty  in  the  city,  led  them  on  to  the  gate;  and, 
being  admitted  within  the  walls;  proceeded  to  the  citadel, 
whither  he  saw  the  crowds  of  fugitives  hurrying.  Nor  was 
less  slaughter  made  here  than  in  the  field;  until,  throwing 
down  their  arms,  and  begging  only  their  lives,  the  enemy 
surrendered  to  the  dictator:  both  the  city  and  camp  were 
given  up  to  be  plundered.  Next  day  the  dictator  assigned 
by  lot  one  captive  to  each  horseman  and  centurion,  and  two 
to  such  as  had  distinguished  themselves  by  extraordinary  be¬ 
haviour,  and  sold  the  rest  by  auction:  then  he  led  back  to 
Rome  his  victorious  army,  enriched  with  abundance  of  spoil, 
and  ordering  the  master  of  the  horse  to  resign  his  office  he 
immediately  gave  up  his  own,  on  the  sixteenth  day  of  his 
holding  it;  leaving  the  government  in  a  state  of  tranquillity, 
which  he  had  received  in  a  state  of  war  and  of  danger. 
Some  annals  have  reported,  that  there  was  also  a  naval  en¬ 
gagement  with  the  Veientians,  at  Fidense,  a  fact  equally  im¬ 
practicable  and  incredible;  the  river,  even  at  present,  being 
not  broad  enough  for  the  purpose,  and  at  that  time,  as  we 
learn  from  old  writers,  considerably  narrower.  This  we  can 
no  otherwise  account  for,  than  by  supposing  that  they  magni¬ 
fied  the  importance  of  a  scuffle  which  took  place,  perhaps, 
between  a  few  ships,  in  disputing  the  passage  of  the  river, 
and  thereon  grounded  those  empty  pretensions  to  a  naval 
victory. 
Y  R  330  XXXV.  The  ensuing  year  had  military  tribunes, . 
B.  C.  422.  with  consular  power,  Aulus  Sempronius  Atratinus, 
Lucius  Quintius  Cincinnatus,  Lucius  Furius  Medullinus,  and 
Lucius  Horatius  Barbatus.  A  truce,  for  twenty  years,  was 
granted  to  the  Veientians;  and  one  for  three  years  to  the 
.iEquans,  although  these  had  petitioned  for  a  longer  term. 
At  home,  there  were  no  disturbances.  The  year  following, 
though  not  distinguished  by  either  troubles  abroad  or  at 

BOOK  IV, 

371 

H.  C.  422,] 

home,  was  rendered  remarkable  by  the  celebration  of  the 
games,  which  had  been  vowed  on  occasion  of  the  war, 
through  the  splendid  manner  in  which  they  were  exhibited 
by  the  military  tribunes,  and  also  through  the  extraordinary 
concourse  of  the  neighbouring  people.  The  tribunes,  y  r  33J 
with  consular  power,  were  Appius  Claudius  Cras-  6*  C.  421. 
sus,  Spurius  Nautius  Rutilus,  Lucius  Sergius  Fidenas,  and 
Sextus  Julius  lulus.  The  shows,  to  which  the  several  peo~ 
pie  had  come  with  the  concurrent  approbation  of  their  states, 
were  rendered  more  agreeable  by  the  courtesy  of  their 
hosts.  After  the  conclusion  of  the  games,  the  tribunes  of 
the  commons  began  their  seditious  harangues,  upbraiding 
the  multitude,  that  they  were  so  benumbed  with  awe  of 
those  very  persons  who  were  the  objects  of  their  hatred,  as 
to  sit  down  listless  in  a  state  of  endless  slavery;  they  not  on- 
ly  wanted  spirit  to  aspire  to  the  recovery  of  their  hopes  of 
sharing  in  the  consulship;  but  even,  in  the  election  of  milita^ 
ry  tribunes,  which  lay  open  to  both  patricians  and  plebeians, 
they  showed  no  regard  to  themselves  or  their  party.  They 
ought  therefore  to  cease  wondering,  that  no  one  busied  him¬ 
self  in  the  service  of  the  commons:  labour  and  danger  would 
always  be  extended  on  objects  from  whence  honour  and 
emolument  might  be  looked  for;  and  there  was  nothing  which 
men  would  not  imdertake,  if,  for  great  attempts,  great  re¬ 
wards  were  proposed.  But  surely  it  could  neither  be  requir¬ 
ed  nor  expected,  that  any  tribune  should  rush  blindfold  into 
disputes,  the  danger  of  which  was  great,  the  profit  nothing: 
in  consequence  of  which,  he  knew,  with  certainty,  that  the 
patricians,  against  whom  his  efforts  were  directed  would 
persecute  him  with  inexpiable  rancour;  and  the  commons,  on 
whose  side  he  contended,  would  never  think  themselves  the 
more  obliged  to  him.  By  great  honours,  the  minds  of  men 
were  elevated  to  greatness;  no  plebeian  would  think  meanly 
of  himself,  when  he  ceased  to  be  contemned  by  others.  The 
experiment  ought  at  length  to  be  made,  whether  there  were 

^72  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  331. 
any  plebeian  capable  of  sustaining  a  high  dignity,  or  whether 
it  were  next  to  a  miracle  and  a  prodigy,  that  there  should 
exist  a  man  of  that  extraction  endowed  with  fortitude  and 
industry.  By  the  most  vigorous  exertions,  and  after  a  vio¬ 
lent  struggle,  the  point  had  been  gained,  that  military  tri¬ 
bunes  with  consular  power  might  be  chosen  from  among  the 
commons.  Men  of  approved  merit,  both  in  the  civil  and 
military  line,  had  stood  candidates.  During  the  first  years 
they  were  hooted  at,  rejected  and  ridiculed  by  the  patricians: 
of  late  they  had  desisted  from  exposing  themselves  to  insult. 
For  his  part  he  could  see  no  reason  why  the  law  itself  could 
not  be  repealed,  which  granted  permission  for  that  which  was 
never  to  happen:  for  they  would  have  less  cause  to  blush  at 
the  injustice  of  the  law,  than  at  their  being  passed  by  on  ac¬ 
count  of  their  own  want  of  merit.’’ 
XXXV I .  Discourses  of  this  sort  being  listened  to  with 
approbation,  induced  several  to  offer  themselves  as  candi' 
dates  for  the  military  tribuneship,  each  professing  intentions 
of  introducing  when  in  office  some  measure  or  regulation, 
advantageous  to  the  commons.  Hopes  were  held  forth  of  a 
distribution  of  the  public  lands,  of  colonies  to  be  settled,  and 
of  money  to  be  raised,  for  paying  the  troops,  by  a  tax  im¬ 
posed  on  the  proprietors  of  estates.  The  military  tribunes 
soon  after  laid  hold  of  an  opportunity,  when  most  people 
had  retired  from  the  city,  having  previously  given  private 
notice  to  the  senators  to  attend  on  a  certain  day,  to  procure 
a  decree  of  the  senate,  in  the  absence  of  the  plebeian  tri¬ 
bunes, — that  whereas  it  was  reported,  that  the  Volscians  had 
marched  from  home  with  intent  to  plunder  the  country  of 
the  Hernicians,  the  military  tribunes  should  therefore  pro¬ 
ceed  to  the  spot  and  inspect  into  the  matter,  and  that  an 
assembly  should  be  held  for  the  election  of  consuls.  At  their 
departure,  they  left  Appius  Claudius,  son  of  the  decemvir, 
praefect  of  the  city,  a  young  man  of  activity;  and  who  had, 
even  from  his  cradle,  imbibed  a  hatred  towards  the  com- 

BOOK  IV. 

373 

B.  C.  421.] 

mons  and  their  tribunes.  The  plebeian  tribunes  had  no 
room  for  contention,  either  with  those  who  had  procured 
the  decree  of  the  senate  during  their  absence;  nor  with 
Appius,  as  the  business  was  already  concluded. 
XXXVII.  The  consuls  elected  were  Caius  Sem-  y.  r.  332. 
pronius  Atratinus,  and  Quintus  Fabius  Vibulanus. 
An  event  which  is  related  to  have  happened  in  this  year, 
though  in  a  foreign  country,  deserves  to  be  recorded. 
Vulturnum,  a  city  of  the  Etrurians,  now  Capua,  was  seized 
by  the  Samnites,  and  called  Capua,  from  Capys  their  leader, 
or,  which  is  more  probable,  from  its  champaign  grounds* 
The  manner  in  which  they  made  themselves  masters  of  it 
was  this:  they  were  some  time  before,  when  the  Etrurians 
had  been  greatly  harassed  in  war,  admitted  to  a  share  of 
this  city  and  its  lands;  these  new  settlers,  afterwards  taking 
the  opportunity  of  a  festival,  attacked  and  massacred  in  the 
night  the  first  inhabitants,  heavy  with  sleep  and  food. 
After  this  transaction,  the  consuls,  whom  we  have  mention* 
ed,  entered  on  office  on  the  ides  of  December;  by  this  time, 
not  only  those  employed  in  inquiries  had  reported  that  the 
Volscians  were  ready  to  commence  hostilities;  but  also 
ambassadors  from  the  Latines  and  Hernicians  had  brought 
information,  that  “  never  at  any  former  time  had  the  Vol¬ 
scians  exerted  more  diligence  and  care  either  in  the  choice 
of  commanders,  or  the  enlisting  of  troops:  that  it  was  a 
common  expression  among  them,  that  they  must  either  lay 
aside  for  ever  all  thoughts  of  war  and  arms,  and  submit  to 
the  yoke,  or  they  must  prove  themselves  not  inferior  to  their 
competitors  for  empire,  either  in  courage,  perseverance,  or 
military  discipline.”  The  intelligence  was  not  without 
foundation:  yet  the  senate  were  not  affected  by  it,  as  might 
have  been  expected;  and  Caius  Sempronius,  to  whom  the 
command  fell  by  lot,  acted  with  carelessness  and  negligence, 
in  every  particular,  relying  on  fortune,  as  if  it  were  incapable 
of  change,  because  he  before  had  headed  a  victorious  sol- 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

374 

[Y-  R.  332. 

dicry  against  those  who  had  been  before  overcome;  so  that 
there  was  more  of  the  Roman  discipline  in  the  Volscian 
army  than  in  his  own.  Success,  therefore,  as  on  many  other 
occasions,  attended  merit.  The  engagement  was  entered 
on  by  Sempronius,  without  either  prudence  or  caution,  with¬ 
out  strengthening  the  line  by  a  reserve,  and  without  posting 
the  cavalry  in  a  proper  situation.  The  shout  gave  a  presage 
at  the  very  beginning  to  which  side  the  victory  would  in¬ 
cline.  That  raised  by  the  Volscians  was  loud  and  full; 
whilst  the  shout  of  the  Romans,  dissonant,  unequal,  lifeless, 
and  often  begun  anew,  betrayed,  by  its  unsteadiness,  the 
fears  which  possessed  them.  This  made  the  enemy  charge 
with  the  greater  boldness;  they  pushed  with  their  shields, 
and  brandished  their  swords:  on  the  other  side,  the  helmets 
were  seen  to  droop  as  the  wearers  looked  round  for  safety, 
disconcerted  and  disordered  on  every  side.  The  ensigns 
sometimes  kept  their  ground,  deserted  by  those  who  ought 
to  support  them;  at  other  times  they  retreated  between  their 
respective  companies.  As  yet  there  was  no  absolute  flight, 
nor  was  the  victory  complete.  The  Romans  covered  them¬ 
selves  rather  than  fought;  the  Volscians  advanced,  and 
pushed  fiercely  against  the  line,  but  still  were  seen  greater 
numbers  of  the  former  falling  than  running  away. 
XXXVIII.  The  Romans  now  began  to  give  way  in  every 
quarter,  while  the  consul  Sempronius  in  vain  reproached 
them,  and  exhorted  them  to  stand;  neither  his  authority,  nor 
his  dignity,  had  any  effect;  and  they  would  shortly  have 
turned  their  backs  to  the  enemy,  had  not  Sextus  Tempanius, 
a  commander  of  a  body  of  horse,  with  great  presence  of 
mind,  brought  them  support,  and  when  their  situation  was 
almost  desperate.  He  called  aloud,  that  the  horsemen  who 
wished  the  safety  of  the  commonwealth,  should  leap  from 
their  horses,  and,  his  order  being  obeyed  by  every  troop,  as 
if  it  had  been  delivered  by  the  consul,  he  said, unless  this 
cohort,  by  the  power  of  its  arms,  can  stop  the  progress  of 

BOOK  IV^ 

375 

B.  C.  420.] 
the  enemy 5  there  is  an  end  of  the  empire.  Follow  my  spear, 
as  your  standard:  show,  both  to  Romans  and  Volscians,  that 
as  no  horse  are  equal  to  you  when  mounted,  so  no  foot  are 
equal  to  you  when  ye  dismount-’^  This  exhortation  being 
received  with  a  shout  of  applause,  he  advanced,  holding  his 
spear  aloft:  wherever  they  directed  their  march,  they  forced 
their  way  in  spite  of  opposition;  and,  advancing  their  targets, 
pushed  on  to  the  place  where  they  saw  the  distress  of  their 
friends  the  greatest.  The  fight  was  restored  in  every  part 
as  far  as  their  onset  reached;  and  there  was  no  doubt,  that 
if^  it  had  been  possible  for  so  small  a  number  to  have  ma¬ 
naged  the  whole  business  of  the  field,  the  enemy  would  have 
turned  their  backs. 
XXXIX.  Finding  that  nothing  could  withstand  them,  the 
Volscian  commander  gave  directions,  that  an  opening  should 
be  made  for  these  targe teers,  until  the  violence  of  their 
charge  should  carry  them  so  far,  that  they  might  be  shut  out 
from  their  friends:  which  being  executed,  the  horsemen  on 
their  part  were  intercepted,  in  such  a  manner,  that  it  was 
impossible  for  them  to  force  a  passage  back;  the  enemy 
having  collected  their  thickest  numbers  in  the  place  through 
which  they  had  made  their  way.  The  consul  and  Roman 
legions,  not  seeing,  any  where,  that  body  which  just  before 
had  afforded  protection  to  the  whole  army,  lest  so  m^y 
men,  of  such  consummate  valour,  should  be  surrounded  and 
overpowered  by  the  enemy,  resolved  at  all  hazards  to  push 
forward.  The  Volscians  forming  two  fronts,  withstood,  on 
one  side,  the  consul;  and  the  legions,  on  the  other,  pressed 
on  Tempanius  and  the  horsemen,  who,  after  many  fruitless 
attempts  to  break  through  to  their  friends,  took  possession 
of  an  eminence,  and  there  forming  a  circle  defended  them¬ 
selves,  not  without  taking  vengeance  on  the  assailants.  Nor 
was  the  fight  ended  when  night  came  on.  The  consul  kept 
the  enemy  employed,  never  relaxing  his  efforts  as  long  as 
any  light  remained.  The  darkness  at  length  separated  them. 

576 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

CY.  R. 

leaving  the  victory  undecided;  and  such  a  panic  seized 
both  camps,  from  the  uncertainty  in  which  they  were  with 
respect  to  the  issue,  that  both  armies,  as  if  they  had  been 
vanquished,  retreated  into  the  nearest  mountains,  leaving 
behind  their  wounded,  and  a  great  part  of  their  baggage. 
The  eminence  however  was  kept  besieged  until  after  mid¬ 
night;  when  intelligence  being  brought  to  the  besiegers  that 
their  camp  was  deserted,  they,  supposing  that  their  friends 
had  been  defeated,  fled  also,  each  wherever  his  fears  trans¬ 
ported  him.  Tempanius  apprehending  an  ambush,  kept  lus 
men  quiet  until  day-light;  and  then  going  out  himself  with  a 
small  party,  to  make  observations,  and  discovering  on  in¬ 
quiry  from  the  wounded  men  of  the  enemy,  that  the  camp 
of  the  Volscians  was  abandoned,  he  called  down  his  men 
from  the  eminence  with  great  joy,  and  made  his  way  into 
the  Roman  camp.  Here  finding  every  place  waste  and  de¬ 
serted,  and  in  the  same  disgraceful  state  in  which  he  had 
seen  the  post  of  the  enemy,  before  the  discovery  of  their 
mistake  should  bring  back  the  Volscians,  he*  took  with 
him  as  many  of  the  wounded  as  he  could;  and  not  knowing 
what  route  the  consul  had  taken,  proceeded  by  the  shortest 
roads  to  the  city. 
XL.  News  had  already  arrived  there  of  the  loss  of  the 
battle,  and  of  the  camp  being  abandoned:  and  great  lamenta¬ 
tions  had  been  made;  for  the  horsemen  above  all,  the  public 
grief  being  not  inferior  to  that  of  their  private  connections. 
The  consul  Fabius,  the  city  being  alarmed  for  its  own  safe¬ 
ty,  had  troops  posted  before  the  gates,  when  the  horsemen 
being  seen  at  a  distance,  occasioned  at  first  some  degree  of 
fright,  while  it  was  not  known  who  they  were:  but  this  being 
presently  discovered,  people’s  fears  were  converted  into  such 
transports  of  joy,  that  every  part  of  the  city  was  filled  with 
shouting;  each  one  congratulating  the  other  on  the  return  of 
the  horsemen,  safe  and  victorious.  Then  were  seen  pouring 
out  in  crowds  into  the  streets  from  the  houses,  which  a  little 

il.C.420.] 

BOOK  IV. 

m 
befc^e  had  been  filled  with  lameutation  and  moumrng,  for 
friends  supposed  lost,  their  mothers  and  wives;  each  rushing 
wildly  to  her  own,  and  scarcely  retaining,  in  the  extravagance 
of  their  rejoicings,  the  powers  either  of  mind  or  body.  The 
tribunes  of  the  commons,  who  had  commenced  a  prosecution 
against  Marcus  Postumius  and  Titus  Quintius,  for  having 
occasioned  the  loss  of  the  battle  at  Veii,  thought  that  the  re¬ 
cent  displeasure  of  the  people  towards  the  consul  Sempro- 
nius,  afforded  a  fit  opportunity  for  reviving  the  anger  of  the 
public  against  them.  Having,  therefore,  convened  the  peo¬ 
ple,  they  exclaimed  loudly,  that  the  commonwealth  had  been 
betrayed  by  its  commanders  at  Veii;  and  afterwards,  in  con¬ 
sequence  of  their  escaping  with  impunity,  the  army  was  also 
betrayed  by  the  consul  in  the  country  of  the  Volscians,  the 
cavalry,  men  of  distinguished  bravery,  given  up  to  slaughter, 
and  the  camp  shamefully  deserted.  Then  Caius  Junius,  one 
of  the  tribunes,  ordered  Tempanius  the  horseman  to  be  call¬ 
ed;  and  in  their  presence  addressed  him  thus:  Sextus  Tem¬ 
panius,  I  demand  of  you,  whether  it  is  your  opinion  that  the 
consul  Caius  Sempronius  either  engaged  the  enemy  at  a  pro¬ 
per  season,  or  strengthened  his  line  with  a  reserve,  or  dis¬ 
charged  any  duty  of  a  good  consul:  and  whether  you  your¬ 
self,  when  the  Roman  legions  were  defeated,  did  not,  of  your 
own  judgment,  dismount  the  cavalry  and  restore  the  fight? 
Did  he  afterwards,  when  you  and  the  horsemen  were  shut 
out  from  our  army,  either  come  himself  to  your  relief  or 
send  you  assistance?  Then  again,  on  the  day  following,  did 
you  find  support  any  where?  Did  you  and  your  cohort,  by 
your  own  bravery,  make  your  way  into  the  camp?  Did  ye  in 
the  camp  find  any  consul  or  any  army?  Or,  did  ye  find  the 
camp  forsaken,  and  the  wounded  soldiers  left  behind?  These 
things,  it  becomes  your  bravery  and  honour,  which  have 
proved  in  this  war  the  security  of  the  commonwealth,  to  de¬ 
clare  this  day.  ^  fine,  where  is  Caius  Sempronius?  where 
are  our  legions?  Have  you  been  deserted,  or  have  you  dc- 
VOL.  I. — 3  C 

sn  HISTORY  OP  ROME.  [Y.  R.  332. 
netted  the  consul  and  the  army?  In  shmi,  have  we  been  de¬ 
feated,  or  have  we  gained  the  victory?” 
XLI.  In  answer  to  these  interrogatories,  Temj^nios  b  said 
to  have  spoken,  not  with  studied  el(Kiuence,  but  with  the 
manly  firmness  of  a  soldier,  neither  vainly  displaying  his 
ovpi  merit,  nor  showing  pleasure  at  the  censure  thrown  on 
others:  to  the  degree  of  military  skill  possessed  by 
Caius  Sempronius  the  general,  it  was  not  his  duty,  as  a  sol¬ 
dier,  to  judge;  that  was  the  business  of  the  Roman  people, 
when,  at  the  election,  they  chose  him  consuL  He  desired, 
therefore,  that  they  would  not  require  from  him  a  detail  of 
the  designs  and  duties  becoming  the  office  of  a  general,  or 
of  a  consul;  matters  which,  even  from  persons  of  the  most 
exalted  capacity  and  genius,  required  much  consideration: 
but  what  he  saw,  that  he  could  relate.  He  had  seen,  before 
his  communication  with  the  army  was  cut  off,  the  consul 
lic:hting  in  the  front  of  the  line,  encouraging  the  men,  and  ac¬ 
tively  employed  between  the  Roman  ensigns  and  the  wea¬ 
pons  of  the  enemy.  He  was  afterwards  carried  out  of  sight 
of  his  countrymen:  however,  from  the  noise  and  shouting,  he 
perceived  that  the  battle  was  prolonged  until  night;  nor  did 
he  believe,  that  it  was  in  their  power,  on  account  of  the 
great  numbers  of  the  enemy,  to  force  their  way  to  the  emi¬ 
nence  where  he  had  taken  post.  Where  the  army  was,  he 
knew  not.  He  supposed  that  as  he,  in  a  dangerous  crisis,  had 
taken  advantage  of  the  ground  to  secure  himself  and  his  men, 
in  like  manner  the  consul,  consulting  the  safety  of  his  army, 
had  chosen  a  stronger  situation  for  his  camp.  Nor  did  he 
believe,  that  the  affairs  of  the  Volscians  were  in  a  better 
posture  than  those  of  the  Roman  people:  for  fortune  and  the 
night  had  caused  abundance  of  mistakes,  both  on  one  side 
and  the  other.”  He  then  begged  that  they  would  not  detain 
him,  as  he  was  much  distressed  with  fatigu'e  and  wounds;  and 
he  was  dismissed  with  the  highest  expressions  of  aj^lause, 
no  less  for  his  modesty  than  his  bravery.  Meanwhile  the 

BOOK  IV- 

379 

B.  C-  420.] 
consul  had  come  as  f«r  as  the  Temple  of .  Rest,  on  the  rcmd 
leading  td  Lavici;  whither  wagons  and  other  carriages  wcie 
s^t  from  the  city,  and  which  took  up  the  men  who  were 
spent  wWi  die  fatigue  of  the  acticm,  and  the  march  by  night. 
The  consul  soon  after  entered  the  city,  and  was  not  more 
anxiously  desirous  to  clear  himself  from  blame,  than  he 
was  to  bestow  on  Tempanius  the  praise  which  he  deserved. 
While  the  minds  of  the  citizens  were  full  of  grief  for  the  ill 
success  of  their  affairs,  and  of  resentment  against  their  com¬ 
manders,  the  first  object  thrown  in  the  way  of  their  ill  hu¬ 
mour  was  Marcus  Postumius,  formerly  military  tribune, 
with  consular  power,  at  Veil,  who  was  brought  to  trial,  and 
condemned  in  a  fine  of  ten  thousand  asses  in  weight,  of  brass.* 
Titus  Quintius  endeavoured  to  transfer  all  the  blame  of  that 
event  from  himself  on  his  colleague,  who  was  already  con¬ 
demned;  and  as  he  had  conducted  business  with  success, 
both  in  the  country  of  the  Vol^cians  when  consul,  under  the 
auspices  of  the  dictator  Postumius  Tubertus,  and  also  at  Fi- 
dense,  when  lieutenant-general  to  another  dictator,  Mamercus 
iEipilius,  aH  the  tribes  acquitted  him.  It  is  said  that  his 
cause  was  much  indebted  to  the  high  veneration  in  which 
his  father  Cincinnatus  was  held;  and  likewise  to  Quintius 
Capitolinas,  who  being  now  extremely  old,  begged  with 
humble  supplications  that  they  would  not  suffer  him  who  had 
so  short  a  time  to  live,  to  carry  any  dismal  tidings  to  Cin¬ 
cinnatus. 
XLII.  The  commons  created  Sextus  Tempanius,  y  r.  sss. 
Aulus  Sellius,  Lucius  Antistius,  and  Sextus  Pom- 
pilius,  in  their  absence,  plebeian  tribunes;  these  being  the 
pers<ms  whom,  by  the  advice  of  Tempanius,  the  horsemen 
had  appointed  to  command  them  as  centurions.  The  senate 
finding  that  through  the  general  aversion  from  Sempronius, 
the  name  of  consul  was  become  displeasing,  ordered  mili^ 

32/.  5^.  lOd. 

380 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R,  333, 

taty  tribunes  with  consular  power  to  be  chosen.  According* 
ly  there  were  elected  Lucius  Manlius  Capitolina^,  QuinUis 
Antunius  Merenda,  and  Lucius  Papirius  Mugillanus.  No 
sooner  had  the  year  begun,  than  Lticius  Hortensius,  a  pte- 
beian  tribune,  commenced  a  prosecution*  against  Caius 
Sempronius,  consul  of  the  preceding  year.  His  four  edi* 
leagues,  in  the  presence  of  the  Roman  people,  besought  him 
not  to  involve  in  vexation  an  unoffending  general,  in  whose 
case  fortune  alone  could  be  blamed;  Hortensius  took  offence 
at  this,  thinking  it  meant  a  trial  of  his  perseverance;  and  that 
the  accused  depended  not  on  the  intreaties  of  the  tribunes, 
which  were  thrown  out  only  for  the  sake  of  ^pearuice,  but 
on  their  protection.  Turning  first  therefore  to  him,  he  asked» 
*  A  prosecution  before  tbe  people  was  a  rery  tedious  busiuess,  andaf^ 
forded  tbe  person  accused  many  chances  of  escaping^  even  though  he 
should  not  be  able  to  prove  his  inoocence:  he  might  prevail  on  the  prose¬ 
cutor  to  relinquish  the  charge,  or  oh  a  plebeian  tribune  to  interpose,  or 
on  the  augurs  to  report  ill  omens  on  the  day  of  the  assembly  for  the  deci¬ 
sion;  or,  at  the  worst,  he  might  go  into  voluntary  exile;  verteresoium  exUii 
graiid.  A  magistrate,  who  intended  to  impeach  a  person  before  the  peo¬ 
ple,  mounted  the  rostrum,  and  gave  notice  thaten  such  a  day  he  intend¬ 
ed  to  accuse  that  person  of  such  a  crime;  on  which  tbe  party  accused  was 
obliged  to  give  bail  for  his  appearance,  which  if  be  failed  to  do,  he  was 
thrown  into  prison.  On  the  day  appointed,  the  pdople  being  assembled 
(by  centuries  if  the  crime  chaig^  was  capital,  by  tribes  if  fineable,)  the 
person  accused  was  summoned  by  the  crier,  and  if  he  did  not  appear,  was 
punUhed  at  the  pleasure  of  the  prosecutor-  If  be  appeared,  the  accuser 
mounted  the  rostrum,  and  began  his  cbaige,  which  he  carried  on  through 
that  and  two  other  days,  allowing  an  interval  of  one  day  between  each. 
On  the  third  day  he  made  a  recapitulation  of  the  chaige,  and  mentioned 
the  punishment  sj^cified  in  the  law  for  such  an  offence.  This  was  express¬ 
ed  in  writing,  and  exhibited  to  public  view  during  three  market-days . 
This  proceeding  was  tenned  rogatio  in  respect  of  the  people,  and  irrogotio 
in  rcbspect  of  the  accused.  On  the  day  after  the  third  market-day,  the 
^euser  finished  the  business  of  the  prosecution,  and  concluded  with  giving 
notice  of  tbe  day  on  which  the  assembly  should  meet  to  pass  judgment. 
The  accused  was  then  at  liberty  to  make  his  defence,  either  by  himself, 
or  by  advocates. 

BOOK  IV, 

38i 

B.  C.419.] 
“  Whe»e  were  the  haughty  airs  of  the  patrician?  Where  was 
the  spirit  upheld  in  confidence  by  conscious  innocence,  that 
a  man  of  consular  dimity  took  shelter  under  the  shade  of 
tribimes?”  Then  to  his  colleagues;  As  to  you,  what  is  your 
intention  in  case  I  ^rsist  in  the  prosecution?  Do  ye  mean 
to  rob  the  people  of  their  jurisdiction,  and  to  overturn  the 
power  of  the  mbunes?’’  To  this  they  replied;  “  that  with  re¬ 
spect  both  to  Sempronius,  and  to  all  others,' the  Roman  people 
pt^scssed  supreme  authority;  that  it  was  neither  in  their 
power  nor  in  their  wishes  to  obstruct  the  exercise  of  it,  but 
if  their  prayers  in  behalf  of  their  general,  who  was  to  them 
a  parent,  shtmid  have  no  effect,  they  were  determined  to 
change  their  apparel  along  with  him.”  Hortensius  then  de¬ 
clared,  ^  the  commons  of  Rome  shall  not  see  their  tribunes 
in  the  garb  of  culprits:  I  have  nothing  farther  to  say  to  Sem- 
prooius,*  since,  by  his  conduct  in  command,  he  has  rendered 
himself  so  dear  to  his  soldiers.”  Nor  was  the  dutiful  attach¬ 
ment  of  the  four  tribunes  more  pleasing  to  the  patricians  and 
to  the  commons,  than  was  the  temper  of  Hortensius,  comply¬ 
ing  so  readily  with  intreaties  founded  on  justice.  -Fortune 
no  longer  indulged  the  iBIquans,  who  had  embraced  the 
doubtful  success  of  the  Volscians  as  their  own. 
XLJll.  In  the  year  following,  which  had  for  y 
consuls  Numerius  Fabms  Vibulanus  and  Titus  B.  C.  418. 
Quintius  Capitolinas,  son  of  Capitolinas,  nothing  memorable 
was  performed  under  the  conduct  of  Fabius,  to  whom  the 
province  of  encountering  the  enemy  fell  by  lot.  The  Alquans, 
on  merely  showing  their  spiritless  army,  were  driven  off  the 
field  in  a  shameful  ffight,  without  affording  the  consul  much 
honour,  for  which  reason  he  was  refused  a  ttiumph;  however, 
as  he  had  effaced  the  ignominy  of  the  misfortune  under  Sem¬ 
pronius,  he  was  permitted  to  enter  the  city  in  ovation «  As 
the  war  was  brought  to  a  conclusion  with  less  difficulty  than 
had  been  apprehended,  so  the  city,  from  a  state  of  tranquilli' 
ty,  was  unexpectedly  involved  in  a  scene  of  turbulent  dis- 

382 

HISTORY  OF  ROME- 

[Y.a*334- 
sensions  between  the  patricians  and  plebeians.  This  vras  die 
efFect  of  a  plan  for  doubling  the  number  of  qusestors:  for  the 
consuls  having  ^roposed^  that,  in  addition  to  the  tw6  ci^*- 
quaestors,  two  others  should  always  attend  the  consuls,  to 
discharge  the  business  relative  to  the  army,  and  the  measure 
having  been  warmly  approved  b}’'  the  patricians,  the  tribunes 
contended,  in  opposition  to  the  consuls,  that  half  the  number 
of  quaestors  should  be  taken  from  among  the  comm<ms,  for 
hitherto  patricians  only  had  been  elected:  against  which  scheme 
both  consuls ^nd  patricians  struggled  at  first  with  their  utmost 
power.  I'hey  afterwards  offered  a  concession,  that  according 
to  the  practice  in  the  election  of  tribunes  with  consular  power, 
the  people  should  have  equal  freedom  of  suffrage  with  re¬ 
spect  to  qu^stors;  yet  finding  that  this  had  no  effect,  they, 
entirely  laid  aside  the  design  of  augmenting  the  number.  No 
sooner,  however,  was  it  dropped  by  them,  than  it  was  taken 
up  by  the  tribunes,  while  several  other  seditious  schemes 
were  continually  started,  and  among  the  rest,  one  for 
agrarian  law.  The  senate  was  desirous,  on  account  of  these 
commotions,  that  consuls  should  be  elected  rather  than  tri¬ 
bunes,  but  no  decree  could  be  passed,  by  reason  of  the  pro¬ 
tests  of  the  tribunes,  so  that  the  government,  from  being  con¬ 
sular,  became  a  kind  of  interregnum:  nor  was  even  that  ac¬ 
complished  without  a  vioknt  strug^e,  the  tribunes  obstruct¬ 
ing  the  meeting  of  the  patricians.  The  greater  part  of  the 
ensuing  year  was  wasted  in  contentions  between  the  new  tri¬ 
bunes,  and  the  several  interreges,  the  tribunes  sometimes 
hindering  the  patricians  from  assembling  to  declare  an  in¬ 
terrex;  at  others,  protesting  against  the  interreges  passing  a 
decree  for  the  election  of  consuls;  at  last,  Lucius  Papirius 
Mugillanus,  being  declared  interrex,  severely  reproved  both 
the  senate  and  the  plebeian  tribunes,  affirming,  that,  “  the 
commonwealth,  being  forsaken  by  men,  and  preserved  by  the 
care  and  providence  of  the  gods,  subsisted  merely  by  means 
of  the  Veientian  truce,  and  the  dilatoriness  of  the  .^quans; 

BOOK  IV. 

-38:^ 

B.  C.  418.] 
from  whkh  Quarter,  should  an  alarm  of  danger  be  heard,  did 
they  think  it  right,  that  the  nation,  destitute  of  a  patrician 
magistrate,  should  be  exposed  to  a  surprise?  That  it  neither 
should  have  an  army,  nor  a  general  to  enlist  one?  Did  they 
think  an  intestine  war  the  proper  means  to  repel  a  foreign 
one?  Should  both  take  place  at  the  same  time,  the  power  of 
the  gods  would  scarcely  be  able  to  preserve  the  Roman  state 
from  ruin.  It  were  much  fitter  that  both  parties  should  re* 
mit  somewhat  of  their  strict  rights;  and,  by  a  mutual  com¬ 
promise  of  their  pretensions,  unite  the  whole  in  concord,  the 
senate  permitting  military  tribunes  to  be  appointed  instead 
of  consuls,  and  the  tribunes  of  the  commons  ceasing  to  pro¬ 
test  against  the  four  quaestors  being  chosen  out  of  the  patri¬ 
cians  and  plebeians,  indiscriminately,  by  the  free  suffrages  of 
the  people.” 
XLIV.  The  election  of  tribunes  was  first  held,  y 
and  there  were  chosen  tribunes,  with  consular  power,  c:  4i7. 
Lucius  Quintius  Cincinnatus  a  third  time,  Lucius  Furius 
Medullinus  a  second  time,  Marcus  Manlius  and  Aulus  Sem- 
pronius  Atratinus,  all  patricians.  The  last-named  tribune  pre¬ 
sided  at  the  election  of  qucestors,  when  there  appeared  among 
several  other  plebeian  candidates,  a  son  of  Antistius,  a  plebeian 
.  tribune,  and  a  brother  of  Sextus  Pompilius,  of  the  same  order; 
but  neither  their  power  nor  interest  were  able  to  prevent  the 
people  from  choosing  rather  to  raise  those  to  the  rank  of  no- 
bility,  whose  fathers  and  grandfathers  they  had  seen  in  the 
consulship.  This  enraged  all  the  tribunes  to  madness,  espe¬ 
cially  Pompilius  and  Antistius,'Who  were  incensed  at  the  dis¬ 
appointment  of  their  relations.  What  could  be  the  meaning 
of  this,  they  said,  that  neither  their  services,  nor  the  in¬ 
jurious  behaviour  of  the  patricians,  nor  even  the  pleasure  of 
exercising  a  newly  acquired  right,  though  a  power  was  now 
granted  which  had  hitherto  been  refused,  had  been  sufficient 
to  procure,  for  any  plebeian  whatever,  the  office  of  military- 
tribune,  or  even  that  of  qufiestor?  The  prayers  of  a  father 

384  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  33S. 
in  behalf  of  his  son,  those  of  one  brother  in  behalf  of  an¬ 
other,  those  of  persons  invested  with  the  tribui^ship  of  Ae 
commons,  that  sacred  and  inviolable  power  created  for  the 
protection  of  liberty,  had  all  proved  ineffectual.  There  must 
certainly  have  been  some  fraudulent  practices  in  the  case, 
and  Aulus  Sempronius  must  have  used  more  artifice  in  the 
election  than  was  consistent  with  honour;”  in  fine,  they  com¬ 
plained  loudly,  that  their  relations  had  been  disappointed  of 
the  office  by  his  unfair  conduct.  But  as  no  serious  attack 
could  be  made  on  him,  because  he  was  secured,  both  by  in¬ 
nocence,  and  by  the  office  which  he  held  at  the  tithe,  they 
turned  their  resentment  against  Caius  Sempronius,  uncle  to 
Atratinus;  and^  aided  by  Canuleius,  one  of  their  colleagues, 
entered  a  prosecution  against  him  on  account  of  the  disgrace 
sustained  in  the  Volscian  war.  By  the  same  tribunes  men¬ 
tion  was  frequently  introduced,  in  the  senate,  of  the  distri> 
button  of  lands,  which  scheme  Caius  Sempronius  had  always 
most  vigorously  opposed;  for  they  foresaw,  as  it  fell  out, 
that,  on  the  one  hand,  should  he  forsake  that  cause,  he  would 
be  less  warmly  defended  by  the  patricians;  and,  on  the  other 
if  he ‘Should  persevere,  at  the  time  when  his  trial  was  ap¬ 
proaching,  he  would  give  offence  to  the  commons.  He  chose 
to  face  the  torrent  of  popular  displeasure,  and  rather  to  in¬ 
jure  his  own  cause,  than  to  be  wanting  to  that  of  the  public; 
and  therefore,  standing  firm  in  the  same  opinion,  he  declared, 
that  “  no  such  largess  should  be  made,  which  would  only 
tend  to  aggrandize  the  three  tribunes;  affirming,  that  the  ob¬ 
ject*  of  their  pursuits  was  not  to  procure  lands  for  the  com¬ 
mons,  but  ill-will  against  him.  That,  for  his  own  part,  he 
would  undergo  the  storm  with  determined  resolution;  and, 
with  regard  to  the  senate,  it  was  their  duty,  not  to  set  so 
high  a  value  on  him,  or  on  any  other  citizen,  as  through  ten¬ 
derness  to  an  individual,  to  give  room  for  an  injury  to  the 
public.”  When  the  day  of  trial  arrived,  he  pleaded  his  own 
cause  with  the  same  degree  of  intrepidhy;  and,  notwith- 

B,  C.  417.] 

BOOK  IV. 

385 

standing  the  patricians  used  every  expedient  to  soften  the 
commons,  he  was  condemned  in  a  fine  of  fifteen  thousand 
oases.*  The  same  year  Posiumia^  a  vestal  virgin,  was  charg¬ 
ed  with  breach  of  chastity.  She  was  free  from  the  guilt,  but 
took  too  little  pains  to  avoid  the  imputation  of  it,  which  was 
grounded  merely  on  suspicion,  caused  by  her  too  great  gayety 
of  dress,  and  from  her  manners  being  less  reserved  than  be¬ 
came  her  state.  The  trial  having  been  adjourned  to  a  farther 
hearing,  and  she  being  afterwards  acquitted,  the  chief  pon¬ 
tiff,  by  direction  of  the  college,  ordered  her  to  refrain  from 
indiscreet  mirth;  and,  in  her  dress,  to  attend  more  to  the 
sanctity  of  her  character,  than  to  the  fashion.  In  this  year 
Cumee,  a  city  then  possessed  by  Greeks,^  was  taken  by  the 
Campanians. 
XLV.  The  ensuing  year  had  for  military  tribunes  y  ^ 
with  consular  power,  Agrippa  Menenius  Lanatus,  K-  p- 
Publius  Lucretius  Tricipitinus,  Spurius  Nautius,  and  Caius 
Servilius;  a  year  which,  by  good  fortune,  was  rendered  re¬ 
markable,  rather  by  great  dangers,  than  by  losses.  The  slaves 
formed  a  conspiracy  to  set  fire  to  the  city  in  different  quar¬ 
ters;  and,  while  the  people  should  be  every  where  intent  on 
saving* the  houses,  to  take  arms,  and  seize  on  the  citadel  and 
the  capitol.  Jupiter  frustrated  their  horrid  designs,  and  the 
offenders,  being  seized  upon  the  information  of  two  of  their 
number,  were  punished.  The  informers  were  rewarded  with 
their  freedom,  and  ten  thousand  in  weight  of  brass, 
paid  out  of  the  treasury,  a  sum  which,  at  that  time,  was 
reckoned  wealth.  Soon  after,  intelligence  was  received  at 
Rome,  from  good  authority,  that  the  ^quans  were  prepar¬ 
ing  to  renew  hostilities,  and  that  this  old  enemy  was  joined  ? 
in  the  design  by  a  new  one,  the  Lavicanians.  Fighting  with 
the  iEquans  was  now  become  to  the  state  almost  an  anniver¬ 
sary  custom.  To  Lavici  ambassadors  were  sent,  who  having 
*  48/.  8*.  9d. 
VOL.  I. — 3  D 

f  32/.  Bs.  \Qd. 

386 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

LY.  R.  337. 

ret\irned  with  an  evasive  answer,  from  which  it  was  evident 
that,  though  immediate  war  was  not  intended,  yet  peace 
would  not  be  of  long  continuance,  orders  were  given  to  the 
Tusculans  to  watch  attentively,  lest  any  new  commotion 
should  arise  at  Lavici.  The  military  tribunes,  with  consular 
power,  of  the  next  year,  Lucius  Sergius  Fidenas,  Marcus 
Y.  R.  337.  Papirius  Mugillanus,  Caius  Servilius  son  of  Pris- 
B.  C.  4io.  who,  in  his  dictatorship,  had  taken  Fidenae, 
were,  soon  after  the  commencement  of  their  office,  attended 
by  an  embassy  from  Tusculum,  the  purport  of  which  was,  that 
the  Lavicanians  had  taken  arms,  and  after  having,  in  conjunc¬ 
tion  with  the  .^quans,  ravaged  that  territory,  had  pitched 
their  camp  at  Algidum.  War  was  then  proclaimed  against  the 
Lavicanians.  The  senate  having  decreed  that  two  of  the  tri¬ 
bunes  should  go  out  to  command  the  army,  and  that  the  other 
should  manage  affairs  at  Rome,  there  sprung  up  on  a  sudden 
a  warm  dispute  among  the  tribunes,  each  representing  him¬ 
self  as  the  fittest  person  to  command  in  the  war,  and  scorn¬ 
ing  the  business  of  the  city  as  disagreeable  and  inglorious. 
The  senate,  beholding  with  surprise  this  indecent  contention 
between  the  colleagues,  Quintus  Servilius  said,  Since  ye 
pay  no  deference  either  to  this; august  body,  or  to  thh  com¬ 
monwealth,  parental  authority  shall  put  an  end  to  your  un¬ 
seemly  altercation.  My  son,  without  putting  it  to  the  lots, 
shall  hold  the  command  in  the  city,  I  hope  that  those,  who 
are  so  ambitious  of  being  employed  in  the  war,  may  act  with 
greater  prudence  and  manliness  in  their  conduct  of  it,  than 
they  show  in  their  present  competition.” 
XLVI.  It  was  resolved,  that  the  levy  should  not  be  made 
out  of  the  whole  body  of  the  people  indiscriminately:  ten 
tribes  were  drawn  by  lot,  and  out  of  these  the  tribunes  en- 
iiste^;;^e  younger  men,  and  led  them  to  the  held.  The  con- 
tentiomJWhich  began  in  the  city,  were,  through  the  same 
eager  ambition  for  command,  raised  to  a  much  greater  height 
in  the  camp.  On  no  one  point  did  their  sentiments  agree; 

B.  C.  415.] 

BOOK  IV. 

387 

each  contended  strenuously  for  his  own  opinion;  endeavour¬ 
ed  to  have  his  own  plans  and  his  own  commands  only  put  in 
execution;  showed  a  contempt  of  the  other;  and  met  with 
the  like  contempt  in  return:  until  at  length,  on  the  remon¬ 
strances  of  the  lieutenant-generals,  they  came  to  a  compro¬ 
mise,  which  was  to  enjoy  the  supreme  command  alternately, 
each  for  a  day.  When  these  proceedings  were  reported  at 
Rome,  Quintus  Serviltus,  whose  wisdom  was  matured  by 
age  and  experience,  is  said  to  have  prayed  to  the  immortal 
gods,  that  the  discord  of  the  tribunes  might  not  prove  as  he 
feared  it  might,  more  detrimental  to  the  commonwealth  than 
it  had  done  at  Veii;  and  to  have  urged  his  son  earnestly  to 
enlist  soldiers  and  prepare  arms,  as  if  he  foresaw  with  cer¬ 
tainty  some  impending  misfortune.  Nor  was  he  a  false  pro¬ 
phet:  for  under  the  conduct  of  Lucius  Sergius,  whose  day 
of  command  it  was,  the  troops  were  suddenly  attacked  by 
the  iEquans,  in  disadvantageous  ground,  adjoining  the  ene¬ 
my’s  camp;  into  which  they  had  been  decoyed  by  vain  hopes 
of  mastering  it;  the  enemy  counterfeiting  fear,  and  having 
retreated  to  their  rampart.  They  were  driven  in  great  dis¬ 
order  down  a  declivity  in  the  rear,  and  while  they  tumbled 
one  on  another  rather  than  fled,  vast  numbers  were  over¬ 
powered  and  slain.  With  difficulty  they  defended  the  camp 
for  that  day;  and  on  the  foUowing,  the  enemy  having  invest¬ 
ed  it  on  several  sides,  they  abandoned  it  in  shameful  flight 
through  the  opposite  gate.  The  generals,  lieutenant-gene¬ 
rals,  and  such  part  of.  the  body  of  the  army  as  followed  the 
colours,  took  the  rout  to  Tusculum:  the  rest  dispersing  up 
and  down,  madef  their  way  to  Rome  by  many  diiferent  roads, 
bringing  exaggerated  accounts  of  the  disaster  which  had 
happened.  This  unfortunate  affair  caused  the  less  conster¬ 
nation,  because,  it  was  not  unexpected,  and  because  there 
was  a  reinforcement  of  troops  already  prepared  by  the  mili¬ 
tary  tribune,  to  which,  in  this  disorder  of  their  affairs,  they 
could  look  for  security.  By  his  ordei»  also,  after  the  eonfu- 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  3S7. 

sion  in  the  city  had  bteen  quieted  by  means  of  the  inferior 
magistrates,  scouts  were  instantly  despatched  for  intettigcnce, 
who  brought  accounts  that  the  generals  and  the  army  were 
at  Tusculutn,  and  that  the  enemy  had  not  removed  their 
camp.  But  what  chiefly  contributed  to  raise  people’s  spirits 
was,  that  in  pursuance  of  a  decree  of  the  senate,  Quintus 
Servilius  Priscus  was  created  dictator,  a  man  whose  exten¬ 
sive  judgment  in  public  affairs  the  state  had  experienced,  as 
well  on  many  former  occasions  as  in  the  issue  of  that  cam¬ 
paign;  he  alone  having,  before  the  misfortune  happened,  ex¬ 
pressed  apprehensions  of  danger  from  the  disputes  of  the 
tribunes.  He  appointed  for  his  master  of  the  horse  the  tri¬ 
bune  by  whom  he  had  been  nominated  dictator,  his  own  son, 
according  to  some  accounts;  but  other  writers  mention  Ser- 
vilius  Ahala  as  master  of  the  horse  that  year.  Then,  putting 
himself  at  the  head  of  the  new  raised  troops,  and  sending 
orders  to  those  at  Tusculum  to  join  him,  he  marched  against 
the  enemy,  and  chose  ground  for  his  camp  within  two  miles 
of  theirs. 
XLVII.  The  negligence  and  the  vanity  inspired  by  suc¬ 
cess,  which  were  formerly  manifested  in  the  Roman  conv* 
manders,  were  now  transferred  to  the  iEquans.  In  the  first 
engagement,  the  dictator  having  thrown  the  enemy’s  van  in¬ 
to  disorder  by  a  charge  of  the  cavalry,  immediately  directed 
the  infantry  to  advance  with  speed,  and  slew  one  of  his  own 
standard-bearers  who  did  not  readily  obey  the  order.  Such 
ardour  was  in  consequence  displayed  by  the  troops  that  the 
^quans  could  not  support  the  shock  of  their  onset.  Van¬ 
quished  in  the  field,  they  fled  precipitately  t6  their  camp,  the 
taking  of  which  cost  even  less  time  and  trouble  than  the  bat¬ 
tle  had  done.  After  the  camp  had  been  ^ken  and  plunder¬ 
ed,  the  -dictator  giving  up  the  spoil  to  the  soldiers,  the  horse¬ 
men,  who  had  pursued  the  enemy  in  their  flight,  returned 
with  intelligence,  that  after  their  defeat  all  the  Lavicmiians, 
and  a*  great  part  of  the^iEquans,  had  retreated  to  Lavici;  on 

BOOK  IV- 

389 

B.C.415.3 

which  the  army  was  next  day  c<mducted  thither,  and  ^he 
town,  being  invested  on  every  side,  was  taken  by  storm. 
The  dictator  having  led  back  his  victorious  army  to  Rome, 
resigned  his  ofSce,  on  the  eighth  day  after  his  appointment; 
and  the  senate,  seizing  the  opportunity  before  the  tribunes 
of  the  commons  should  raise  seditions  about  the  agrarian 
laws,  voted,  in  full  assembly,  that  a  colony  should  be  con¬ 
ducted  to  Lavici,  'at  the  same  time  introducing  a  proposal 
for  a  distribution  of  its  lands.  One  thousand  five  hundred 
colonists,  sent  from  the  city,  received  each  two  acres.  Du¬ 
ring  two  years  after  the  tak^g  of  Lavici,  in  the  y*  ^ 
first  of  which  Agrippa  Menenius  Lanatus,  Lucius  C.  414. 
Servilius  Structus,  Publius  Lucretius  1‘ricipitinus,  all  these 
a  second  time,  and  Spurius  Rutilus  Crassus  were  military 
tribunes  with  consular  power;  and  in  the  following,  Aulus 
Sempronius  Atratinus  a  third  time,  and  Marcus  y  ^ 
Papirius  Mugillanus  and  Spurius  Nautius  Rutilus  B.  c.  4is. 
both  a  second  time.  There  was  tranquillity  with  respect  to 
affairs  abroad,  but  at  home  dissensions  occasioned  by  agrari¬ 
an  laws. 
XL VI I L  The  incendiaries  of  the  populace  were  the  Spu- 
rii,  tribunes  of  the  commons,  Mcecilius  a  fourth  time,  and 
Meetilius  a  third,  both  elected  in  their  absence.  A  very 
violent  contest  between  the  patricians  and  plebeians  was  now 
expectfed  on  the  subject  of  the  agrarian  laws;  for  these  tri¬ 
bunes  had  publicly  proposed,  that  the  lands,  taken  from 
their  enemies,  should  be  distributed  in  such  a  manner,  that 
every  man  might  have  a  share.  Had  this  proposal  passed 
into  a  law,  the  proper^  of  a  great  part  of  the  nobles  would 
have  been  confiscated;  for  scarcely  was  there  any  of  the  pub¬ 
lic  territory,  not  even  the-  ground  on  which  the  city  itself 
was  built,  but  what  had  been  acquired  by  arms^  all  of  which 
consequently  must  have  been  comprehended  in  it;  nor  could 
the  military  tribunes,  either  in  the  senate,  or  in  the  private 
meetings  of  the  nobles,*devise,  in  this  exigency,  any  promts- 

390 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  339. 

ing.  plan  of  conducts  when  Appius  -  Claudius^  grandson  of 
him  who  had  been  decemvir  for  compiling  the  laws^  being 
the  youngest  senator  in  the  assembly,  is  said  to  have  told 
them,  that  “  he  had  brought  from  home,  for  their  use  an  old 
scheme,  which  had  been  first  devised  by  his  family: — ^that 
his  great  grandfather  Appius  Claudius  had  shown  the  pa¬ 
tricians  one  method  of  baffling  the  power  of  the  tribunes,  by 
the  protests  of  their  colleagues: — that  new  men  were  easily 
drawn  off  from  their  designs  by  the  influence  of  people  of 
consequence,  if  they  were  addressed  in  language  suited  to 
the  times  rather  than  to  the  dignity  of  the  speakers.  Their 
sentiments  were  ever  directed  by  their  circumstances.  When 
they  should  see  that  their  colleagues  who  first  set  the  busi¬ 
ness  on  foot  had  got  the  start;  and  monopolized  the 
whole  credit  of  it  with  the  commons,  so  that  there  was  no 
room  left  for  them  to  come  in  for  any  share,  they  would, 
without  reluctance,  lean  for  support  to  the  cause  of  the  se¬ 
nate,  by  means  of  which  they  might  conciliate  the  favour,  not 
only  of  the  principal  patricians,  but  of  the  whole  body.” 
Every  one  expressing  approbation,  and  particularly  Quintus 
Servilius  Priscus,  highly  commending  the  youth  for  not  hav¬ 
ing  degenerated  from  the  Claudian  race,  a  general  charge 
was  given,  that  they  should  gain  over  as  many  of  the  college 
of  tribunes  as  possible,  to  enter  protests.  On  the  breaking 
up  of  the  senate,  the  principal  patricians  made  their  applica¬ 
tions  to  the  tribunes,  and  by  persuasions,  admonitions,  and 
assurances  that  it  would  be  acknowledged  as  a  favour  by 
each  of  them  in  particular,  and  also  by  the  whole  senate,  they 
prevailed  on  six  to  promise  their  protests.  Accordingly,  on 
the  day  following,  when  the  senate  was  consulted,  as  had 
been  preconcerted,  concerning  the  sedition  which  Mgecilius 
and  Msetilius  were  exciting,  by  the  proposal  of  a  largess  of 
most  pernicious  tendency,  the  speeches* of  the  principal  pa¬ 
tricians  ran  all  in  the  same  strain,  each  declaring  that,  for  his 
part,  he  could  neither  devise  any  satisfactory  mode  of  pro- 

B.  C.  413,] 

BOOK  IV. 

a9i 
ceeding,  nor  could  he  see  a  remedy  any  where,  unless  it 
were  found  in  the  protection  of  the  tribunes.  To  that  office 
the  commonwealth,  embarrassed  with  difficulties,  in  like 
manner  as  a  private  person  in  distress,  had  now  recourse  for 
aid:  and  that  it  would  be  highly  honourable  to  themselves, 
and  to  their  office,  if  they  showed  that  the  tribune  ship  pos¬ 
sessed  not  greater  power  to  harass  the  senate,  and  excite  dis¬ 
cord  between  the  orders  in  the  state,  than  to  favour  ill-de¬ 
signing  colleagues.”  The  voices  of  the  whole  senate  were 
then  heard  together,  appeals  to  the  tribunes,  coming  from 
every  corner  of  the  house;  and,  in  some  time,  silence  being 
obtained,  those  who  had  been  prepared  through  the  influence 
of  the  principal  nobility  gave  notice,  that  the  proposal  of 
a  law,  published  by  their  colleagues,  which,  in  the  judgment 
of  the  senate,  tended  to  the  dissolution  of  the  commonwealth, 
they  would  oppose  with  their  protests,”  The  thanks  of  the 
senate  were  given  to  the  protestors:  but  the  authors  of  the 
proposal,  having  called  an  assembly  of  the  people,  abused 
their  colleagues  as  traitors  to  the  interests  of  the  commons, 
and  slaves  to  the  consulars;  but,  after  uttering  other  bitter 
invectives  agaii^st  them,  dropped  the  prosecution  of  their 
scheme. 
XL  IX,  The  two  perpetual  enemies  of  the  Ro-  y  ^ 
mans  would  have  given  them  employment  during  B.  C.412. 
the  following  year,  in  which  Publius  Cornelius  Cossus,  Caius 
Valerius  Potitus,  Quintus  Quintius  Cincinnatus,  and  Nume- 
rius  Fahius  Vibulanus  were  military  tribunes  with  consular 
power,  had  not  the  religious  scruples  of  their  leaders  defer¬ 
red  the  military  operations  of  the  Veientians,  in  consequence 
of  their  lands  having  suffered  severely,  principally  in  the 
destruction  of  their  country-seats,  by  an  inundation  of  the 
Tiber.  At  the  same  time,  the  iEquans,  by  the  loss  which 
they  had  sustained  three  years  before,  were  deterred  from 
affording  aid  to  the  Volani,  one  of  their  kindred  states.  These 
had  made  inroads  on  the  contiguous  district  of  Lavici,  and 

392  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  341. 
committed  hostilities  on  the  new  colony:  in  which  unjust 
proceeding  they  had  hoped  to  have  been  supported  by  the 
concurrence  of  all  the  iEquansi  but,  being  forsaken  by  their 
confederates,  they,  without  performing  any  action  worth 
mentioning,  were  stripped,  in  one  slight  battle  and  a  siege, 
both  of  their  lands  and  their  city.  An  attempt  made  by 
Lucius  Sextius,  plebeian  tribune,  to  procure  a  law  that  a  co¬ 
lony  should  be  sent  to  Volae,  in  like  manner  as  to  Lavici, 
was  crushed  by  the  protests  of  his  colleagues;  who  declared 
openly  that  they  would  not  suffer  any  order  of  the  commons 
Y.  K.  341.  ^  passed,  unless  it  were  approved  by  the  senate. 
B,  C.  411.  isJext  year  the  iEquans,  having  recovered  Voice, 
and  sent  a  colony  thither,  strengthened  the  town  with  addi¬ 
tional  fortifications,  the  military  tribunes  with  consular  power, 
at  Rome,  being  Cneius  Cornelius  Cossus,  Lucius  Valerius 
Potitus,  Quintus  Fabius  Vibulanus,  a  second  time,  and  Mar¬ 
cus  Postumius  Regillensis.  The  conduct  of  the  war  with  the 
diquans  was  intrusted  to  the  last  mentioned,  a  man  of  a  de¬ 
praved  mind;  which,  however,  did  not  appear  so  much  in 
his  management  of  the  campaign,  as  in  his  behaviour  on  gain¬ 
ing  success..  Having,  with  great  activity,  levied  an  army  and 
marched  to  Volae,  after  breaking  the  spirits  of  the  ^quans 
in  slight  engagements,  he  at  length  forced  his  way  into  the 
place;  where  he  began  a  contention  with  his  countrymen,  in¬ 
stead  of  the  .dilquaiis.  For  having  proclaimed,  during  the 
assault,  that  the  plunder  should  be  given  to  the  soldiers,  he 
broke  his  word  on  getting  possession  of  the  town.  This,  I 
am  inclined  to  believe,  was  the  cause  of  the  displeasure  of 
the  army;  rather  than  from  finding  less  booty  than  the  tri¬ 
bune  had  represented,  and  which  they  could  not  well  expect 
in  a  new  colony,  and  a  town  which  had  been  sacked  a  short 
time  before.  Their  anger  was  farther  inflamed  on  his  return 
to  the  city,  (whither  he  had  been  summoned  by  his  colleagues, 
on  account  of  seditions  raised  by  the  plebeian  tribunes,)  from 
an  expression  which  he  was  heard  to  utter  in  an  assembly  of 

BOOK  IV. 

393 

B*  C.  411 J 
the  people,  which  ^owed  great  weakness,  or  tath»  a 
degree  of  insanity.  On  Sextius,  the  plebeian  tribune,  pr©* 
posing  an  agrarian  law,  and  at  the  same  time  declaring  that 
he  wcHiid  also  {u-opose  the  sending  of  a  colony  to  Vol«,  be» 
cause  those  men  deserved  to  enjoy  the  city  and  lands  of 
Volee,  who  had  gained  possession  of  them  by  their  arms,  he 
exclaimed,  “  Wo  to  my  soldiers,  if  they  ate  not  quiet.^’ 
Which  words  gave  not  greater  offence  to  the  assembly,  than 
they  did  soon  after  to  the  patricians,  when  they  heard  them; 
and  the  plebeian  tribune,  a  keen  man,  and  iK>t  destitute  of 
eloquence,  having  foimd  among  his  adversaries  this  haughty 
temper  and  ungovemed  tongue,  which  he  could  easily  pro* 
yoke  to  such  expressions  as  would  excite  indignation,  nc^ 
only  against  himself,  but  against  the  whole  body  and  their 
cause,  took  occasion  to  draw  Postumius  more  frequently  in^ 
to  disputes  than  any  other  of  the  military  tribunes.  But  now, 
<m  such  a  barbarous  and  inhuman  expression,  he  remm'ked, 
“  Do  ye  hear  him,  citizens*  denouncing  Wo  to  soldiers  as  he 
would  to  slaves?  and  yet  this  brute  will  be  judged 
more  deserving  of  his  high  oiUce  than  those  who  seisdi  y<m 
into  colonies,  atiid  enrich  you  with  lands  and  cities;  wte  pro*.^ 
vide  a  settlement  for  your  old  age;  and  who  ftght,  to  tiie  last, 
in  defence  of  your  interests.  Begin  then  to  learn  why  so  few 
undertake  your  cause.  What  would  they  have  to  exp^t 
at  your  hands?  posts  of  honour?  These  ye  choose  to  coi^^ 
on  your  adversaries,  rather  than  on  the  ehsmapiems  of 
Roman  people.  Ye  .murmured  just  now  on  hearing  rhirt 
man’s  words#  What  does  that  avail?  if  ye  had  mi  op^>rtUt 
nhy,  this  moment,  of  giving  your  votes,  ye  would  no  doubt 
prefer  him  who  denounces  wo  to  you^  before  those  who  wish 
to  procur^e  establishments  for  you,  of  la^s,  hsdbtetions,  and 
property,^’  ?  , 
^  L.  The  words  of  Postumius  being  cemyeyed  to  the 
dmrs,  cxci^d  iu  ihe  camp  a  much  hi^er  degi^ec  of  indigt 
nation.  ^  Should  a  fraudulent  eml^zzler  of  the  s^mils,’’  they. 
VOL.  T. —  3  E 

394 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  342. 

said,  “  denounce  also  wo  to  the  soMiersr’  ^  general  and 
open  avowal  of  their  resentment  ensuing,  the  qusestor,  Pub¬ 
lius  Sextius,  supposing  that  the  mutiny  might  be  quashed, 
by  the  same  violence  which  had  given  rise  to  it,  sent  a  Hctor 
to  one  of  the  most  clamorous  of  the  soldiers,  on  which  a  tu¬ 
mult  and  scuffle  arose,  in  which  he  received  a  blow  of  a 
stohe,  which  obliged  him  to  withdraw  from  the  crowd;  the 
person  who  had  wounded  him  adding,  with  a  sneer,  that 
the  q  uses  tor  had  got  what  the  general  had  threatened  to  the 
soldiers.”  Postumius  being  sent  for,  on  account  of  this  dis¬ 
turbance,  exasperated  still  farther  the  general  ill  humour,  by 
the  severity  of  his  inquiries  and  cruelty  of  his  punishments. 
At  last,  a  crowd  being  drawn  together,  by  the  cries  of  some 
whom  he  had  ordered  to  be  put  to  death  under  a  hurdle,  he 
gave  a  loose  to  his  rage,  running  down  from  the  tribunal,  like 
a  madman,  against  those  who  interrupted  the  execution. 
There  the  indignation  of  the  multitude,  increased  by  the  lic- 
tors  clearing  the  way  on  all  sides,  and  by  the  conduct  of  the 
centurions,  burst  out  with,  such  fury,  that  the  tribune  was 
overwhelmed  with  stones  by  his  own  troops.  When  this  deed 
of  such  a  heinous  nature  was  reported  at  vRome,  and  the 
military  tribunes  endeavoured  to  procure  a  decree  of  the 
senate,  for  an  inquiry  into  the  death  of  their  colleague,  the 
plebeian  tribunes  interposed  their  protest.  But  this  dispute 
was  a  branch  of  a  contest  of  another  kind;  for  the  patricians 
had  been  seized  with  apprehensions  that  the  commons,  ac¬ 
tuated  by  resentment  and  dread  of  the  inquiries,  would  elect 
•military  tribunes  out  of  their  own  body;  there^re,  they  la¬ 
boured  with  all  their  might  for  an  election  of  consuls.  The 
plebeian  tribunes,  not  suffering  the  decree  of  the  senate  to 
pass,  and  also  protesting  against  the  election  of  ccmsuls,^the 
affair  %vas  brought  to  an  interregnum.  The  patricians  then 
obtained  the  vktcay. 
y.  B  S42  Fabius  Vibulanus,  interrex,  prcsid- 
B.  c.  410.  ing  in  the  assembly,  Marcus  Cornelius  Cossusand 

BOOK  IV. 

395 

B,  C.  4I0J 
Lucius  Farias  MeduUinus  were  chosen  consuls.  In  the  be- 
gitming  of  dieir  year  of  office,  the  senate  passed  a  decree, 
that  the  tribunes  shoutd,  without  delay,  propose  to  the  com¬ 
mons  an  inquiry  into  the  murder  of  Postumius,  and  that  the 
commons  should  appoint  whomsoever  they  should  think 
proper  to  ccmduct  the  inquiry.  The  employment  was,  by  a 
vote  of  the  commons,  which  was  approved  by  the  people  at 
large,  commit^d  to  the  consuls;  who,  notwithstanding  they 
proceeded  in  the  business  with  the  utmost  moderation  and 
lenity,  passing  sentence  of  punishment  only  on  a  few,  who, 
as  there  is  good  reason  to  believe,  put  an  end  to  their  own 
lives;  yet  could  he  not  prevent  the  commons  from  conceiving 
the  highest  displeasure,  and  from  observing  that  “  any  con¬ 
stitutions,  enacted  for  their  advantage,  lay  long  dormant  and 
unexecuted;  whereas  a  law  passed,  in  the  mean  time,  con¬ 
signing  their  persons  and  lives  to  forfeiture,  was  instantly 
enforced,  and  that  with  such  full  effect/^  This  would  have 
been  a  most  seasonable  time,  after  the  punishment  of  the 
mutiny,  to  have  soothed  their  minds  with  such  a  healing 
measure  as  the  distribution  of  the  territory  of  Volse;  as  it 
would  have  diminished  their  eagerness  in  the  pursuit  of  mi 
agrarian  law,  which  tended  to  expel  the  patricians  from  the 
public  lands,  the  possession  of  which  they  had  unjustly  ac¬ 
quired.  But  as  matters  were  managed,  the  ill  treatment 
shown  them,  in  this  very  instance,  was  an  additional  source 
of  vexation,  as  the  nobility  not  only  persisted  with  obstinacy 
to  retain  possession  of  those  public  lands,  but  even  refused 
to  distribute  to  the  commons  such  as  had  been  lately  taken 
from  the  enemy,  which  otherwise  would,  like  the  rest,  in  a 
slmrt  time  become  the  prey  of  a  few.  This  year  the  legions 
were  led  out  by  the  consul  Furius  against  the  Voiscians,  who 
were  ravaging  the  country  of  the  Hernicians;  but  not  finding 
the  enemy  there,  they  proceeded  to  and  took  Ferentinum, 
whither  a  great  multitude  had^  retreated.  The  quantity  of 
the  spoil  was  less  than  they  had  expected,  because  the  Vol- 

396 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  344. 

scians,  seeing  small  hopes  of  holding  oot,  had  carried  off 
their  effects  by  night,  and  abandoned  the  town}  which,  being 
left  almost  without  an  inhabitant,  felVnext  day  into  the  hands 
of  the  Romans.  The  lands  were  given  to  the  H^mickns. 
Y.  R.  343.  That  yem*,  through  the  modemrimi  of  the 
B.  C.  409.  tribunes,  passed  in  domestic  t|Uiet;  but  the  sue* 
ceeding  one,  wherein  Quintus  Fabius  Ambustus  and  Caius 
Furius  Pacilus  were  consuls,  was  ushered  in  with  the  turbu¬ 
lent  operations  of  Lucius  I cilius,  a  plebeian  tribune.  Whilst, 
in  the  very  beginning  of  the  year,  he  was  employed  in  ex¬ 
citing  sedition  by  the  publication  of  agrarian  laws,  as  if  that 
were  a  task  incumbent  on  his  name  and  family,  a  pestilence 
broke  out,  more  alarming,  however,  than  deadly,  which  di¬ 
verted  men’s  thoughts  from  the  Forum,  and  political  dis¬ 
putes,  to  their  own  houses,  and  the  care  of  their  personal 
safety.  It  is  believed  that  the  disorder  was  less  fatal  in  its 
effects,  than  the  sedition  would  have  proved,  the  state  being 
delivered  from  it,  with  the  loss  of  very  few  lives;  though  the 
X  B  S44.  been  exceedingly  generri.  This  year 
B.  C.  40s;  of  pestilence  was  succeeded  by  one  of  scarcity,  ow¬ 
ing  to  the  neglect  of  agriculture,  usual  in  such  cases.  Mar¬ 
cus  Papirius  Atratinus  and  Caius  Nauticus  Rutiius  wei^ 
consuls.  Famine  would  now  have  produced  more  dismal 
effects  than  the  pest,  had  not  a  supply  been  procured  to  the 
market  by  despatching  envoys  round  all  the  nations  border¬ 
ing  on  the  Tuscan  sea,  and  on  the  Tiber,  to  purchase  c<H*n. 
The  Samnites,  who  were  then  in  possession  of  Capua  and 
Cumae,  in  a  haughty  manner  prohibited  them  from  tl:a^diIlg 
there:  they  met,  however,  with  a  different  reception  from 
the  tyrant  of  Sicily,  who  kindly  affoided  every  assistance. 
The  largest  supplies  were  brought  down  by  the  THber, 
through  the  very  active  zeal  of  the  Etrurians.  In 
quence  of  the  sickness,  the  consuls  were  at  a  loss  for  men  to 
transact  the  business  of  the  nation,  so  that  not  finding  more 
than  one  senator  for  each  embassy,  they  were  obliged  to  join 

BOOK  IV. 

B,  C.  4m.} 

to  it  twp.  ki»gbts»  Bxcept  from  thi?  sickness  and  the  sc^city, 
there  happened  nothing  during  those  two  years,  eidier  at 
^me  or  abroad,  to  give  them  any  trouble*  But  no  soonet 
did  those  causes  of  uneasin^s  disappem"  than  all  the  evils 
which  had  hitherto  so  frequently  distressed  the  state,  started 
up  together,  intestine  discord  and  foreign  wars* 
1*111.  In  the  succeeding  consulate  of  Mamcr*  y  ^ 
cus^mUiusand  Caius  Valerius  Potitus,  the  £quans  B-  C.  401. 
made  jn^eparatiems  for  war;  and  the  Volscians,  though  they 
took  not  arms  by  public  authority,  supplied  them  with  vol^- 
teers  who  served  for  pay*  On  the  report  of  hostilities  haying 
been  committed  by  them,  for  they  had  now  marcl^d  out  into 
the  territories  of  the  Latines  and  Hemicians,  Valerius  the 
consul  began  to  enlist  troops,  whilst  Marcus  M»mus,  a  ple^ 
beian  tribune,  who  was  pushing  forward  an  agrarian  law,  ob¬ 
structed  the  levies;  and  as  th^  people  were  secure  of  the 
support  of  the  tribune,  no  one,  who  did  not  choose  it,  took 
the  military  oath, — ^when  on  a  sudden,  news  arrived  that  the 
citodel  of  Carventa  had  been  seized  by  the  enemy.  The  dis¬ 
grace  incurred  by  this  event,  while  it  served  the  senate  as  a 
ground  of  severe  reproaches  against  Msenius,  afforded  at  the 
same  time  to  the  other  tribunes,  who  had  been  already  pre- 
engaged  to  protest  against  the  agrarian  law,  a  more  justifi¬ 
able  pretext  for  acting  in  opposition  to  dieir  colleague* 
Wherefore,  after  the  business  had  been  protracted  to  a  great 
length,  by  wrangling  disputes,  the  consuls  appealing  to  gods 
and  men,  n^ntained  that  whatever  losses  or  disgrace  had 
already  been,  or  was  likely  to  be  suffered  from  the  enemy,  the 
blame  of  aU  was  to  be  imputed  to  Msenius,  who  hindered  the 
kviesi  M^nius,  on  the  other  hand,  exclaiming,  that  if  the  un¬ 
just  occupiers  would  resi^  the  possessiem  of  the  public  lands, 
he  would  give  no  delay  to  the  levies*  On  this,  the  nine  tri¬ 
bunes  interposed,  by  a  decree,  and  put  an  end  to  the  cont^t, 
moclaiming  as  the  ^(germination  of  their  college,  that  ‘‘  t  y 
would,  for  the  purpose  of  enforcing  the  levy,  in  opposition 

m  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R,  U&. 
to  the  pto^t  c$.  thw  colki^e,  support  Casus  Valerios  m 
tuflictiug  fines  and  mother  penatti^^  on  as  should  refiiie 
to^Ust*’’  Armed  arith  diis.  decree,  tli^  consul  ordfcn-ed  a 
fear,  who  appealed  to  the  tribute,  to  be  taJcen  into  custody; 
lU  which,  the  rest,  being  teirified,  took  the  milittay  oath. 
The  troops  wei^  led  to  the  citadel  of  Canrenta,  and  though 
mutual  dislike  prevailed  between  them  and  the  ccmsul,  yet, 
as  soon  ss  fibey  mrived  at  die  spot,  they  retook  the  citadel 
with  great  spirit,  driving  out  the  troops  which  defended  it. 
Numbers  having  cgrel^ly  straggled  from  the  garrison,  in 
search  of  plunder,  had  left  the  place  so  exposed  as  to  be  at¬ 
tacked  with  success.  The  booty  was  diere  considerable;  be¬ 
cause  die  whole  of  what  idiey  collected,  in  their  cmitinaal 
depredations,  had  been  stored  up  in  the  citadel,  as  a  place  of 
safety.  This  the  consul  ordered  the  qusestors  to  sell  by  auc¬ 
tion,  and  to  carry  the  produce  into  the  treasury,  declaring 
that  when  the  soldiers  should  appew  not  to  have  a  desire  to 
decline  the  service,  they  should  then  share  in  the  spoil*  This 
so  much  increased  the  anger  of  the  people  and  s<ddiers 
against  the  consul,  that  when,  in  pursuance  of  a  decree  of 
the  senate,  he  entered  the  city  in  ovation,  in  the- Couplets  of 
rude  verses,  thrown  out  with  military  license,  and  in  which 
he  was  reflected  on  with  severity,  the  name  of  Msenius  was 
extolled  with  praises,  and  on  every  mention  of  the  tri¬ 
bune,  the  attachment  of  the  surrounding  populace,  manifest¬ 
ed  itself  in  expressions  of  approbation  and  applsuise,  which 
vied  with  the  commendations  of  the  soldiers*  This. circum¬ 
stance*  in  regard  to  the  tribune,  more  than  the  wanttm  rail¬ 
lery  of  the  soldiers  against  the  corasul,  and  which  was  in 
some  measure  customaiy,  gave  great  uneasiness  to  the  se¬ 
nate;  m  that,  not  doubting  but  Msenius  would  be  hozmured 
with  a  place  among  the  military  tribunes,  if  be  were  to  be  a 
candidate,  diey  put  it  out  of  his  reach  by  appoinriug  an  elec¬ 
tion  of  a^nsuis.  ^ 

399 

%C.40r4  ,  BQ&SLIV. 
.  IflV.  The  contsub  elected  were  Cr^ioe  Come*  y,  »,»4e 
Cossua  imd  Lucius  Furlus  Mcdulliuus  a  second  bI  c.  4m\ 
time*  The  commoas  were  never  more  highly  displeased  dia» 
now,  at  not  being  allowed  to  elect  tribunes.^  At  the  nomina¬ 
tion  of  quaestors,  they  discovered  this  displeasure,  and  at  the 
s^e  time  took  their  revenge  by  raising,  for  the  fim  timef 
plebeians  to  their  place;  of  the  four  appointed,  Cseso  Fabius 
Ambustus  was  the  only  patrician;  the  three  plebeians,  Quin^ 
tus  Silius,  Publius  -Sllius,  and  Publius  Pupius  being  prefer¬ 
red  before  young  men  of  the  most  illustrious  families.  That 
the  people  exerted  this  freedom,  in  giving  their  suffrages, 
was  owing,  I  find,  to  the  Icili^  out  of  which  family,  the  most 
hostile  of  any  to  the  patricians,  three  were  chosen  tribunes 
for  that  year;  who,  after  flattering  the  multitude  with  the 
prospect  of  various  and  great  designs  to  be  achieved,  and 
thereby  exciting  their  most  ardent  expectations,  affirmed  that 
they  would  not  stir  a  step,  unless  the  nation  would,  at  least 
in  the  election  of  queestors,  the  only  one  which  the  senate 
had  left  open  tp  both  patricians  and  plebeians,  show  a  proper 
degree  of  spirit  for  the  accomplishment  of  what  they  had 
long  wished  for,  and  what  the  laws  had  put  in  their  power. 
The  commons,  therefore,  considered  this  as  an  important 
victory,  and  estimated  the  queestorsbip  in  its  present  state, 
not  according  to  the  intrinsic  value  of  the  office  ,  itself,  but  as 
it  appeared  to  lay  open  to  new  men  an  access  to  the  consul¬ 
ship  and  the  honours  of  a  triumph.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
patricians  expressed  great  indignation  at  the  prospect  of  the 
posts  of  honour  not  only  b^eing  shared  with  otiiers,  but  per¬ 
ils  lost  to  themsdves,  affirnung,  that  “  if  things  were  to  re¬ 
main  ip  that  state,  it  would  be  fpUy  to  educate  children,  who, 
being  excluded  from  the .  station  of  their  ancestors,  smd  see¬ 
ing  such  in  possession  pf  their  right/ul  honours,  would  be 
left  without  , command  or  power,  in  the  character  of  Ssdii  or 
Flamens,  with  no  other  emplp3nii|^nt  than  that  of  offering  sa- 
criflcea  fot  the  people.’’  The  mmds  of  both  parties  became 

mo  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  $4^ 
Uglily  mitatcd^  wMie  the  e^tmncms  mw 
id  havhig  aeqaifed  leadei^  of  Ae  popi^r 
mmt  distktgoMi|d  I'eputation.  The  seeing  Aat  evtaty 
election  wherein  the  comnscms  ^fead  of  choosing  out  of 
both  partiesj  would  provm  in  the  ksue  like  that  of  the  qmes- 
tors,  were  earnest  hat  the  naming  of  consnk,  which  was  not 
yet  laid  cqien  to  them.  On  the  other  hand«  the  Icilii  insisted 
that  military  tribunes  should  be  elected,  and  some  posts  of 
dignt^  be  at  length  imparted  to  the  commons. 
LV.  The  ccmsuls  hsnl  no  business  on  their  hands,  by  an 
opposidon  to  which  they  eoidd  extern  a  coespliance  with 
their  wishes:  when  at  a  mom^  smpraai^y  seasonable  for 
their  purpose,  news  was  brought  th®  Volscians  and 
iEquans  had  marched  beyond  their  ovm  frontiers,  to  ravage 
the  lands  of  the  Latines  wsA  Hemicians.  Bat  when  the  con¬ 
suls  began  to  levy  troops,  the  tt^unes  exerted  themselves 
strenuously  to  hinder  k;  i^rmicg  that  this  was  an  advanta¬ 
geous  opportunity,  presented  by  fcatune  to  them  and  to  the  com¬ 
mons.  There  were  three  of  them  all  men  of  die  most  active  ta¬ 
lents,  and  consider^le  families  among  die  plebeians.  Two  of 
these  chose  each  a  consul,  whose  motions  he  was  to  watch  with 
unremitting  assiduity,  the  third  had  the  charge  assigned  him, 
of  sometimes  restraining,  s^eumes  spiriting  up  the  com¬ 
mons  by  his  harangues.  Thus  the  ccmsuls  could  not  accom¬ 
plish  the  levy,  nor  the  tribunes  tlm  election  which  they  had 
planned*  After  some  tmae  expnesacs  arrived  di^ 
^qttans  had  attacked  the  citadd  of  tkrv^ta,  while  die 
dters  the  ^iTisK>n  wi^e  i^ragg^g  abroad  in  seaidt  cf 
plunder,  and  had  put  todemhthe  frw  who  wexe  le&tog^^i^ 
it;  iim  several  were  slain  as^dsey  ha^ly  retuiagmig  to 
dl^det;  with  kho  wete  dis|N:r^sd  thrcmi^  lhe 
This  fncident,  wMe  it  pngcfcfeed  dm 
fiwcei^  fnroject  of  the  txiUmnitSi,  For,  tho^  48aiiMiil€d 
by  er€ty  argument  to  md^me  ’  dbem  to  desist,  at  least  m  the 
present  sHuadon  of  affiurs,  frmh  obstructing  die  fmitess  of 

B.  C.  406.] 

BOOK  IV. 

401 

tht  war,  they  would  not  give  way  either  to  the  storm  which 
threatened  the  public,  or  to  the  torrent  of  displeasure  to 
which  themselves  were  exposed;  and,  at  length,  carried  their 
point,  that  the  senate  should  pass  a  decree  for  the  election  of 
military  tribunes.  This,  however,  was  accompanied  with  an 
express  stipulation,  that  no  person  should  be  admitted  as  a 
candidate  who  was  in  that  year  a  plebeian  tribune;  and  that 
no  plebeian  tribune  should  be  rechosen  for  the  year  follow¬ 
ing:  the  senate  in  this,  pointing  undoubtedly  at  the  Icilii, 
whotn  they  suspected  of  aiming  at  the  consular  tribuneship. 
After  this,  the  levy  and  other  preparations  for  war,  went  for¬ 
ward,  with  the  general  concurrence  of  all  ranks.  The  di¬ 
versity  of  the  accounts  given  by  writers  renders  it  uncer¬ 
tain,  whether  the  two  consuls  marched  to  the  citadel  of  Car- 
venta,  or  whether  one  remained  at  home  to  hold  the  elec¬ 
tions,  but  those  facts  in  which  they  do  not  disagree,  we  may 
receive  as  certain;  that,  after  having  carried  on  the  attack 
for  a  long  time,  without  effect,  the  army  retired  from  that 
citadel;  that,  by  the  same  army,  Verrugo,  in  the  country  of 
the  Volscians,  was  retaken,  great  devastation  made,  and  im¬ 
mense  booty  captured,  in  the  territories  both  of  the  iEquans 
and  Volscians. 
LVI.  At  Rome,  as  the  commons  gained  the  vie-  y 
tory,  so  far  as  to  procure  the  kind  of  election  which  B.  C.  405. 
they  preferred,  so  in  the  issue  of  it,  the  patricians  were  vic¬ 
torious:  for,  contrary  to  the  expectation  of  all,  three  patricians 
were  chosen  military  tribunes  with  consular  power;  Caius 
Julius  lulus,  Publius  Cornelius  Cossus,  and  Caius  Servilius 
Ahala.  It  is  said  that  an  artifice  was  practised  by  the  pa¬ 
tricians  on  the  occasion,  and  the  Icilii  charged  them  with  it 
at  the  time;  that  by  intermixing  a  number  of  unworthy  can¬ 
didates,  with  the  deserving,  they  turned  away  the  people’s 
thoughts  from  the  plebeian  candidates.  The  disgust  was  ex¬ 
cited  by  the  remarkable  meanness  of  some  of  the  number. 
Information  was  now  received  that  the  Volscians  and 
voi..  I. — 3  F 

4m 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  347. 
iEqaans,  s^aated  by  hopes,  from  having  been  able  to  keep 
possession  of  the  citadel  of  Carventa,  or  by  anger,  for  the 
loss  of  the  garrison  of  Verrugo,  had  in  conjunction  com¬ 
menced  hostilities  with  the  utmost  force  which  they  could 
muster,  and  that  the  Antians  were  the  chief  promoters  of 
this  measure;  for  that  their  ambassadors  had  gone  about 
among  both  those  states,  upbraiding  their  spiritless  conduct, 
saying  that  they  had  the  year  before  lain  hid  behind  walls, 
and  suffered  the  Romans  to  carry  their  depredations  through 
every  part  of  the  country,  and  the  garrison  of  Verrugo  to 
be  overpowered.  That  now,  armed  troops,  as  well  as  co¬ 
lonies,  were  sent  into  their  territories;  and  that  the  Romans 
not  only  kept  possession  of  their  property,  and  distributed 
it  among  themselves,  but  even  made  presents  of  a  part  of  it 
to  the  Hernicians  of  Terentinum,  a  district  of  which  they 
had  been  stripped.  People’s  minds  being  inflamed  by  these 
representations  of  the  envoys,  great  numbers  of  the  young 
men  were  enlisted.  Thus  the  youth  of  all  the  several  na¬ 
tions  were  drawn  together  to  Antiura,  and  there  pitching 
their  camp,  they  waited  the  attack.  These  violent  proceed¬ 
ings  being  reported  at  Rome,  and  exaggerated  beyond  the 
truth,  the  senate  instantly  ordered  a  dictator  to  be  nomina¬ 
ted,  their  ultimate  resource  in  all  perilous  conjunctures.  We 
are  told  that  this  measure  gave  great  offence  to  Julius  and 
Cornelius,  and  was  not  accomplished  without  much  ill  tem¬ 
per  in  others.  The  principal  patricians,  after  many  fruitless 
complaints  against  the  military  tribunes,  for  refusing  to  be 
directed  by  the  senate,  at  last  went  so  far  as  to  appeal  to  the 
tribunes  of  the  commons,  representing,  that  compulsory 
measures  had  been  used  by  that  body  even  to  consuls  in  a 
similar  case.  The  plebeian  tribunes,  overjoyed  at  this  dis¬ 
sension  among  the  patricians,  made  answer,  that  ‘‘  there  was 
no  support  to  be  expected  from  persons  who  were  not  ac¬ 
counted  in  the  number  of  citizens,  and  scarcely  of  the  hu¬ 
man  race.  If  at  any  time  the  posts  of  honour  should  cease 

BOOK  IV. 

403 

B,  C*  405.1| 
to  be  confined  to  one  party,  and  the  people  should  be  admit¬ 
ted  to  a  share  in  the  administralkm  of  government,  they 
would  then  exert  their  endeavours  to  prevent  the  decrees  of 
the  senate  being  invalidated  by  any  arrogance  of  magistrates. 
Until  then,  the  patricians,  who  were  under  no  restraint  in 
respect  to  the  laws,  might  by  themselves  manage  the  tribu- 
nitian  office  along  with  the  rest.” 
LVIL  This  connection,  at  a  most  unseasonable  time, 
and  when  they  had  on  their  hands  a  war  of  such  importance, 
occupied  every  one’s  thoughts;  until  at  length,  after  Julius 
and  Cornelius  had  for  a  long  time  descanted,  by  turns,  on  the 
injustice  done  them  in  snatching  out  of  their  hands  the  hon¬ 
ourable  employment  entrusted  to  them  by  the  people,  (they 
being  sufficiently  qualified  to  conduct  the  war,J  Servilius 
Ahala,  one  of  the  military  tribunes,  said,  that  ‘‘  he  had  kept 
silence  so  long,  not  because  he  was  in  doubt  as  to  the  part  he 
ought  to  take;  for  what  good  citizen  would  consider  his  own 
emolument,  rather  than  that  of  the  public?  but  because  he 
wished  that  his  colleagues  would,  of  their  own  accord,  yield 
to  the  authority  of  the  senate,  rather  than  let  supplications  be 
made  to  the  college  of  tribunes,  for  support  against  them. 
That  notwithstanding  what  had  passed,  if  the  situations  of 
affairs  would  allow  it,  he  would  still  give  them  time  to  recede 
from  an  opinion,  too  obstinately  maintained.  But  as  the  exi¬ 
gences  of  war  would  not  wait  on  the  counsels  of  men,  he 
would  prefer  the  interest  of  the  commonwealth  to  the  regard 
of  his  associates;  and  if  the  senate  continued  in  the  same 
sentiments,  he  would,  on  the  following  night,  nominate  a 
dictator;  and  if  any  person  protested  against  the  senate  pass¬ 
ing  a  decree,  he  would  consider  a  vote  of  that  body  as  suffi¬ 
cient  authority.”*  By  this  conduct,  having,  deservedly,  ob¬ 
tained  the  praises  and  countenance  of  all,  after  he  had  nomi- 
*  Many  circumstances  might  prevent  the  senate^s  passing  a  decree;  in 
such  cases  Uie  opinion  of  the  majority  was  lecorded,  and  was  called 
hiS  auctoritwf.  It  might  be  referred  to  the  people  for  confirmation. 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  348. 

4U4 
nated  Publius  Cornelius  dictator^  he  was  himself  appointed 
by  him  master  of  the  horse,  and  afforded  an  example  to  such 
as  observed  his  case,  and  that  of  his  colleagues,  that  honours 
and  public  favour  sometimes  offer  themselves  the  more  readi¬ 
ly  to  those  who  show  no  ambition  for  them*  The  war  pro¬ 
duced  no  memorable  event.  In  one  battle,  and  that  gained 
without  difficulty,  the  enemy  were  vanquished  at  Antium. 
The  victorious  army  laid  the  lands  of  the  Volscians  entirely 
waste.  Their  fort,  at  the  lake  Fucinus,  was  taken  by  storm, and 
in  it  three  thousand  men  made  prisoners;  the  rest  of  the  Vol¬ 
scians  were  driven  into  the  towns,  without  making  any  attempt 
to  defend  the  country.  The  dictator  having  conducted  the  war 
in  such  a  manner  as  showed  only  that  he  was  not  negligent 
of  fortune’s  favours,  returned  to  the  city  with  a  greater  share 
of  success  than  of  glory,  and  resigned  his  office.  The  mi¬ 
litary  tribunes,  without  making  any  mention  of  an  election 
of  consuls,  I  suppose  through  pique  for  the  appointment  of 
a  dictator,  issued  a  proclamation  for  the  choosing  of  mili¬ 
tary  tribunes.  The  perplexity  of  the^patricians  became  now 
greater  than  ever,  when  they  saw  their  cause  betrayed  by 
men  of  their  own  order.  In  like  manner,  therefore,  as  they 
had  done  the  year  before,  they  set  up  as  candidates  the  most 
unworthy  of  the  plebeians,  thus  creating  a  disgust  against 
all  of  these,  even  the  deserving;  and  then,  by  engaging 
those  patricians  who  were  most  eminently  distinguished 
by  the  splendor  of  their  character,  and  by  their  interest,  to 
stand  forth  as  candidates,  they  secured  every  one  of  the 
places  according  to  their  wish.  There  were  four  military 
tribunes  elected,  all  of  whom  had  already  served,  Lucius 
Y  R  348  Medullinus,  Caius  Valerius  Potitus,  Nu- 
B.  C.  404.  merius  Fabius  Vibulanus,  and  Caius  Servilius 
Ahala:  the  last  being  continued  in  office,  by  re-election,  as 
well  on  account  of  his  other  deserts,  as  in  consequence  of 
the  popularity  which  he  had  recently  acquired  by  his  singular 
moderation. 
LVIII.  In  that  year,  the  term  of  the  truce  with  the  Vei- 

BOOK  IV. 

405 

B.  C.404.] 
entian  nation  being  expired,  ambassadors  and  heralds  wer<r 
employed  to  make  a  demand  of  satisfaction  for  injuries,  who, 
on  coming  to  the  frontiers,  were  met  by  an  embassy  from 
the  Veicntiaiis.  These  requested  that  the  others  would  not 
proceed  to  Veil,  until  they  should  first  have  access  to  the 
Roman  senate.  From  the  senate  they  obtained,  that,  in  con¬ 
sideration  of  the  Veientians  being  distressed  by  intestine 
dissensions,  satisfaction  should  not  be  demanded:  so  far  were 
they  from  seeking,  in  the  troubles  of  others,  an  occasion  of 
advancing  their  own  interests.  In  another  quarter,  and  in 
the  country  of  the  Volscians,  a  disaster  was  felt  in  the  gar¬ 
rison  at  Verrugo  being  lost.  On  which  occasion  so  much 
depended  on  time,  that  though  the  troops  besieged  there  by 
the  Volscians  had  requested  assistance,  and  might  have  been 
succoured,  if  expedition  had  been  used,  the  army  sent  to 
their  relief,  came  only  in  time  to  destroy  the  enemy,  who, 
just  after  puUliig  the  garrison  to  the  sword,  were  dispersed, 
in  search  of  plunder.  This  diiatoriness  was  not  to  be  impu* 
ted  to  the  tribunes,  so  much  as  to  the  senate;  who,  because 
they  were  told  that  a  very  vigorous  resistance  was  made, 
never  considered,  that  there  are  certain  limits  to  human 
strength,  beyond  which  no  degree  of  bravery  can  proceed. 
These  very  gallant  soldiers,  however  were  not  without  re¬ 
venge,  both  before  and  after  their  death.  In  the  following 
year,  Publius  and  Cneius  Cornelius  Cossus,  Name-  y  343 
rius  Fabius  Amhustus,  and  Lucius  Valerius  Potitus  C.  403. 
being  military  tribunes  with  consular  power,  war  was  com¬ 
menced  against  the  Veientians,  in  resentment  of  an  insolent 
answer  of  their  senate;  who,  when  the  ambassadors  demand¬ 
ed  satisfaction,  ordered  them  to  be  told,  that  if  they  did 
not  speedily  quit  the  city,  they  would  give  them  the  satisfac¬ 
tion  which  Lars  Tolumnius  had  given.  The  Roman  senate 
being  highly  offended  at  this,  decreed,  that  the  military  tri¬ 
bunes  should,  as  early  as  possible,  propose  to  the  people  the 
proclaiming  war  against  the  Veientians.  As  soon  as  that 

406 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  {Y.  R-  349. 
proposal  was  made  public,  the  youug  men  openly  expressed 
their  discontent.  ‘‘  The  war  with  the  Volscians,”  they  said, 
“  was  not  yet  at  an  end;  it  was  not  loi^  since  two  gariistms 
were  utterly  destroyed,  and  one  of  the  forts  was  with 
difficulty  retained.  Not  a  year  passed,  in  which  they  were 
not  obliged  to  meet  an  enemy  in  the  field,  and,  as  if  these 
fatigues  were  thought  too  trifling,  a  new  war  was  now  set  on 
foot  against  a  neighbouring  and  most  powerful  nation,  who 
would  soon  rouse  all  Etruria  to  arms.*’  These  discontents, 
first  suggested  by  themselves,  were  farther  aggravated  by 
the  plebeian  tribunes,  who  affirmed,  that  “  the  war  of  great¬ 
est  moment  subsisting,  was  that  between  the  patricians  and 
plebeians.  That  the  latter  were  designedly  harassed  by  mi- 
litary  service,  and  exposed  to  the  destructive  weapons  of  en¬ 
emies.  They  were  kept  at  a  distance  from  the  city,  and  in 
a  state  of  banishment,  lest,  should  they  enjoy  rest  at  home, 
they  might  turn  their  thoughts  towards  liberty,  and  the  es¬ 
tablishment  of  colonies,  and  form  plans,  either  for  obtaining 
possession  of  the  public  lands,  or  asserting  their  right  of  giv¬ 
ing  their  suflfrages  with  freedom.”  Then  taking  hold  of  the 
veterans,  they  recounted  the  years  which  each  of  them  had 
served,  their  wounds  and  scars,  asking,  “  where  was  there 
room  on  their  bodies  to  receive  new  wounds?  what  quantity 
of  blood  had  they  remaining  which  could  be  shed  for  the 
commonwealth?”  As  they  had  by  these  insinuations  and  re¬ 
marks,  thrown  out  in  public  assemblies,  rendered  the  com¬ 
mons  averse  from  the  war,  the  determination  on  Ae  propo¬ 
sition  was  adjourned,  because  it  was  manifest,  that,  if  it 
came  before  them,  during  the  present  ill-humour  it  wouM 
certainly  be  rejected. 
LIX.  It  was  resolved,  that,  in  the  mean  time,  the  milita¬ 
ry  tribunes  should  lead  an  army  into  the  territories  of  the 
Volscians.  Cneius  Cornelius  alone  was  left  at  Rome.  The 
three  tribunes,  finding  that  the  Volscians  had  not  any  where 
formed  a  camp,  and  that  they  were  resolved  not  to  hazard  a 

B.  C.  403.] 

BOOK  IV. 

407 

battle,  divided  their  forces  itjto  three  parts,  and  set  out  to¬ 
wards  different  quarters  to  waste  the  enemy’s  countr}^  Va¬ 
lerius  directed  his  march  to  Antium,  Cornelius  to  Ece- 
tra,  and  wherever  they  came,  they  made  extensive  depre¬ 
dations  both  on  the  lands  and  houses,  in  order  to  se¬ 
parate  the  troops  of  the  Volscians.  Fabius  marched,  with¬ 
out  plundering,  to  attack  Anxur,  which  was  the  principal 
object  in  view.  Anxur  is  the  city  which  we  now  call  Tar- 
racins^,  situated  on  a  declivity  adjoining  a  morass.  On  this 
side,  Fabius  made  a  feint  of  attacking  it,  but  sent  round  four 
cohorts  under  Caius  Servilius  Abala,  who,  having  seized  on 
an  eminence  which  commands  the  city,  assailed  the  walls, 
with  great  shouting  and  tumult,  and  where  there  was  no 
guard  to  defend  them.  Those,  who  were  employed  in  pro¬ 
tecting  the  lower  part  of  the  city  against  Fabius,  being  stun¬ 
ned  and  in  amazement  at  this  tumult,  gave  him  an  opportu¬ 
nity  of  applying  the  scaling  ladders.  Every  place  was  quick¬ 
ly  filled  with  the  Romans,  and  a  dreadful  slaughter  continu¬ 
ed  a  long  time  without  distinction  of  those  who  fled  and 
those  who  made  resistance,  of  the  armed  or  unarmed.  The 
vanquished  therefore  were  under  a  necessity  of  fighting, 
there  being  no  hope  for  such  as  retired,  until  an  order  was 
suddenly  proclaimed,  that  no  one  should  be  injured  except 
those  who  were  in  arms,  which  induced  ail  the  surviving 
multitude  instantly  to  surrender.  Of  these,  there  were  taken 
alive,  to  the  number  of  two  thousand  five  hundred.  Fabius 
would  not  suffer  his  soldiers  to  meddle  with  the  spoil,  until 
his  colleagues  arrived,  saying,  that  those  armies  had  also  a 
part  in  the  taking  of  Anxur,  who  bad  diverted  the  other 
troops  of  the  V olscians  from  the  defence  of  the  place.  On 
their  arrival  the  three  armies  plundered  the  city,  which  a 
long  course  of  prosperity  had  filled  with  opulence;  and  this 
liberality  of  the  commanders  first  began  to  reconcile  the  com¬ 
mons  to  the  patricians:  which  end  was  soon  after  farther  pro¬ 
moted;  for  the  principal  nobility,  with  a  generosity  towards 

408 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  349. 

the  multitude  the  most  seasonable  that  ever  was  shown,  pro¬ 
cured  a  decree  of  the  senate,  and  before  such  a  scheme 
could  be  mentioned  by  the  tribunes  or  commons,  that  the 
soldiers  should  receive  pay  out  of  the  public  treasury,* 
whereas  hitherto  every  one  had  served  at  his  own  expense. 
LX.  No  measure,  we  are  told,  was  ever  received  by  the 
commons  with  such  transports  of  joy;  they  ran  in  crowds  to 
the  senate-house,  caught  the  hands  of  the  senators  as  they 
came  out,  declaring  that  they  were  fathers  in  reality,  and 
acknowledging  that  their  conduct  had  been  such,  that  every 
man,  whilst  he  had  any  share  of  strength  remaining,  would 
risk  his  person,  and  property,  in  the  cause  of  a  country  so 
liberal  to  its  citizens.  Whilst  they  were  delighted  with  the 
comfortable  prospect  of  their  private  substance  at  all  events 
resting  unimpaired,  during  such  time  as  they  should  be  con¬ 
signed  over  to  the  commonwealth,  and  employed  in  its  ser¬ 
vice,  their  joy  received  a  manifold  addition,  and  their  grati¬ 
tude  was  raised  to  a  higher  pitch,  from  the  consideration 
that  this  had  been  a  voluntary  grant,  having  never  been 
agitated  by  the  tribunes,  nor  attempted  to  be  gaine^J  by  any 
requisitions  of  their  own.  The  plebeian  tribunes,  alone, 
partook  not  of  the  general  satisfaction  and  harmony  diffused 
through  every  rank,  but  averred,  that  this  would  not  prove 
such  matter  of  joy  nor  so  honourable  to  tJhe  patricians,  as 
they  themselves  imagined.  That  the  plan ''appeared  better 
on  the  first  view,  than  it  would  prove  on  experience.  For 
how  could  that  money  be  procured  unless  by  imposing  a  tax 
on  the  people?  They  were  generous  to  some,  therefore,  at 
others’  expense.  Besides,  even  though  this  should  be  borne, 
those  who  had  served  out  their  time  in  the  army  would 
never  endure,  that  their  successors  should  be  retained  on 
*  The  foot  soldiers  only,  The  horse  did  not  receive  pay  until  three  years 
after.  The  pay  of  a  foot  soldier,  in  the  time  of  the  second  Punick  war. 
was  three  asses;  too  small,  if  they  had  not  received  an  allowance  of  corn 
and  sometimes  of  clothes. 

BOOK  IV. 

409 

B.  C.4O30 
better  terms  thsm  they  themselves  had  been;  and  that  they 
diould  bear  the  expense  first  of  their  own  service  and  dien 
of  that  of  others.”  These  arguments  had  an  effect  on  great 
numbers  of  the  commons.  At  last,  on  the  publication  of  the 
decree  for  levying  the  tax,  the  tribunes  went  so  far,  as,  on 
their  part,  to  give  public  notice,  that  they  would  give  pro¬ 
tection  to  any  person  who  should  refuse  his  proportion,  of 
the  tax  for  payment  to  the  soldiers.  The  patricians  persis¬ 
ted  in  support  of  a  matter  so  happily  begun.  They  first  of 
all  paid  in  their  own  ass^essment;  and  there  being  no  silver 
coined  at  that  time,  some  of  them  conveying  their  weighed 
brass  to  the  treasury  in  wagons,  gave  a  pompous  appearance 
to  their  payments.  This  being  done  by  the  senate  with  the 
strictest  punctuality,  and  according  to  their  rated  properties, 
the  principal  plebeians,  connected  in  friendship  with  the 
nobility,  in  pursuance  of  a  plan  laid  down,  began  to  pay;  and, 
when  the  populace  saw  these  highly  commended  by  the 
patricians,  and  also  respected  as  good  citizens  by  those  of 
military  age,  scorning  the  support  of  the  tribunes,  they 
began  at  once  to  vie  with  each  other  in  paying  the  tax.  The 
law  being  then  passed,  for  declaring  war  against  the  Veien- 
tians,  a  numerous  army,  composed  chiefly  of  volunteers, 
followed  the  new  military  tribunes,  with  consular  power,  to 
Veii. 
LXI.  These  trfounes  were  Titus  Quintius  Capi-  y.  350 
tolinus,  Publius  Quintius  Cincinnatus,  Caius  Julius  B-C.402. 
lulus  a  second  time,  Aulus  Manlius,  Lucius  Furius  Medul- 
linus  a  second  time,  and  Manias  JSmilius  Mamercinus.  By 
these  Veii  was  first  invested.  A  little  before  this  siege 
began,  a  full  meeting  of  the  Etrurians  being  held  at  the 
temple  of  Voltumna,  the  question  whether  the  Veientians 
should  be  supported  by  the  joint  concurrence  of  the  whole 
confederacy,  was  left  undecided.  During  the  following 
year  the  siege  was  prosecuted  with  less  vigour,  because 
some  of  the  tribunes  and  their  troops  were  called  away  to 
VOL.  I. — 3  G 

410 

HISTORY  OR  ROME.  [Y.  R.  S51. 
T.  It.  361.  oppose  the  Volscians.  The  military  tribunes^  urith 
B.  C.  401.  consular  power,  of  this  year  were,,Caiu6  Valerim 
Potitus  a  third  time.  Manias  Sergius  Fidenas,  Publius  Cor¬ 
nelius  Malughiensis,  Cneius  Cornelius  Cossus,  Caeso  Fabius 
Ambustus,  Spurius  Nautius  Rutilus,  a  second  time.  A  pitched 
bank  was  fought  with  the  Volscians, between  Ferentinum  and 
Ecetra,  in  which  the  Romans  had  the  advantage.  Siege 
was  then  laid  by  the  tribunes  to  Artena,  a  town  of  the 
Volscians.  After  some  time,  the  enemy  having  attempted 
a  sally,  and  being  driven  back  into  the  town,  the  besiegers 
got  an  opportunity  of  forcing  their  way  in,  and  made  them¬ 
selves  masters  of  every  place,  except  the  citadel.  This  for¬ 
tress  was  naturally  very  strong,  and  a  body  of  armed  men 
had  thrown  themselves  into  it.  Under  its  wail  great  num¬ 
bers  were  slain  and  made  prisoners.  The  citadel  was  then 
besieged,  but  it  neither  could  be  taken  by  storm,  because  it 
had  a  garrison  sufficient  for  the  size  of  the  place,  nor  did  it 
afford  any  hope  of  a  surrender,  because,  before  the  city  was 
taken,  all  the  public  stores  of  corn  had  been  conveyed  thither, 
so  that  the  Romans  would  have  grown  weary  of  the  attempt, 
and  retired,  had  not  the  fortress  been  betrayed  to  them  by 
a  slave.  He  gave  admittance,  through  a  place  of  difficult 
access,  to  some  soldiers,  who  made  themselves  masters  of 
it;  and  while  they  were  employed  in  killing  the  guards,  the 
rest  of  the  multitude,  losing  all  courage  at  the  sight  of  this 
unexpected  attack,  laid  down  their  arms.  After  demolish¬ 
ing  both  the  citadel  and  city  of  Artena,  the  legions  were  led 
back  from  the  country  of  the  Volscians,  and  the  whole  pow¬ 
er  of  Rome  turned  against  Veit.  The  traitor  received  as  a 
reward,  besides  his  liberty,  the  property  of  two  families,  and 
was  called  Servius  Romanus.  Some  are  of  opinion,  that 
Artena  belonged  to  the  Veientians,  not  to  the  Volscians;  a 
mistake  occasioned  by  there  having  been  once  a  town  of 

BOOK  IV, 

411 

B.  C  401.] 
that  name,  between  C«ere  and  VeiL  that  town  the 
Roman  kings  demolished;  it  was  the  property  of  the  Can- 
tians,  not  of  the  Veientians;  this  other  of  the  same  name, 
the  destruction  of  which  we  Have  related,  was  in  ^e  country 
of  the  Volscians. 

THE 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

BOOK  V. 
Od  occasion  of  the  siege  ofVeii,  winter  huts  erected  for  the  troops;  on  ac¬ 
count  of  which,  being  a  new  plan,  the  tribunes  of  the  people  endeavour 
to  excite  discontent,  complaining  that  no  repose  is  given  to  the  sol¬ 
diers,  even  in  winter.  The  cavalry,  for  the  first  time,  serve  on  horses 
of  their  own.  Veii,  after  a  siege  of  ten  years,  taken  by  Furius  Camil- 
lus,  dictator.  In  the  character  of  military  tribunes,  he  lays  seige  to 
Falisci;  sends  back  the  children  of  the  enemy,  who  ivere  betrayed  into 
his  hands;  being  charged  with  criminal  conduct,  goes  into  exile.  The 
Senonian  Gauls  lay  siege  to  Clusium.  Koraaa  ambassadors  sent  to 
mediate  peace,  take  part  with  the  Clusians;  provoked  at  which,  the 
Gauls  march  directly  against  Rome,  and,  after  routing  the  Romans  at 
the  Allia,  take  possession  of  the  whole  city,  except  the  Capitol.  Hav¬ 
ing  scaled  the  Capitol  in  the  night,  they  are  discovered  by  the  cackling 
of  geese,  and  repulsed,  principally  by  the  exertions  of  Marcus  Manlius. 
The  Romans,  compelled  by  famine,  agree  to  ransom  themselves.  W  bile 
they  are  weighing  the  gold,  Camillas  arrives  with  an  array,  beats  off  the 
Gauls,  and  destroys  their  army.  He  prevents  the  design  of  moving  to 
Veii. 
y  R  S52  Peace  now  subsisted  in  all  other  quarters; 
&  C.  400.  but  the  Romans  and  Veientians  were  still  in  arms, 
and  displayed  such  violent  rancour  and  animosity  as  made  it 
evident  that  utter  destruction  would  be  the  fate  of  the  party 
vanquished.  The  election  of  magistrates  in  the  two  states 
was  conducted  in  Very  different  methods.  The  Romans 

BOOK  V. 

4^^ 
augmented  the  number  of  their  military  tribunes  with  con¬ 
sular  power,  electing  eight,  a  number  greater  than  had  hither¬ 
to  been  known*  These  were  Manius  iEmilius  Mamercinus 
a  second  time,  Lucius  Valerius  Potitus  a  third  time,  Appius 
Claudius  Crassus,  Marcus  Quintilius  Varus,  Lucius  Julius 
lulus,  M^cus  Postumius,  Marcus  Furius  Camillus,  Marcus 
Postumius  Aibinus.  The  Veientians,  on  the  other  hand, 
disgusted  at  the  annual  intrigues  of  candidates,  which  were 
sometimes  the  cause  of  violent  dissensions,  elected  a  king* 
This  step  gave  great  offence  to  all  the  states  of  Etruria,  as 
besides  their  abhorrence  of  kingly  government,  they  held 
the  person  elected  in  no  less  detestation.  He,  out  of  the 
insolence  of  wealth,  and  the  arrogance  of  his  temper,  had 
before  this  rendered  himself  obnoxious  to  the  nation,  by  vio¬ 
lently  breaking  off  the  performance  of  certain  annual  games, 
the  omission  of  which  was  deemed  an  impiety;  for  instigated 
by  pique,  because  another  candidate  for  the  office  of  priest 
had  been  preferred  before  him,  by  the  suffrages  of  the  twelve 
states,  in  the  middle  of  the  solemnity,  he  abruptly  carried 
away  the  performers,  of  whom  a  great  part  were  his  slaves. 
That  nation,  therefore  devoted  beyond  all  others  to  religious 
performances,  the  more  so,  because  they  excelled  in  the  con¬ 
duct  of  them,  passed  a  decree,  by  which  all  aid  was  refused 
to  the  Veientians,  so  long  as  they  should  continue  under  the 
government  of  a  king.  At  Veii,  all  mention  of  this  decree 
was  suppressed  by  people’s  dread  of  the  king,  who  would 
have  treated  any  person,  reported  to  have  mentioned  such  a 
matter,  as  a  leader  of  sedition,  not  as  the  author  of  an  idle  ru¬ 
mour.  Although  the  Romans  received  intelligence  that  all 
was  quiet  in  Etruria,  yet  being  also  informed  that  this  busi¬ 
ness  was  agitated  in  every  one  of  their  meetings,  they  form¬ 
ed  and  strengthened  their  fortifications  in  such  a  manner  as 
gave  them  security  on  both  sides.  Some  they  raised  on  the 
part  next  the  town,  against  the  irruptions  of  the  townsmen; 

414  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  352. 
other$f  the  side  opposite  Etruria,  so  as  to  guard  againsliL  any 
auxiliaries  which  might  come  from  thence. 
II.  The  Roman  generals,  conceiving  greater  hopes  fmm 
a  blockade,  than  from  an  assault,  resolved  to  cany  on  their 
operations  during  the  whole  winter;  and  accordingly  they 
began  to  erect  huts,  a  proceeding  quite  new  to  Roman  sol¬ 
diers-  As  soon  as  an  account  of  this  was  brought  to  the 
plebeian  tribunes,  who  for  a  long  time  past  found  no  pretext 
for  starting  new  disturbances,  they  flew  out  to  meet  the  peo¬ 
ple  in  assembly,  and  laboured  to  inflame  the  minds  of  the 
commons,  asserting,  that  this  was  the  purpose  for  which 
pay  for  the  soldiery  had  been  established;  nor  had  they  been 
so  blind,  as  not  to  see,  that  such  a  present  from  their  ene¬ 
mies  was  tainted  with  poison.  That  the  liberty  of  the  com¬ 
mons  had  been  sold;  their  young  men  carried  away  without 
hope  of  return,  exposed  to  the  severity  of  winter,  excluded 
from  their  houses  and  family  affairs.  What  did  they  suppose 
was  the  reason  for  keeping  the  troops  on  duty  without  inter¬ 
mission?  They  would  find  it,  in  fact,  to  be  no  other  than 
the  apprehension,  lest  in  case  of  the  attendance  of  those 
youths,  in  whom  the  whole  strength  of  the  commons  consist¬ 
ed,  some  steps  might  be  taken  towards  promoting  their  in¬ 
terests.  Besides,  the  men  were  more  harassed,  and  sub¬ 
jected  to  greater  hardships  than  the  Veientians.  For  the  latter 
passed  the  winter  under  their  own  roofs,  having  thejr  city 
secured  by  strong  walls,  and  its  natural  situation;  while  the 
Roman  sold  iers,  in  the  midst  of  labour  and  toils,  lay  perish¬ 
ing  in  tents,  overwhelmed  by  snow  and  frost;  never  laying 
their  arms  out  of  their  hands  even  in  that  severe  season, 
which  had  ever  given  a  respite  to  all  wars  either  on  land  or 
sea.  Neither  kings  nor  consuls,  overbearing  as  they  were 
before  the  institution  of  the  tribunitian  office;  nor  the  stem 
government  of  a  dictator;  nor  the  arbitrary  decemvirs;  ever 
imposed  such  a  pain  as  this  of  unremitting  military  service. 
Yet  military  tribunes  assumed  that  degree  of  kingly  power 

BOOK*  V. 

415 

B.  C.  400.3 
over  the  commons  of  Rome.  Whac  would  have  been  the 
behaviour  of  those  men,  in  the  office  of  consul  or  dictator, 
who  have  exhibited  a  picture  of  proconsular  power  in  colours 
of  such  harshness  and  cruelty?  but  this  was  no  worse  than 
what  the  people  deserved.  Among  eight  military  tribunes, 
diey  did  not  give  room  to  one  {debeian.  Till  of  late,  the 
patricians  used  to  find  the  utmost  difficulty  in  filling  up  three 
places;  but,  now  they  march  in  files,  eight  deep,  to  take  pos¬ 
session  of  the  posts  of  government;  and  even  in  such  a  crowd, 
no  plebeian  is  found  intermixed,  who,  if  he  served  no  .other 
purpose,  might  remind  his  colleagues,  that  the  army  was 
composed  not  of  slaves  but  of  freemen;  of  citizens  who  ought 
to  ht  brought  home,  at  least  in  winter,  to  their  habitations^ 
and  the  comforts  of  their  own  roofs,  and  allowed,  at  some 
time  of  the  year,  to  visit  their  parents,  children,  and  wives, 
to  exercise  the  rights  of  Romans,  and  to  take  a  part  in  the 
election  of  magistrates,”  While  they  exclaimed  in  these, 
and  such  like  terms,  they  were  not  unequally  matched  in  an 
opponent,  Appius  Claudius,  who  had  been  left  at  home,  by 
his  colleagues,  for  the  purpose  of  repressing  the  turbulent 
schemes  of  the  tribunes;  a  man  trained,  from  his  youth,  in 
contentions  with  the  plebeians;  who  some  years  before,  had 
recommended,  as  has  been  mentioned,  the  disuniting  the 
power  of  the  tribunes  by  the  protests  of  their  colleagues. 
III.  Endowed  by  nature  with  good  abilities,  and  posses¬ 
sed  also  of  experience,  from  long  practice,  he  spoke  on  this 
occasion  in  the  following  manner:  “  if  it  ever  was  a  matter 
of  doubt,  citizens,  whether  the  motives  which  led  the  ple¬ 
beian  tribunes  to  foment  sedition,  on  every  occasion,  regard¬ 
ed  your  interests  or  their  own,  I  am  confident  that,  in  the 
course  of  this  year,  every  such  doubt  must  have  vanished; 
and  while  I  rejoice  at  your  being  at  length  undeceived  in 
respect  of  a  mistake  of  long  continuance,  I  cannot,  at  the 
same  time,  refrain  from  congratulating  you,  and  on  your  ac¬ 
count,  the  commonwealth,  that  the  delusion  has  been  remov 

416 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  £¥,  R.  S52, 

ed  by  a  train  of  prosperous  events,  rather  than  by  any  other 
means.  Is  there  a  person  living,  who  is  not  convinced  that 
the  plebeian  tribunes  were  never  so  highly  displeased  and 
provoked  by  any  instance  of  the  ill  treatment  felt  by  you,  if 
any  such  ever  really  existed,  as  by  the  generosity  of  the  pa* 
tricians  towards  the  commons,  in  establishing  pay  for  the 
army?  What  other  event  do  ye  think  they  either  dreaded 
then,  with  so  much  anxiety;  or  wish  so  ardently,  at  present 
to  obviate,  as  an  union  between  the  orders,  which  in  their 
opinjon  would  prove  the  subversion  of  the  tribunitian  power? 
Thus,  in  fact,  as  labourers  in  the  field  of  iniquity,  they  are 
at  a  loss  for  employment,  and  even  wish,  that  there  may  be 
always  some  diseased  part  in  the  commonwealth,  for  the 
cure  of  which  they  may  be  employed  by  you.  For  whether, 
tribunes,  are  ye  at  present  defending  the  commons,  or  mak* 
ing  an  attack  on  them?  Whether  are  ye  adversaries  of  the 
soldiery,  or  patrons  of  their  cause.  Perhaps  ye  will  say  thus, 
whatever  the  patricians  do,  we  disapprove,  whether  it  be  fa¬ 
vourable  or  prejudicial  to  the  commons;  and,  just  as  masters 
forbid  their  slaves  to  have  any  dealings  with  those  belonging 
to  others,  and  think  proper  to  cut  off  the  commerce  between 
them  either  of  kindness  or  unkindness,  ye,  in  like  manner, 
interdict  us,  the  patricians,  from  all  intercourse  with  the 
commons;  lest  by  our  civility  and  generosity,  we  should 
challenge  their  regard,  and  they  become  obedient  and  willing 
to  be  directed  as  we  might  see  best.  Would  it  not  much 
better  become  you,  if  ye  had  any  of  the  sentiments,  or  feel¬ 
ings,  I  say  not,  of  fellow  citizens,  but  of  human  beings,  rather 
to  favour,  and,  as  far  as  in  your  power  to  cherish  this  kind¬ 
ness  of  the  patricians,  and  the  tractable  disposition  of  the 
commons?  Were  such  harmony  once  established,  on  a  per¬ 
manent  footing,  who  is  there  that  would  not  venture  to  en¬ 
gage,  that  this  empire  would  soon  arrive  at  a  height  of  gran¬ 
deur  far  beyond  all  the  neighbouring  states? 

B.  C.  400*] 

BOOK  V. 

417 

IV*  I  shall  hereafter  explain  to  you,  not  only  the  expe¬ 
diency,  but  the  necessity,  of  the  plan  adopted  by  my  col¬ 
leagues,  of  not  drawing  off  the  troops  from  Veii,  until  the 
business  shall  be  completed.  At  present  I  choose  to  confine 
my  observations  to  the  state  of  the  soldiery:  and  if  what  I 
shall  say  on  that  head  were  to  be  spoken,  not  only  before  you, 
but  also  in  the  camp,  I  am  persuaded,  that  it  would  appear 
reasonable,  to  the  army  themselves*  Indeed,  if  my  own  un¬ 
derstanding  were  incapable  of  suggesting  any  arguments  on 
the  subject,  I  might  be  well  content  with  those  which  hav^e 
been  thrown  out  in  the  discourses  of  our  adversaries.  They 
lately  insisted  that  pay  ought  not  to  be  given  to  the  sol¬ 
diers,  because  it  had  never  been  given  before.  Upon  what 
grounds,  therefore  can  they  now  be  displeased,  if  persons 
who  have  received  an  addition  of  profit,  beyond  what  was 
usual,  are  enjoined  to  perform  some  additional  labour  pro¬ 
portioned  thereto^  In  no  case  is  labour  to  be  procured  with¬ 
out  eniolument,  nor  emolument,  in  general,  without  the  ex¬ 
pense  of  labour.  Toil  and  pleasure,  in  their  natures  opposite, 
are  yet  linked  together  in  a  kind  of  necessary  connection. 
Formerly,  the  soldier  deemed  it  a  hardship  to  give  up  his 
labour  to  the  commonwealth,  and  to  bear  his  own  expenses. 
At  the  same  time,  he  found  pleasure  in  having  it  in  his 
power,  for  a  part  of  the  year,  to  till  his  own  ground,  and  to 
acquire  the  means  of  supporting  himself  and  his  family,  at 
home,  and  in  the  field.  At  present,  he  has  a  source  of  plea¬ 
sure  in  the  profits  set  apart  for  him  by  the  commonwealth, 
and  he  no  doubt  receives  his  pay  with  joy.  Let  him,  there¬ 
fore,  bear  with  resignation  the  being  detained  a  little  longer 
from  his  home,  and  from  his  family  affairs,  which  are  not 
now  burthened  with  his  expenses.  Suppose  the  common¬ 
wealth  called  him  to  a  statement  of  accounts,  might  it 
not  justly  say,  you  receive  pay  by  the  year,  give  me  your  la¬ 
bour  by  the  year.  Do  you  think  it  just,  that  for  half  a-year’s 
service,  you  should  receive  a  whole  year’s  payr  It  is  dis- 
voL.  I. — 3  H 

418 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  352, 

agreeable  to  me,  Romans,  to  dwell  on  this  topic;  for  this  kind 
of  proceeding  suits  only  those,  who  employ  mercenary  sol¬ 
diers;  but  we  wish  to  deal,  as  with  our  fellow -citizens. 
Either,  then,  the  war  ought  not  to  have  been  undertaken,  or 
it  ought  to  be  conducted  in  a  manner  suited  to  the  dignity 
of  the  Roman  people,  and  to  be  brought  to  a  conclusion  as 
soon  as  possible.  Now  it  will  certainly  be  brought  to  a  con% 
elusion,  if  we  press  forward  the  siege;  if  we  do  not  retire, 
until  we  have  attained  the  object  of  our  hopes,  in  the  cap¬ 
ture  of  Veii.  In  truth,  if  there  were  no  other  motive,  the 
very  discredit  of  acting  otherwise  ought  to  urge  us  to  per¬ 
severance.  In  former  times,  a  city  was  held  besieged  for  ten 
years  on  account  of  one  woman,  by  the  united  force  of  all 
the  Greeks.  At  what  a  distance  from  their  homes!  What 
tracts  of  land  and  sea  lying  between!  Yet  we  grumble  at  the 
fatigue  of  a  siege  of  one  year’s  continuance,  within  less  than 
twenty  miles  of  us,  almost  within  sight  of  our  city;  because, 
I  suppose,  the  ground  of  our  quarrel  is  not  sufficiently  just 
to  stimulate  us  to  persevere.  This  is  the  seventh  time  that 
the  people  have  rebelled.  During  peace,  they  never  were 
faithful  to  their  engagements.  They  have  laid  waste  our  ter¬ 
ritories  a  thousand  times.  They  have  compelled  the  Fidena- 
tians  to  revolt  from  us;  have  put  to  death  our  colonists  in 
that  district;  and  have  been  the  instigators  of  the  impious 
murder  of  our  ambassadors,  in  violation  of  the  laws  of  na¬ 
tions:  they  have  endeavoured,  in  short,  to  stir  up  all  Etruria 
against  us;  and,  at  this  day,  are  busy  in  the  same  attempt; 
and  scarcely  did  they  refrain  from  offering  violence  to  our 
ambassadors  who  demanded  satisfaction.  Against  such 
people,  ought  war  to  be  waged  in  a  remiss  and  dilatory 
manner? 
V.  If  such  just  causes  of  resentment  have  no  weight 
with  us,  have,  I  beseech  you,  the  following  considerations 
none."  The  city  has  been  inclosed  with  immense  works,  by 
which  the  enemy  are  confined  within  their  walls.  Of  late 

B.  C.  400,] 

BOOK  V. 

419 

they  have  not  tilled  their  lands;  and  what  were  cultivated  be* 
fore,  have  been  laid  waste  in  the  course  of  the  war.  If  we 
withdraw  our  army,  who  can  doubt  that  not  only  through 
desire  of  revenge,  but  even  through  the  necessity  imposed 
on  them  of  plundering  the  property  of  others,  since  they  have 
lost  their  own,  they  will  make  an  invasion  on  our  territories? 
By  such  conduct,  therefore,  we  should  not  defer  the  war,  but 
open  it  a  passage  into  our  ovm  frontiers.  What  shall  we  say, 
as  to  the  circumstances  immediately  affecting  the  soldiers, 
of  whose  interests  your  worthy  tribunes  have,  all  on  a  sud¬ 
den,  grown  so  careful,  after  having  attempted  to  wrest  theiV 
pay  out  of  their  hands?  How  do  they  stand?  They  have 
formed  a  rampart  and  a  trench,  both  works  of  immense  la¬ 
bour,  through  so  great  an  extent  of  ground:  they  have  erect¬ 
ed  forts,  at  first  only  a  few,  afterwards  a  great  number,  when 
the  army  was  augmented;  and  they  have  raised  defences,  not 
only  on  the  side  next  to  the  city,  but  also  opposite  Etruria, 
against  any  succours  which  should  arrive  from  thence.  Why 
need  I  mention  towers,  covered  approaches,  and  the  like; 
together  with  all  the  various  machines  used  in  attacking 
towns:  Now,  that  such  a  quantity  of  labour  has  been  ex¬ 
pended,  and  that  they  have  just  come  to  the  finishing  of  the 
work,  do  ye  think  it  would  be  prudent  to  abandon  all  these 
preparations,  that,  the  next  summer,  they  may  be  obliged  to 
undergo  again  the  same  course  of  toil  and  labour  in  forming 
them  a-new?  How  much  less  difficult  would  it  be,  to  sup¬ 
port  the  works  already  formed,  to  press  forward,  to  perse¬ 
vere,  and  thus  at  once  to  be  set  at  rest?  The  business  might 
soon  be  accomplished  b}*^  an  uniform  course  of  exertions;  for 
it  is  certain,  that  by  thus  interrupting  and  suspending  all  pro¬ 
ceedings,  we  absolutely  hinder  the  attainment  of  our  own 
hopes.  What  I  have  said,  regards  only  the  labour,  and  the 
loss  of  time.  But  let  me  ask  farther,  can  we  disregard  the 
danger  which  we  incur  by  procrastination,  while  we  see  so 
frequent  meetings  held  by  the  Etrurians  on  the  subject  of 

420 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  352. 

sending  aid  to  Veil?  As  matters  stand  at  present,  they  are 
displeased  and  angry  with  that  people;  declare  that  they  will 
not  send  them  aid;  and,  for  any  concern  which  they  take  in 
the  affair,  we  are  at  liberty  to  take  Veil,  But  who  can  pro¬ 
mise  that  if  we  suspend  our  operations,  they  will  be  in  the 
same  temper  hereafter?  For,  if  you  allow  any  relaxation, 
more  respectable,  and  more  frequent,  embassies  will  be  des¬ 
patched;  and  the  very  circumstance  which  now  disgusts  the 
Etrurians,  the  establishnient  of  a  king  at  Veil,  may,  in  the 
interim,  be  done  away,  either^ by  the  joint  determination  of 
the  several  members  of  the  state,  for  the  sake  of  recovering 
the  friendship  of  Etruria,  or  by  a  voluntary  act  of  the  king 
himself,  who  may  be  unwilling  to  continue  on  the  throne, 
when  he  finds  it  an  obstruction  to  the  welfare  of  his  coun¬ 
trymen.  See  now  how  many  consequences,  and  how  detri¬ 
mental,  attend  that  method  of  proceeding;  the  loss  of  works 
formed  with  so  great  labour;  the  consequent  devastation  of 
our  frontiers;  and,  instead  of  the  Veientians,  the  whole  na¬ 
tion  of  Etruria  united  against  us.  These,  tribunes,  are  your 
plans,  much  indeed,  of  the  same  kind,  as  if,  in  the  case  of  a 
sick  person,  who  by  submitting  to  a  regimen  with  resolution, 
might  quickly  recover  his  health,  should  render  his  disorder 
tedious,  and  perhaps  incurable,  for  the  sake  of  the  present 
pleasure  which  eating  and  drinking  would  afford  him. 
VI.  I  insist,  that,  though  it  were  of  no  consequence,  with 
respect  to  the  present  war,  yet  it  is  certainly  of  the  utmost 
importance  to  military  discipline,  that  our  soldiers  be  accus¬ 
tomed,  not  only  to  enjoy  the  fruits  of  victory,  but,  should 
the  business  prove  tedious,,  to  endure  the  irksomeness  of 
delay;  to  wait  the  issue  of  their  hopes,  though  tardy;  and,  if 
the  summer  did  not  finish  the  war,  to  try  what  the  win¬ 
ter  might  produce;  and  not,  like  birds  of  spring,  to  look 
about  for  hiding  places  and  shelter,  the  moment  autumn  ar¬ 
rived.  Consider,  I  beseech  you,  how  the  pleasure  of  hunting 
and  eagerness  in  the  chace  hurry  men  through  woods  and 

bookV. 

421 

B.  C.  400.] 
over  mountains,  in  the  midst  of  frost  and  snow;  and  shall 
we  not  bestow  on  the  necessary  exigences  of  war,  the  same 
degree  of  patience,  which  is  usually  called  forth,  even  by 
sport  and  amusement?  Do  we  suppose  the  bodies  of  our  sol¬ 
diers  so  effeminate,  their  minds  so  feeble,  that  they  cannot 
for  one  winter,  endure  the  fatigue  of  a  camp,  and  absence 
from  home?  That,  like  those  who  carry  on  war  by  sea,  they 
must  regulate  their  operations  by  taking  advantage  of  the 
weather,  and  observing  the  seasons  of  the  year?  That  they 
are  incapable  of  enduring  either  heat  or  cold?  I  am  convinced 
they  would  blush,  if  such  things  were  laid  to  their  charge, 
and  would  maintain  that  both  their  minds  and  bodies  were 
possessed  of  manly  firmness:  that  they  were  able  to  perform 
the  duties  of  war,  as  well  in  winter  as  in  summer;  that  they 
never  had  commissioned  the  tribunes  to  patronize  sloth  and 
effeminacy ;  and  remembered  very  well,  that  it  was  not  under 
their  own  roofs,  nor  in  the  shade,  that  their  ancestors  es¬ 
tablished  the  tribuneship.  Such  sentiments  are  worthy  of  the 
valour  of  soldiers,  such  are  worthy  of  the  Roman  name;  not 
to  consider  merely  the  city  of  Veii,  nor  the  present  war,  in 
which  ye  are  employed,  but  to  seek  a  reputation  which  may 
last  during  other  wars,  and  among  all  other  nations.  Do  ye 
look  on  the  difference  between  the  characters  which  will  be 
applied  to  you,  according  to  your  conduct  in  this  affair,  as  a 
matter  of  trivial  importance?  Whether  the  neighbouring  na- 
tions  deem  the  Romans  to  be  soldiers  of  such  a  kind,  that 
any  town  which  can  withstand  their  first  assault,  and  that  of 
very  short  continuance,  has  nothing  farther  to  apprehend; 
or,  whether  our  name  be  terrible  on  this  account,  that  neither 
the  fatigue  of  a  tedious  siege,  nor  the  severity  of  winter,  can 
remove  a  Roman  army  from  a  place,  which  it  has  once  in¬ 
vested;  that  it  knows  no  other  termination  of  war,  than  vic¬ 
tory;  and  that  its  operations  are  not  more  distinguished  by 
briskness  of  action,  than  by  steady  perseverance?  a  qualifica¬ 
tion  which,  as  it  is  highly  requisite  in  every  kind  of  military 

422 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R,  352. 

service,  is  most  particularly  so  in  carrying  on  sieges  oftownsj 
because  these  being  generally,  from  the  nature  of  their  situa¬ 
tion,  and  the  strength  of  their  works,  impregnable  by  assault, 
time  alone  overpowers  and  reduces  them  by  means  of  hun¬ 
ger  and  thirst,  as  it  will  certainly  reduce  Veii,  unless  the 
tribunes  of  the  commons  supply  aid  to  the  enemy,  and  the 
Veientians  find  in  Rome  that  support,  wtiich  they  seek  in 
vain  in  Etruria.  Could  any  other  event  so  fully  accord  to 
the  wishes  of  the  Veientians,  as  that  the  city  of  Rome  first, 
and  then,  by  the  spreading  of  the  contagion,  the  camp,  should 
be  filled  with  sedition?  But  now,  among  the  enemy,  such  a 
temperate  disposition  prevails,  that  neither  through  disgust 
at  the  length  of  the  siege,  nor  even  at  the  establishment  of 
kingly  government,  has  one  change  of  measures  been  attempt¬ 
ed;  nor  has  the  refusal  of  aid,  from  the  Etrurians,  soured 
their  temper;  because,  if  any  one  there  proposes  seditious 
measures,  he  will  be  instantly  put  to  death;  nor  will  any  per¬ 
son  be  suffered  to  utter  such  things,  as  are  uttered  among 
you  without  any  fear  of  punishment.  He  deserves  the  basti¬ 
nade  who  forsakes  his  colours,  or  quits  his  post;  yet  men  are 
heard,  openly  in  public  assembly,  recommending,  not  to  one 
or  two  particular  soldiers,  but  to  whole  armies,  to  leave  their 
colours,  and  desert  their  camp.  With  such  partiality  are  ye 
accustomed  to  listen  to  whatever  a  plebeian  tribune  advances, 
although  it  manifestly  tends  to  the  ruin  of  your  country, 
and  the  dissolution  of  the  commonwealth;  and  so  captivated 
are  ye  by  the  charms  of  that  office,  that,  under  shelter  of  it^ 
ye  suffer  every  kind  of  wickedness  to  lurk  unnoticed.  They 
have  but  one  step  farther  to  take,  to  engage  the  soldiers  in 
camp,  in  the  same  measures  which  they  urge  here  with  so 
much  clamour,  to  debauch  the  troops,  and  allow  them  no 
longer  to  obey  their  officers,  since  liberty,  according  to  the 
present  notion  of  it  at  Rome,  consists  in  casting  off  all  re- 
t  erence  for  the  senate,  for  the  magistrates,  for  the  laws,  for 

B.  C.  400.] 

BOOK  V. 

423 

the  practices  of  our  ancestors,  for  the  institutions  of  our 
fathers,  and  for  military  discipline.” 
VI I .  Appius  was  now  fully  equal  to  a  contention  with  the 
plebeian  tribunes,  even  in  the  assemblies  of  the  people,  when 
a  misfortune  suffered  before  Veii,  by  an  effect  which  no  one 
oould  have  expected,  threw  the  superiority  at  once  on  his 
side,  and  produced  both  an  unusual  harmony  between  the 
orders  of  the  state,  and  a  general  ardour  to  push  on  the  siege 
of  Veii  with  greater  vigour.  For  when  the  trenches  had  been 
advanced  almost  to  the  very  town,  and  the  machines  were 
just  ready  to  be  applied  to  the  walls,  the  troops,  employing 
greater  assiduity  in  forming  their  works  by  day,  than  in 
guarding  them  by  night,  one  of  the  gates  was  thrown  open 
on  a  sudden,  and  a  vast  multitude,  armed  chiefly  with 
torches,  sallied  forth,  and  set  fire  to  them  on  all  sides;  so 
that  the  flames  destroyed  in  an  instant  both  the  rampart  and 
the  machines,  the  construction  of  which  had  cost  so  much 
time;  and  great  numbers  of  men,  attempting,  in  vain,  to  save 
them,  perished  by  fire  and  the  sword.  When  news  of  this  dis¬ 
aster  arrived  at  Rome,  it  diffused  a  general  sadness  through 
all  ranks  of  men,  and  filled  the  senate  also  with  anxiety  and 
strong  apprehensions,  lest  they  should  find  it  impossible  to 
withstand  any  longer  the  machinations  of  the  seditious,  either 
in  the  city  or  the  camp,  and  lest  the  tribunes  of  the  com¬ 
mons  should  insult  over  the  commonwealth,  as  if  it  lay  van¬ 
quished  at  their  feet.  At  this  juncture,  those  persons  who 
possessed  equestrian  fortunes,  and  had  not  had  horses  as¬ 
signed  them  by  the  public,  after  previously  consulting  to¬ 
gether,  went  in  a  body  to  the  senate,  and  having  obtained 
permission  to  speak,  declared  their  resolution  to  serve  in  the 
army,  on  horses  provided  at  their  own  expense.  On  which 
the  senate  returning  them  thanks,  in  the  most  honourable 
terms,  and  the  report  of  this  proceeding  having  spread 
through  the  Forum,  and  all  parts  of  the  city,  there  imme¬ 
diately  ensued  a  general  concourse  of  the  commons  to  the 

424 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R,  352, 

senate-house,  where  they  declared,  that  they  were  now  the 
infantry  of  that  army;  and  that,  though  it  was  not  their  turn 
to  serve,  yet  they  freely  engaged  in  the  cause  of  the  com¬ 
monwealth,  whether  it  should  be  thought  proper  to  lead  them 
to  Veii,  or  to  any  other  place.  If  they  should  be  led  to 
Veil,”  they  affirmed  that  they  would  never  return  from 
thence  until  that  city  should  be  taken  from  the  enemy.”  The 
senate  now  scarce  set  any  bounds  to  the  torrent  of  joy  which 
flowed  in  upon  them;  for  they  did  not,  as  in  the  case  of  the 
horsemen,  pass  an  order  for  thanks  to  be  conveyed  by  the 
magistrates,  neither  were  the  people  called  into  the  senate- 
house  to  receive  an  answer;  nor  did  the  senators  confine 
themselves  within  their  house;  but,  from  the  eminence  ad¬ 
joining,  every  one  of  them  eagerly,  with  voice  and  hands, 
testified  the  public  satisfaction,  to  the  multitude  who  stood 
below  in  the  assembly;  declared,  that,  by  such  unanimity, 
the  city  of  Rome  was  rendered  happy,  invincible,  and  ever¬ 
lasting;  praised  the  horsemen,  praised  the  commons;  blessed 
even  the  day,  as  a  day  of  happiness,  and  acknowledged  that 
the  courtesy  and  kindness  of  the  patricians  were  now  out* 
done,  while,  through  excess  of  joy,  tears  flowed  in  abundance, 
both  from  the  patricians  and  commons;^  until  the  senators, 
being  called  back  into  their  house,  passed  a  decree,  that 
‘‘  the  military  tribunes,  summoning  an  assembly,  should  give 
thanks  to  the  infantry,  and  to  the  horsemen,  and  should  as¬ 
sure  them,  that  the  senate  would  keep  in  remembrance  the 
dutiful  affection  which  they  had  shown  towards  their  coun¬ 
try;  and  had  come  to  a  resolution  that  every  one  of  those 
who  had,  out  of  tuin,  voluntarily  undertaken  the  service, 
should -enjoy  rank  and  ]iay  from  that  date.”  A  certain  sti¬ 
pend  was  also  assigned  to  the  horsemen.  This  was  the  first 
instance  of  the  cavalry  serving  on  their  own  horses.  This 
army  of  volunteers,  being  led  to  Veii,  not  only  restored  the 
works  which  had  been  destroyed,  but  erected  new  ones. 
Greater  care  than  ever  was  used,  in  sending  them  supplies 

BOOK  V. 

425 

B.  C.400.] 
from  the  city,  that  no  kind  of  accommodation  should  be 
wanting  to  troops  who  merited  so  highly* 
VIII.  The  ensuing  year  had  military  tribunes  y  ^ 
with  consular  power,  Caius  Servilius  Ahaia  a  B.  c.  sss. 
third  time,  Quintus  Servilius,  Lucius  Virginius,  Quintus  Sul- 
picius,  Aulus  Manlius  a  second  time,  Manias  Sergius  a  se¬ 
cond  time.  In  their  tribunate,  whilst  all  men’s  attention  was 
directed  to  the  Veientian  war,  the  security  of  the  garrison  at 
Anxur  was  neglected,  the  soldiers  obtaining  leave  of  absence, 
and  the  Volscian  traders  being  freely  admitted:  the  conse¬ 
quence  of  which  was,  that  the  guards  at  the  gates  were  sud¬ 
denly  overpowered,  and  the  place  taken  by  surprize.  The 
number  of  soldiers  slain  was  the  less,  because,  except  the 
sick,  they  were  all  employed  like  suttlers,  in  trafficking 
about  the  country  and  the  neighbouring  cities.  Nor  did  bet¬ 
ter  success  attend  the  operations  before  Veii,  which  were 
then  the  grand  object  which  engrossed  all  the  public  solici¬ 
tude;  for  the  Roman  commanders  showed  a  stronger  disposi¬ 
tion  to  quarrel  among  themselves,  than  to  act  with  spirit 
against  the  enemy.  Besides,  the  power  of  their  adversaries 
received  an  addition,  by  the  unexpected  arrival  of  the  Cape- 
natians  and  Faliscians.  These  two  states  of  Etruria,  con¬ 
tiguous  in  situation  to  Veii,  judged  that,  should  that  city  be 
conquered,  they  should  be  the  next  exposed  to  the  attacks 
of  the  Romans.  The  Faliscians  were  farther  induced,  by  a 
reason  particularly  affecting  themselves,  to  enter  into  the 
quarrel,  as  having  been  formerly  a  party  in  the  war  of  the 
Fidenatians:  wherefore,  after  having,  by  reciprocal  embas¬ 
sies,  ratified  their  engagements  with  an  oath,  they  advanced 
with  their  forces  to  Veii,  at  a  moment  when  no  one  thought 
of  their  coming.  They  happened  to  attack  the  camp  on  that 
quarter,  where  Manius  Sergius,  military  tribune,  command¬ 
ed,  which  caused  a  violent  alarm;  for  the  Romans  imagined 
that  all  Etruria  had  been  set  in  motion,  and  had  come  out 
in  a  mass  against  them.  The  same  opinio?^  roused  to  action 
VOL.  r. — 3  I 

426 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

Cy.R.353. 

the  Veimtiaim  m  city.  Thus  the  csonp  was  attacked  on 
both  sides;  and  the  troops,  in  opposing  the  attempts  of  the 
enemy,  being  obliged  to  wlwel  round  their  battaiicms  from 
one  post  to  another,  could  neither  effectually  confine  die 
Veientians  within  their  fortifications,  nor  repd  the  as¬ 
sault  from  their  own  works,  nor  even  defend  themselves  on 
the  outer  side*  Their  <mly  hope  was,  that  they  mi^t  be 
reinforced  from  the  greater  camp,  and  then  the  several  dif¬ 
ferent  legions  would  support  the  different  parts  of  the  fight, 
some  against  the  Capenatians  and  Faliscians,  others  against 
the  sallies  from  the  town*  But  that  camp  was  commanded 
by  Virginius,  between  whom  and  Sergius  subsisted  a  per¬ 
sonal  hatred:  on  being  informed  that  most  of  the  forts  were 
attacked,  the  fortifications  scaled,  and  that  the  enemy  poured 
in  on  both  sides,  he  kept  his  men  within  his  own  works, 
under  arms,  saying,  that  if  there  were  need  of  a  reinforce¬ 
ment,  his  colleague  would  send  to  him.  His  arrogance  was 
equalled  by  the  obstinacy  of  the  other;  who,  rather  than  ap¬ 
pear  to  have  asked  any  assistance  from  a  person  with  wlmm 
he  was  at  variance,  chose  to  be  conquered  by  the  enemy. 
His  troops  inclosed  on  either  side,  suffered  great  slaughter 
for  a  long  time;  at  last,  abandoning  the  works,  a  very  small 
part  of  them  made  their  way  to  the  principal  camp;  the 
greater  number,  with  Sergius  himself,  proceeded  to  Rome; 
here,  as  he  threw  the  entire  blame  on  his  colleague,  it  was 
determined  that  Virginias  should  be  called  home,  and  diat 
in  the  mean  time  the  lieutenant*geimrals  should  hold  the 
command.  The  aflair  was  taken  into  consideration  by  Uie 
senate,  where  the  dispute  between  the  colleagues  was  carried 
on  with  mutual  recrimmations.  Few  of  the  members  re¬ 
garded  the  interests  of  the  commonwealth,  each  adhered  to 
one,  or  the  other,  just  as  he  happened  to  be  prejudiced  by 
private  regard,  or  interest. 
iX.  The  principal  senators  were  of  opinion,  that  whether 
the  misconduct,  or  the  misfortune  of  the  comnmnders,  had 

BOOK  V. 

42? 

B.  C.  399.3 
been  the  cause  of  such  an  ignommiot^  overthrow,  they  ought 
not  to  want  for  the  regular  time  of  eketion,  but  to  create  im¬ 
mediately  new  military  tribunes,  who  should  enter  into  of* 
fice  on  the  calends  of  October.  While  the  members  were 
proceeding  to  show  their  assent  to  this  opinion,  the  other 
military  tribunes  oiFered  no  objection;  but  Sergius  and 
Virginius,  to  whose  behaviour  it  was  evidently  owing  that 
men  wished  to  get  rid  of  the  magistrates  of  that  year,  at 
first  deprecated  the  ignominy  which  would  hereby  be  thrown 
upon  them,  and  afterwards  protested  against  the  passing  of 
the  decree,  and  declared  that  they  woidd  not  retire  from 
office  before  the  ides  of  December,  the  usual  day  for  others 
entering  into  office.  On  this  the  tribunes  of  the  commons, 
who,  during  the  general  harmony  and  the  prosperity  of  public 
affairs,  had  unwillingly  kept  silence,  at  once  assuming  confi¬ 
dence,  threatened  the  military  tribunes,  that,  unless  they  sub¬ 
mitted  to  the  direction  of  the  senate,  they  would  order  them 
to  be  carried  to  prison.  Then  Caius  Servilius  Ahala,  one 
of  the  military  tribunes,  said,  “  As  to  your  part,  tribunes  of 
the  people,  I  assure  you  I  would  with  great  pleasure  put  it 
to  the  proof,  whether  your  threats  are  more  destitute  of  au¬ 
thority,  or  yourselves  of  spirit.  But  I  consider  it  as 
impious  to  act  in  oppo^tion  to  the  will  of  the  senate; 
wherefore  on  the  one  hand,  I  desire  that  ye  may  desist  from 
seeking  in  our  disputes  for  an  opportunity  of  doing  mischief; 
and  on  the  other  hand,  either  my  colleagues  shall  act  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  order  of  the  senate,  or  if  they  persist  any  far¬ 
ther  in  opposition,  1  will  instantly  nominate  a  dictator,  who 
will  compel  them  toiretii^  from  office.’*  This  discourse  be¬ 
ing  received  with  universal  approbation,  and  the  senators  re¬ 
joicing  that  another  power  had  been  thought  of,  which,  by 
its  superior  authority,  might  reduce  the  magistrates  to  order 
without  the  terrors  of  the  tribunitian  office,  those  magistrates 
yielded  to  the  universal  desire  of  the  public,  and  held  an. 
flection  of  military  tribunes,  who  were  to  enter  into  office  on 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

4^S 

[Y.  R.  354. 

the  calends  of  October;  and  before  that  day^  they  devested 
themselves  of  the  magistracy* 
y  ^  X*  Hiis  military  tribunate  with  consular  power, 
B-  C.  $S8.  of  Lucius  Valerius  Potitus  a  fourth  time,  Marcus 
Furius  Camillas  a  second.  Manias  ^cnilius  M,amercinus  a 
third,  Cneitui  Cornelius  Cossus  a  second,  Caeso  Fabius  Am* 
bustus  and  Lucius  Julius  lulus,  was  occupied  by  a  multipli¬ 
city  of  business  both  civil  and  military;  for  the  operations  of 
war  were  to  be  carried  on  in  many  diiferent  places  at  once, 
at  Veii,  and  at  Capena;  at  Falerii,  and  among  the  Volscians 
for  the  recovery  of  Anxur.  Then  at  Rome,  there  was  great 
uneasiness,  occasioned  by  the  levying  of  troops,  and  at  the 
same  time  by  the  paying  in  of  the  tax.  There  was  also  a 
struggle  about  the  appointment  of  the  plebeian  tribunes; 
while  the  trials  of  two  of  those,  who  had  lately  been  invested 
with  consular  power  excited  no  trifling  disturbance.  The  mi¬ 
litary  tribunes  applied  themselves,  first  of  all,  to  the  raising 
of  troops,  and  not  only  the  younger  men  were  enlisted,  but 
the  elder  citizens  also  were  compelled  to  give  in  their  names, 
to  serve  as  a  garrison  to  the  city.  Now,  in  proportion  as  the 
number  of  soldiers  was  augmented,  so  much  the  more  mo¬ 
ney  became  necessary  for  their  pay,  and  this  was  made  up 
by  a  tax,  which  was  very  unwillingly  paid  by  those  who  re¬ 
mained  at  home,  because,  as  the  guard  of  the  city  lay  upon 
them,  they  must  also  perform  military  dpty,  and  give  their 
labour  to  the  public.  These  circumstances,  grievous  in 
themselves,  were  set  forth  in  more  provoking  terms,  in  the 
seditious  harangues  of  the  plebeian  tribunes,  who  insisted, 
that  the  establishment  of  pay  to  the  soldiers  was  intended 
for  the  purpose  of  ruining  one-half  of  the  commons,  by  the 
fatigues  of  war,  and  the  other  half,  by  a  tax.  That  one  war 
had  now  been  protracted  to  the  fifth  year;  and  was  conduct¬ 
ed,  without  success,  designedly,  in  order  that  it  might  afford 
them  the  longer  employment.  Besides  armies  had  been  eB.. 
listed  at  one  levy  for  four  different  expeditions,  and  even 

BOOK  V. 

459 

B.  C,  598.] 

bo3rs  and  old  men  dragged  from  their  homes.  That  no 
distinction  was  made  between  summer  and  winter^  lest 
any  respite  should  be  allowed  to  the  wretched  commons; 
who,  now,  as  the  finishing  stroke,  had  been  made  subject  to 
a  tax;  so  that  when  they  should  return,  with  their  bodies 
wasted  through  toils,  wounds,  and  even  age,  and  find  every 
thing  at  home  in  disorder,  from  the  long  absence  of  the  own¬ 
ers,  would  at  the  same  time  be  obliged,  out  of  their  ruined 
property^  to  refund  in  a  manifold  proportion,  to  the  state,  the 
money  which  they  had  received  as  pay,  as  if  it  had  been  taken 
up  at  usurious  interest.”  Between  the  levy,  and  the  tax, 
and  from  men’s  thoughts  being  occupied  by  more  important 
concerns,  the  number  of  plebeian  tribunes  could  not  be  filled 
up  on  the  day  of  election.  A  violent  effort  was  afterwards 
made  to  have  patricians  assumed  into  the  vacant  places,  but 
that  being  found  impracticable,  another  plan  was  adopted, 
for  the  purpose  of  ’weakening  at  least  the  authority  of  the 
Trebonian  law,  by  the  assumption  of  Caius  Lacerius  and 
Marcus  Acutius  as  plebeian  tribunes;  and  this  was  effected 
evidently  by  the  influence  of  the  patricians. 
XI.  It  so  happened,  that  this  year  Caius  Trebonius  was  a 
plebeian  tribune:  and  he  considered  it  as  a  duty  incumbent 
on  his  name  and  family,  to  patronize  the  Treboman  law.  He 
therefore  complained  loudly,  that  **  a  measure  which  had 
been  attempted  by  some  patricians,  and  in  which  they  were 
baffled  at  their  first  setting  out,  had  been  violently  carried  by 
the  military  tribunes: — that  the  Trebonian  law  had  been  sub¬ 
verted,  and  plebeian  tribunes  elected,  not  in  conformity  to 
the  suffrage  of  the  people,  but  to  the  mandate  of  the  patri¬ 
cians.  That  the  matter  was  brought  to  this  issue,  that  people 
must  be  content  to  see  the  office  of  plebeian  tribune  filled 
cither  by  patricians  or  their  dependmits: — that  all  the  advan¬ 
tages  of  the  devoting  laws  were  wrested  from  them,  and  the 
tribunitian^ower  forcibly  transferred  to  other  hands.”  And 
he  insisted,  that  “  this  must  have  been  effected,  either  by  some 

430 

HISTORY  OF  HOME. 

[Y.  R.  354. 

artificjes  of  the  patricians,  or  by  the^villainy  and  treachery  of 
his  colleagues.”  The  public  being  inflamed  ndth  an  hi^ 
degree  of  resentment,  not  only  against  the  patricians,  but 
the  tribunes  of  die  people  also;  as  well  those  who  had  been 
elected,  as  those  who  had  elected  them;  three  of  that  body, 
Publius  Curatius,  Marcus  Metilius,  and  Marcus  Minucias, 
greatly  alarmed  for  their  own  interests,  made  an  attack  on 
Sergius  and  Virgpnius,  military  tribunes  of  the  former  year, 
and,  by  a  prosecution  which  they  commenced,  turned  off 
upon  them  the  anger  of  the  commons,  and  the  resentment  of 
the  public.  They  desired  people  to  “  take  notice,  that  such 
as  felt  themselves  aggrieved  by  tiie  levy,  by  the  tax,  by  long 
service  in  the  army,  and  the  distance  of  the  seat  of  war; 
such  as  lamented  the  loss  sustained  at  Veii;  such  as  had  their 
houses  in  mourning  for  the  loss  of  children,  brethren,  kins¬ 
men,  and  relations;  all  these  had  now,  by  their  means,  both 
the  right  and  the  power  afforded  them,  of  avenging  the  pub¬ 
lic  and  private  calamities  on  the  two  persons  who  were  the 
guilty  causes  of  them.  For  to  Sergius  and  Virginius  were 
owing,”  they  asserted,  ‘‘  all  their  misfortunes.  And  that 
was  not  more  fully  evinced  by  the  charge  of  the  prosecutor, 
than  by  the  acknowledgment  of  the  defendants;  who,  being 
equally  conscious  of  crime,  each  imputed  it  to  the  other; 
Virginius  charging  Sergius  with  cowardice;  Sergius,  VirgL 
nius  with  treachery.  The  absurdity  of  whose  conduct  was 
so  great,  that  there  was  a  high  degree  of  probability  that  tiie 
whole  affair  had  been  transacted  by  concert,  and  according 
to  a  wicked  design  of  the  patricians,  who,  for  the  purpose  of 
protracting  the  war,  first  gave  the  Vcientians  an  opportunity 
to  bum  the  works,  and  now,  had  delivered  up  an  army  to  the 
sword  of  the  enemy,  and  surrendered  a  Rommi  camp  to  the 
Faliscians.  The  management  of  all  affairs  was  directed  to 
one  end,  that  the  young  men  should  grow  old  before  Veii; 
and  that  the  tribunes  should  be  thereby  deprived  of  the 
power  of  taking  the  sense  of  the  people,  either  concerning 

BOOK  V- 

431 

B.  C.  398.] 
&e  laisds,  or  any  other  advantages  of  the  commons;  of  hav¬ 
ing  riieir  plans  supported  by  a  numerous  attendance  of  citi- 
zois,  CHT  of  making  head  against  the  conspiracy  of  the  patri¬ 
cians*  That  the  cause  of  the  defendants  had  been  already 
prejudged  by  the  senate^  by  the  Roman  people^  and  by  thfeir 
own  colleagues*  For,  by  a  decree  of  the  senate,  they  had 
been  removed  from  the  administration  of  government;  and, 
refusing  to  resign  their  office,  bad  been  constrained  to  sub* 
mit,  by  their  colleagues,  who  threatened  them  with  a  dicta¬ 
tor,  and  that  the  Roman  people  had  elected  tribunes,  who 
were  to  assume  the  government,  not  on  the  usual  day,  the 
ides  of  December,  but  instantly  on  the  calends  of  October; 
because  the  continuance  of  the  former  in  office  was  incom* 
patible  with  the  safety  of  the  commonwealth*  Yet,  after  all 
this,  those  men,  censured,  and  overwhelmed  by  so  many  de¬ 
cisions  against  them,  presented  themselves  for  trial  before 
the  people,  and  imagined  that  they  were  discharged,  and 
had  undergone  sufficient  punishment,  because  they  had  been 
reduced  to  the  r^ik  of  private  citizens,  two  months  sooner 
than  ordinary;  never  considering,  that  this  was  only  taking 
out  of  their  hands  the  power  of  doing  farther  mischief,  not 
inflicting  punishment;  their  colleagues,  who  were  manifestly 
clear  of  all  share  of  the  blame,  being  deprived  of  authority 
as  well  as  themselvesi*  They  requested  that  the  citizens  of 
Rome  would  resume  the  same  sentiments,  which  they  had 
felt  when  the  disastrous  event  was  recent,  when  they  beheld 
the  army  flying  in  consternation,  covered  with  wounds,  and 
filled  with  dismay;  pouring  into  the  gates,  accusing  not  for¬ 
tune,  nor  any  of  the  gods,  but  these  their  comrades.  They 
were  confident,  that  there  was  not  a  man  present  in  the  as¬ 
sembly  who  did  not,  on  that  day,  utter  execrations  and  curses 
against  the  persons,  the  families,  and  fortunes  of  Lucius 
Virginius  and  Marcus  Sergius.  And  it  would  be  the  high¬ 
est  inconsistency  if  they  did  not  now,  when  it  was  not  only 
lawful  but  their  duty,  exert  their  own  power  against  those. 

432 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  354. 

on  whom  each  of  them  had  imprecated  the  ven^ance  of  the 
gods.  The  gods  themselves  never  laid  thdr  hands  on  the 
guilty,  it  was  enough  if  they  armed  the  injured  with  power 
to  take  revenge.”* 
XIL  Instigated  by  such  discourses,  the  commons  con¬ 
demned  the  accused  in  a  fine  of  ten  dtousand  asses  in  weight;* 
while  Sergius  in  vain  alleged  that  the  miscarriage  was  to  be 
imputed  to  fortune,  and  the  common  chance  of  war;  and 
Virginius  made  earnest  supplications  that  they  would  not 
render  him  more  unfortunate  at  home,  than  he  had  been  in 
the  field.  The  current  of  popular  resentment,  having  been 
thus  turned  against  them,  almost  obliterated  the  remembrance 
of  the  assumption  of  tribunes,  and  the  fraudulent  infraction 
of  the  Trebonian  law.  The  victorious  tribunes,  in  order  that 
the  commons  might  reap  an  immediate  advantage  from  their 
elFort,  published  a  proposal  of  an  agrarian  law,  and  forbade 
the  tax  to  be  paid,  since  pay  was  required  for  such  a  number 
of  troops,  while  the  success  of  their  anns  in  any  of  the  wars, 
had  been  no  more  than  sulHced  to  keep  their  hopes  in  sus¬ 
pense.  At  Veil,  the  camp  which  had  been  lost,  was  reco¬ 
vered,  and  strengthened  with  forts  and  a  garrison.  Here 
Marcus  ^milius  and  C«so  Fabius,  military  tribunes,  com¬ 
manded.  Marcus  Furius  in  the  territory  of  the  Faliscians, 
and  Cneius  Cornelius  in  that  of  the  Capenatians,  meeting 
with  none  of  the  enemy  in  the  field,  drove  off  the  spoil  and 
ravaged  the  country,  burning  all  the  houses  and  the  fruits  of 
the  earth.  The  towns  they  neither  assaulted  nor  besieged. 
But  in  the  country  df  the  Volsctans,  after  the  lands  had  been 
wasted,  Anxur  was  assaulted,  though  without  success.  Being 
seated  on  a  lofty  eminence,  and  force  being  found  ineffectual, 
it  was  determined  to  surround  it  with  a  rampart  and  trench. 
This  province  of  the  Volscians  had  fallen  to  Valerias  Poti- 
tus.  While  the  business  of  the  campaign  was  in  this  state, 

*  221.  Ss.  lOd. 

mOKY. 

433 

B.  C,  398.] 

a  aeditioa  burst  out  at  home^  wkb  more  formids^ble  Tioience 
than  appeared  in  the  opeiatiom  against  the  enemy.  And  m 
the  tribunes  would  not  sid^r  die  tax  to  be  paid,  and  coime* 
quehtly  no  remittances  were  made  to  the  generab  for  the 
payment  of  the  tmdps,  and  as  the  soldiers  clamorously  de¬ 
manded  their  due,  there  was  the  greatest  danger  that  the 
ccmmgi^  of  sedition  might  spread  from  the  city,  and  the 
camp  also  be  involved  in  confusion.  Though  the  commons 
wei^  so  much  incensed  against  the  patricians,  and  though 
the  plebeian  tribunes  asserted,  that  the  time  was  now  come 
for  estabUshing  liberty,  and  transferring  the  supreme  dignity 
from  such  as  Sergius  mid  Virginias,  to  men  of  plebeian  rank, 
men  of  fortitude  and  industry,  yet  they  proceeded  no  farther 
in  graufication  of  their  passion,  than  the  election  of  one  pie- 
beian,  Publius  Licinius  Calvus,to  the  office  of  mi-  y  r  355 
litary  tribune  with  consular  power,  for  the  purpose  B.  C,  397. 
of  establishing  their  right  by  a  precedent.  The  others  elect¬ 
ed  were  patricians,  Publius  M«eaius,  Lucius  Titinius,  Pub¬ 
lius  Mselius,  Lucius  Furius  MeduUinus,  and  Lucius  Publius 
V obcus.  The  commons  themselves  were  surprised  at  having 
carried  such  an  important  point,  no  less  than  the  man  him¬ 
self  who  had  been  elected,  a  person  who  had  no  post  of 
honour  before,  although  a  senator  of  long  standing,  mid  now 
far  advanced  in  years.  Nor  does  it  sufficiently  appear  why 
he  was  chosen  in  preference  to  others*,  to  taste  the  first  sweets 
of  this  new  dignity.  Some  are  of  opinion,  that  he  was  ap¬ 
pointed  to  so  high  a  station  by  the  influence  of  his  brother 
Cneius  Cornelius,  who  had  been  military  tribune  the  preced¬ 
ing  year,  and  had  given  triple  pay  to  the  cavalry.  Others, 
that  it  was  owing  to  a  seasonable  discourse,  made  by  him¬ 
self,  recommending  harmony  between  the  orders  of  the  state, 
which  was  equally  acceptable  to  the  patricians  and  plebeians. 
The  plebeian  tribunes,  filled  with  exultation  by  this  victory' 
in  the  election,  remitted  their  opposition  with  respect  to  the 
tax,  which  was  the  principal  obstruction  to  the  public  bu,si- 
VOL.  I. — 3  K 

fY,  B-  m. 

4H  HISTORY  OF  ROME. 
ntm*  It  wsa  then  paid  in  wUhout  murmnring,  and  aent  tn 
Ae  army. 
XIII*  In  the  country  of  the  Vokeians,  Anxur  was  quiet¬ 
ly  retaken^  through  the  neglect  of  Ac  guards  on  a  festiv^ 
day*  This  year  was  remanrkahle  for  a  cold  winter  and  great 
fall  of  snow,  so  Aat  the  roads  were  impassable,  and  the  na¬ 
vigation  of  the  Tiber  .shut  up.  There  was  no  change  in  the 
price  of  provisions,  considerable  stores  having  been  previous- 
ly  collectetL  As  Publius  Lieinius  had  obtained  his  olEce 
without  any  riotous  proceeding,  to  Ac  great  joy  of  the  ccan- 
mons,  and  the  no  less  mortification  of  the  patricians,  so  the 
same  regularity  was  preserved  through  the  whole  course  of 
his  administration*  Hence  Ae  people  became  enraptured 
with  the  thonghts  of  choosing  plebeians  at  the  next  election 
Y  R  S&6  <>f  ^ihtary  tribunes.  Of  the  patrician  candidates 
B.  c.  S06.  Marcus  Veturius  ahme  carried  his  election.  The 
centuries  almost  unanimously  appointed  Ae  following  ple¬ 
beians  military  tribunejs  wiA  insular  power:  Marcus  Pom- 
ponius,  Caius  Duilius,  Volcro  Publilius,  Cnqius  Genutius, 
and  Lucius  Atilius.  The  severe  winter,  whether  from  the 
ill  temperature  of  the  air,  occasioned  by  Ae  sudden  transi¬ 
tion  from  one  extreme  to  Ae  other,  or  from  some  other  cause, 
was  succeeded  by  a  sickly  summer,  fatal  to  all  kinds  of  ani¬ 
mals,  and  as  neither  the  beginning  nor  end  of  the  virulence 
of  the  disorder  could  be  discovered,  the  Sibylline  books  were 
consulted,  in  pursuance  of  a  decree  of  the  senate.  The  de¬ 
cemvirs  who  had  Ae  direction  of  religious  matters,  then  first 
introduced  the  lectistemium*  in  the  city  of  Rome,  and  deck¬ 
ing  out  three  coaches  with  the  utmost  magnificence  which 
*  From  leclusy  a  bed,  or  rather  couch,  and  derno^  to  spread.  Upon  couch¬ 
es  of  this  kind  the  Romans  reclined  at  their  meals,  but  especially  at  en¬ 
tertainments.  Upon  this  occasion  these  coaches  were  brought  out  into  the 
streets,  and  being-  decorated  in  the  most  magaiheent  manner,  the  statues 
of  the  gods  and  goddesses  were  laid  thereupon,  and  sumptuous  banquets 
placed  before  them,  pf  these  repasts  all  comers  were  allowed  to  partake 

BOOK  V. 

B.  C.  396.] 

those  ^mes  coidd  albrd,  implor^tlu^die 
Latona^  aod  Diana;  and  of  Herctdes,  Mercury^  and  Nep« 
tune,  for  the  space  of  eight  days*  The  sati^  soleinn  rttca 
were  performed  by  private  persons*  We  are  told,  that  the 
doors  were  thrown  open  in  every  part  of  the  city;  that  every 
thing  was  exposed  in  public  to  he  used  in  common;  that  pas¬ 
sengers,  whether  known  or  unknown,  were  universally  in¬ 
vited  to  lodgings;  and  even  that  people  at  variance,  refraining 
from  animosity  and  ill  language,  conversed  together  with 
camplaisanee  and  ^kindness*  During  those  days  too,  such  as 
were  in  confinement  were  set  at  liberty;  and  that  afterwards, 
people  were  deterred,  by  a  religious  scruple,  from  imprison¬ 
ing  those  persons  to  whom  the  gods  had  brought  such  de¬ 
liverance.  Meanwhile  dangers  multiplied  at  Veii,  to  which 
point  the  operations  of  three  different  wars  were  concen¬ 
tred,  for  the  Capenatians  and  Faliscians  coming  up  un¬ 
expectedly  to  the  relief  of  the  town,  the  troops  were 
obliged,  in  the  same  manner  as  formerly,  to  make  head 
against  three  diflFerent  armies,  on  different  sides,  through  the 
whole  extent  of  their  works.  What  contributed  to  their 
safety  beyond  every  thing  else,  was  the  recollection  of  the 
sentence^assed  on  Sergii^  and  Virgtnius:  so  that  a  reinforce¬ 
ment  was  quickly  led  round  from  the  principal  camp,  where 
the  delay  had  been  made  in  the  former  case,  and  these  fell 
upon  the  rear  of  the  Capenatians,  while  their  front  was  en- 
gaged  against  the  rampart  of  the  Romans.  The  fight  no 
sooner  began  here,  than  it  struck  terror  into  the  Faliscians 
also,  and  a  seasonable  sally,  made  from  the  camp  while  they 
were  thus  disordered,  obliged  'them  to  turn  their  backs. 
The  victors  then,  pursuing  them  in  their  retreat,  made  vast 
slaughter  among  them;  and,  in  a  short  time  after,  a  party, 
which  had  been  employed  in  ravaging  the  territory  of  Ca- 
pena,  accidentally  meeting  them  as  they  fled  in  confusion,  en¬ 
tirely  cut  oflF  those  who  had  survived  the  fight.  Great  num¬ 
bers  of  the  Veientians  also,  in  their  retreat  to  the  city,  were 
slain  before  the  gates;  for,  dreading  lest  the  Homans  should 

436 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y,  R.  357. 

force  m  aicmg  they  ck»ed  the  g^tes,  anddbutout 
the  hitidmoat  of  "tfeeir  own  men.  These  were  the  trasmc* 
tions  of  that  year.  .  . 
XIV.  And  now  af^roached  the, election  of  military 
tribunes f  which  seemed  to  engross  a  greater  share  of  the  at¬ 
tention  of  the  patricians^  than  even  the  business  of  the  war: 
for  they  saw  that  the  sovereign  power  was  not  only  shared 
with  the  commons,  but  almost  entirely  lost  to  themselves* 
They  therefore,  by  concert,  engaged  the  most  iUustrious 
characters  to  stand  candidates,  such  as  they  believed 
people  would  be  ashamed  to  pass  by;  the  others,  neverthe¬ 
less,  put  in  practice  every  possible  expedient,  as  if  they  had 
ail  been  aiming  at  the  same  object,  and  endeavoured  to  draw 
to  their  side,  not  only  men,  but  the  gods,  representing  the 
election  held  two  years  before  in  a  light  offensive  to  religion; 
that  “  in  the  former  of  those  years,  a  winter  came  on  with 
intolerable  severity,  such  as  bore  every  appearance  of  a  pro¬ 
digy  sent  from  the  gods.  In  the  following,  no  longer  portents 
but  events  ensued;  a  pestilence  fell  on  both  country  and  city, 
manifestly  displaying  the  wrath  of  heaven;  whom,  as  was 
discovered  in  the  books  of  the  fates,  it  was  necessary  to  ap¬ 
pease,  in  order  to  avert  that  plague.  It  appears  to  the  im¬ 
mortals  as  an  affront,  that,  in  an  election  held  under  their 
auspices,  honours  should  be  prostituted,  and  the  distinctions 
of  birth  confounded,’’  The  people  being  deeply  struck,  both 
by  the  high  dignity  of  the  candidates,  and  also  by  a  sense 
of  religion,  chose  all  the  military  tribunes  with  consular  pow¬ 
er  from  among  the  patricians,  the  greater  part  of  them  men 
who  had  been  highly  distinguished  by  public  honours;  Lu- 
y  R  357  Valerius  Potitus  a  fifth  time,  Marcus  Va- 
B.  C.  385.  lerius  Maximus,  Marcus  Furius  Camillus  a  third 
time,  Lucius  Furius  MeduliiQUs  a  third  time,  Quintus  Ser- 
vilius  Fidenasa  second  time,  Quintus  Sulpicius  Camerinusa 
second  time.  During  their  tribunate,  nothing  very  memo¬ 
rable  w^s  performed  at  Veii:  the  forces  were  wholly  em- 

437 

B.  C.  395.1  BOOK  V. 
ployed  in  w^ting  the  country;  two  commanders  of  cpnsum'* 
im^  abilities  did  nothing  more  than  carry  off  vast  quanti¬ 
ties  of^poi4  Potitus  from  Falerii^^and  Camillus  from  Ca- 
pena,  leaving  nothing  undestray ed  that  could  be  injured  ei¬ 
ther  by  sword  or  fire. 
XV,  In  the  mean  time,  many  prodigies  were  reported  to 
have  happenedi  the  greater  part  of  which  met  with  little 
credit,  and  were  generally  disregardedj  partly,  because  the 
accounts  rested  on  the  testimony  of  single  persons;  and  part¬ 
ly  because,  while  they  were  at  war  with  the  Etrurians,  they 
could  not  procure  aruspices  to  perform  the  expiations.  One 
of  them,  however,  attracted  universal  attention;  the  lake  in 
the  Alban  forest  swelled  to  an  unusual  height,  without  any 
rain  or  other  cause,  so  that  the  fact  could  only  be  accounted 
for  by  a  miracle.  Commissioners  were  sent  to  the  oracle  at 
Delphi,  to  inquire  what  the  gods  portended  by  this  prodigy; 
but  an  interpreter  of  the  will  of  the  fates  was  thrown  in  their 
way  nearer  home:  a  certain  aged  Veientian,  amidst  the  scoffs 
thrown  out  by  the  Roman  and  Etrurian  soldiers,  from  the  out¬ 
posts  and  guards,  pronounced,  in  the  manner  of  one  deliver¬ 
ing  a  prophesy,  that  the  Roman  would  never  be  master  of 
Veil,  until  the  water  were  discharged  from  the  Alban  lake,” 
This,  at  first,  was  disregarded,  as  thrown  out  at  random;  after¬ 
wards  it  became  the  subject  of  conversation;  at  length  one  of 
the  Roman  soldiers  on  guard  asked  a  townsman  on  the  near¬ 
est  post,  as  from  the  long  continuance  of  the  war  they  had 
come  into  the  practice  of  conversing  with  each  other,  who 
that  person  was,  that  threw  out  those  ambiguous  expressions 
concerning  the  Alban  lake;  and,  on  hearing  that  he  was  an 
aruspex,  the  man,  whose  mind  was  not  without  a  tincture  of 
religion,  pretending  that  he  wished  to  consult  him  on  the  ex¬ 
piation  of  a  private  portent,  enticed  the  prophet  to  a  confe¬ 
rence.  When  they  had  proceeded  free  from  any  apprehen¬ 
sions,  being  both  without  arms,  to  a  considerable  distance 
from  their  parties,  the  young  Roman,  having  the  superiority 

458 

HISTORY  OP  ROME, 

[Y,  R.  358. 

in  streagth^  r^iztd  the  feeble  old  mmi  in  dse  vle«r  of  all, 
and,  in  spite  of  the  bustle  made  by  the  Etrmians,  carried  Mm 
off  to  his  own  party.  Being  conducted  to  the  general,  he 
was  sent  by  him  to  Rome  to  the  senate;  and,  on  their  iii$|oi* 
ring  the  meaning  of  the  information  which  he  had  given  con* 
ceming  the  Alban  lake,  he  answered,  that  certainly  the 
gods  had  been  incensed  against  the  Vetentian  nation,  on  that 
day  when  they  prompted  him  to  disclose  the  decree  of  the 
fates,  which  domned  his  native  country  to  destruction.  What? 
therefore,  he  had  then  delivered  under  the  influence  of  di¬ 
vine  inspiration,  he  could  not  now  recall,  so  to  render  it 
unsaid;  and  perhaps  the  guilt  of  impiety  might  be  contract¬ 
ed  in  as  high  a  degree,  by  concealing  what  it  was  the  will 
of  the  gods  should  be  published,  as  by  publishing  what 
ought  to  be  concealed.  Thus,  therefore,  it  was  denounced 
in  the  books  of  the  fates,  and  the  Etrurian  doctrine,  that 
whensoever  the  Alban  water  should  rise  to  an  unusual 
height,  if  the  Romans  should  then  discharge  it  in  a  proper* 
manner,  victory  would  be  granted  them  over  the  Veien- 
tians;  but  until  that  should  be  done,  the  gods  would  never 
abandon  the  walls  of  Veii,’^  He  then  gave  directions  with 
respect  to  the  proper  method  of  draining  it;  but  the  senate, 
deeming  his  authority  of  but  little  weight,  and  nc^  to  be 
entirely  relied  on  in  a  case  of  such  importance,  determined 
to  wait  for  the  deputies,  with  the  answer  of  the  Pytbiad 
oracle. 
Y.  R.  358.  XVI.  Before  the  commissioners  returned  from 
B.  C,  394.  Delphi,  or  the  method  of  expiating  the  Alban  prodigy 
was  discovered,  the  new  military  tribunes  with  consular  power 
came  into  office.  These  were  Eucius  Julius  lulus,  and  Lucius 
Furius  MeduUinus  a  fourth  time,  Lucius  Sergius  Fidenas, 
Aulus  Postumius  Regillensis,  Publius  *  Cornelius  Malu- 
ginensis,  and  Aulus  Manlius.  This  year  there  started  up  a 
new  enemy,  the  Tarquinians;  who,  seeing  the  Romans 
embroiled  in  so  many  wars  at  once,  against  the  Volscians  at 
Anxur,  where  the  garrison  was  besieged;  at  Lavici  against 

•BOOK  V, 

4S9 

ac.m.] 
the  who  were  besiegio^  the  colony  there;  and  also 
against  the  Veienti^s  and  die.  Ealiscians,  and  the  Capena* 
tians^  while  their  affairs  within  the  walls  were  not  less  em¬ 
barrassed  by  dissensions,  thought  this  a  favourable  seascm 
to  attack  them  with  e|fect.  They  sent  their  light-armed 
cohmrts  to  make  depredations  on  the  Roman  territories,  con¬ 
cluding  that  the  people  would  either  suffer  that  affront  to 
pass  unrevfcnged,  rather  than  bui^hen  themsdves  with  an 
additional  war,  or  if  they  resented  it,  would  send  out  an 
army  neither  numerous  nor  strong.  The  Romans  felt 
greater  indignation  at  the  affront  than  concern  for  the  k«s 
sustained  by  the  inroads  of  the  Tarquinians.  They,  dierc- 
fore,  undertook  the  business  Without  either  much  prepara¬ 
tion  or  long  delay.  Aulas  Postumius  and  Lucias  Julius 
having  collected  a  body  of  troops,  not  by  a  regular  levy,  for 
in  that  they  were  prevented  by  the  tribunes  of  the  commons, 
but  mostly  volunteers,  whom  by  persuasions  they  had  pre¬ 
vailed  on  to  follow  them,  directed  their  march  by  cross 
roads  through  the  territory  of  Ceere,  and  came  upon  the 
Tarquinians  unawares,  as  they  were  returning  from  their 
depredations,  heavily  laden  with  booty;  they  slew  great 
numbers  of  their  men,  got  possession  of  all  their  baggage; 
and,  having  re-taken  the  spoils  olpheir  Imds,  returned  to 
Rome,  The  space  of  two  days  was  allowed  to  the  owners  to 
reclaim  their  property;  on  the  third,  what  remained  unclaim¬ 
ed,  the  greatest  part  of  which  had  belonged  to  the  enemy, 
was  sold  by  auction,  and  the  produce  distributed  among  the 
soldiers*  The  issue  of  the  other  wars,  particularly  that  of 
Veil,  still  remained  doubtful.  And  now  the  Romans,  des¬ 
pairing  of  success  through  human  aid,  began  to  look  for 
succour  towards  the  fates  and  the  gods,  when  the  deputies 
arrived  from  Delphi,  bringing  with  them  the  decision  of  the 
oracle,  which  corresponded  with  the  answer  of  the  captive 
prophet.  Rotpan,  beware  lest  the  Alban  water  be  con¬ 
fined  in  the  lake;  beware  lest  thou  suffer  it  to  flow  into  the 

440 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  356. 

sea  in  a.  stream.  Thou  shalt  form  for  it  a  passage  over  the 
fields;  and,  by  dispefstng  it  in  a  multimde  of  channek,  con¬ 
sume  it.  Then  press  thou  bcddly  on  the  walls  of  the  enemy; 
assured,  that  over  the  city  which  thou  bessegest  through  so 
many  years,  conquest  is  granted  by  ^eae  orders  of  the  fates, 
which  are  now  disclosed*  The  war  ccmcluded,  do  thou, 
possessed  of  victory,  bring  ample  offering  to  my  temples, 
and  renewing  the  religious  rites  of  thy  country,  the  t^serva- 
tion  of  which  has  been  neglected,  perform  them  in  the  usual 
manner.” 
XVII.  The  captive  prophet,  upon  this,  began  to  be  held 
in  very  high  esteem,  and  the  milimry  tribune,  Cornelius 
and  Postumius,  thenceforwar^consulted  with  him  concern¬ 
ing  the  expiation  of  the  Alban  prodigy,  and  the  proper  method 
of  appeasing  the  gods*  It  was  at  length  discovered  what 
was  that  neglect  of  ceremonies,  and  omission  of  customary 
rites,  for  which  they  were  blamed  by  the  gods.  It  was,  in 
fact,  nothing  else  than  that  the  magistrates,  their  election 
being  defective,  had  not,  with  due  regularity,  directed  the 
Latine  festival,*  and  the  anniversary  solemnities  on  the 
Alban  mount.  The  only  mode  of  expiation  in  this  case 
was,  that  the  military  tribunes  should  resign  the  govern¬ 
ment,  the  auspices  be  tal^  anew,  and  an  interregnum  ap¬ 
pointed.  All  which  was  performed,  pursuant  to  a  decree 
*  The  Romans,  Latioes,  and  some  states  of  the  Flernicians  and  Volscians. 
met  annually  on  the  Alban  mount  to  celebrate  this  festival,  in  commemo¬ 
ration  of  the  treaty  made  with  those  states  by  Tarqum  the  Proud.  It  was 
attended  by  the  deputies  of  forty-seven  states,  who,  under  the  din?ction  of 
the  Roman  consul,  or  other  chief  magpistrate,  offered  joint  sacrifices  to 
Jupiter,  whom  they  termed  In  particular,  they  offered  a  white 
bufi,  of  which  the  deputies  each  state  received  a  piece*  The  pub¬ 
lic  festivals,  ^rtce,  were  of  four  kind^:  *taiiv(B  immoveable;  emceptwes,  or 
indict,  moveable;  imperativee,  commanded  on  particular  occasions;  and 
nwidincB,  for  holding  markets;  so  called,  Because  the  time  was  fixed  by 
prociamattom  they  were  generally  celebrated  by  the  consuls,  before 
departure  for  their  provinces. 

BOOK  V. 

B.  C.  3940 

44t 

of  the  senatCp  There  were  three  interreges  in  succession: 
Lucius  Valerius,  Quintus  Servilius  Fidenas,  and  Marcus 
Furius  Camillas.  In  the  meantime  the  city  was  a  scene  of 
unceasing  confusion  and  disorder,  the  plebeian  tribunes  refu* 
sing  to  let  the  elections  proceed,  unless  a  previous  stipu¬ 
lation  were  agreed  to,  that  the  greater  number  of  the  military 
tribunes  should  be  chosen  out  of  the  commons*  During 
these  transactions,  a  general  assembly  of  Etruria  was  held  at 
the  temple  of  Voltumna,  and  the  Capenatians  and  Faliscians 
demanding  that  all  the  states  of  Etruria  should  unite  in  the 
design  of  raising  the  siege  of  Veil,  the  answer  returned  was, 
that  they  had  formerly  given  a  refusal  of  the  same  request 
to  the  Veientians,  because  these  ought  not  to  apply  for 
succour,  where  in  a  case  of  such  consequence,  they  had  not 
applied  for  advice.  That  at  present,  though  they  of  them¬ 
selves  would  not  refuse  it,  yet  the  situation  of  their  affairs 
compelled  them  so  to  do:  especially,  as  in  that  part  of 
Etruria,  the  Gauls,  a  race  of  men  with  whom  they  were 
unacquainted,  had  lately  become  their  neighbours,  and  with 
whom  they  were  not  on  a  footing,  either  of  secure  peace,  or 
of  determined  war.  Nevertheless,  in  consideration  of  the 
blood,  the  name,  and  the  present  dangers  of  their  kinsmen, 
they  would  go  so  far,  as  that  if  any  of  their  young  men  chose 
to  go  to  that  war,  they  would  not  hinder  them.”  The  arrival 
of  these  was  announced  at  Rome,  as  of  a  formidable  number 
of  enemies;  and,  through  the  apprehensions  which  this  exci- 
ted  for  the  public  safety,  the  violence  of  their  intestine 
quarrels  of  course  began  to  subside. 
XVIII.  Without  causing  any  displeasure  to  the  patricians, 
the  prerogative  tribe,*  at  the  election,  chose  for  military 
♦  Tbe  prerogative  tribe  was  that  to  which  the  lot  fell  to  vote  first, 
at  the  election  of  magistrates.  Anciently,  the  centuries  were  called 
to  give  their  votes  according  to  the  order  established  among  them  by 
Servius  TuUius,  first  the  then  the  centuries  of  the  first  class^ 
&c.  It  was  afterwards  {at  what  time  is  not  known)  determined  by 
lot,  s^rtUio,  m  what  order  they  should  vote. 
VOL,  I,— 3  L 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  359. 

442 
tribune  Publius  Licinius  Calvus,  although  he  had  not  declar¬ 
ed  himself  a  candidate;  this  honour  was  done  him,  because 
in  his  former  administration  he  had  approved  himself  a  man 
of  moderation;  but  he  was  now  in  extreme  old  age.  It  was 
observed,  that  those  who  had  been  his  colleagues,  in  that 
year,  were  re-elected  in  order;  Lucius  Titinius,  Publius 
M»nius,  Publius  M«clius,  Cneius  Genutius,  and  Lucius 
AtUius.  Before  these  were  proclaimed  to  the  tribes,  who 
were  to  vote  in  the  ordinary  course,  Publius  Licinius  Calvus, 
with  permission  of  the  interrex,  spoke  to  this  effect:  I  con¬ 
sider  it,  Romans,  as  an  omen  of  concord,  a  thing  essential^ 
requisite  to  the  state  at  the  present  juncture,  that,  from  the 
remembrance  of  our  former  administration,  ye  are  desirous 
of  re-electing  the  same  colleagues,  improved  by  experience. 
As  to  me,  ye  no  longer  see  me  the  same,  but  the  shadow 
and  the  name  of  Publius  Licinius.  The  powers  of  my  body 
are  decayed,  my  senses  of  sight  and  hearing  are  grown  dull, 
my  memory  falters,  and  the  vigour  of  my  mind  is  blunted. 
Behold  here  a  youth,”  pursued  he,  holding  his  son,  the 
representation  and  image  of  him  whom  ye  formerly  made  a 
military  tribune,  the  first  plebeian  that  was  ever  so  honoured. 
Him,  formed  under  my  own  discipline,  I  present  and  dedi¬ 
cate  to  the  commonwealth  as  a  substitute  in  my  stead.  And 
I  beseech  you,  Romans,  that  the  honour,  which  of  your  own 
motion,  ye  offered  to  me,  ye  will  vouchsafe  to  grant  to  his 
petition,  and  to  my  prayers,  which  I  add  in  his  behalf.’^ 
This  request  of  the  father  was  complied  with,  and  his  son 
Y  R  S69  Licinius  was  declared  military  tribune 
B  c.  S93.  with  consular  power,  together  with  those  whom  we 
mentioned  before.  The  military  tribunes,  Titinius  and  Ge- 
nucius,  marched  against  the  Faliscians  and  Capenatians,  and 
acting  with  more  courage  than  conduct,  fell  into  an  ambush* 
Genucius  atoned  for  his  rashness  by  an  honourable  death, 
falling  among  the  foremost,  and  in  the  front  of  the  standards. 
Titinius  after  rallying  his  men,  who  had  been  thrown  into 

BOOK  V. 

4M 

B.  C.  393.] 
the  utmost  confusion,  and  leading  them  to  a  rising  ground, 
formed  them  again  in  order  of  battle;  but  did  not  venture  to 
come  down  and  meet  the  enemy.  The  disgrace  was  greater 
than  the  loss,  and  had  like  to  have  proved  the  cause  of  grie¬ 
vous  misfortunes,  so  great  was  the  alarm  which  it  excited 
not  only  at  Rome,  where  it  was  highly  exaggerated  by  re¬ 
port,  but  also  in  the  camp  before  Veii.  Here  the  soldiers 
were,  with  difficulty,  restrained  from  flight,  on  a  rumour 
having  spread,  that  the  generals  and  the  army  had  been  cut 
to  pieces;  and  that  the  Capenatians  and  Faliscians,  flushed 
with  victory,  arid  all  the  youth  of  Etruria,  were  at  no  great 
distance  from  their  posts.  Accounts  still  more  dreadful  had 
gained  credit  at  Rome:  that  the  camp  at  Veii  was  already 
attacked,  and  that  part  of  the  enemy  were  already  on  their 
march  to  the  city  prepared  for  an  assault.  The  men  ran  in 
crowds  to  the  walls,  and  the  matrons,  called  out  from  their 
houses  by  the  public  distraction,  offered  supplications  for 
protection  in  all  the  temples,  beseeching  the  gods  to  repel 
destruction  from  the  Roman  walls,  from  the  houses  of  the 
city,  and  the  temples,  and  to  turn  back  such  terrors  on  Veii/ 
if  the  sacred  rites  had  been  renewed,  and  the  prodigies  expi¬ 
ated  in  due  manner. 
XIX.  The  games  and  the  Latine  festival  had  now  been  per¬ 
formed  anew,  the  water  from  the  Alban  lake*  discharged  on 
the  fields  and  the  fates  demanded  the  ruin  of  Veii.  Accordingly 
a  general,  selected  both  for  the  destruction  of  that  city,  and  the 
preservation  of  his  native  country,  Marcus  F  urius  Camillas, 
was  nominated  dictator,  and  he  appointed  Publius  Cornelius 
Scipiohis  master  of  the  horse.  The  change  of  the  commander 
at  once  produced  a  change  in  every  particular:  even  the  for¬ 
tune  of  the  city  seemed  to  have  assumed  a  new  face;  so  that 
men  felt  themselves  inspired  with  different  hopes  and  different 
♦  The  remains  of  the  sewer,  a  stupendous  work,  by  which  the  water  was 
discharged,  still  subsist,  at  the  bottom  of  the  hill  on  which  stands  Castei 
Gandolpho,  Uie  elegant  country-retirement  of  the  Pope. 

444  HISTORY  OF  ROME,  [Y.  R.  S59 
spirits.  He  first  of  all  put  in  force  the  rules  of  military  dis- 
cipline  against  such  as  had  fled  from  Veii,  on  the  alarm  ex¬ 
cited  there,  and  took  effectual  care  that  the  enemy  should  not 
be  the  principal  object  of  the  soldier’s  fears.  Then  having, 
by  proclamation,  appointed  a  certain  day  for  holding  a  levy 
of  trof^ps,  he  made,  in  the  mean  time,  a  hasty  excursion  in 
person  to  Veii,  in  order  to  strengthen  the  courage  of  the  sol¬ 
diers.  From  thence  he  returned  to  R<^me  to  enlist  the  new 
army,  and  not  a  man  declined  the  service.  Young  men  came 
even  from  foreign  states,  Latines  and  Hernicians,  offering 
their  service  in  the  war:  to  whom  the  dictator  returned  thanks 
in  the  senate.  And  now,  having  completed  all  necessary 
preparations  for  the  campaign,  he  vowed,  in  pursuance  of  a 
decree  of  the  senate,  that  he  would,  on  the  capture  of  Veii, 
celebrate  the  great  games;  and  would  repair  and  dedicate 
the  temple  of  Mother  Matuta,  which  had  been  formerly  con¬ 
secrated  by  king  Servius  Tullius.  Marching  out  of  the  city 
at  the  head  of  his  army,  while  people’s  anxiety  was  stronger 
than  their  hopes,  he  came  to  the  first  engagement  with  the 
Faliscians  and  Capenatians,  in  the  district  of  Nepote,  on  which 
occasion  every  particular  was  conducted  with  consummate 
prudence  and  skill;  success  of  course  ensued.  He  not  only 
routed  the  enemy  in  battle,  but  took  possession  of  their  camp, 
and  seized  a  vast  quantity  of  spoil,  the  greatest  part  of  which 
was  put  into  the  hands  of  the  queestor,  and  no  great  share 
distributed  to  the  soldiers.  From  thence  the  troops  were 
led  to  Veii,  where  additional  forts  were  erected  at  smaller 
distances  from  each  other,  and  by  an  edict,  forbidding  any 
to  fight  without  orders,  the  soldiers  were  taken  off  from 
skirmishing,  which  had  hitherto  been  frequently  practised 
between  the  walls  and  the  rampart  of  the  camp,  and  their 
labour  applied  to  the  works.  Of  these,  the  greatest  by  far 
and  most  laborious  was  a  mine,  which  they  undertook  to  car¬ 
ry  into  the  citadel  of  the  enemy.  In  order  that  there  should 
be  no  interruption  in  this,  and  at  the  same  time  that  the  same 

BOOK  V* 

445 

B,  C.  393.] 
act  of  persons  should  not>  by  unintermUted  labour  under 
ground,  be  spent  with  fatigue,  he  formed  the  whole  num¬ 
ber  of  pioneers  into  six  divisions,  and  six  hours  were  al¬ 
lotted  for  each  division  to  work  in  rotation;  nor  did  they  stop, 
either  by  night  or  day,  until  they  formed  a  passage  into 
the  citadel. 
XX.  When  the  dictator  now  saw  conquest  within  his  reach 
and  that  he  was  on  the  point  of  getting  possession  of  a  city 
of  the  greatest  opulence,  the  spoil  of  which  would  exceed  in 
quantity  whatever  had  been  obtained  in  all  former  wars  taken 
together,  fearing  lest  he  might  incur  either  the  resentment, 
of  the  soldiers,  as  being  too  sparing  in  his  distribution  of 
it^  or  thf  displeasure  of  the  senators  as  being  profusely  lavish, 
he  despatched  a  letter  to  the  senate,  that  through  the  fa¬ 
vour  of  the  immortal  gods,  his  own  conduct,  and  the  perse¬ 
vering  courage  of  the  troops,  Veii  would  immediately  be  in 
the  power  of  the  Roman  people,  and  requested  their  direc¬ 
tions  with  regard  to  the  spoil.”  Two  opinions  divided  the 
senate;  one  was  that  of  the  elder  Publius  Licinius,  who  be¬ 
ing  first  called  upon  by  his  son,  as  we  are  told,  proposed  a 
resolution,  that  public  notice  should  be  given  to  the  people 
by  proclamation,  that  whosoever  chose  to  share  in  the  spoil 
should  retire  to  the  camp  before  Veii.  The  other  that  of 
Appius  Claudius,  who  censured  such  profusion  as  unpre¬ 
cedented,  extravagant,  and  partial;  and  which  would  also  be 
productive  of  ill  consequences,  if  people  should  once  con¬ 
ceive  an  opinion  that  it  would  be  criminal  to  deposit  in  the 
treasury,  when  exhausted  by  wars,  the  money  taken  from  the 
enemy.  He  therefore  recommended  it  to  them  to  make  that 
a  fund  for  the  payment  of  the  soldiers’  wages,  to  the  end  that 
the  commons  might  be  eased  of  part  of  the  tax.  For  every 
man’s  family,”  he  said,  would  feel  its  share  of  such  a  boun¬ 
ty  in  equal  proportion,  and  the  hands  of  the  idle  city  rabble, 
ever  greedy  of  rapine,  would  not  then  snatch  away  the  pri¬ 
zes  due  to  men  who  had  showed  their  bravery  in  war:  it  be- 

446 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R*  359. 

ing  generally  the  case,  that  the  man  who  is  most  ready,  on 
every  occasion,  to  undertake  the  largest  share  of  toil  and 
danger,  is  the  kast  active  in  plundering.”  Licinius,  on  the 
other  hand,  argued,  thsx  in  that  case  the  money  would  be 
an  eternal  cause  of  jealousy  and  ill-humour,  would  afford 
grounds  for  invidious  representations  to  the  commons,  and, 
in  consequence,  for  seditions,  and  the  enacting  of  new  laws. 
It  was  therefore  more  to  be  desired,”  he  said,  ‘‘  that  the 
affection  of  the  commons  might  be  conciliated  by  a  bounty 
of  that  kind;  that  this  resource  should  be  afforded  them,  after 
they  had  been  exhausted  and  entirely  drained,  by  the  pay¬ 
ment  of  the  tax  for  so  many  years;  and  that  they  should  en¬ 
joy  the  fruits  arising  from  a  war,  in  which  they  had. employ¬ 
ed,  one  might  say,  the  better  part  of  their  lives.  That  what 
a  man  took  with  his  own  hand  from  the  enemy,  and  brought 
home  with  him,  would  afford  him  more  satisfaction  and  de¬ 
light,  than  a  share  many  times  larger  conferred  on  him  by 
mjother.  That  the  dictator  himself  was  aware  of  the  odium 
and  the  disagreeable  reflections  to  which  this  business  might 
subject  him,  and  had  for  that  reason  transferred  the  deter¬ 
mination  of  it  from  himself  to  the  senate;  and  that  the  se¬ 
nate  ought,  on  their  part,  since  the  business  had  been  thus 
thrown  upon  them,  to  hand  it  over  to  the  commons,  and  let 
every  man  enjoy  what  the  chance  of  war  should  give  him.” 
This  plan  was  deemed  the  safer,  as  it  promised  to  procure 
popularity  to  the  senate.  Accordinerly  proclamation  was 
made,  that  all  such  as  chose  might  go  to  the  camp  of  the  dicta¬ 
tor,  to  share  in  the  plunder  of  Veil.  The  vast  multitude  who 
went  entirely  filled  the  camp. 
XXI.  Then  the  dictator,  after  taking  the  auspices,  came 
forth,  and  having  previously  ordered  the  soldiers  to  take 
arms,  spoke  thus:  “  O  Pythian  Apollo,  under  thy  guidance, 
and  inspired  by  thy  divinity,  I  am  now  proceeding  to  de¬ 
stroy  the  city  of  Veil,  and  I  devote  to  thee  the  tenth  part  of 
the  spoil  thereof.  Thee  also,  imperial  Juno,  who  now  dwell- 

BOOK  V. 

447 

B,  C.  593.] 
est  in  Veil,  I  be8e€ch,  that  when  we  shall  have  obtained  the 
victory,  thou  wilt  accompany  us  into  our  city,  soon  to  be 
thine  own,  where  a  temple  shall  receive  thee,  worthy  of  thy 
majesty,”  After  these  prayers,  having  more  than  a  sufficient 
number  of  men,  he  assaulted  the  city  on  every  quarter;  in 
order  to  prevent  their  perceiving  the  danger  which  threatened 
from  the  mine.  The  Veientians,  ignorant  that  they  had  been 
already  doomed  to  ruin  by  their  own  prophets,  and  likewise 
by  foreign  oracles;  that  the  gods  had  been  already  invited  to 
a  share  in  their  spoil;  that  some  of  them,  listening  to  the 
vows  by  which  they  had  been  solicited  to  forsake  their  city, 
began  to  look  towards  the  temples  of  the  enemy,  and  new 
habitations,  and  that  this  was  the  last  day  of  their  existence; 
fearing  nothing  less,, than  their  walls  being  already  under¬ 
mined,  and  the  citadel  filled  with  enemies,  ran  briskly  in 
arms  to  the  ramparts,  wondering  what  could  be  the  reason, 
that  when  for  so  many  days  not  one  Roman  had  stirred  from 
his  post,  they  should  now  run  up  to  the  walls  without  appre¬ 
hension,  as  if  struck  with  a  sudden  fit  of  madness.  A  fabu¬ 
lous  account  has  been  given  of  an  incident  happening  at  this 
juncture;  it  is,  that  while  the  king  of  the  Veientians  was  of¬ 
fering  sacrifice,  the  words  of  the  aruspex  were  heard  in  the 
mine,  denouncing,  that  whoever  should  cut  up  the  entrails  of 
that  victim  should  obtain  the  victory,  and  that  this  incited 
the  Roman  soldiers  to  burst  open  the  mine,  seize  the  entrails, 
and  carry  them  to  the  dictator.  But  in  matters  of  such  re¬ 
mote  antiquity,  I  think  it  enough,  if  relations  which  carry  a 
resemblance  of  truth,  be  received  as  true;  stories  of  this  kind, 
better  calculated  for  the  extravagant  exhibitions  of  the  stage, 
which  delights  in  the  marvellous,  than  for  gaining  belief,  It 
is  needless  either  to  affirm  or  refute.  The  mine  at  this  time, 
full  of  chosen  men,  suddenly  discharged  its  armed  bands  in 
the  temple  of  Juno,  which  stood  in  the  citadel  of  Veii,  some 
of  whom  attacked  the  rear  of  the  enemy  on  the  walls,  some 
tore  down  the  bars  of  the  gates,  some  set  fire  to  the  houses. 

448 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

lY.  H.  359. 

from  the  roofs  of  which  stones  and  tiles  were  thrown  by  fe¬ 
males  and  slaves.  Every  place  was  filled  with  confused  cla¬ 
mour,  composed  of  the  terrifying  shouts  of  the  assailants, 
and  the  cries  of  the  affrighted  joined  to  the  lamentations  of 
the  women  and  children.  Those  who  defended  the  works 
were  in  an  instant  beaten  off,  and  the  gates  forced  open, 
where  some  entering  in  bodies,  others  scaling  the  deserted 
walls,  the  town  was  filled  with  the  enemy,  and  a  fight  com¬ 
menced  in  every  quarter.  After  great  slaughter  the  ardour 
of  the  combatants  began  to  abate,  and  the  dictator,  proclaim¬ 
ing  orders  by  the  heralds,  that  no  injury  should  be  done  to 
the  unarmed,  put  an  end  to  the  effusion  of  blood.  The  towns¬ 
men  then  began  to  lay  down  their  arms  and  surrender,  and 
the  soldiers,  with  permission  of  the  dictator,  dispersed  in 
search  of  booty.  When  the  spoil  was  collected  before  his 
eyes,  far  exceeding  both  in  quantity  and  in  the  value  of  the 
effects  all  his  calculations  and  hopes,  the  dictator  is  said  to 
have  raised  his  hands  towards  heaven,  and  prayed,  ‘‘  that  if 
any  gods  or  men  looked  on  his  success  and  that  of  the  Ro¬ 
man  people  as  excessive,  such  jealousy  might  be  appeased  by 
some  calamity  peculiar  to  himself  alone,  rather  than  by  the 
slightest  detriment  to  the  Roman  people.’’  It  is  recorded, 
that  as  he  turned  himself  about,  during  this  address  to  the 
gods,  he  stumbled  and  fell;  and  this  was  considered  after¬ 
wards,  by  such  as  judged  of  the  matter  by  the  events  which 
followed,  to  be  an  omen  portending  Camillus’s  own  condem¬ 
nation,  and  the  disaster  of  the  city  of  Rome  being  taken, 
which  happened  a  few  years  after.  The  subduing  of  the 
enemy,  and  the  plundering  of  this  very  opulent  city,  employ¬ 
ed  that  whole  day. 
XXII.  Next  day  the  dictator  sold  the  inhabitants  of  free 
condition  by  auction:  the  money  arising  from  this  sale  was 
all  that  was  applied  to  the  use  of  the  public,  and  even  that 
was  resented  by  the  commons.  As  to  what  spoil  they  brought 
home,  they  did  not  think  themselves  under  any  obligation, 

B,  C.  393*] 

BOOK  V. 

449 

in  applying  it,  either  to  the  general  who,  with  design  to  pro^ 
cure  their  countenance  to  his  own  parsimony,  had  referred  to 
the  senate  a  business  which  properly  belonged  to  his  own  ^ 
jurisdiction,  or  to  the  senate,  but  to  the  Licinian  family,  of 
which  the  son  had  laid  the  affair  before  the  senate,  and  the 
father  first  proposed  the  popular  resolution.  When  the  wealth, 
belonging  to  the  inhabitants,  had  been  carried  away  from  Veii, 
they  then  began  to  remove  the  treasures  of  the  gods,  and  the 
gods  themselves,  but  with  the  demeanor  of  worshippers  rather 
than  of  ravishers:  for  certain  young  men  selected  out  of  the 
army,  to  whom  was  assigned  the  charge  of  conveying  impe¬ 
rial  Juno  to  Rome,  after  thoroughly  washing  their  bodies, 
and  clothing  themselves  in  white  garments,  entered  her  tem¬ 
ple  with  tokens  of  adoration,  and  approaching,  laid  hands 
upon  her  with  religious  awe,  because,  according  to  tho  Etru¬ 
rian  rules,  no  person  but  a  priest  of  a  particular  family,  had 
been  usually  allowed  to  touch  that  statue.  Afterwards  one 
of  them,  either  prompted  by  divine  inspiration,  oi  in  a 
fit  of  youthbil  jocularity,  saying,  “  Juno,  art  thou  willing  to 
go  to  Rome,”  the  rest  cried  out  at  once,  that  the  goddess 
had  assented.  To  this  fable  an  addition  was  made,  that  she 
was  heard  to  utter  the  words,  ‘‘  I  am  willing.”  However  we 
are  informed,  that  she  Avas  raised  from  the  place  whereon 
she  stood  by  machines,  with  slight  efforts,  and  was  found 
light  and  easy  to  be  removed,  as  if  she  accompanied  them 
with  her  own  consent;  that  she  was  brought  safe  to  the  Aven- 
tine,  her  eternal  seat,  to  which  the  vows  of  the  Roman  dic¬ 
tator  had  invited  her,  where  the  same  Camillus  who  had 
vowed  it  afterwards  dedicated  her  temple.  I'hus  fell  Veii^^' 
the  roost  powerful  cit}'  of  the  Etrurian  nation,  even  in  its 
final  overthrow  demonstrating  its  greatness;  for,  after  havings’  r  ' 
withstood  a  siege  during  ten  summers  and  winters,  without 
intermission,  after  inflicting  on  its  enemy  losses  considerably 
greater  than  itself  had  felt;  even  now,  even  when  fate  at  last 
VOL,  I. — 3  M 

450  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  359. 
urged  its  doom,  yet  still  it  was  vanquished  not  by  force,  but 
by  the  art  of  engineers. 
XXI 1 1.  When  the  news  arrived  at  Rome  that  Veil  was 
taken,  notwithstanding  that  the  prodigies  had  been  expiated^ 
that  the  answers  of  the  prophets  and  the  responses  of  the 
Pythian  oracle  were  known  to  all,  and  that  they  had  used 
the  most  effectual  means  which  human  wisdom  could  sug¬ 
gest,  for  insuring  success,  in  giving  the  command  to  Marcus 
Furius,  the  greatest  general  of  the  age^  yet,  as  they  had  for 
so  many  years  experienced  such  a  variety  of  fortune  in  that 
war,  and  had  sustained  so  many  losses,  their  joy  was  as  un¬ 
bounded  as  if  they  had  entertained  no  hopes  of  that  event. 
And  before  the  senate  passed  any  decree  to  the  purpose, 
every  temple  was  filled  with  the  Roman  matrons  returning 
thanks  to  the  gods.  The  senate  ordered  supplications  for  the 
space  of  four  days,  a  longer  term  than  had  ever  been  ap¬ 
pointed  in  the  case  of  an\^  former  war.  The  dictator  also  on 
his  arrival  was  more  numerously  attended  than  any  general 
had  ever  been  before;  all  ranks  pouring  out  to  meet  him, 
while  the  honours,  conferred  on  him  in  his  triumph,  far  sur¬ 
passed  the  compliments  usually  paid  on  such  occasions.  He 
himself  was  the  most  conspicuous  c^ject  of  all,  riding  through 
the  city  in  a  chariot  drawn  by  white  horses,  which  was 
deemed  unbecoming,  not  to  say  a  member  of  a  common¬ 
wealth,  but  a  human  being,  people  deeming  it  an  affront  to 
religion,  that  the  dictator  should  emulate  the  equipage  of 
Jupiter  and  Apollo;  and  on  account  chiefly  of  that  single 
circumstance,  his  triumph  was  more  splendid  than  pleasing. 
He  then  contracted  for  the  building  of  a  temple  to  imperial 
Juno  on  the  Aventine,  and  dedicated  that  of  mother  Matuta: 
after  performing  these  services  to  the  gods,  and  to  mankind, 
he  laid  down  his  office  of  dictator.  The  offering  to  be  made  to 
Apollo  came  then  under  consideration,  and  Camillas  de¬ 
claring  that  he  had  vowed  the  tenth  part  of  the  spoil  to  that 
use,  and  the  pontiffs  having  given  their  opinion  that  the  peo- 

B.  C,  393*3 

BOOK  V. 

451 

pie  ought  to  dischage  that  vow,  it  was  found  difficult  to  strike 
out  a  proper  mode  of  obliging  them  to  refund  the  spoil,  in 
order  that  the  due  proportion  might  be  set  apart  for  diat  re¬ 
ligious  purpose*  At  length,  recourse  was  had  to  a  method 
which  seemed  least  troublesome,  that  every  man  who  wished 
to  acquit  himself  and  his  family  of  the  obligation  of  the  vow, 
making  his  own  estimate  of  his  share  of  the  spoil,  should 
pay  into  the  treasury  the  tenth  part  of  the  value,  in  order 
that  a  golden  offering  might  be  made,  worthy  of  the  gran¬ 
deur  of  the  temple,  the  divinity  of  the  god,  and  the  dignity 
of  the  Roman  people:  this  contribution  also  helped  to  alie¬ 
nate  the  affection  of  the  commons  from  Camillas.  During 
these  transactions,  ambassadors  had  come  from  the  Volscians 
and  ^quans  to  sue  for  peace,  and  peace  was  granted  them 
rather  out  of  a  desire  that  the  state,  wearied  with  so  tedious 
a  war,  might  enjoy  some  repose,  than  in  consideration  of  the 
desert  of  the  persons  petitioning. 
XXIV.  The  year  which  followed  the  taking  of  y.  R.  360. 
Veil  had  six  military  tribunes,  with  consular 
power,  the  two  Publii  Cornelii,  Cossus,  and  Scipio,  Marcus 
Valerius  Maximus  a  second  time,  Caeso  Fabius  Ambustus 
a  third  time,  Lucius  Furius  Medullinus  a  fifth  time,  and 
Quintus  Servilius  a  third  time.  The  war  with  the  Falis- 
Clans  fell  by  lot  to  the  Cornelii;  that  with  the  Capenatians  to 
Valerius  and  Servilius,  These  latter  made  no  attempt  on 
the  towns,  either  by  assault  or  siege,  but  spread  devastation 
over  the  lands,  and  carried  off  ao  spoil  every  thing  found  in 
the  country;  not  a  fruit  tree,  nor  any  useful  vegetable,  was 
left  in  the  whole  territory.  These  losses  reduced  the  peo¬ 
ple  of  Capena  to  submission,  and  on  their  suing  for  peace, 
it  was  granted.  The  war  with  the  Faliscians  still  continu¬ 
ed.  Meanwhile  seditions  multiplied  at  Rome,  and  in  order 
to  assuage  their  violence  it  was  resolved,  that  a  colony  should 
be  sent  to  the  country  of  the  Volscians,  for  which  three 
thousand  Roman  citizens  should  be  enrolled,  and  the  tri- 

452 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  36a 
umvirs,  appointed  to  conduct  it,  distributed  three  acres 
and  seven  twelths  to  each  man.  This  donation  was  looked 
on  with  scorn,  because  they  considered  the  offer  as  intended 
to  pacify  thena,  on  the  disappointment  of  higher  expectations: 
for  “  why,’’ said  they,  should  the  commons  be  sent  into 
exile  among  the  Volscians,  when  the  beautiful  city  of  Veii 
lay  within  view,  and  the  territory  belonging  to  it  being  more 
fertile  and  more  extensive  than  the  territory  of  Rome?” 
This  city,  too,  they  extolled  as  preferable  even  to  that  of 
Rome,  both  in  point  of  situation,  and  the  magnificence  of  its 
edifices  and  inclosures,  both  public  and  private.  Nay,  they 
W’ent  so  far  as  to  propose  the  scheme  which,  after  the  taking 
of  Rome  by  the  Gauls,  was  more  generally  adopted,  of  re¬ 
moving  to  Veii.  But  their  plan  now  was,  that  half  of  the 
commons,  and  half  of  the  senate,  should  fix  their  habitations 
at  Veii;  and  thus  two  cities,  composing  one  commonwealth, 
might  be  inhabited  by  the  Roman  people.  The  nobles  op¬ 
posed  these  measures  with  such  warmth,  as  to  declare,  that 
they  would  sooner  die  in  the  sight  of  the  Roman  people,  than 
that  any  of  those  matters  should  be  put  to  the  vote;  for, 
‘^when  one  city  at  present  supplied  such  abundance  of 
dissensions,  what  would  be  the  case  with  two?  Was  it 
possible  that  any  one  could  prefer  a  vanquished,  to  a  victori¬ 
ous  city,  and  suffer  Veii,  after  being  captured,  to  enjoy  a 
greater  degree  of  prosperity  than  ever  it  had  known  in  its 
most  flourishing  days?  In  short,  they  might  be  forsaken  in 
their  native  country  by  their  fellow  citizens,  but  no  force 
ought  ever  to  compel  them  to  forsake  that  country  and  those 
citizens,  and  to  follow  Titus  Sicinius,  (for  he  was  the  ple¬ 
beian  tribune  who  had  brought  forward  the  proposition,)  as 
a  founder  to  Veii,  abandoning  the  divine  Romulus,  the  son 
of  a  god,  the  parent;  and  founder  of  the  city  of  Rome.” 
These  disputes  proceeded  to  a  shameful  height:  for  the  pa¬ 
tricians  had  drawn  over  one  half  of  the  plebeian  tribunes  to 
their  sentiments;  so  that  no  other  circumstance  obliged  the 

BOOK  W 

45S 

B.  C.392,] 
ccHumons  to  refrain  from  outrage,  but  that  after  a  clamour 
had  been  set  up  as  the  prelude  to  a  riot,  the  principal  mem¬ 
bers  of  the  senate,  throwing  themselves  foremost  in  the  way 
of  the  crowd,  desired  that  they  might  be  the  persons  attack¬ 
ed,  struck,  or  put  to  death.  On  this  the  populace  not  only 
abstained  from  offering  violence  to  their  age,  their  dignity, 
and  honourable  characters,  but  in  respect  for  their  opinions 
restrained  their  rage  even  from  any  such  attempts  on  others. 
XXV.  Camillus  on  every  occasion,  and  in  every  place, 
publicly  asserted,  that  there  was  nothing  surprizing  in  all 
these  commotions;  that  the  state  was  actually  gone  mad;  for 
though  it  was  engaged  by  a  vow,  yet  it  bestowed  more  con¬ 
cern  on  every  other  kind  of  business,  than  on  acquitting 
itself  of  the  obligation.  He  would  say  nothing  of  the  con¬ 
tribution  of  an  alms  in  reality,  rather  than  of  a  tenth.  How¬ 
ever,  as  each  man  had  bound  himself,  in  his  private  capacity, 
the  public  was  set  free.  But  his  conscience  would  not  suf¬ 
fer  him  to  be  silent  on  another  head, — that  the  tenth  of  that 
part  only  of  the  spoil  was  set  apart,  which  consisted  of  movea¬ 
ble  effects,  and  no  mention  was  made  of  the  city,  or  of  the 
lands,  which  as  well  as  the  rest  were  comprehended  in  the 
vow.”  The  senate,  finding  it  difficult  to  come  to  a  deter¬ 
mination  on  this  point,  referred  it  to  the  pontiffs  in  conjunc¬ 
tion  with  Camillus;  and  that  body  gave  their  opinion,  that 
whatsoever  had  been  the  property  of  the  Veientians  before 
the  uttering  of  the  vow,  and  alter  the  vow  was  made,  came 
into  the  power  of  the  Roman  people;  of  that  the  tenth  part 
was  sacred  to  Apollo.  Thus  the  city  and  the  land  were 
brought  into  the  estimate.  The  money  was  issued  from  the 
treasury,  and  the  consular  military  tribunes  were  commis¬ 
sioned  to  lay  it  out  in  the  purchase  of  gold.  A  sufficient 
quantity  of  this  metal  could  not  be  procured;  on  which  the 
matrons,  after  holding  some  meetings  to  deliberate  on  the 
subject,  with  unanimous  consent,  engaged  to  supply  the  mili¬ 
tary  tribunes  with  gold,  and  actually  carried  all  their  oma- 

454 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  361. 

ments  into  the  treasury.  Nothing  ever  happened  which  gave 
greater  pleasure  to  the  senate,  and  it  is  said,  that  in  return 
for  this  generosity,  these  women  were  honoured*  with  the 
privilege  of  using  covered  chariots,  when  going  to  public 
worship  or  games,  and  open  chaises  on  any  day  whether 
festival  or  common.  The  gold  being  received  from  each  by 
weight,  and  a  valuation  being  made,  in  order  that  the  price 
might  be  repaid,  it  was  resolved  that  a  golden  bowl  should 
be  made  thereof,  to  be  carried  to  Delphi  as  an  offering  to 
Apollo.  No  sooner  were  men’s  minds  disengaged  from  re¬ 
ligious  concerns,  than  the  plebeian  tribunes  renewed  their 
seditious  practices,  stimulating  the  resentment  of  the  popu¬ 
lace  against  all  the  nobility,  but  especially  against  Camillas; 
alleging  that,  “  by  his  confiscations  and  consecrations,  he  had 
reduced  the  spoils  of  Veii  to  nothing;’'  daringly  abusing  the 
nobles,  in  their  absence;  yet,  on  their  appearing,  as  they 
sometimes  threw  themselves  in  the  way  of  their  fury,  show¬ 
ing  them  some  respect.  When  they  perceived  that  the  bu¬ 
siness  would  be  protracted  beyond  the  present  year,  they 
re-elected  for  the  year  following  such  tribunes  of  the  com¬ 
mons,  as  had  promoted  the  passing  of  the  law,  and  the  patri¬ 
cians  exerted  themselves  to  effect  the  same  with  regard  to 
such  of  them  as  had  protested  against  it.  By  these  means 
the  same  persons  mostly  were  re-elected  plebeian  tribunes. 
Y.  K.  361.  XXVI.  At  the  election  of  military  tribunes,  the 
B.  C.  391.  pa^jcians,  by  straining  their  interest  to  the  utmost, 
prevailed  to  have  Marcus  Furius  Camillus  chosen.  They 
pretended,  that  on  account  of  the  wars  in  which  they  were 
engaged,  they  wished  to  have  him  as  a  commander:  but,  in 
fact,  they  wanted  him  as  an  antagonist  to  the  tribunes,  to 
check  their  corrupt  profusion.  Together  with  Camillus  were 
elected  military  tribunes  with  consular  power,  Lucius  Furi¬ 
us  Medullinus  a  sixth  time,  Caius  iEmilius,  Lucius  Valerius 
Poplicola,  Spurius  Postumius  and  Publius  Cornelius  a  se¬ 
cond  time.  In  the  beginning  of  the  year,  the  plebeian  tri- 

BOOK  V. 

455 

B.  C.  391.] 
bunes  declined  proceeding  on  the  business,  until  Marcus 
Furius  CamiUus  should  set  out  against  the  Faliscians;  for 
he  had  been  appointed  to  the  command  in  that  war.  In 
consequence  of  this  delay,  the  ardour  of  the  pursuit  was 
cooled,  and  Camillas,  whom  they  had  chiefly  dreaded  as  an 
opponent,  found  an  increase  of  glory  in  the  country  of  the 
Faliscians:  fwr  the  enemy  at  first  confining  themselves  with¬ 
in  their  walls,  which  appeared  to  be  the  safest  plan,  he,  by 
ravaging  the  country  and  burning  the  houses,  compelled 
them  to  come  forth  from  the  city.  .But  still  their  fears  pre¬ 
vented  them  from  advancing  to  any  considerable  length.  At 
the  distance  of  about  a  mile  from  the  town,  they  pitched 
their  camp,  for  the  security  of  which  they  confided  entirely 
in  the  difficulty  of  the  approaches,  all  the  roads  on  cveiy^ 
side  being  rough  and  craggy,  in  some  parts  narrow,  in  others 
steep:  but  CamiUus,  following  the  direcUons  of  a  prisoner 
taken  in  the  country,  who  acted  as  his  guide,  decamped  in 
the  latter  end  of  the  night,  and,  at  break  of  day,  showed 
himself  on  ground  much  higher  than  theirs.  The  Romans 
were  formed  into  three  divisions,  each  of  which,  in  turn, 
worked  on  the  fortifications  of  the  camp,  while  the  rest  of 
the  troops  stood  in  readiness  for  battle.  The  enemy  then 
making  an  attempt  to  interrupt  his  works,  he  attacked  and 
put  them  to  flight;  and  with  such  consternation  were  the  Fa¬ 
liscians  struck,  that  in  their  haste,  they  passed  by  their  own 
camp,  which  lay  in  their  way,  and  pushed  forward  to  the  ci¬ 
ty.  Great  numbers  were  slain  and  wounded  before  they 
reached  the  gates,  through  which  they  rushed  in  great  con¬ 
fusion  and  dismay.  Their  camp  was  taken,  and  the  spoil 
given  up  by  CamiUus  to  the  queestors,  to  the  great  dissatis¬ 
faction  of  the  soldiers:  but  such  was  the  influence  of  his 
strictness  in  discipline,  that  the  same  propriety  of  conduct 
which  excited  their  resentment,  raised  also  their  admiratitm. 
The  town  was  then  invested,  and  the  approaches  carried  on, 
while  sometimes  occasional  attacks  were  made  by  the  towns- 

4^6 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  361, 
men  on  the  Roman  posts,  and  trifling  skirmishes  ensued. 
Thus  time  was  spent  without  either  party  gaining  a  prospect 
of  success,  and  as  the  beseiged  were  more  plentifully  suppli¬ 
ed  than  the  beseigers,  with  corn  and  all  other  necessaries, 
from  magazines  which  they  had  formed  some  time  before, 
the  affair,  to  judge  from  appearances,  would  have  been 
as  laborious  and  tedious  as  at*Veii,  had  not  fortune,  together 
with  an  instance  of  meritorious  conduct,  which,  in  respect  of 
military  matters,  he  had  already  sufficiently  displayed,  pro¬ 
cured  to  the  Roman  commander  a  speedy  victory. 
XXVII.  It  was  the  custom  among  the  Faliscians,  to  employ 
the  same  person  as  master  and  private  tutor  to  their  children; 
and,  as  it  continues  to  be  the  practice  to  this  day  in  Greece, 
several  were  intrusted  at  the  same  time  to  the  care  of  one 
man.  The  teacher  who  appeared  to  have  the  greater  share 
of  knowledge,  had  of  course  the  instruction  of  the  children 
of  the  first  rank.  The  person  supposed  to  possess  this  know¬ 
ledge,  and  now  so  intrusted,  having  made  it  a  custom  in 
time  of  peace,  to  carry  the  boys  out  of  the  city  for  the  sake 
of  exercise  and  play,  and  having  never  discontinued  the 
practice  since  the  war  began,  drew  them  away  from  the  gate, 
sometimes  in  shorter,  sometimes  in  longer  excursions.  At 
length,  he  found  an  opportunity  of  straying  farther  than 
usual;  and,  by  introducing  a  variety  of  plays  and  conversa¬ 
tions,  he  led  them  on  between  the  advanced  guards  of  the 
enemy,  and  then  through  the  Roman  camp,  into  the  tent  of 
Camillas;  and  there,  to  this  atrocious  act,  added  a  speech  still 
more  atrocious:  that  “  he  had  delivered  Falerii  into  the  hands 
of  the  Romans,  by  putting  into  their  power  those  boys,  whose 
parents  were  there  at  the  head  of  affairs/’  On  hearing  which, 
Camillus  told  him,  “  Neither  the  people,  nor  the  commander, 
to  whom  thou  hast  come,  thou  wretch,  with  thy  villainous 
offer,  is  like  unto  thyself.  Between  us  and  the  Faliscians 
there  subsists  not,  it  is  true,  that  kind  of  societ)^  which  is 
formed  by  human  compact,  but  that  which  nature  has  im- 

BOOK  V. 

B.  C.  391.] 

4MT 

{Wanted  m  both,  does,  and  ever  will  s\d>8ist<  War  has  Us  laws 
as  well  as  peace;  and  we  have  learned  m  waging  it,  to 
ol^ervant  oi  those  laws,  as  we  are  Inrave.  We  carry  arw, 
not  against  persons  of  such  age  as  these,  who,  even  in  '^e 
storming  towns,  are  exempted  from  injury,  but  against 
men  who  have  arms  in  their  hands,  as  well  as  ouri^lves,  and 
who,  without  being  either  injured  or  prov^ed  by  us,  made  an 
attack  on  a  Roman  camp  at  Veil.  Those  thou  hast  eonquer<^ 
as  far  as  in  thee  lay,  by  an  act  of  unex»npled  viUamy«  1 ' 
shall  conquer  them  as  1  conquered  Veil,  by  Roman  metlmds, 
by  valour,  by  labour,  and  by  arms*’’  Then  ordering  him  to 
be  stripped  naked,  and  his  hands  to  be  tied  behind  his  back, 
he  delivered  him  to  the  boys  to  be  conducted  back  to  Falerii, 
and  gave  them  rods  with  which  they  should  scourge  the 
traitor,  and  drive  him  into  the  city.  Such  a  spectacle  first 
attracting  a  concourse  of  people,  and  the  senate  being  after¬ 
wards  summoned  by  the  magistrates  on  the  extraordinary 
case,  so  great  an  alteration  was  hereby  effected  in  their  scn^* 
timents,  that  they,  who  a  short  time  before  were  so  outra¬ 
geous  in  their  hatred  and  anger,  as  almost  to  have  chosen 
the  catastrophe  of  the  Vientians,  rather  than  the  truce  ob¬ 
tained  by  the  Capenatians;  these  same  persons  now,  through 
every  rank  in  the  state,  universally  called  out  for  peace*  The 
faith  of  the  Ramans,  and  the  justice  of  their  general,  were 
extolled  by  every  mouth  in  the  Forum,  and  in  the  senate- 
house:  and  in  complmnce  with  the  universal  desire,  ambas¬ 
sadors  went  to  the  camp  to  Camillas,  and  from  thence,  with 
permission  of  Camillus,  to  Rome,  to  make  a  surrender  of 
Falerii.  On  being  introduced  to  the  senate,  they  are  said  to 
have  spoken  in  this  manner:  ^  Comeript  fathers!  overcome 
by  you  and  your  general^  by  a  victory  of  such  a  kind,  as 
neither  God  nor  man  can  view  with  dispkasure  we  surrender 
oursdives  into  your  hsuu^  and  in  m  expectation  which  re¬ 
dounds  in  the  higher  degree  to  the  honour  of  the  cooquerew, 
that  we  shall  Ikve  more  happily  imdcr  your  government  than 
VOL.  I. — 3  N 

458 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

[Y-  R-  361. 

ui^er  our  own  laws.  In  the  issue  of  this  war,  two  salutary 
examples  have  been  held  out  to  mankind*  Ye  have  preferred 
good  faith  in  war,  to  present  victory.  We,  challenged  to 
emulation  in  the  observance  of  faith,  have  voluntarily  pre¬ 
sented  you  with  conquest.  We  are  your  subjects:  send  per¬ 
sons  to  receive  our  arras,  hostages,  and  our  city,  whose  gates 
they  will  find  open.  Ye  will  never  have  reason  to  complain 
of  our  fidelity,  or  we  of  your  government.”  Cam  ill  us  re¬ 
ceived  the  thanks  both  of  the  enemy  and  of  his  countrymen. 
The  Faliscians  were  ordered  to  furnish  that  year’s  pay  for 
the  soldiers,  that  the  Roman  people  might  enjoy  a  respite 
from  the  tax.  As  soon  as  peace  was  acceded  to,  the  troops 
were  brought  home  to  Rome. 
XXVIII.  Camillus  returning  home,  crowned  with  honours 
of  far  greater  value  than  when  white  horses  had  drawn  him 
in  triumph  through  the  city, being  distinguished  by  a  conquest 
acquired  through  the  means  of  justice  and  good  faith,  the 
senate  did  not  conceal  their  sense  of  the  respectful  attention 
due  to  his  concerns,  but  hastened  the  measures  for  acquitting 
him  of  his  vow.  Lucius  Valerius,  Lucius  Sergius,  and  Aulus 
Manlius  were  sent  ambassadors  with  one  ship  of  war,  to  carry 
the  golden  bowl  to  Delphi,  as  an  offering  to  Apollo.  These 
falling  in  with  some  Liparensian  pirates,  not  far  from  the  Sici¬ 
lian  streight,  were  taken  and  carried  to  Liparae.  It  was  the 
custom  of  this  state,  to  make  a  general  division  of  all  booty 
acquired,  as  if  piracy  were  the  public  act  of  the  government. 
It  happened  that  the  office  of  chief  magistrate  was  filled  by 
one  Timasitheus,  a  man  more  like  the  Rmnans  than  his  own 
Countrymen,  who,  being  touched  himself  with  reverence  for 
the  character  of  ambassadors,  for  the  offering,  for  the  god 
to  whom  it  was  sent,  and  the  cause  for  which  it  was  pre¬ 
sented,  impressed  the  multitude  likewise,  who  almost  in  aU 
resemble  their  ruler,  with  proper  sentiments  of  religion 
on  the  occasion;  and,  after  entertaining  the  ambas^dors  sA 
the  public  expense,  convoyed  them  with  some  of  his  own 
I 

BOOK  V. 

B.  C.  391.] 

459 

ships  to  Oeiphi,  and  from  thence  conducted  them  in  safety 
to  Rome.  By  decree  of  senate,  a  league  of  hospitality  was 
formed  with  him,  and  presents  were  made  him  by  order 
the  state.  During  this  year,  the  war  with  the  ^quans  was  at'- 
tended  with  advantages  pretty  equal  on  both  sides;  so  that  it 
was  a  matter  of  doubt,  both  at  Rome  and  even  among  the 
troops  themselves,  whether  they  were  victorious  or  vanquish¬ 
ed.  The  Roman  commanders  were  Caius  iEmilius  and  Spu- 
rius  Postumius,  two  of  the  military  tribunes*  At  first  they 
acted  in  conjunction,  but  after  having  defeated  the  enemy 
in  the  field,  they  came  to  a  determination  that  jEmiliiia,  with 
a  sufficient  force,  should  keep  possession  of  Verrugo,  and 
that  Postumius  should  lay  waste  the  country.  In  perform¬ 
ance  of  this,  the  latter,  since  the  late  success,  thinking  less 
caution  requisite,  and  marching  in  an  unguarded  manner, 
was  attacked  by  the  ^quans,  who  threw  his  troops  into  con¬ 
fusion,  and  drove  them  to  the  next  hills.  The  panic  spread 
from  thence  even  to  Verrugo,  to  the  other  part  of  the  army 
posted  there.  Postumius  having  withdrawn  his  men  to  a 
place  of  safety,  called  them  to  an  assembly,  where  he  up¬ 
braided  them  with  their  fright,  and  with  having  fled  from 
the  field,  being  routed  by  an  enemy  heretofore  remarkable 
for  cowardice  and  running  away.  On  which  the  whole  army 
cried  out  together,  that  they  deserved  to  hear  such  re¬ 
proaches,  and  that  they  acknowledged  the  shamefuiness  of 
their  behaviour;  but  that  they  were  at  the  same  time  deter¬ 
mined  to  make  amends  for  it,  and  that  the  conqueror’s  joy 
on  the  occasion  should  be  but  of  short  duration.  They  re¬ 
quested  earnestly  that  he  would  lead  them  thence  direct¬ 
ly  to  the  camp  of  the  enemy,  which  lay  in  the  plain  within 
their  view,  offering  to  submit  to  any  punishment  if  they  did 
not  take  it  before  night.  After  commending  their  resolution, 
he  ordered  them  to  refresh  themselves,  and  to  be  in  readi¬ 
ness  at  the  fourth  watch:  the  enemy  on  the  other  side,  with 
design  to  prevent  the  Romans  from  flying  from  the  hill  by 

460 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  361. 

night,  thfcmgh  the  road  which  led  to  Verrugo,  were  there 
|yrepared  to  receive  them,  and  the  battle  began  at  the  first 
hour.  However^  the  moon  was  up  through  the  whole  night, 
so  that  the  fight  was  managed  with  as  little  confusion  as  it 
could  have  been  by  day.  But  the  shout  reaching  Verrugo, 
where  it  was  imagix^d  that  the  Roman  camp  had  been  at¬ 
tacked,  the  troops  were  seized  with  such  terror,  that  in  spite 
of  the  in  treaties  of  iEmilius,  and  all  his  endeavours  to  detain 
them^  they  fled  to  Tusculum  in  the  utmost  disorder.  From 
thence  a  report  was. carried  to  Rome,  that  Postumius  and  his 
army  were  cut  to  pieces*  However,  as  soon  as  daylight  had 
removed  the  danger  of  falling  into  ambuscades,  in  case  of  a 
hasty  pursuit,  riding  through  the  ranks,  and  demanding  the 
performance  of  their  promises,  the  general  infused  into  the 
men  such  a  degree  of  ardour,  that  the  ^quans  could  no 
longer  withstand  their  efforts,  but  betook  themselves  to  flight, 
when  a  slaughter  of  them  ensued  (as  in  a  case  where  anger 
was  more  concerned  than  courage,)  that  ended  in  the  entire 
destruction  of  their  army;  and  the  afflicting  news  from  Tus- 
culum,  which  had  caused  a  great,  though  groundless,  alarm 
in  the  city,  were  followed  by  a  letter  from  Postumius  decked 
with  laurel,*-— that  victory  had  fallen  to  the  Roman  people, 
and  that  the  army  of  the  -^quans  was  wholly  destroyed. 
XXIX.  As  no  determination  had  yet  been  made,  with  re¬ 
spect  to  the  plans  introduced  by  the  plebeian  tribunes,  the 
commons  on  the  one  hand  laboured  to  continue  in  office  such 
of  them  as  had  promoted  the  passing  of  the  law,  and  the  pa¬ 
tricians  on  the  other,  to  procure  the  re-election  of  those  who 
had  protested  against  it.  But  the  commons  had  the  superior 
influence  in  the  election  of  their  own  magistrates:  for  which 
disappointment  the  patricians  revenged  themselves  by  passing 
a  decree  of  senate,  that  consuls  ( magistrates  ever  ckIIous  to  the 
commons)  should  be  elected.  Thus,  after  an  interval  of  fifteen 
♦  It  was  the  custom  w  hen  the  Roman  generals  sent  intelligence  of  a 
victory,  to  wrap  their  Je iters  up  in  laurel. 

B.  C,  391.] 

moK  V. 

4^1 

years,  consuls  were  again  appointed,  Lucius  Lucre*  ^  ^  $$2 
tius  Flavus,  and  Servius  Sulplcius  Camerinus.  In  390. 
the  beginning  of  this  year,  while  the  plebeian  tribunes,  unit¬ 
ing  their  efforts,  pressed  the  passing  of  their  law  with  great 
confidence,  because  there  was  not  any  of  their  body  who 
would  protest  against  it,  and  while  the  consuls  for  that  very 
reason  were  no  less  active  in  opposing  it,  (the  whole  atten* 
tion  of  the  public  being  taken  up  with  this  business,)  the 
^quans  made  themselves  masters  of  Vitellia,  a  Roman 
colony  in  their  territory.  The  general  part  of  the  colonists 
escaped  with  safety  to  Rome;  for  the  town  being  betrayed  to 
the  enemy  in  the  night,  there  was  nothing  to  hinder  their 
flight  from  the  contrary  side  of  the  city.  That  province  fell 
to  the  lot  of  the  consul  Lucias  Lucretius.  He  marched 
thither  with  an  army,  defeated  the  enemy  in  the  field,  and 
returned  to  Rome,  where  he  was  to  encounter  a  contest  of 
much  greater  difficulty.  A  prosecution  had  been  commenced 
against  Aulus  Virginias,  and  Quintus  Pomponius,  plebeian 
tribunes  of  the  two  preceding  years,  whom  the  senate  was 
bound  in  honour  to  defend  with  the  joint  exertions  of  all  the 
patricians;  for  no  one  laid  any  other  charge  against  them, 
with  respect  either  to  their  conduct  in  life,  or  their  behaviour 
in  office,  than  that,  to  gratify  the  nobles,  they  had  protested 
against  the  law  proposed  by  the  tribunes.  However,  the  re¬ 
sentment  of  the  commons  overpowered  the  influence  of  the 
senate,  and  by  a  sentence,  of  most  pernicious  example,  those 
men,  convicted  of  no  crime,  were  condemned  to  pay  a  fine 
of  ten  thousand  asses  in  weight,*  This  highly  incensed  the 
patricians:  Camillas  openly  reproached  the  commons  with 
violating  the  duty  w’hich  they  owed  to  their  own  order,  tell¬ 
ing  them,  that  “  while  they  thus  vented  their  spleen  on  their 
own  magistrates,  they  did  not  perceive  that  b)'  their  iniqui¬ 
tous  sentence  they  had  abolished  the  privilege  of  protesting. 

»  32^  lOd- 

462 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  362. 
and  by  taking  away  that  privilege,  had  overturned  the  tribu- 
nitiao  power.  For  they  were  much  mistaken  if  they  ima¬ 
gined,  that  the  patricians  would  endure  the  unbridled  licen¬ 
tiousness  of  that  office.  If  tribunitian  violence  could  not  be 
repelled  by  tribunitian  aid,  the  patricians  would  find  out  a 
weapon  of  some  other  kind.  He  censured  the  consuls  also, 
for  silently  suffering  those  tribunes,  who  had  complied  with 
the  directions  of  the  senate,  to  be  disappointed  in  their  re¬ 
liance  on  the  faith  of  the  public.”  By  such  discourses,  utter¬ 
ed  In  public,  he  exasperated  people  daily  more  and  mdre 
against  him. 
XXX.  As  to  the  senate,  he  never  ceased  urging  them  to  a 
vigorous  opposition  to  the  passing  of  the  law;  exhorting  them, 
that  ‘‘  when  the  day  arrived  on  which  it  was  to  be  put  to  the 
vote,  they  should  go  down  to  the  Forum  with  no  other  sen¬ 
timents  than  such  as  became  men  who  knew  they  were  to 
contend  for  their  religion  and  liberty;  for  the  temples  of  their 
gods,  and  the  soil  that  gave  them  birth.  As  to  his  own  par¬ 
ticular  part,  if  it  were  allowable  for  him,  during  a  contest 
wherein  the  interest  of  his  country  lay  at  stake,  to  consider 
the  aggrandizement  of  his  own  character,  it  would  even  re¬ 
dound  to  the  increase  of  his  fame,  that  a  city  which  he  had 
taken  should  be  filled  with  inhabitants,  that  he  should  every 
day  enjoy  that  monument  of  his  own  glory,  and  have  before 
his  eyes  a  people  whom  he  himself  had  led  in  his  triumph, 
and  that  all  men,  at  every  step  they  took,  should  meet  with 
testimonies  of  his  valour.  But  in  his  opinion,  it  would  be 
an  impious  proceeding,  if  a  city  forsaken  and  abandoned  by 
the  immortal  gods  were  to  be  inhabited;  if  the  Roman  peo¬ 
ple  were  to  reside  in  a  captivated  soil,  and  to  exchange  a 
victorious  for  a  vanquished  country.’’  Stimulated  by  such 
arguments,  uttered  by  the  first  man  in  the  state,  the  patri¬ 
cians,  both  old  and  young,  when  the  law  was  to  be  debated, 
came  in  a  body  to  the  Forum,  and  dispersing  themselves 
through  the  tribes,  each  endeavoured  to  influence  the  mem- 

BOOK  V. 

46J 

B.  c.  3m] 
bets  of  his  own  body;  beseeching  them,  with  tears,  not  to 
abandon  the  country,  in  defence  of  which  themselves,  and 
their  fathers,  had  fought  with  the  greatest  bravery  and  the 
greatest  success,  pointing  at  the  same  time  to  the  capitol, 
the  temple  of  Vesta,  and  the  other  temples  of  the  gods 
which  stood  within  view;  that  they  would  not  drive  the  Ro¬ 
man  people,  as  exiles  and  outcasts,  away  from  their  native 
soil  and  guardian  deities,  into  a  once  hostile  city,  and  bring 
matters  to  such  a  conclusion,  that  it  would  be  better  if  Veil 
had  never  been  taken,  lest  Rome  should  be  abandoned/’  As 
they  made  use  of  no  violence,  but  of  entreaties  only,  and 
among  these  entreaties  made  frequent  mention  of  the  gods, 
the  greatest  part  of  the  people  were  impressed  with  an  opi¬ 
nion  that  religion  was  concerned  in  the  case,  and  the  tribes, 
by  a  majority  of  one,  rejected  the  law.  The  patricians  were 
so  highly  gratified  by  this  success,  that  next  day,  the  consuls 
holding  a  meeting  for  the  purpose,  a  decree  of  senate  was 
passed,  that  a  distribution  should  be  made  to  the  commons 
of  the  Veientian  lands,  in  the  proportion  of  seven  acres  to 
each,  and  that  this  distribution  should  be  extended  not  only 
to  the  fathers  of  families,  but  to  every  person  in  their  houses 
of  free  condition,  that  they  might  have  satisfaction  in  rearing 
children  with  the  hope  of  such  an  establishment. 
XXXL  This  generosity  had  such  a  conciliatory  y  ^  353 
effect  on  the  minds  of  the  commons,  that  no  oppo-  c.  389. 
sition  was  made  to  the  election  of  consuls.  Lucius  Valerius 
Potitus  and  Marcus  Manlius,  afterwards  surnamed  Capitoli¬ 
nas,  were  appointed  to  that  office.  In  their  consulate  were 
celebrated  the  great  games  which  Marcus  Furius  when  dic¬ 
tator  had  vowed,  on  occasion  of  the  war  with  the  Veientians. 
In  this  year  also,  the  temple  of  imperial  Juno,  vowed  by  the 
same  dictator,  during  the  same  war,  was  dedicated,  and  it  is 
mentioned  that  the  matrons  displayed  an  extraordinary  de¬ 
gree  of  zeal  in  their  attendance  on  the  dedication.  In  the  cam¬ 
paign  against  the  Aiquans,  the  seat  whereof  was  at  Algldum. 

464 

HISTORY  OP  ROME. 

CY,  R.  364. 

oozing  memordile  occurred;  the  Inemy  scarcely  waitiog 
for  the  enga^tnent  to  begin,  before  they  l^took  themselves 
to  flight.  To  Valerius,  because  he  continued  the  pursuit 
and  slaughter  with  great  earnestness,  a  triumph  was  decreed; 
to  Manlius  an  ovation.  This  year  there  sprung  up  a  new 
enemy,  the  Volsinians,  against  whom  no  army  could  be  sent 
on  account  of  a  famine  and  pestilence  which  raged  in  the 
Roman  territories,  in  consequence  of  extraordinary  drought 
and  heat.  On  these  circumstances  the  Volsinians  presumed 
with  such  confidence,  that,  forming  a  junction  with  the  Sal- 
pinians,  they  made  incursions  on  the  lands  of  the  Romans. 
War  was  then  proclaimed  against  those  two  nations.  Cams 
Julius  died  in  the  office  of  censor,  and  Marcus  Cornelius 
was  substituted  in  his  room,  which  proceeding  came  after¬ 
wards  to  be  considered  as  displeasing  to  the  gods,  because 
in  that  lustrum  Rome  was  taken.  Nor  since  that  time  is  a 
censor  ever  substituted  in  the  room  of  one  dying.  The  con¬ 
suls  being  seized  by  the  distemper,  it  was  resolved  that  an 
interregnum  should  be  constituted,  and  auspices  taken  a-new. 
y.  R.  364.  XXXII.  In  pursuance  therefore  of  a  decree  of 
B.  C.  388,  senate,  the  consuls  having  resigned  their  office, 
Marcus  Furius  Camillas  was  created  interrex,  who  ap¬ 
pointed  Publius  Cornelius  Scipio  interrex,  and  he,  after¬ 
wards,  Lucius  Valerius  Potitus.  By  him  were  elected  six 
military  tribunes  with  consular  power,  to  the  end  that  in  case 
any  of  them  should  be  disabled  by  bad  health,  the  com-^ 
men  wealth  might  still  have  a  sufficient  number  of  magis¬ 
trates.  These  were  Lucius  Lucretius,  Servius  Sulpicius, 
Marcus  JSmilius,  Lucius  Furius  Medullinus  a  seventh 
time,  Agrippa  Furius,  and  Caius  iErailius  a  second  time, 
who  entered  into  office  on  the  calends  of  July.  Of  these 
Lucius  Lucretius  and  Caius  iEmilius  had  the  Volsinians  as 
their  province;  Agrippa  Furius  and  Servius  Sulpicius  the 
Salpinians.  The  first  battle  happened  with  the  Volsmians. 
This  war,  formidable  in  appearance,  from  the  great  nuad>er 

BOOK  V. 

465 

B.  C.  388 J 
of  the  enemy,  was  terminated  without  any  difficulty:  at  the 
first  onset,  their  army  was  put  to  flight,  and  eight  thousand 
of  their  soldiers,  being  surrounded  by  the  cavalry,  laid  down 
their  arms,  and  surrendered.  The  account  which  they  re¬ 
ceived  of  that  battle,  made  the  Salpinians  determine  not  to 
hazard  an  engagement;  their  troops  secured  themselves  in 
the  towns.  The  Romans,  meeting  no  opposition,  carried 
off  the  spoil  from  all  parts,  both  of  the  Volsinian  and  Salpi- 
nlan  territories,  until  the  Volsinians,  becoming  weary  of 
the  war,  had  a  truce  for  twenty  years  granted  them,  on  con¬ 
dition  that  they  should  make  restitution  to  the  Roman 
people,  and  furnish  the  pay  of  the  army  for  that  year.  During 
this  year,  Marcus  Casdicius,  a  plebeian,  gave  information 
to  the  tribunes,  that  in  the  new  street,  where  the  chapel  now 
stands,  above  the  temple  of  Vesta,  he  had  heard  in  the  dead 
of  the  night,  a  voice  louder  than  that  of  a  man,  ordering 
notice  to  be  given  to  the  magistrates,  that  the  Gauls  were 
approaching.’’  This  intelligence,  on  account  of  the  mean 
condition  of  the  author,  was,  as  frequently  happens,  disre¬ 
garded;  and  also,  because  that  nation,  lying  at  a  great  dis¬ 
tance,  was  therefore  very  little  known.  They  not  only 
slighted  the  warnings  of  the  gods,  at  this  crisis  of  impen¬ 
ding  fate,  but  the  only  human  aid  which  could  have  availed 
them,  Marcus  Furius,  they  drove  away  to  a  distance  from 
the  city;  for,  having  been  cited  by  Apuleius,  a  plebeian  tri¬ 
bune,  to  answer  a  charge  concerning  the  plunder  of  Veii, 
and  having  about  the  same  time  suffered  the  loss  of  a  son, 
who  had  almost  arrived  at  the  years  of  manhood,  he  called 
together  to  his  house  the  members  of  his  tribe  and  depend¬ 
ants,  who  composed  a  great  part  of  the  commons,  and  asked 
their  sentiments  on  the  occasion;  when  being  told,  in  answer, 
that  they  would  make  up  by  a  contribution  whatever  fine  he 
should  be  condemned  to  pay,  but  to  effect  his  acquittal  was 
out  of  their  power,  he  went  into  exile,  after  praying  to  the 
immortal  gods,  that  if  he  was  underserving  of  such  injurious 
VOL.  I. — 3  O 

466  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  364 
treatment,  they  would  speedily  give  that  ungrateful  state 
reason  to  regret  his  absence.  On  his  not  appearing,  he  was 
fined  fifteen  thousand  asses  in  weight.* 
XXXllI.  Having  thus  driven  away  the  citizen,  whose 
presence,  if  in  any  case  we  can  pronounce  with  certainty  on 
human  affairs,  would  have  effectually  saved  Rome  from 
falling  into  the  hands  of  an  enemy,  the  destined  ruin  now 
approached  the  city  with  hasty  steps:  at  this  time  ambassa¬ 
dors  arrived  from  the  people  of  Clusium,  soliciting  aid 
against  the  Gauls.  According  to  some  reports,  that  nation 
was  allured  to  cross  the  Alps,  and  take  possession  of  the 
country  formerly  cultivated  by  the  Etrurians,  by  the  de¬ 
liciousness  of  its  productions,  and  especially  of  the  wine,  a 
luxury  then  new  to  them:  and  Aruns  of  Clusium  having 
introduced  it  into  Gaul  for  the  purpose  of  enticing  that 
people,  that  he  might,  by  their  means,  gratify  his  resent¬ 
ment  for  his  wife*s  being  debauched  by  Lucumo,  (whose 
guardian  he  himself  had  been,)  a  young  man  of  overgrown 
power,  on  whom  it  would  have  been  impossible  to  inflict 
punishment  without  foreign  assistance*  He  acted  as  their 
guide,  in  passing  the  Alps,  and  advised  them  to  lay  siege 
to  Clusium.  I  do  not  indeed  take  upon  me  to  deny,  that 
the  Gauls  were  conducted  to  Clusium  by  Aruns,  or  some 
other  Clusian,  but  that  those  who  laid  siege  to  Clusium, 
were  not  the  first  who  crossed  the  Alps,  is  certain;  for  the 
Gauls  went  over  into  Italy,  two  hundred  years  before  they 
besieged  that  town,  and  took  the  city  of  Rome.  Nor  were 
these  the  first  of  the  Etrurians  with  whom  they  waged  war; 
for  long  before  this,  the  Gallic  armies  fought  many  battles 
with  those  who  dwelt  between  the  Apennines  and  the  Alps. 
The  Tuscans,  before  the  growth  of  the  Roman  empire, 
possessed  veiy  extensive  sway  both  by  land  and  sea:  how 
great  their  power  was  in  the  upper  and  lower  seas,  by  which 
Italy  is  almost  surrounded,  as  an  island,  the  names  of  those 

^  48/.  M. 

B.  C.  388.] 

BOOK  V. 

46r 

seas  demonstrate;  one  being  called  by  the  Italian  nations, 
the  Tuscan,  the  general  appellation  of  that  people j  the  other 
the  Adriatic,  from  Adria,  a  colony  of  Tuscans.  The  Greeks 
also  call  those  seas  the  Tyrrhenian  and  Adriatic.  This 
people  inhabited  both  the  tracts  of  territory  which  stretch 
from  each  side  of  the  mountain,  to  the  two  seas,  having 
founded  twelve  cities  on  either,  first  on  the  hither  side  to¬ 
wards  the  lower  sea,  and  afterwards  sending  to  the  other 
side  of  the  Apennines  as  many  colonies  as  there  were  capital 
cities  in  the  mother  country.  These  acquired  possession  of 
the  whole  region  beyond  the  Po,  all  the  way  to  the  Alps, 
except  the  corner  of  the  Venetians  who  dwell  round  the 
extreme  point  of  the  Adriatic.  The  Alpine  nations  also, 
without  doubt,  derived  their  ori/yin  from  them,  particularly 
the  Rhetians,  who  were  rendered  savage  merely  by  their 
situation,  so  as  to  retain  no  mark  of  their  original,  except 
the  accent  of  their  language,  and  not  even  that  without 
corruption. 
XXXIV.  Concerning  the  passage  of  the  Gauls  into  Italy, 
what  we  have  learned  is  this:  when  Tarquinius  Priscus 
reigned  at  Rome,  the  supreme  government  of  the  Celts, 
who  composed  one-third  part  of  Gaul,  lay  in  the  hands  of 
the  Biturigians.  These  gave  a  king  to  the  Celtic  nation, 
Ambigatus,  a  man  very  eminently  distinguished  by  his  own 
merit,  and  by  the  extraordinary  degree  of  prosperity  which 
attended  him,  both  in  his  own  private  concerns,  and  in  those 
of  the  public;  in  his  time  Gaul  was  so  fruitful,  and  so  nu¬ 
merously  peopled,  that  it  seemed  scarcely  practicable  to 
retain  such  an  enormous  multitude  under  the  direction  of 
one  government.  Being  far  advanced  in  years,  and  wishing 
to  exonerate  his  realm  of  a  crowd  with  which  it  was  over- 
burthened,  he  declared  his  intention  of  sending  away  his 
sister’s  sons,  Bellovesus  and  Sigovesus,  two  spirited  young 
men,  to  whatever  settlements  the  gods  should  point  out  by 
their  auguries;  and  that  they  should  carry  with  them  any* 

468 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  364. 

number  of  men,  which  they  themselves  should  choose;  so 
that  no  nation  which  lay  in  their  way  should  be  able  to  ob¬ 
struct  their  course.  Sigovesus  was  then  directed  by  the 
oracle  to  the  Hercinian  forest:  to  Bello vesus  the  gods  showed 
a  much  more  delightful  route  into  Italy.  He  carried  with 
him  from  the  Biturigians,  the  Arvernians  the  Senonians,  the 
iEduans,  the  Ambarrians  the  Camutians,  and  the  Aulerci- 
ans,  all  their  superfluous  numbers:  and  setting  out,  at  the 
head  of  an  immense  body  of  horse  and  foot,  arrived  in  the 
country  of  the  Tricastinians.  The  Alps  then  stood  in  his 
way,  which  I  do  not  wonder  that  these  people  should  con¬ 
sider  as  impassable,  having  never  been  climbed  over  by  any 
path,  at  least  as  far  as  we  have  been  able  to  learn,  unless  we 
choose  to  believe  the  fables  told  of  Hercules.  Whilst  the 
height  of  the  mountains  kept  the  Gauls  penned  up  as  it 
were,  and  while  they  were  looking  about  for  some  route 
between  those  lofty  summits  which  joined  the  sky,  an 
ominous  incident  also  gave  them  some  delay;  for  an  account 
was  brought  to  them,  that  some  strangers,  who  had  come  in 
search  of  lands,  were  attacked  by  the  nation  of  the  Salyaas; 
these  were  the  Massilians  who  had  come  by  sea  from 
Phocea.’^  The  Gauls,  considering  this  as  prognostic  of  their 
own  fortune,  gave  them  their  assistance,  in  fortifying  the 
ground,  which  they  had  first  seized  on  their  landing,  covered 
with  wide  extended  woods.  They  themselves  climbed  over 
the  pathless  Alps,  through  the  forest  of  Taurinum,  routed 
the  Tuscans  in  battle,  not  far  from  the  river  Ticinus;  and, 
hearing  that  the  district  in  which  they  had  posted  them¬ 
selves,  was  called  Insubria,  the  same  name  by  which  one  of 
*  A  city  of  Asia  Minor,  built  by  a  colony  of  Atbeoians.  Being  be¬ 
sieged  and  hard  pressed  by  Harpagus,  an  officer  of  Cyrus  king  of  Persia, 
the  inhabitants  resolved  to  abandon  the  town,  and  seek  another  residence. 
Accordin^y,  after  uttering  heavy  iinprecaticHas  on  themselves,  if  they 
should  ever  return,  they  carried  their  effects  on  board  their  ships,  and, 
tailing  to  the  coast  of  Provence,  founded  the  city  of  Marseilles. 

B.  C.  388,] 

BOOK  V, 

469 

the  cantons  of  the  Insubrian  jEdusais  was  distinguished, 
they  embraced  the  omen  which  the  place  presented,  and 
founded  there  a  city  which  they  called  Mediolanum, 
XXXV.  Some  time  after,  another  body,  composed  of  the 
Cenomanians,  under  the  conduct  of  Elitovius,  following  the 
tracks  of  the  former,  made  their  way  over  the  Alps,  through 
the  same  forest,  Bellovesus  favouring  their  march,  and  set¬ 
tled  themselves  where  the  cities  Brixia  and  Verona  now 
stand,  places  then  possessed  by  the  Libuans.  After  these, 
came  the  Salluvians,  who  fixed  their  abode  near  the  ancient 
canton  of  the  Ligurians,  called  Leevi,  who  inhabited  the 
banks  of  the  Ticiaus.  The  next  who  came  over  were  the 
Boians  and  Lingonians,  through  the  Penine  pass,  who,  find¬ 
ing  all  the  space  between  the  Alps  and  the  Po  already  occu¬ 
pied,  crossed  the  Po  on  rafts,  and  drove  out  of  the  country, 
not  only  the  Etrurians,  but  the  Umbriai^  also.  They  con¬ 
fined  themselves  however  within  the  Apennines.  After  them 
the  Senonians,  the  latest  of  these  emigrants,  possessed  them¬ 
selves  of  the  track  which  reaches  from  the  river  Utens  to 
the  iEsis.  This  latter  people,  I  find,  it  was,  who  came  to 
Clusiura,  and  from  thence  to  Rome.  But  whether  alone,  or 
assisted  by  all  the  nations  of  Cisalpine  Gauls,  is  not  known 
with  certainty.  The  Clusians,  on  observing  so  great  a  multi¬ 
tude,  the  appearance  of  the  men,  too,  being  different  from 
any  which  they  had  seen  before,  and  also  the  kind  of  arms 
which  they  carried,  were  terrified  at  the  approach  of  this 
strange  enemy;  and  having  heard  that  the  legions  of  the 
Etrurians  had  been  often  defeated  by  them,  on.  both  sides  of 
the  Po,  determined,  although  they  had  no  claim  on  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  either  in  right  of  alliance  or  Friendship,  except  that 
they  had  not  protected  their  relations  the  Veientians  in  op¬ 
position  to  the  Roman  people,  to  send  ambassadors  to  Rome, 
to  solicit  aid  from  the  senate;  which  request  was  not  com¬ 
plied  with.  The  three  Fabii,  sons  of  Ambustus,  were  sent  to 
mediate  with  the  Gauls,  in  the  name  of  the  senate  and  com- 

470 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  S64. 

mom  of  Rome;  who  recommended  to  diem  not  to  attack  the 
allies  and  fiiends  of  the  Roman  people,  from  whom  they  had 
received  no  injury,  and  whom  they  would  be  obliged  to  sup¬ 
port  even  by  force  of  arms,  if  matters  went  so  far;  but  who, 
at  the  same  time,  would  be  better  pleased,  that  hostile  pro¬ 
ceedings  should  be  avoided  if  possible,  and  that  their  ac¬ 
quaintance  with  the  Gauls,  a  nation  to  whom  they  were  as 
yet  strangers,  should  commence  in  an  amicable  rather  than 
in  an  hostile  manner. 
XXXVL  This  was  an  embassy  mild  in  its  import,  but  in¬ 
trusted  to  men  of  tempers  too  ferocious,  more  resembling 
Gauls  than  Romans.  These,  having  explained  their  com¬ 
mission  in  an  assembly  of  the  Gauls,  received  for  answer, 
that  although  this  was  the  first  time  that  they  had  heard  the 
name  of  the  Romans,  yet  they  supposed,  that  they  were  men 
of  bravery,  whose  assistance  the  Clusians  had  implored  in  a 
conjuncture  so  perilous;  and  in  consideration  of  their  having 
chosen  to  interfere  between  their  allies  and  them,  in  the  way 
of  negociation,  rather  than  that  of  arms,  they  would  make  no 
objection  to  the  amicable  terras  which  they  proposed,  pro¬ 
vided  that  the  Clusians,  who  possessed  a  greater  portion  of 
land  than  they  turned  to  use,  would  give  up  a  part  of  it  to  the 
Gauls,  who  wanted  it.  On  no  other  terms,  they  said,  was 
peace  to  be  obtained:  that  they  wished  to  receive  an  answer 
in  presence  of  the  Romans,  and  if  the  land  were  refused 
them ,  would  also  decide  the  matter  by  arms  in  the  presence  of 
the  same  Romans,  that  they  might  inform  their  countrymen, 
how  far  the  Gauls  excelled  the  rest  of  mankind  in  bravery. 
The  Romans  asking,  by  what  right  they  could  demand  land 
from  the  possessors,  and  in  case  of  refusal  threaten  war;  and 
what  concern  the  Gauls  had  in  Etruria?  The  others  fiercely 
replied,  that  they  carried  their  right  on  the  points  of  their 
swords,  and  that  all  things  were  the  property  of  the  brave. 
Thus,  with  minds  inflamed  on  both  sides,  they  hastily  sepa¬ 
rated  to  prepare  for  battle,  which  began  without  delay.  Here, 

BOOK  V. 

471 

B.  C.  S88.3 
fate  MW  pressing  tbe  city  of  Rome^  the  ambassadors,  con* 
trary  to  the  law  of  nations,  took  a  part  in  the  action;  a  fact 
which  could  not  be  concealed,  for  three  of  the  noblest  and 
bravest  of  the  Roman  youth  fought  in  the  van  of  the  Etru* 
rian  army;  and  Uie  valour  of  these  foreigners  was  eminently 
conspicuous.  Besides,  Quintus  Fabius  rode  forward  beyond 
the  line,  and  slew  a  general  of  the  Gauls,  who  was  making  a 
furious  charge  against  the  standards  of  the  Etrurians,  fun¬ 
ning  him  through  the  side  with  his  spear.  He  was  known  by 
the  Gauls,  while  he  was  stripping  him  of  his  spoils;  on  which 
notice  was  conveyed  round  through  the  whole  army,  that  he 
was  one  of  the  Roman  ambassadors.  Dropping  therefore 
their  resentment  against  the  Clusians,  they  sounded  a  retreat, 
threatening  to  wreak  their  vengeance  on  the  Romans.  Some 
advised  that  they  should  march  instantly  to  Rome.  But  the 
opinion  of  the  elders  prevailed;  that  ambassadors  should  first 
be  sent  to  complain  of  the  ill  treatment,  which  they  had  re¬ 
ceived,  and  to  deman4  that  the  Fabii  should  be  delivered  into 
their  hands  as  a  satisfaction  for  having  violated  the  law  of 
nations.  When  the  ambassadors  of  the  Gauls  had  explained 
those  matters  according  to  their  commission,  the  senate  were 
highly  displeased  at  the  behaviour  of  the  Fabii,  and  thought  the 
demand  of  the  barbarians  just;  but  in  the  caseof  nobles,  of  such 
exalted  rank,  partial  favour  prevented  their  passing  a  decree 
conformable  to  their  judgment.  Lest,  therefore,  they  might 
be  chargeable  with  any  misfortune,  which  might  perhaps  be 
sustained  in  a  war  with  the  Gauls,  they  referred  the  deter¬ 
mination,  on  the  demands  of  the  Gauls,  to  the  assembly  of 
the  people:  where  so  prevalent  was  the  influence  of  interest 
and  wealth,  that  Ae  very  persons  whose  punishment  was  the 
subject  of  deliberation,  were  appointed  military  tribunes  with 
consular  power  for  the  ensuing  year.  At  which  proceeding 
the  Gauls  being  justly  enraged,  and  openly  denouncing  war, 
returned  to  their  countrymen.  Together  with  the  y.  R.  365. 
three  Fabii,  were  appointed  military  tribunes, 

472  HISTORY pF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  365. 
Quintus  Sulpicius  Longus,  Quintus  Serviiius  a  fourth  time, 
and  Servius  Cornelius  Maluginensis. 
XXXVII.  When  fortune  is  determined  upon  the  ruin  of 
a  people,  she  can  so  blind  them,  as  to  render  them  insensi¬ 
ble  to  danger,  even  of  the  greatest  magnitude:  accordingly 
the  Roman  stgte,  which,  in  its  wars  with  the  Fidenatians  and 
Veicntians  and  other  neighbouring  enemies,  had  left  no  means 
untried  to  procure  aid,  and  had,  on  many  occasions,  nomi¬ 
nated  a  dictator;  yet  now,  when  an  enemy  whom  they  had 
never  met,  or  even  heard  of,  was,  from  the  ocean  and  the 
remotest  coasts,  advancing  in  arms  against  them,  they  look¬ 
ed  not  for  any  extraordinary  command  or  assistance.  Tri¬ 
bunes,  whose  temerity  had  brought  on  the  troubles,  were  in¬ 
trusted  with  the  reins  of  government,  and  they  used  no 
greater  diligence  in  levying  forces,  than  was  usual  in  case  of 
a  rupture  with  any  of  their  neighbours,  extenuating  the  im¬ 
portance  which  fame  gave  to  the  war.  Meanwhile  the  Gauls, 
hearing  that  the  violators  of  the  rights  of  mankind  had  even 
been  recompensed  with  honours,  and  that  their  embassy  had 
been  slighted,  inflamed  with  anger,  a  passion  which  that  na¬ 
tion  knows  not  how  to  control,  instantly  snatched  up  their 
ensigns,  and  began  to  march  with  the  utmost  expedition. 
When  their  precipitate  movement  caused  such  an  alarm 
wherever  they  passed,  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  cities  ran 
together  to  arms,  and  the  peasants  betook  themselves  to 
flight,  they  signified  to  them,  by  loud  shouts,  that  it  was  to 
Rome  they  were  going,  while  the  space  covered  by  their 
men  and  horses  was  immense,  the  troops  spreading  widely 
on  every  side.  But  report  outstripped  them;  and  messengers 
also  from  the  Clusian,  and  from  several  other  states,  one  af¬ 
ter  another,  and  the  quickness  of  the  enemy’s  proceedings, 
caused  the  utmost  consternation  among  the  Romans,  whose 
army,  composed,  in  a  manner,  of  tumultuary  troops,  with  all 
the  haste  which  they  could  make,  scarce  advanced  so  far  as 
the  eleventh  stone  before  they  met  them,  where  the  river 

BOOK  V. 

473 

B.  C.  387.] 
Allia^  running  down  from  the  Crustuminian  mountains  in  a 
very  deep  channel^  joins  the  Tiber,  a  little  way  below  the 
road.  Already  every  place,  in  front,  and  on  each  side,  was 
occupied  by  numerous  bodies  of  Gauls;  and,  as  that  nation 
has  a  natural  turn  for  aggravating  terror  by  confusion,  by 
their  harsh  music  and  discordant  clamours,  they  filled  the 
air  with  a  horrible  din. 
XXXVII f.  There  the  military  tribunes,  without  having 
previously  formed  a  camp,  without  the  precaution  of  raising 
a  rampart  which  might  secure  a  retreat,  regardless  of  duty 
to  the  gods,  to  say  nothing  of  that  to  man,  without  taking 
auspices,  without  offering  a  sacrifice,  drew  up  their  line, 
which  they  extended  on  towards  the  flanks,  lest  they  should 
be  surrounded  by  the  numerous  forces  of  the  enemy.  Still 
they  could  not  show  an  equal  front,  and  at  the  same  time 
thinned  their  line  in  such  a  manner,  as  weakened  the  centre, 
and  left  it  scarce  sufEcient  to  fill  up  the  ranks  without  a 
breach.  There  was  a  small  eminence  on  the  right,  which 
they  determined  to  occupy  with  a  body  of  reserve;  which 
measure,  as  it  gave  the  first  cause  to  their  dismay  and  de¬ 
sertion  of  the  field,  so  it  proved  the  only  means  of  safety  in 
their  flight.  Brennus,  the  chieftain  of  the  Gauls,  thinking, 
that  as  his  enemies  were  few,  their  skill  was  what  he  had 
chiefly  to  guard  against;  and  supposing,  that  the  eminence 
had  been  seized  with  design,  that  when  the  Gauls  should 
be  engaged  in  front  with  the  line  of  the  legions,  that  reserv¬ 
ed  body  might  make  an  attack  on  their  rear  and  flank,  turn¬ 
ed  his  force  against  the  reserve,  not  doubting,  that  if  he  could 
dislodge  them  from  their  post,  bis  troops,  so  much  superior 
in  number,  would  find  an  easy  victory  in  the  plain:  thus  not 
only  fortune,  but  judgment  also  stood  on  the  side  of  the  bar¬ 
barians.  In  the  opposite  army  there  appeared  nothing  like 
Romans,  either  among  the  commanders,  or  the  soldiers. 
Terror  and  dismay  had  taken  possession  of  their  minds,  and 
such  a  total  unconcern  for  the  rest  of  mankind,  that  greater 
VOL.  I. — 3  P 

474f 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  365. 

numbers  by  far  fled  to  Vcii,  a  city  of  their  enemy,  though 
the  Tiber  lay  across  the  way,  than  by  the  direct  road  to 
Rome,  to  their  wives  and  children.  The  situation  of  the 
ground  for  some  time  defended  the  reserve:  but  those  who 
composed  the  rest  of  the  line,  on  their  flank,  smd  on  their 
rear,  no  sooner  heard  the  shout,  th^,  not  only  without  at¬ 
tempting  to  fight,  but  without  even  returning  the  shout,  fresh 
as  they  were,  and  unhurt,  they  ran  away  from  an  untried 
enemy,  and  at  whom  they  had  scarcely  ventured  to  look. 
Thus,  no  lives  were  lost  in  battle;  but  their  rear  was  cut  to 
pieces  while  they  crowded  on  one  another,  in  such  hurry  and 
confusion,  as  retarded  their  retreat.  Great  slaughter  was 
made  on  the  bank  of  the  Tiber,  whither  the  whole  left  wing, 
after  throwing  away  their  arms,  had  directed  their  flight; 
and  great  numbers  who  knew  not  how  to  swim,  or  were  not 
very  strong,  being  burthened  with  their  coats  of  mail  and 
other  defensive  armour,  were  swallowed  up  in  the  current. 
However  the  greatest  part  escaped  safe  to  Veii,  from  whence 
they  neither  sent  any  reinforcement  to  Rome,  nor  even  a 
courier  to  give  notice  of  their  defeat.  Those  of  the  right 
wing  which  had  been  posted  at  a  distance  from  the  river, 
near  the  foot  of  the  mountain,  all  took  the  way  to  Rome,  and 
without  even  shutting  the  gates  of  the  city,  made  their  way 
into  the  citadel. 
/  XXXIX.  On  the  other  band,  the  attainment  of  such  a 
speedy,  such  an  almost  miraculous  victory,  astonished  the 
Gauls.  At  first,  they  stood  motionless  through  apprehension 
for  their  own  safety,  scarcely  knowing  what  had  happened; 
then,  they  dreaded  some  stratagem;  at  length,  they  collected 
the  spoils  of  the  slain,  and  piled  the  arms  in  heaps,  accord¬ 
ing  to  their  practice.  And  now,  seeing  no  sign  of  an  enemy 
any  where,  they  at  last  began  to  march  forward,  and  a  little 
before  sun-set  arrived  near  the  city  of  Rome,  where  receiv¬ 
ing  intelligence  by  some“  horsemen  who  had  advanced  be¬ 
fore,  that  the  gates  were  open  wid:u>ut  any  troops  posted  to 

J8.  C.  387J 

BOOK  V. 

47S 

defend  them,  wxt  any  s<#1diers  on  the  walls,  this  second  in* 
cident,  x^t  less  unaccountaUe  than  the  former,  induced 
them  to  halt:  and,  apprehending  danger  from  the  darkness 
of  the  night,  and  their  ignorance  of  the  situation  of  the  city^ 
they  took  post  between  Rome  and  the  Anio,  sending  scouts 
about  the  walls,  and  the  several  gates,  to  discover  what  plans 
the  enemy  would  pursue  in  this  desperate  state  their  affairs. 
The  Roman  soldiers,  who  were  living,  jheir  friends  lamented 
as  lost;  the  greater  part  of  them  having  gone  from  the  field 
of  battle  to  Veil,  and  no  one  supposing  that  any  survived, 
except  those  who  had  come  home  to  Rome*  In  fine,  the  city 
was  almost  entirely  filled  with  sorrowings.  But  on  the  ar¬ 
rival  of  intelligence  that  the  enemy  were  at  hand,  the  appre¬ 
hensions  excited  by  the  public  danger  stifled  all  private  sor¬ 
row;  soon  after,  the  barbarians  patroling  about  the  walls  in 
troops,  they  heard  their  yells  and  the  dissonant  clangour  of 
their  martial  instruments.  During  the  whole  interval,  be¬ 
tween  this  an^  the  next  morning,  they  were  held  in  the  most 
anxious  suspense,  every  moment  expecting  an  assault  to  be 
made  on  the  city.  At  the  enemy’s  first  approach,  it  was 
supposed  that  they  would  begin  the  attack  as  soon  as  they 
should  arrive  at  the  city,  since,  if  this  were  not  their  inten¬ 
tion,  they  would  probably  have  remained  at  the  Allia.  Their 
fears  were  various  and  many;  first,  they  imagined  that  the 
place  would  be  instantly  stormed,  because  there  was  not 
much  of  the  day  remaining;  then  that  the  design  was  put  off 
until  night,  in  order  to  strike  the  greater  terror.  At  last,  the 
approach  of  light  sunk  them  in  dismay,  and  the  evil  itself 
which  they  dreaded,  closed  this  scene  of  unremitted  appre¬ 
hension,  the  enemy  marching  through  the  gates  in  hostile 
array.  During  that  night,  however,  and  also  the  following 
day,  the  state  preserved  a  character,  very  different  from  that 
which  such  a  dastardly  flight  at  the  Allia  had  indicated:  for 
there  being  no  room  to  hope  that  the  city  could  possibly  be 
defended  by  the  small  number  of  troops  remaining,  a  rcs<>* 

476 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  36^, 

iutfon  was  that  the  young  men  who  were  fit  to  bear 
arms,  ahd  the  abler  part  of  the  senate,  with  their  wives  and 
children,  should  go  up  into  the  citadel  and  the  capitol;  and 
li^ving  collected  stores  of  arms  and  com,  should,  in  that 
strong  post,  maintain  the  defence  of  the  deities,  of  the  in¬ 
habitants,  and  of  the  honour  of  Rome.  That  the  Flamen 
Quirinalis,  and  the  vestal  priestesses,  should  carry  away,  far 
from  slaughter  and  confiagration,  all  that  appertained  to  the 
gods  of  the  state;  and  that  their  worship  should  not  be  in¬ 
termitted,  until  there  should  be  no  one  left  to  perfqrm  it. 
‘‘  If  the  citadel  and  the  capitol,  the  mansion  of  the  gods;  if 
the  senate,  the  source  of  public  counsel;  if  the  youth  of  mili¬ 
tary  age,  should  survive  the  ruin  which  impended  over  the 
city,  they  must  deem  the  loss  of  the  aged  light,  as  of  a  crowd 
whom  they  were  under  the  necessity  of  leaving  behind,  though 
with  a  certain  prospect  of  their  perishing.”  That  such  of 
this  deserted  multitude  as  consisted  of  plebeians,  might  bear 
their  doom  with  the  greater  resignation,  the*  aged  nobles, 
formerly  dignified  with  triumphal  honours  and  consulships, 
openly  declared,  that  they  would  meet  death  along  with 
them,  and  would  not  burthen  the  scanty  stores  of  the  fighting 
men,  with  bodies  incapable  of  carrying  arms,  and  of  protecting 
their  country.”  Such  were  the  consolations  addressed' to  each 
other  by  the  aged  who  were  destined  to  death. 
XL.  Their  exhortations  were  then  turned  to  the  band  of 
young  men,  whom  they  escorted  to  the  capitol  and  citadel, 
tommending  to  their  valour  and  youthful  vigour  the  remain¬ 
ing  fortune  of  their  city,  which,  through  the  course  of  three 
hundred  and  sixty  years,  had  ever  been  victorious  in  all  its 
r  wars.  When  those  who  carried  with  them  every  hope  and 
every  resource,  parted  with  the  others,  who  had  determined 
not  to  survive  the  capture  and  destruction  of  the  city,  the 
view  which  it  exhibited  was  sufficient  to  call  forth  the  live¬ 
liest  feelings,  the  women  at  the  same  time  running  up  and 
down  in  distraction,  now  following  one  party,  then  the  other. 

B,  c.  ssr,] 

BOOK  V. 

477 

asking  their  husbands  and  their  sons,  to  what  fate  they  would 
consign  them?  All  together  formed  such  a  picture  of  human 
wo  as  could  admit  of  no  aggravation.  A  great  part,  how¬ 
ever,  of  the  women  followed  their  relations  into  the  citadel, 
no  one  either  hindering  or  inviting  them;  because,  though 
the  measure  of  lessening  the  number  of  useless  persons  in  a 
siege,  might  doubtless  be  advisable  in  one  point  of  view,  yet 
it  was  a  measure  of  extreme  inhumanity.  The  rest  of  the 
multitude,  consisting  chiefly  of  plebeians,  for  whom  there 
was  neither  room  on  so  small  a  hill,  nor  a  possibility  of  sup¬ 
port  in  so  great  a  scarcity  of  corn,  pouring  out  of  the  city  in 
one  continued  train,  repaired  to  the  Janiculum.  From  thence 
some  dispersed  through  the  country,  and  others  made  their 
way  to  the  neighbouring  cities,  without  any  leader,  or  any 
concert,  each  pursuing  his  own  hopes  and  his  own  plans,  those 
of  the  public  being  deplored  as  desperate.  In  the  mean  time, 
the  Flamen  Quirinalis,  and  the  Vestal  virgins,  laying  aside 
all  concern  for  their  own  affairs,  and  consulting  together 
which  of  the  sacred  deposits  they  should  take  with  them, 
and  which  they  should  leave  behind,  for  they  had  not  strength 
sufficient  to  carry  all,  and  what  place  they  could  best  de¬ 
pend  on  for  preserving  them  in  safe  custody,  judged  it  the 
most  eligible  method  to  inclose  them  in  casks,  and  to  bury 
them  under  ground,  in  the  chapel  next  to  the  dwelling-house 
of  the  Flamen  Quirinalis,  where  at  present  it  is  reckoned 
profane  even  to  spit.  The  rest  they  carried,  distributing  the 
burthens  among  themselves,  along  the  road  which  leads  over 
the  Sublician  bridge,  to  the  Janiculum.  On  the  ascent  of  that 
hill,  I.ucius  Albinius,  a  Roman  plebeian,  was  conve)  ing  away 
in  a  wagon  his  wile  and  children,  but  observing  them  among 
the  crowd  of  those  who  being  unfit  for  war  were  retiring 
from  the  city,  and  retaining,  even  in  his  present  calamitous 
state,  a  regard  to  the  distinction  between  things  divine  and 
homun,  he  thought  it  would  betray  a  v  an*  of  respect  to  reli¬ 
gion,  it  the  public  priests  ot  the  Roman  people  were  to  go 

4^8 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

[Y,  R.  365, 

on  foot,  thus  hfdtiy  whilst  he  mid  his  familf  were  seen 
mounted  hi  a  carriage;  ordering  his  wife  and  chiUfa’en  then 
to  alight,  be  pot  die  virgins  and  the  sacred  things  ii^  die 
wagon,  and  conveyed  them  to  Oere,  whither  the  priests  had 
determined  to  go. 
XLI.  Meanwhile,  at  Rome,  when  every  dispmition  for 
the  defence  of  the  citadel  had  been  completed,  as  far  as  was 
possible  in  such  a  conjuncture,  the  aged  crowd  withdrew  to 
their  houses,  and  there,  with  a  firmness  of  mind  not  to  be 
shaken  by  the  approach  of  death,  waited  the  coming  erf  the 
enemy:  such  of  them  as  had  held  curule  offices,  choosing  to 
die  in  that  garb  which  displayed  the  emblems  of  their  for¬ 
mer  fortune,  of  their  honours,  or  of  their  merk,  put  on  the 
most  splendid  rc4>es  worn,  when  they  draw  the  chariots  of  the 
gods  in  procession,  or  ride  in  triumf^*  Thus  habited,  they 
seated  themselves  in  their  ivory  chmrs  at  the  fronts  oi  their 
houses.  Some  say  that  they  devoted  themselves  for  the  safe- 
.ty  of  their  country  and  their  fellow  citizens;  and  that  they 
sung  a  hymn  upon  the  occasion,  Marcus  Fabius,  the  chief 
pontiff,  dictating  the  form  of  words  to  them.  On  the  side  of 
the  Gauls,  as  the  keenness  of  their  rage,  excited  by  the  fight, 
had  abated  during  the  ni^t;  and,  as  they  had  neither  met 
any  dangerous  opposition  in  the  field,  nor  were  now  taking 
the  city  by  storm  or  force;  they  marched  next  day,  without 
any  anger  or  any  heat  of  passion,  into  the  city,  through  the 
CoUine  gate,  which  stood  open,  and  advanced  to  the  Forum, 
casting  round  their  eyes  on  the  temples  of  the  gods,  and  on 
the  citadel,  the  only  place  which  had  the  appearance  of  mak¬ 
ing  resistance.  From  thence,  leaving  a  small  guard  to  pre¬ 
vent  any  attack  from  the  citadel  or  capitbl,  they  ran  about 
in  quest  of  plunder.  Not  meeting  a  human  being  in  the 
streets,  part  of  them  rushed  in  a  body  to  the  houses  that 
stood  nearest;  part  sought  the  most  distant,  as  expecting  to 
find  them  untouched  and  abounding  with  spoil.  Afterwards, 
being  frightened  from  thence,  by  the  very  solitude,  and  fear- 

B.  C.  387.] 

BOOK.  V, 

479 

mg  lest  some  secret  desi^  of  the  enemy  might  be  put  in 
execution  against  them,  while  they  were  thus  dispersed,  they 
formed  themselves  into  bodies,  and  returned  again  to  the 
Forum,  and  places  adjoining  to  it.  Findingithe  houses  of  the 
plebeians  shut  up,  and  the  palaces  of  the  nobles  standing 
open,  they  showed  rather  greater  backwardness  to  attack 
these  that  were  open,  than  such  as  were  shut:  with  such  a 
degree  of  veneration  did  they  behold  men  sitting  in  the 
porches  of  those  palaces,  who,  beside  their  ornaments  and 
apparel,  more  splendid  than  became  mortals,  bore  the  nearest 
resemblance  to  gods,  in  the  majesty  displayed  in  their  looks, 
and  the  gravity  of  their  countenances.  It  is  said,  that  while 
they  stood  gazing  as  on  statues,  one  of  them,  Marcus  Papi- 
rius,  provoked  the  anger  of  a  Gaul,  by  striking  him  on  the 
head  with  his  ivory  sceptre,  while  he  was  streaking  his 
beard,  which  at  that  time  was  universally  worn  long;  that 
the  slaughter  began  with  him,  and  that  the  rest  were  slain  in 
their  seats*  The  nobles  being  put  to  death,  the  remainder  of 
the  people  met  the  same  fate.  The  houses  were  plundered, 
and  then  set  on  fire.  ^ 
XLIL  However,  whether  it  was,  that  they  were  not  all 
possessed  with  a  desire  of  reducing  the  city  to  ruins,  or 
whether  the  design  had  been  adopted  by  the  chiefs  of  the 
Gauls,  that  some  fires  should  be  presented  to  the  view  of  the 
Iiesieged,  for  the  purpose  of  terrifying  them,  and  to  try  if 
they  could  be  compelled  to  surrender,  through  affection  to 
their  own  dwellings,  or  that  they  had  determined  that  all  the 
houses  should  not  be  burned  down,  because  whatever  re¬ 
mained,  they  could  hold  as  a  pledge,  by  means  of  which  the\ 
might  work  upon  the  minds  of  the  garrison,  the  fire  did  not^ 
during  the  first  day,  spread  extensively,  as  is  usual  in  a  cap¬ 
tured  city.  The  Romans,  beholding  the  enemy  from  the 
citadel,  who  ran  up  and  down  through  every  street,  while 
some  new  scene  of  horror  arose  to  their  view  in  every  dif¬ 
ferent  quarter,  were  scarcely  sdsle  to  preserve  their  presence 

480 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  365. 
of  mind.  To  whatever  side  the  shouts  of  the  enemy,  the 
cries  of  women  and  children,  the  crackling  from  the  flames; 
and  the  crash  of  falling  houses  called  their  attention,  thither, 
deeply  shocked  at  every  incident,  they  turned  their  eyes, 
their  thoughts,  as  if  placed  by  fortune  to  be  spectators  of  the 
fall  of  their  country; — left,  in  short,  not  for  the  purpose  of 
protecting  any  thing  belonging  to  them,  but  merely  their  own 
persons,  much  more  deserving  of  commiseration,  indeed, 
than  any  before  who  were  ever  beleaguered;  as  by  the  siege 
which  they  had  to  sustain  they  were  excluded  from  their  na¬ 
tive  city,  whilst  thev  saw  every  thing  which  they  held  dear 
in  the  power  of  the  enemy.  Nor  was  the  night,  which  suc¬ 
ceeded  such  a  shocking  day,  attended  with  more  tranquillity. 
The  morning  appeared  vdth  an  aspect  equally  dismal;  nor 
did  any  portion  of  time  relieve  them  from  the  sight  of  a 
constant  succession  of  ne\r  distresses.  Loaded  and  over¬ 
whelmed  with  such  a  multiplicity  of  evils,  they  notwith¬ 
standing  remitted  nought  of  their  firmness;  determined, 
though  they  should  see  every  thing  in  flames,  and  levelled 
with  the  dust,  to  defend  by  their  bravery  the  hill  which  they 
occupied,  small  and  ill  provided  as  it  was,  yet  being  the  only 
refuge  of  their  liberty.  And  as  the  same  ev^ents  recurred 
every  day,  they  became  so  habituated,  as  it  were,  to  disas¬ 
ters,  that,  abstracting  their  thoughts  as  much  as  possible  from 
their  circumstances,  they  regarded  the  arms,  and  the  swords 
in  their  hands,  as  their  only  hopes. 
XL  I II.  On  the  other  side,  the  Gauls,  having  for  several 
days  waged  only  an  ineffectual  war  against  the  buildings, 
and  perceiving  that  among  the  fires  and  ruins  of  the  city  no¬ 
thing  now  remained  but  a  band  of  armed  enemies,  who  were 
neither  terrified  in  the  least,  nor  likely  to  treat  of  a  capitu¬ 
lation  unless  force  were  applied,  resolved  to  have  recourse 
to  extremities,  and  to  make  an  assault  on  the  citadel.  On  a 
signal  given,  at  the  first  light,  their  whole  multitude  was 
marshalled  in  the  Forum,  from  whence,  after  raising  the 

BOOK  V. 

481 

B,  C.  387.] 
shout,  and  forming  a  tcstudo,*  they  advanced  to  the  attack. 
The  Romans  in  their  defence  did  nothing  rashly,  nor  in  a 
hurry;  but  having  strengthened  the  guards  at  every  approach, 
and  opposing  the  main  strength  of  their  men  on  the  quarter 
where  they  saw  the  battalions  advancing,  they  suffered  them 
to  mount  the  hill,  judging  that  the  higher  they  should  ascend, 
the  more  easily  they  might  be  driven  back,  down  the  steep. 
About  the  middle  of  the  ascent  they  met:  and  there  making 
their  charge  down  the  declivity,  which  of  itself  bore  them 
against  the  enemy,  routed  the  Gauls  with  such  slaughter,  and 
such  destruction,  occasioned  by  their  falling  down  the  pre¬ 
cipice,  that  they  never  afterwards,  either  in  parties,  or  with 
their  whole  force,  made  another  trial  of  that  kind  of  fight. 
Laying  aside  therefore  the  hope  of  effecting  their  approaches 
by  force  of  arms,  they  resolved  to  form  a  blockade,  for  which, 
having  never  until  this  time  thought  of  making  provision, 
they  were  ill  prepared.  With  the  houses,  all  was  consumed 
in  the  city;  and  in  the  course  of  the  days  they  had  passed 
there,  the  produce  of  the  country  round  about  had  been  has- 
tily  carried  off  to  Veii.  Wherefore  dividing  their  forces, 
they  determined  that  one  part  should  be  employed  in  plun¬ 
dering  among  the  neighbouring  nations,  while  the  other  car¬ 
ried  on  the  siege  of  the  citadel,  in  order  that  the  ravagers  of 
the  country  might  supply  the  besiegers  witji  corn. 
XL  IV.  The  party  of  Gauls,  which  marched  away  from 
the  city,  were  conducted  merely  by  the  will  of  fortune,  who 
chose  to  make  a  trial  of  Roman  bravery,  to  Ardea,  where 
Camillas  dwelt  in  exile,  pining  in  sorrow,  and  more  deeply 
grieving  at  the  distresses  of  the  public,  than  at  his  own;  ac¬ 
cusing  godsend  men,  burning  with  indignation,  and  wonder¬ 
ing  where  were  now  those  men  who  with  him  had  taken 
Veii,  and  Falerii;  those  men  who,  in  other  wars,  had  ever 
*  Forming  themselves  into  a  compact  body,  with  their  shields  joined 
together,  and  held  over  their  heads  to  protect  them  from  the  missile  wea¬ 
pons  of  the  enemy, 
VOL.  I. — 3  Q 

482 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  365. 

been  more  indebted  to  their  own  courage,  than  to  chance. 
Thus  pondering,  he  heard,  on  a  sudden,  that  the  army  of  the 
Gauls  was  approaching,  and  that  the  people  of  Ardea  in  con¬ 
sternation  were  met  in  council  on  the  subject.  On  which,  as 
if  moved  by  divine  inspiration,  he  advanced  into  the  midst 
of  their  assembly,  having  hitherto  been  accustomed  to  ab* 
sent  himself  from  such  meetings,  and  said,  People  of  Ar¬ 
dea,  my  friends  of  old,  of  late  my  fellow -citizens  also,  a  re¬ 
lation  encouraged  by  your  kindness,  and  formed  by  my  for¬ 
tune;  let  not  any  of  you  imagine,  that  my  coming  hither  to 
your  council  is  owing  to  my  having  forgotten  my  situation; 
but  the  present  case,  and  the  common  danger,  render  it  ne¬ 
cessary  that  every  one  should  contribute  to  the  public  every 
kind  of  assistance  in  his  power.  And  when  shall  I  repay  so 
great  obligations  as  I  owe  you,  if  I  am  now  remiss?  On 
what  occasion  can  I  ever  be  serviceable  to  you,  if  not  in  war? 
By  my  knowledge  in  that  line,  I  supported  a  character  in  my 
native  country,  and  though  never  overcome  by  an.  enemy  in 
war,  I  was  banished  in  time  of  peace  by  my  ungrateful  coun¬ 
trymen,  To  you,  men  of  Ardea,  fortune  has  presented  an 
opportunity  of  making  a  recompense  for  all  the  valuable  fa¬ 
vours  which  the  Roman  people  have  formerly  conferred  on 
you.  How  great  these  have  been,  ye  yourselves  remember; 
nor  need  I,  who  know  you  to  be  grateful,  remind  you  of 
them.  At  the  same  time  you  may  acquire,  for  this  your 
city,  a  high  degree  of  military  renown,  by  acting  against  the 
common  enemy.  The  nation,  which  is* now  approaching,  in 
a  disorderly  march,  is  one  to  whom  nature  has  given  minds 
and  bodies  of  greater  size  than  strength:  for  which  reason, 
they  bring  to  every  contest  more  of  terror,  than  of  real  vi¬ 
gour.  The  disaster  of  Rome  may  serve  as  a  proof  of  this; 
they  took  the  city,  when  every  avenue  lay  open;  but  still  a 
small  band  in  the  citadel  and  capitol  are  able  to  withstand 
them.  Already  tired  of  the  slow  proceedings  of  the  siege, 
they  retire  and  spread  themselves  over  the  face  of  the  coun« 

BOOK  V. 

483 

B.  C.  387.] 

try.  When  gorged  by  food,  and  greedy  draughts  of  wine, 
as  soon  as  night  comes  on,  they  stretch  themselves  promis¬ 
cuously,  like  brutes,  near  streams  of  water,  without  intrench- 
ment,  and  without  either  guards  or  advanced  posts;  using  at 
present,  in  consequence  of -success,  still  less  caution  than 
usual.  If  it  is  your  wish  to  defend  your  own  walls,  and 
not  to  suffer  all  this  part  of  the  world  to  become  a  province 
of  Gaul,  take  arms  unanimously  at  the  first  watch.  Follow 
me,  to  kill,  not  to  fight.  If  I  do  not  deliver  them  into  your 
hands,  overpowered  with  sleep,  to  be  slaughtered  like  cattle, 
I  am  content  to  meet  the  same  issue  of  my  affairs  at  Ardea 
which  I  found  at  Rome.” 
XLV.  Every  one  who  heard  him,  had  long  been  possess¬ 
ed  with  an  opinion,  that  there  was  not  any  where  in  that  age 
a  man  of  equal  talents  for  war.  The  meeting  then  being  dis¬ 
missed,  they  took  some  refreshment,  and  waited  with  impa¬ 
tience  for  the  signal  being  given.  As  soon  as  that  was  done, 
during  the  stillness  of  the  beginning  of  the  night,  they  attend¬ 
ed  Camillas  at  the  gates:  they  had  not  marched  far  from  the 
city,  when  they  found  the  camp  of  the  Gauls,  as  had  been 
foretold,  unguarded  and  neglected  on  every  side,  and,  rais¬ 
ing  a  shout,  attacked  it.  There  was  no  fight  any  where,  but 
slaughter  every  where:  being  naked,  and  surprised  in  sleep, 
they  were  easily  cut  to  pieces.  However,  those  who  lay 
most  remote,  being  roused  from  their  beds,  and  not  knowing 
how  or  by  whom  the  tumult  was  occasioned,  were  fey  their 
fears  directed  to  flight,  and  some  of  them  even  into  the  midst 
of  the  enemy,  before  they  perceived  their  mistake.  A  great 
number,  flying  into  the  territory  of  Antium,  were  attacked 
on  their  straggling  march  by  the  inhabitants  of  that  city,  sur¬ 
rounded  and  cut  off.  A  like  carnage  was  made  of  the  Tus¬ 
cans  in  the  territory  of  Vexi:  for  they  were  so  far  from  feel¬ 
ing  compassion  for  a  city,  which  had  been  their  neighbour 
xiow  near  four  hundred  years,  and  which  had  been  overpow¬ 
ered  by  a  strange  and  unheard  of  enemy,  that  they  made  in- 

484 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  S6S. 
cursions  at  that  very  time  on  the  Roman  territory:  and,  after 
loading  themselves  with  booty,  purposed  even  to  lay  siege 
to  Veii,  the  bulwark,  and  the  last  remaining  hope  of  the 
whole  Roman  race.  The  soldiers  there,  who  bad  seen  them 
straggling  over  the  country,  and  also  collected  in  a  body, 
driving  the  prey  before  them,  now  perceived  their  camp 
pitched  at  no  great  distance  from  Veii.  At  first,  their  minds 
were  filled  with  melancholy  reflections  on  their  own  situa* 
tion;  then  with  indignation,  afterwards  with  rage.  Must 
their  misfortunes,  they  said,  be  mocked  even  by  the  Etru¬ 
rians,  from  whom  they  had  drawn  off  the  Gallic  war  on 
themselves?”  Scarce  could  they  curb  their  passions  so  far 
as  to  refrain  from  attacking  them  that  instant;  but,  being  re¬ 
strained  by  Quintus  Csedicius,  a  centurion,  whom  they  had 
appointed  their  commander,  they  consented  to  defer  it  until 
night.  The  action  which  ensued  wanted  nothing  to  render 
it  equal  to  the  former,  except  that  it  was  not  conducted  by  a 
general  equal  to  Camillas:  in  every  other  respect  the  course 
of  events  was  the  same,  and  the  issue  equally  fortunate. 
Not  content  with  this  blow,  but  taking,  as  guides,  some  pri¬ 
soners  who  had  escaped  the  slaughter,  and  advancing  to  Sa- 
linse  against  another  body  of  Tuscans,  they  surprised  them 
on  the  night  following,  slew  a  still  greater  number,  and  then 
returned  to  Veii,  exulting  in  their  double  victory. 
XLVI.  Meanwhile,  at  Rome  the  siege,  in  general,  was 
carried  on  slowly,  and  both  parties  lay  quiet;  for  the  atten¬ 
tion  of  the  Gauls  was  solely  employed  in  preventing  any  of 
the  enemy  frorh  escaping  between  their  posts;  when,  on  a 
sudden,  a  Roman  youth  drew  on  himself  the  attention  and 
admiration  both  of  his  countrymen  and  the  enemy.  There 
was  a  sacrifice  always  solemnized  by  the  Fabian  family  at 
stated  times,  on  the  Quirinal  hill;  to  perform  which,  Caius 
Fabius  Dorso  having  come  down  from  the  capitol,  dressed 
in  the  form  called  the  Gabine  cincture,  and  carrying  in  his 
hands  the  sacred  utensils  requisite  for  the  ceremony,  jessed 

B.  €•  387.] 

BOOK  V- 

481^ 
out  through  the  midst  of  the  enemy^s  posts,  without  being 
moved  in  the  least  by  any  of  their  calls  or  threats.  He  pro¬ 
ceeded  to  the  Quirinal  hill,  and  after  duly  performing  there 
the  solemn  rites,  returned  by  the  same  way,  preserving  the 
same  firmness  in  his  countenance  and  gait,  confident  of  the 
protection  of  the  gods,  whose  worship,  even  the  fear  of  death, 
had  not  power  to  make  him  neglect,  and  came  back  to  his 
friends  in  the  capitol,  while  the  Gauls  were  either  held  mo¬ 
tionless  with  astonishment  at  his  amazing  confidence,  or 
moved  by  considerations  of  religion,  of  which  that  nation  is 
by  no  means  regardless.  Meanwhile,  those  at  Veii  found 
not  only  their  courage,  but  their  strength  also  increasing  dai¬ 
ly,  Not  only  such  of  the  Romans  repaired  thither,  who,  in 
consequence  either  of  the  defeat  in  the  field,  or  of  the  dis¬ 
aster  of  the  city  being  taken,  had  been  dispersed  in  various 
parts,  but  volunteers  also  flowed  in  from  Latium,  with  a 
view  to  share  in  the  spoilj  so  that  it  now  seemed  high  time 
to  attempt  the  recovery  of  their  native  city,  and  rescue  it 
out  of  the  hands  of  the  enemy.  But  this  strong  body  want¬ 
ed  a  head:  the  spot  where  they  stood  reminded  them  of  Ca- 
millus;  a  great  number  of  the  soldiers  having  fought  with 
success  under  his  banners  and  auspices.  Besides,  Csedicius 
declared,  that  he  would  not  take  any  part  which  might  afford 
occasion,  either  for  god  or  man,  to  take  away  his  command; 
but  rather,  mindful  of  his  own  rank,  would  himself  insist  on 
the  appointment  of  a  general.  With  universal  consent  it  was 
resolved,  that  Camillus  should  be  invited  from  Ardea;  but 
that  first  the  senate  at  Rome  should  be  consulted:  so  careful¬ 
ly  did  they  regulate  every  proceeding  by  a  regard  to’ proprie¬ 
ty,  and,  though  in  circumstances  nearly  desperate,  maintain¬ 
ed  the  distinctions  of  the  several  departments  of  government. 
It  was  necessaiy^  to  pass  through  the  enemy’s  guards,  which 
could  not  be  effected  without  the  utmost  danger.  A  spirited 
youth,  called  Pontius  Cominius,  offered  himself  for  the  un¬ 
dertaking,  and  supporting  himself  on  pieces  of  cork,  was  car- 

486 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.365. 

ried  down  the  stream  of  the  Tiber  to  the  city.  From  thence, 
where  the  distance  from  the  bank  was  shortest,  he  made  his 
way  into  the  capitol  over  a  part  of  the  rock  which  was  very 
steep  and  cr^aggy,  and  therefore  neglected  by  the  enemy^s 
guards;  and  being  conducted  to  the  magistrates,  delivered 
the  message  of  the  army.  Then,  having  received  a  decree 
of  the  senate,  that  Camillas  should  both  be  recalled  from 
exile  in  an  assembly  of  the  Curias,  and  instantly  nominated 
dictator  by  order  of  the  people,  and  that  the  soldiers  should 
have  the  general  whom  they  wislied,  going  out  of  the  same 
way,  he  proceeded  with  his  despatches  to  Vcii;  from  whence 
deputies  were  sent  to  Ardea  to  Camillus,  who  conducted 
him  to  Veii:  or  else,  the  law  was  passed  by  the  Curians,and 
he  was  nominated  dictator  in  his  absence;  for  I  am  inclined 
to  believe,  that  he  did  not  set  out  from  Ardea  until  he  found, 
that  this  was  done,  because  he  could  neither  change  his  resi¬ 
dence  without  an  order  of  the  people,  nor  hold  the  privilege 
of  the  auspices  in  the  army,  until  he  was  nominated  dictator. 
XL VI I.  Thus  they  were  employed  at  Veii,  whilst,  in  the 
mean  time,  the  citadel  and  capitol  at  Rome  were  in  the  ut¬ 
most  danger.  The  Gauls  either  perceived  the  track  of  a  hu¬ 
man  foot,  where  the  messenger  from  Veii  had  passed;  or, 
from  their  own  obeservation,  had  remarked  the  easy  ascent  at 
the  rock  of  Carmentis:  on  a  moon-light  night,  therefore,  hav¬ 
ing  first  sent  forward  a  person  unarmed  to  make  trial  of  the 
way,  handing  their  arms  to  those  befoie  them;  when  any 
difficulty  occurred,  supporting  and  supported  in  turns,  mtd 
drawing  each  other  up  according  as  the  ground  required, 
they  clintbed  to  the  summit  in  such  silence,  that  they  not  only 
escaped  the  notice  of  the  guards,  but  did  not  even  alarm  the 
dogs,  animals  particularly  watchful  with  regard  to  any  noise 
at  night.  They  were  not  unperceived  however  by  some 
geese,  which  being  sacred  to  Juno,  the  people  had  spared, 
even  in  the  present  great  scarcity  of  food;  a  circumstance  to 
which  they  owed  their  preservation;  for  by  the  cackling  of 

BOOK  V. 

487 

B.  C.  387.] 

these  creatures,  and  the  clapping  of  their  wings,  Marcus 
Manlius  was  roused  from  sleep,— a  man  of  distinguished  cha¬ 
racter  in  war,  who  had  been  consul  the  third  year  before;  and 
snatching  up  his  arms,  and  at  the  same  time  calling  to  the 
rest  to  do  the  same,  he  hastened  to  the  spot:  where,  while 
some  ran  about  in  confusion,  he  by  a  stroke  with  the  boss  of 
his  shield  tumbled  down  a  Gaul  who  had  already  got  footing 
on  the  summit;  and  this  man’s  weight,  as  he  fell,  throwing 
down  those  who  were  next,  he  slew  several  others,  who  in 
their  consternation,  threw  away  their  arms,  and  caught  hold 
of  the  rocks,  to  which  they  clung.  By  this  time  many  of  the 
garrison  had  assembled  at  the  place,  who  by  throwing  jave¬ 
lins  and  stones,  beat  down  the  enemy,  so  that  the  whole  band, 
unable  to  keep  either  their  hold  or  footing,  were  hurled 
down  the  precipice  in  promiscuous  ruin.  The  alarm  then 
subsiding,  the  remainder  of  the  night  was  given  to  repose, 
as  much  at  least  as  could  be  enjoyed  after  such  perturbation, 
when  the  danger  though  past,  kept  up  the  agitation  of  peo¬ 
ple’s  minds.  As  soon  as  day  appeared,  the  soldiers  were 
summoned  by  sound  of  trumpet,  to  attend  the  tribunes  in 
assembly,  when  due  recompense  was  to  be  made  both  to  mer¬ 
it  and  demerit.  Manlius  was  first  of  all  commended  for  the 
bravery  which  he  had  displayed,  and  was  presented  with 
gifts,  not  only  by  the  military  tribunes,  but  by  the  soldiers 
universally;  for  every  one  carried  to  his  house,  which  w^as  in 
the  citadel,  a  contribution  of  half  a  pound  of  corn,  and  half 
a  pint  of  wine — a  present  which  appears  trifling  in  the  rela¬ 
tion,  yet  the  scarcity  which  prevailed  rendered  it  a  very 
strong  proof  of  esteem,  since  each  man  contributed,  in  hon¬ 
our  of  a  particular  person,  a  portion  subtracted  from  his  ne¬ 
cessary  supplies.  Those  who  had  been  on  guard  at  the  place 
where  the  enemy  climbed  up  unobserved,  were  now  cited; 
and  though  Qjuintus  Sulpiciua,  military  tribune  had  declared, 
that  he  would  punish  e^ery  man  according  to  the  rules  of 
military  discipline,  yet  being  deterred  by  the  unanimous  re- 

488 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y,  R.  S65. 

mcmstrances  of  the  soldiers,  who  threw  all  the  blame  on  one 
particular  man  of  the  guard,  he  spared  the  rest.  The  one 
who  was  manifestly  guilty  he  with  the  approbation  of  all 
threw  down  from  the  rock.  From  this  time  forth,  the  guards 
on  both  sides  became  more  vigilant;  on  the  side  of  the  Gauls, 
because  a  rumour  spread  that  messengers  passed  between 
Veii  and  Rome;  and  on  that  of  the  Romans,  from  their 
recollection  of  the  danger  to  which  they  had  been  exposed  in 
the  night. 
XLVIII.  But  beyond  all  the  evils  of  the  war  and  the 
siege,  famine  distressed  both  armies.  To  which  was  added 
on  the  side  of  the  Gauls,  a  pestilential  disorder,  occasioned 
by  their  lying  encamped  in  low  ground  surrounded  with 
hills,  which  besides  having  been  heated  by  the  burning  of 
the  buildings,  and  filled  with  exhalations,  when  the  wind 
rose  ever  so  little,  sent  up  not  only  ashes  but  embers.  These 
inconveniencies  that  nation,  of  all  others,  is  the  worst  quali¬ 
fied  to  endure,  as  being  accustomed  to  cold  and  moisture. 
In  a  word,  they  suffered  so  severely  from  the  heat  and  suf¬ 
focation,  that  they  died  in  great  numbers,  disorders  spread¬ 
ing  as  among  a  herd  of  cattle.  And  now  growing  weary  of 
the  trouble  of  burying  separately,  they  gathered  the  bodies 
in  heaps  promiscuously,  and  burned  them,  and  this  rendered 
the  place  remarkable  by  the  name  of  the  Gallic  piles.  A 
truce  was  now  made  with  the  Romans,  and  conferences  held 
with  permission  of  the  commanders;  in  which,  when  the 
Gauls  frequently  made  mention  of  the  famine  to  which  the 
former  were  reduced,  and  thence  inferred  the  necessity  of 
their  surrendering,  it  is  said,  that  in  order  to  remove  this 
opinion,  bread  was  thrown  from  the  capitol  into  their  ad¬ 
vanced  iposts,  though  the  famine  could  scarcely  be  dissem¬ 
bled  or  endured  any  longer.  But  whilst  the  dictator  was  em¬ 
ployed  in  person  in  levying  forces  at  Ardea,  in  sending  his 
master  of  the  horse,  Lucius  Valerius,  to  bring  up  the  troops 
from  Veii,  and  in  making  such  preparations  and  arrange- 

BOOK  V. 

489 

B.  C.38r.] 
ments  as  would  enable  him  to  attack  the  enemy  on  equal 
terms,  the  garrison  of  the  capitol  was  worn  down  with  the 
fatigue  of  guards  and  watches.  They  had  hitherto  stood  su¬ 
perior  to  all  evils,  yet  famine  was  one  which  nature  would 
not  allow  to  be  overcome,  so  that  looking  out  day  after  day 
for  some  assistance  from  the  dictator,  and  at  last,  not  only 
provisions,  but  hope  failing,  their  arms  in  the  course  of 
relieving  the  guards  at  the  same  time  almost  weighing  down 
their  feeble  bodies,  they  insisted  that  either  a  surrender 
should  be  made,  or  the  enemy  bought  off,  on  such  terms 
as  could  be  obtained:  for  the  Gauls  had  given  plain  intima¬ 
tions,  that,  for  a  small  compensation,  they  might  be  induced 
to  relinquish  the  siege.  The  senate  then  met,  and  the  mili¬ 
tary  tribunes  were  commissioned  to  conclude  a  capitulation. 
The  business  was  afterwards  managed  in  a  conference  between 
Quintus  Sulpicius  a  military  tribune,  and  Brennus  the  chief¬ 
tain  of  the  Gauls,  and  a  thousand  pounds  weight  of  gold* 
was  fixed  as  the  ransom  of  that  people,  who  were  afterwards 
to  be  rulers  of  the  world.  To  a  transaction  so  very  humilia¬ 
ting  in  itself,  insult  was  added.  False  weights  were  brought 
by  the  Gauls,  and  on  the  tribune  objecting  to  them,  the  in¬ 
solent  Gaul  threw  in  his  sword  in  addition  to  the  weights, 
and  was  heard  to  utter  an  expression  intolerable  to  Roman 
eafs,  wo  to  the  vanquished.” 
XLIX.  But  both  gods  and  men  stood  forth  to  prevent 
the  Romans  living  under  the  disgrace  of  being  ransom¬ 
ed.  For,  very  fortunately,  before  the  abominable  payment 
was  completed,  the  whole  quantity  of  gold  being  not  yet 
weighed  in  consequents  of  the  altercation,  the  dictator  came 
up  to  the  spot,  ordered  the  gold  to  be  carried  away  from 
thence,  and  the  Gauls  to  clear  the  place.  And  when  they 
made  opposition,  and  insisted  on  the  agreement,  he  affirmed 
that  such  an  agreement  could  have  no  validity,  being  made 
♦  46,000/. 
VOL.  I. — 3  R 

490 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  365* 

after  he  had  been  created  dictator,  without  his  order,  by  a 
magistrate  of  subordinate  authority;  and  be  gave  notice  to 
the  Gauls  to  prepare  for  b^tle.  His  own  men  he  ordered  to 
throw  their  baggage  in  a  heap,  to  get  ready  their  arms,  and 
to  recover  their  country  with  steel,  not  with  gold;  having  be¬ 
fore  their  eyes  the  temples  of  the  gods,  their  wives  and  chil- 
*dren,  the  site  of  their  native  city,  disfigured  with  rubbish 
through  the  calamities  of  war,  and  every  c^ject  which  they 
were  bound  by  the  strongest  duties  to  defend,  to  recover, 
and  to  revenge.  He  then  drew  up  his  forces  for  battle,  as 
far  as  the  nature  of  the  ground  would  allow,  on  the  site  of 
the  half  demolished  city;  which  was  in  itself  naturally  un¬ 
even,  having  made  every  previous  arrangement  and  prepara¬ 
tion,  which  could  be  suggested  by  knowledge  in  war,  to  se¬ 
cure  all  possible  advantages  to  himself.  The  Gauls,  alarmed 
at  this  unexpected  event,  took  up  arms,  and  with  more  rage 
than  conduct  rushed  upon  the  Romans.  Fortune  had  now 
changed  sides;  and  both  divine  favour  and  human  wisdom 
aided  the  Roman  cause.  At  the  first  onset,  therefore,  the 
Gauls  were  put  to  the  route  with  no  greater  difficulty  than 
they  had  themselves  found,  when  they  gained  the  victory  at 
the  Ailia.  They  were  afterwards  defeated,  under  the  conduct 
and  auspices  of  the  same  Camillus,  in  a  more  regular  en¬ 
gagement  at  the  eighth  stone  c«i  the  Gabine  road,  where  they 
raUied  after  their  fiight.  Here  the  slaughter  was  immense; 
their  camp  was  taken,  and  not  even  a  single  person  left  to 
carry  the  news  o£  the  defeat.  The  dictator,  having  thus 
recovered  his  country  from  the  enemy,  returned  in  triumph, 
and  among  the  rough  jokes  which  |he  soldiers  throw  out 
on  such  occasions,  received  the  appellalicms  ctf  a  Romulus,  a 
second  founder  of  the  city,*^praises  certainly  not  unmerit¬ 
ed.  His  country  thus  saved4>y  arms,  he  evidently  saved  it 
a  second  time  in  peace,  when  he  hindered  the  people  from 
removing  "to  Veii,  a  scheme  pressed  by  the  tribunes  with 
greater  earnestness  after  the  burning  of  the  city,  and  which 

'book  V. 

491 

B.  C.  387.] 
the  commons,  of  themselves,  were  then  more  inclined  to 
pursue;  and  for  that  reason  he  did  not  resign  the  dictator¬ 
ship  immediately  after  his  triumph,  being  entreated  by  the 
senate  not  to  leave  the  commonwealth  in  that  unsettled  state. 
L.  The  first  business  which  he  laid  before  the  senate  was 
that  which  respected  the  immortal  gods;  for  he  was  remark¬ 
ably  attentit'e  to  all  matters  in  which  religion  was  concern¬ 
ed.  He  procured  a  decree  of  senate,  that  ‘‘  all  the  temples 
having  been  in  possession  of  the  enemy  should  be  restored, 
their  bounds  traced,  and  expiation  made  for  them,  and  that 
the  form  of  expiation  should  be  sought  in  the  books  by  the 
duumvirs.  That  a  league  of  hospitality  should  be  formed 
by  public  authority  with  the  people  of  Caere,  because  they 
had  afforded  a  reception  to  the  sacred  utensils,  and  to  the 
priests  of  the  Roman  people;  and  because  to  the  kindness  of 
that  nation  it  was  owing,  that  the  worship  of  the  immortal 
gods  had  not  been  intermitted;  that  Capitoline  games  should 
be  exhihitod  in  honour  of  Jupher,  supremely  good  and  great, 
for  having,  in  time  of  dan^r,  protected  his  own  mansion, 
and  the  citadel  of  Rome;  and  that  a  certain  number  of  citi¬ 
zens,  for  the  due  performance  thereof,  should  be  incorpora¬ 
ted  by  the  dictator,  out  of  those  who  resided  in  the  capitol 
and  fort.”  Mention  was  also  introduced  of  expiating  the 
voice  which  had  been  heard  by  night,  giving  notice  of  the 
calamity  before  the  Gallic  war,  md  which  had  been  neglect¬ 
ed;  and  an  order  was  made  that  a  temple  should  be  erec^d 
to  Aius  Locutius,  in  the  new  street.  The  gold,  which  had 
been  rescued  from  the  Gauls,  and  also  what  had  been,  during 
the  hurry  of  the  alarm,  carried  from  the  other  temples  into 
the  recess  of  Jupiter’s  temple,  was  altogether  judged  to  be 
sacred,  and  ordered  to  be  deposited  under  the  throne  of  Ju¬ 
piter,  because  no  one  could  recollect  to  what  temples  it 
ought  to  be  returned.  The  state  had,  before  this,  manifest¬ 
ed  a  high  regard  to  religion,  in  accepting  a  contribution  of 
gold  from  the  maU'ons,  when  the  public  fund  was  found  in-» 

492 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  365. 

sufficient  to  make  up  the  sum  stipulated  to  be  paid  to  the 
Gauls,  rather  than  meddle  with  the  sacred  gold.  To  the 
matrons  public  thanks  were  given,  and  also  the  privilege 
of  having  funeral  orations  delivered  in  honour  of  them  on 
their  death,  the  same  as  on  that  of  the  men.  When  he  had 
finished  such  business  as  respected  the  gods,  and  such  as 
could  be  determined  by  the  authority  of  the  senate,  and  as 
the  tribunes  never  ceased  teasing  the  commons  in  their  ha¬ 
rangues  to  abandon  the  ruins,  and  remove  to  Veii,  a  city 
ready  for  their  reception,  being  attended  by  the  whole  body 
of  the  senate,  he  mounted  the  tribunal  and  spoke  to  this  ef¬ 
fect. 
LI.  “  Romans,  so  strong  is  my  aversion  from  holding  con¬ 
tentions  with  the  tribunes  of  the  people,  that  while  I  resided 
at  Ardea,  I  had  no  other  consolation  in  my  melancholy  exile 
thaii  that  1  was  at  a  distance  from  such  contests;  and,  on 
account  of  these,  I  was  fully  determined  never  to  return, 
even  though  ye  should  recall  me  by  a  decree  of  senate  and 
order  of  the  people.  Nor  was  it  any  change  of  my  senti¬ 
ments,  which  induced  me  now  to  revisit  Rome,  but  the  situa¬ 
tion  of  your  affairs.  For  the  point  in  question  was,  not 
whether  I  should  reside  in  my  native  land,  but  whether  that 
land,  (if  I  may  so  express  myself,)  should  keep  in  its  own 
established  seat?  And  on  the  present  occasion  most  willingly 
would  I  remain  silent,  did  not  this  struggle  also  affect  the 
essential  interests  of  my  country;  to  be  wanting  to  which,  as 
long  as  life  remains,  were  base  in  others,  in  Camillus  infa¬ 
mous.  For  to  what  purpose  have  we  laboured  its  recovery? 
Why  have  we  rescued  it  out  of  the  hands  of  the  en®iy? 
After  it  has  been  recovered,  shall  we  voluntarily  desert  it? 
Notwithstanding  that  the  capitol  and  citadel  continued  to  be 
held  and  inhabited  by  the  gods  and  the  natives  of  Rome,  even 
when  the  Gauls  were  victorious,  and  in  possession  of  the 
whole  city;  notwithstanding  that  the  Romans  are  now  the 
victors;  shall  that  capitol  and  citadel  be  abandoned  with  all 

BOOK  V. 

493 

B.  C.  387.] 
the  rest^  and  our  prosperity  become  the  cause  of  greater  de¬ 
solation,  than  our  adversity  was?  In  truth,  if  we  had  no  reli¬ 
gious  institutions  which  were  founded  together  with  the  city, 
and  regularly  handed  down  from  one  generation  to  another; 
yet  the  divine  power  has  been  so  manifestly  displayed  ^at 
this  time  in  favour  of  the  Roman  affairs,  that  I  should  think 
all  disposition  to  be  negligent  in  paying  due  honour  to  the 
gods  effectually  removed  from  the  minds  of  men.  For,  take 
a  review  of  the  transactions  of  these  latter  years  in  order, — 
prosperous  and  adverse, — ^ye  will  find  that  in  every  instance 
prosperity  constantly  attended  submission  to  the  immortals, 
and  adversity  the  neglect  of  them.  To  begin  with  the  war 
of  Veil:  for  what  a  number  of  years,  and  with  what  an  im¬ 
mensity  of  labour,  was  it  carried  on?  Yet  it  could  not  be 
brought  to  a  conclusion,  until,  in  obedience  to  the  admonition 
of  the  gods,  the  water  was  discharged  from  the  Alban  lake* 
Consider,  did  this  unparalleled  train  of  misfortunes,  which 
ruined  our  city,  commence  until  the  voice  sent  from,  heaven, 
concerning  the  approach  of  the  Gauls,  had  been  disregarded; 
until  the  laws  of  nations  had  been  violated  by  our  ambassa- 
dors;^and  until  we,  with  the  same  indifference  towards  the  dei¬ 
ties,  passed  over  that  crime  which  we  were  bound  to  punish? 
Vanquished,  therefore,  made  captives,  and  ransomed,  we  have 
suffered  such  punishments  at  the  hands  of  gods  and  men,  as 
render  us  a  warning  to  the  whole  world.  After  this,  our 
misfortunes  again  reminded  us  of  our  duty  to  the  heavens. 
We  fled  for  refuge  into  the  capitol,  to  the  mansion  of  Jupi¬ 
ter,  supremely  good  and  great.  I'he  sacred  utensils,  amidst 
the  ruin  of  our  own  properties,  we  partly  concealed  in  the 
earth,  partly  conveyed  out  of  the  enemy’s  sight,  to  the  neigh¬ 
bouring  cities.  Abandoned  by  gods  and  men,  yet  we  did 
not  intermit  the  sacred  worship.  The  consequence  was,  they 
restored  us  to  our  country,  to  victory,  and  to  our  former  re¬ 
nown  m  war,  which  we  had  forfeited;  and  on  the  heads  of 
the  enemy,  who,  blinded  by  avarice,  broke  the  faith  of  a  trea- 

494  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  365. 
ty  in  respect  to  the  ^weight  of  the  gold,  they  turned  dismay, 
and  flight^  and  daughter. 
LIl.  When  ye  reflect  tm  these  strong  instances  of  the 
powerful  effects  produced  on  the  affairs  of  men  by  their 
eldier  honouring  or  neglecting  the  deity,  do  ye  not  perceive, 
Romans,  what  an  act  of  impiety  we  are  about  to  perpetrate, 
even  in  the  very  moment  of  emerging  from  the  wreck  and 
ruin  which  followed  our  former  misconduct?  We  arc  in 
possession  of  a  city  built  under  the  direction  of  auspices  and 
auguries,  in  which  there  is  not  a  spot  but  is  full  of  gods  and 
religious  rites.  The  days  of  the  anniversary  sacriflees  are 
not  more  precisely  stated,  thsm  are  the  places  where  they 
are  to  be  performed.  All  these  gods,  both  public  and  pri¬ 
vate,  do  ye  intend,  Romans,  to  forsake?  What  similitude 
does  your  conduct  bear  to  that,  which  lately,  during  the 
siege,  was  beheld,  with  no  less  admiration  by  the  enemy 
than  by  yourselves,  in  that  excellent  youth  Caius  Fabius, 
when  he  went  down  from  the  citadel  through  the  midst  of 
Gallic  weapons,  and  performed  on  the  Quirinal  hill  the  an¬ 
niversary  rites  pertaining  to  the  Fabian  family?  Is  it  your 
opinion  that  the  religious  performmices  of  particular  fami¬ 
lies  should  not  be  intermitted,  though  war  obstruct, 
but  that  the  public  rites  and  the  Roman  gods  should  be 
forsaken  even  in  time  of  peace;  smd  that  the  pemtiffs  ami 
flamens  should  be  more  negligent  of  those  rites  of  religion 
than  was  a  private  pemon?  Some,  perhaps,  may  say,  we  will 
perform  these  at  Veii;  we  will  send  our  priests  thither  for 
that  purpose:  but  this  cannot  be  done  without  an  infringe¬ 
ment  of  the  established  forms*  Even  in  the  case  of  the  flmst 
of  Jupiter,  (not  to  enumerate  all  the  several  gods,  and  all 
the  different  kinds  of  sacred  rites,)  can  the  ceremonies  of  the 
lectistemium  be  performed  in  any  other  place  than  the 
Capitol?  What  shall  I  say  of  the  eternal  fire  of  Vesta;  and 
of  the  statue,  that  pledge  of  empire,  which  is  kept  under  the 
safeguard  of  her  temple?  AVhat,  O  Mars  Gradivus,  and 

BOOK  V. 

495 

B.  C.  5870 

thou,  Father  Quirinus,  of  thy  Ancilia?*  Is  it  right  that 
those  sacred  things,  coeval  with  the  city,  nay  some  of  them 
more  ancient  than  the  city  itself,  shcmld  all  be  abandoned  to 
profanaticm?  Now,  observe  the  difference  between  us  and 
our  ancestors*  They  handed  down  to  us  certain  sacred 
rites  to  be  performed  on  the  Alban,  and  on  the  Lavinian 
mounts.  Was  it  then  deemed  not  offensive  to  the  gods, 
that  such  rites  should  be  brought  to  Rome,  and  from  the  ci¬ 
ties  of  our  enemies;  and  shall  we,  without  impiety,  remove 
them  from  hence  to  an  enemy’s  city,  to  Veii?  Recollect,  I 
beseech  you,  how  often  sacred  rites  are  performed  anew, 
because  some  particular  ceremony  of  our  country  has  been 
omitted  through  negligence  or  accident.  In  a  late  instance, 
what  other  matter,  after  the  prodigy  of  the  Alban  lake,  prov¬ 
ed  a  remedy  for  the  distresses  brought  on  the  commonwealth 
by  the  war  of  Veii,  but  the  repetition  of  them,  and  the  re¬ 
newal  of  the  auspices?  But  besides,  as  if  zealously  attached 
to  religious  institutions,  we  have  brought  not  only  foreign 
deities  to  Rome,  but  have  established  new  ones.  It  was  but 
the  other  day  that  imperial  Juno  was  removed  hither  from 
Veii;  and  with  what  a  crowded  attendance  was  her  dedica¬ 
tion  on  the  Aventine  celebrated?  And  how  greatly  was  it 
distinguished  by  the  extraordinary  zeal  of  the  matrons?  We 
have  passed  an  order  for  the  erecting  of  a  temple  to  Aius  Lo- 
cutius  in  the  new  street,  out  of  re^rd  to  the  heavenly  voice 
which  was  heard  there.  To  our  other  solemnities  we  have 
added  Capitoline  games,  and  have,  by  direction  of  the  se¬ 
nate,  founded  a  new  college  for  the  performance  thereof. 
Where  was  there  occasion  for  any  of  these  institutions,  if 

^Andlty  a  shield,  supposed  to  be*of  the  god  Mare,  said  to  have  fallen 
from  heaven  in  the  reign  of  Noma.  It  was  reposited  io  the  sanctuarj, 
and  kept  with  great  care  by  the  priests  of  Mars,  called  Salii.  Being  con¬ 
sidered  as  a^i^iEibol  of  the  perpetual  duration  of  the  empire  to  prevent  its 
betng'Stcden,  eleven  others  were  made,  exactly  resembling  it,  and  laid  up 
with  it 

496 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  365. 

we  were  to  abandcHi  the  city  at  the  same  time  with  *  the 
Gauls;  if  it  was  against  our  will  that  we  resided  in  the  capi- 
tol  for  the  many  months  that  the  seige  continued;  if  it  was 
through  a  motive  of  fear  that  we  suffered  ourselves  to  be 
confined  there  by  the  enemy?  Hitherto  we  have  spoken  of 
the  sacred  rites  and  the  temples,  what  are  we  now  to  say  of 
the  priests?  Does  it  not  occur  to  you,  what  a  degree  of 
profaneness  would  be  committed  with  respect  to  them?  For 
the  vestals  have  but  that  one  residence,  from  which  nothing 
ever  disturbed  them,  except  the  capture  of  the  city.  It  is 
deemed  impious  if  the  Flamen  Diaiis  remain  one  night  out 
of  the  city.  Do  ye  intend  to  make  them  Veientian  priests 
instead  of  Roman?  And,  O  Vesta,  shall  thy  virgins  for¬ 
sake  thee?  And  shall  the  flamen,  by  foreign  residence,  draw 
every  night  on  himself  and  the  commonwealth  so  great  a 
load  of  guilt?  What  shall  we  say  of  other  kinds  of  business 
which  we  necessarily  transact  under  auspices,  and  almost 
all  within  the  Pomcerium?  To  what  oblivion,  or  to  what 
neglect,  are  we  to  consign  them?  The  assemblies  of  the  cu¬ 
rias,  which  have  the  regulation  of  military  affairs;  the  assem¬ 
blies  of  the  centuries,  in  which  ye  elect  consuls  and  military 
tribunes;  where  can  they  be  held  under  auspices,  except  in 
the  accustomed  place?  Shall  we  transfer  these  to  Veii?  Or 
shall  the  people,  in  order  to  hold  their  meetings,  lawfully 
crowd  together  here,  with  so  great  inconvenience,  and  into  a 
city  deserted  by  gods  and  men? 
LI II.  “  But  it  is  urged  that  the  case  itself  compels  us  to 
leave  a  city  desolated  by  fire  and  ruin,  and  remove  to  Veii, 
where  every  thing  is  entire,  and  not  to  distress  the  needy 
commons  by  building  here.  Now,  I  think,  Romans,  it 
must  be  evident  to  most  of  you,  though  I  should  not  say  a 
word  on  the  subject,  that  this  is  but  a  pretext  held  out  to 
serve  a  purpose,  and  not  the  real  motive.  For  ye  remem¬ 
ber,  that  this  scheme  of  our  removing  to  Veii  was  agitated 
before  the  coming  of  die  Gauls,  when  the  buildings,  both 

BOOK  V. 

497 

is- 
;  ^  C.  387,] 
;  public  and  private,  were  unhurt,  and  when  the  city  stood  in 
safety*  Observe,  then,  tribunes,  the  difference  between  my 
way  of  thinking  and  yours.  Ye  are  of  opinion,  that  even 
though  it  were  not  advisable  to  remove  at  that  time,  yet  it 
is  plainly  expedient  now.  On  the  contrary,  and  be  not  sur¬ 
prised  at  what  I  say  until  3’e  hear  my  reasons,  even  allowing  i 
that  it  had  been  advisable  so  to  do,  when  the  whole  city  was 
in  a  state  of  safety,  I  would  not  vote  for  leaving  these  ruins 
now.  At  that  time,  removing  into  a  captured  city  from  a 
victory  obtained,  had  been  a  cause  glorious  to  us  and  our  pos¬ 
terity;  but  now,  it  would  be  wretched  and  dishonourable  to 
us,  while  it  would  be  glorious  to  the  Gauls.  For  we  shall 
appear  not  to  have  left  our  country  in  consequence  of  our 
successes,  but  from  being  vanquished;  and  by  the  flight  at 
the  Allia,  the  capture  of  the  city,  and  the  blockade  of  the 
Capitol,  to  have  been  obliged  to  forsake  our  dwellings, 
and  fly  from  a  place  which  we  had  not  strength  to  de¬ 
fend.  And  hav^e  the  Gauls  been  able  to  demolish  Rome, 
and  shall  the  Romans  be  deemed  unable  to  restore  it?  What 
remains,  then,  but  that  ye  allow'^  them  to  come  with  new  for¬ 
ces,  for  it  is  certain  they  have  numbers  scarcely  credible,  and 
make  it  their  choice  to  dwell  in  this  city,  once  captured  by 
them,  and  now  forsaken  by  you?  What  would  you  think,  if, 
not  the  Gauls,  but  your  old  enemies  the  .^quans  or  Vol- 
scians,  should  form  the  design  of  removing  to  Rome?  Would 
ye  be  willing  that  they  should  become  Romans,  and  you 
Veientians?  Or  would  ye  that  this  should  be  either  a  desert 
in  your  possession,  or  a  city  in  that  of  the  enemy?  Any 
thing  more  impious  I  really  cannot  conceive.  Is  it  out  of 
aversion  from  the  trouble  of  rebuilding,  that  ye  are  ready  to 
incur  such  guilt  and  such  disgrace?  Supposing  that  there 
could  not  be  erected  a  better  or  more  ample  structure  than 
that  cottage  of  our  founder,  were  it  not  more  desirable  to 
dwell  in  cottages,  after  the  manner  of  shepherds  and  rustics, 
in  the  midst  of  your  sacred  places  and  tutelar  deities,  than 
vox..  I. — 3  S 

4n 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y;  R.  365."^ 
to  have  the  commonwealth  go  into  exile?  Our  forefathers, 
a  body  of  uncivilized  strangers,  when  there  was  nothing  in 
these  places  but  woods  and  marshes,  erected  a  city  in  a  very 
short  time.  Do  we,  though  we  have  the  capitol  and  citadel 
safe,  and  the  temples  of  the  gods  standing,  think  it  too  great 
a  labour  to  rebuild  one  that  has  been  burned?  What  each 
particular  man  would  have  done,  if  his  house  had  been  de¬ 
stroyed  by  fire,  should  the  whole  of  us  refuse,  in  the  case  of 
a  general  conflagration? 
LIV.  Let  roe  ask  you,  if,  through  some  ill  design  or 
accident,  a  fire  should  break  out  at  Veii,  and  the  flames  be¬ 
ing  spread  by  the  wind,  as  might  be  the  case,  should  consume 
a  great  part  of  the  city:  must  wc  seek  Fidense,  or  Gabii,  or 
some  other  city,  to  remove  to?  Has  our  native  soil  so  slight 
a  hold  of  our  affections;  and  this  earth,  which  we  call  our 
mother?  Or  does  our  love  for  our  country  extend  no  farther 
than  the  surface,  and  the  timber  of  the  houses?  I  assure 
you,  for  I  will  confess  it  readily,  that  during  the  time  of  my 
absence,  (which  I  am  less  willing  to  recollect,  as  the  effect 
of  ill  treatment  from  you,  than  of  my  own  hard  fortune,)  as 
often  as  my  countr}^  came  into  my  mind,  every  one  of  these 
circumstances  occurred  to  me;  the  hills,  the  plains,  the  Tiber, 
the  face  of  the  coutitry  to  which  my  eyes  had  been  accus¬ 
tomed,  and  this  sky,  under  which  I  had  been  born  and  edu¬ 
cated;  and  it  is  my  wish,  Romans,  that  these  may  now  en¬ 
gage  you,  by  the  ties  of  affection,  to  remain  in  your  own 
established  settlements,  rather  than  hereafter  prove  the  cause 
of  your  pining  away  in  anxious  regret  at  having  left  them. 
Not  without  good  reason  did  gods  and  men  select  this  spot 
for  the  building  of  Rome,  where  are  most  healthful  hills,  a 
commodious  river,  whose  stream  brings  down  the  produce  of 
the  interior  countries,  while  it  opens  a  passage  for  foreign 
commerce;  the  sea,  so  near  as  to  answer  every  purpose  of 
convenience,  yet  at  such  a  distance  as  not  to  expose  it  to 
danger  from  the  fleets  of  foreigners:  and  in  the  centre  of  the 

BOOK  V. 

499 

B,  C. 

3S7,3 

regions  of  Italy,  a  situation  singularly  adapted  by  its  nature 
to  promote  the  increase  of  a  city.  Of  this  the  very  size, 
as  it  was,  must  be  held  a  demonstration.  Romans,  this  pre¬ 
sent  year  is  the  three  hundred  and  sixty-fifth  of  the  city; 
during  so  long  a  time  have  ye  been  engaged  in  war,  in  the 
midst  of  nations  of  the  oldest  standing:  yet,  not  to  mention 
single  nations,  neither  the  iEquans  in  conjunction  with  the 
Volscians,  who  possess  so  many  and  so  strong  towns,  nor  the 
whole  body  of  Etruria,  possessed  of  such  extensive  power 
by  land  and  sea,  and  occupying  the  whole  breadth  of  Italy, 
from  one  sea  to  the  other,  have  shown  themselves  equal  to 
you  in  war.  This  being  the  case,  where  can  be  the  wisdom 
in  making  trial  of  a  change,  when,  though  your  valour  might 
accompany  you  in  your  removal  to  another  place,  the  fortune 
of  this  spot  could  not  certainly  be  transferred?  Here  is  the 
capitol,  where  a  human  head  being  formerly  found,  it  was 
foretold  that  in  that  spot  should  be  the  head  of  the  world, 
and  the  seat  of  sovereign  empire.  Here,  when  the  capitol 
was  to  be  cleared  by  the  rites  of  augury,  Juventas  and  Ter¬ 
minus,  to  the  very  great  joy  of  our  fathers,  suffered  not  them¬ 
selves  to  be  moved.  Here  is  the  fire  of  Vesta,  here  the 
Ancilia  sent  down  from  heaven,  here  ail  the  gods,  and  they, 
too,  propitious  to  your  stay.”  Camillus  is  said  to  have  af¬ 
fected  them  much  by  other  parts  of  his  discourse,  but  par¬ 
ticularly  by  that  which  related  to  religious  matters.  But  still 
the  affair  remained  in  suspense,  until  an  accidental  expres¬ 
sion,  seasonably  uttered,  determined  it.  For  in  a  short  time 
after  this,  the  senate  sitting  on  this  business  in  the  Curia 
Hostilia,  it  happened  that  some  cohorts,  returning  from  re¬ 
lieving  the  guards,  passed  through  the  Forum  in  their  march, 
when  a  centurion  in  the  Comitium  called  out,  “  Standard- 
bearer,  fix  your  standard.  It  is  best  for  us  to  stay  here/^ 
On  hearing  which  expression,  the  senate,  coming  forth  from 
the  Curia,  called  out  with  one  voice,  that  “  they  cmbracedi 
the  omen;”  and  the  surrounding  crowd  of  commons  joined 

Dtete  Due  365."^ 
their  approbation.  The  proposed  law  being  then  rejected, 
they  set  about  rebuilding  the  city  in  all  parts  at  once.  7'iies 
were  supplied  at  the  public  expense,  and  liberty  granted  to 
hew  stones  and  fell  timber,  wherever  each  person  chose,  se¬ 
curity  being  taken  for  their  completing  the  edifices  within 
the  year.  Their  haste  took  away  all  attention  to  the  regula¬ 
tion  of  the  course  of  the  streets;  for  setting  aside  all  regard 
to  distinction  of  property,  they  built  on  any  spot  which  they 
found  vacant.  And  that  is  the  reason  that  the  old  sewers, 
which  at  first  were  conducted  under  the  public  streets,  do 
now,  in  many  places,  pass  under  private  houses,  and  that  the 
form  of  the  city  appears  as  if  force  alone  had  directed  the 
distribution  of  the  lots. 

KKD  or  VOL.  I. 

TiBDB 

fflSTORY  OF  ROME, 

TITUS  LIVIUS. 

VOL.  n. 

THE 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 
BY 
TITUS  LIVIUS. 

TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  ORIGINAL, 
WITH  SroTEd  AITD  liITTSTEATIOJTS, 
BY  GEORGE  BAKER,  A.  M. 

History  is  Philosophy  teaching  by  example. 
B0IJ3rHBa#XE. 

FIRST  AMERICAN,  FROM  THE  LAST  LONDON  EDITION. 
IN  SIX  VOLUMES.— VOL.  II. 
NEW  YORK : 
PVBUSffEB  BT  BBTBE  A.  XBSJER,  COIXJKS  &  CO.,  T.  &.  J.  SWOBBS,  A.  T.  GOOD. 
BICH,  HEKHT  I.  MSGART,  B.  &  W.  A.  BARTOW,  S.  GOtJLB,  W.  B.  GILLET,  JAMBS 
BASTfiCTKN,  GEORGE  BORG,  PRIOR  &  BUNRIRG,  SAMVRI.  CAMfBSXiB  &  SOK,  £. 
BUSS  &  £.  WHITE,  A.  BIT&BIX  &  CO.  ARB  JAMES  T.  SXAmAB. 
18S3. 

Zo-y 
.IS 
33 
’  !  -- 

FEOPERTY  OF  Ci'.Il'.--  liFFAKT 
p/kMPDEN.SYn*,rv,  v\:^r'\-u 

CONTENTS 
OiF 
THE  SEOONB  VOLUME. 

BOOK  VI . 1 
BOOK  VII.  ...  74 
BOOK  Vm . 148 
BOOK  IX . 220 
BOOK  X . SOS 
Contents  of  tbe  Lost  Books,  387 
BOOK  XXI.  ...  393 

-j  ^90/ 

THE 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

BOOK  VI. 

Successful  operations  ag-ainst  the  .Slquans,  and  Volscians,  and  Prxnestines. 
Four  new  tribes  added.  Marcus  Manlius,  who  defended  the  CapUoh 
beif^  convicted  of  aspiring  to  regul  power,  is  thrown  from  the  Tarpeian 
rock.  A  law,  proposed  by  two  plebeian  tribunes,  that  consuls  might  be 
chosen  from  among  the  commons,  causes  a  long  and  vkdent  contest,  du< 
ring  which,  for  five  years,  the  same  set  of  plebeian  tribunes  are  the  only 
magistrates  in  the  state  :  is  at  length  passed  :  and  Lucius  Sextus,  one  of 
the  proposers,  made  the  first  plebeian  consul.  A  law  passed,  that  no 
perscm  shall  po^ess  more  than  five  hundred  acres  of  land. 
L  IN  die  five  preceding  books,  I  have  exhibited  a  view 
of  the  affairs  of  the  Romans,  from  the  building  of 
the  city  of  Rome,  until  capture ;  under  the  gov-  g*c*3gf  * 
ernment, first,  of  kings ;  then  of  consuls  and  dictators, 
decemvirs,  and  consular  tribunes  ;  their  foreign  wars,  and  do¬ 
mestic  dissensions :  matters  involved  in  obscurity,  not  only  by 
reason  of  their  great  antiquity,  like  objects  placed  at  such  a  dis¬ 
tance  as  to  be  scarcely  discernible  by  the  eye  ;  but  also  because 
#iat,  in  those  times,  the  use  of  letters,  the  only  faithful  guardian 
of  the  memory  of  events,  was  ver\^  rare.  And  besides,  what*- 
vor.  ir. — B 

2 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  365. 

ever  information  might  have  been  contained  in  the  commen¬ 
taries  of  the  pontiiFs,  and  other  public  or  private  records,  it 
was  almost  entirely  lost  in  the  burning  of  the  city.  Hence¬ 
forward,  from  the  second  origin  of  Rome,  from  whence,  as 
from  its  root,  receiving  new  life,  it  sprung  up  with  redoubled 
health  and  vigour,  I  shall  be  able  to  give  the  relation  of  its 
affairs,  both  civil  and  military,  with  more  clearness  and  cer¬ 
tainty.  Now,  after  its  restoration,  it  leaned  still,  for  princi¬ 
pal  support,  on  the  same  instrument  which  had  raised  it  from 
ruin,  Marcus  Furius  Camillus.  Nor  did  the  people  suffer 
him  to  lay  aside  the  dictatorship  before  the  end  of  that  year. 
It  was  judged  improper  that  the  tribunes,  during  whose  ad¬ 
ministration  the  city  had  been  taken,  should  preside  at  the 
elections  for  the  year  ensuing,  and  an  interregnum  was  re¬ 
solved  on*  While  the  public  were  kept  diligently  employed 
in  repairing  the  city,  Quintus  Fabius,  as  soon  as  he  went  out 
of  office,  had  a  prosecution  instituted  against  him  by  Caius 
Marcius,  a  tribune  of  the  commons,  for  having,  while  in  the 
character  of  ambassador,  contrary  to  the  law  of  nations,  acted 
in  arms  against  the  Gauls,  with  whom  he  had  been  sent  as  a 
minister  to  negotiate :  he  escaped  standing  his  trial,  by  a 
death  so  opportune,  that  most  people  believed  it  voluntary. 
The  Interregnum  commenced.  Publius  Cornelius  Scipio  was  in¬ 
terrex  i  and,  after  him,  Marcus  Furius  Camillus  a  second  time. 
He  elected  military  tribunes,  with  consular  power, 
B  C  386*  Valerius  Poplicola  a  second  time,  Lucius 
Virginius,  Publius  Cornelius,  Aulus  Manlius,  Lu¬ 
cius  iEmilius,  and  Lucius  Postumius.  "fhese,  entering  on  office, 
immediately  on  the  conclusion  of  the  interregnum,  consulted 
the  senate  on  no  other  business  previous  to  that  which  related 
to  religion.  They  ordered,  in  the  first  place,  that  a  collection 
should  be  made  of  the  treaties  and  laws  which  could  be  found* 
The  latter  consisted  of  the  twelve  tables,  and  some  laws  enacted 

BOOK  VI, 

3 

B.C.  387,] 

by  the  kings.  Some  of  these  were  publicly  promulgated ; 
but  such  as  related  to  religious  matters  were  kept  secret, 
chiefly  through  means  of  the  pontiffs,  that  they  might  hold  the 
minds' of  the  multitude  in  bondage.  They  next  turned  their 
deliberations  to  those  days,  which  were  to  be  accounted  dis¬ 
pleasing  to  the  gods ;  and  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  calends  of 
August  was  distinguished  by  an  order,  that  on  that  unfortu¬ 
nate  day  no  public  or  private  business  whatever  should  be 
transacted  ;  it  was  deemed  doubly  unfortunate :  for,  on  that 
day,  the  Fabii  were  slain  at  Cremera  ;  and,  afterwards,  on 
the  same  day,  the  faul  battle  of  Allia,  which  effected  the 
destruction  of  the  city,  was  fought :  from  the  latter  disaster, 
it  was  denominated  the  Allian  day.  Some  are  of  opinion, 
that,  because,  on  the  day  following  the  ides  of  July,  Sulpicius, 
.when  military  tribune,  had  neglected  to  perform  the  rites  of 
the  augury  ;  and,  without  being  assured  of  the  favour  of  the 
gods,  had,  on  the  third  day  after,  exposed  the  Homan  army 
to  the  enemy,  it  was  ordained,  that  the  days  following  the 
calends,  and  the  nones,  should  also  be  accounted  equally  in¬ 
auspicious, 
II,  But  it  was  not  long  allowed  them  to  consult,  in  quiet, 
on  the  means  of  raising  up  the  city,  after  such  a  grievous  fall. 
On  one  side,  their  old  enemy,  the  Volscians,  had  taken  arms, 
resolved  to  extinguish  the  Roman  name  ;  and,  on  the  other, 
according  to  intelligence  received  from  certain  traders,  a  con¬ 
spiracy  of  the  leading  men,  from  all  the  several  states  of 
Etruria,  had  been  formed  at  the  temple  of  Voltumna,  for  the 
purpose  of  commencing  hostilities.  To  which  was  added  a 
new  cause  of  apprehension,  by  the  defection  of  the  Latines 
and  Hemicians,  who,  ever  since  the  battle  fought  at  the  lake 
RegiQus,  during  the  course  of  near  an  hundred  years,  had 
continued  in  friendship  with  the  Roman  people  without  ever 
giving  reason  to  doubt  tiheir  fidelity.  Wherefore,  when  such 
alarms  started  up  c«i  every  side,  and  all  men  plainly  perceived, 

4 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  3€«. 

that  the  Roman  name  was  not  only  loaded  with  hatred  among 
their  enemies,  but  also  with  contempt  among  their  allies,  it 
was  determined  that  the  defence  of  the  commonwealth  should 
be  conducted  by  the  same  auspices  which  had  effected  its  re¬ 
covery,  and  that  Marcus  Furius  Camillus  should  be  nomina¬ 
ted  dictator.  On  being  invested  with  that  office,  he  appmnted 
Caius  Serviiius  Ahala  master  of  the  horse  j  and,  proclaiming' 
a  cessation  of  civil  business,  made  a  levy  of  the  younger  citi¬ 
zens,  at  the  same  time  administering  the  oath  of  obedience 
to  such  of  the  elders  also  as  retained  any  considerable  degree 
of  strength,  and  enrolling  them  among  the  troops.  The  army, 
thus  enlisted  and  armed,  he  divided  into  three  pins ;  one  di¬ 
vision  he  opposed  to  the  Etrurians,  in  the  Veientian  territo¬ 
ries  ;  another  he  ordered  to  encamp  near  the  city :  the  latter 
were  commanded  by  Aulus  Manlius,  military  tribune  j  those 
who  were  sent  against  the  Etrurians,  by  Lucius  ^millus. 
The  third  division  he  led,  in  person,  against  the  Volscians, 
and  prepared  to  assault  their  camp  at  a  place  called  Admar- 
cium,  near  Lanuvium.  Their  inducement  to  begin  this  war 
was,  a  belief  that  almost  the  whole  of  the  Roman  youth  were 
cut  off  by  the  Gauls  j  nevertheless,  on  hearing  that  the  com¬ 
mand  was  given  to  Camillus,  they  were  struck  with  such  ter¬ 
ror,  that  they  fenced  themselves  with  a  rampart,  which  they 
further  secured  with  trees  piled  on  each  other,  that  the  enemy 
might  find  no  pass  by  which  they  could  enter  the  works.  As 
soon  as  Camillus  saw  the  nature  of  this  defence,  he  ordered  it 
to  be  set  on  fire  :  a  high  wind  blowing  at  the  time  towards 
the  enemy,  the  flames  quickly  opened  a  passage,  which,  to¬ 
gether  with  the  heat,  the  smoke,  and  the  cracking  of  the  green 
timber  in  burning,  filled  them  with  such  consternation,  that 
the  Romans  found  less  difficulty  in  climbing  over  the  rampart 
into  the  Volscian  camp,  than  they  had  met  in  making  their 
way  across  the  fence,  after  it  was  consumed  by  the  flames. 
The  enemy  being  routed  and  put  to  the  sword,  the  dictator. 

BOOK  VL 

s 

BX. 
as  lie  had  taken  the  camp  by  assault,  gave  tire  spoil  to  the  sol¬ 
diers  ;  a  present  the  more  acceptable  to  them,  the  less  kopes 
they  had  conceived  of  it,  from  a  commander  by  no  means  in¬ 
clined  to  profuse  generosity.  Proceeding  then  in  pursuit  of 
those  who  fled,  by  entirely  wasting  every  part  of  their  lands, 
he  at  kngth,  in  the  seventieth  year,  reduced  the  Volsciansto 
submissiem.  After  subduing  the  Volscians,  he  marched 
against  the  iEquans,  who  likewise  had  begun  hemtilities ;  sur¬ 
prised  their  army  at  Bolae,  and,  having  attacked  not  only  their 
camp,  but  their  city  also,  carried  both  at  the  first  onset. 
III.  While  such  fortune  attended  the  operations,  on  that 
side  where  Camillus,  the  life  of  the  Roman  affairs,  was  em¬ 
ployed,  a  violent  alarm  had  fallen  on  another  quarter :  for  the 
Etrurians,  having  taken  arms,  with  almost  their  entire  force, 
laid  siege  to  Sutrium,  a  place  in  fiance  with  the  Roman  peo¬ 
ple,  whose  ambassadors,  having  applied  to  the  senate,  implor¬ 
ing  aid  in  their  distress,  obtained  a  decree,  that  the  dictator 
should,  as  soon  as  possible,  cany  assistance  to  the  Sutrians. 
But  the  circumstances  of  the  besieged  not  permitting  them  to 
wait  the  issue  of  their  hopes,  from  that  quarter,  the  townsmen 
being  quite  spent  with  labour,  watching,  and  wounds,  which, 
through  the  smallness  of  their  number,  fell  continually  on  the 
same  persons,  they  gave  -up  the  city  to  the  enemy,  by  capitu¬ 
lation  ;  and  being  discharged  without  arms,  with  only  a  sin¬ 
gle  garment  each,  were  leaving  their  habitations  in  a  misera¬ 
ble  train,  when,  at  the  very  juncture,  Camillus  happened  to 
come  up  at  the  head  of  the  Roman  army.  The  mournful 
crowd  prostrated  themselves  at  his  feet,  and  their  leaders  ad¬ 
dressed  him  in  a  speech  dictated  by  extreme  necessity,  and 
seconded  by  the  lamentations  of  the  women  and  children,  who 
were  dragged  into  exile  with  them :  on  which  he  bade  the 
Sutrians  cease  their  lamentations,  for  he  was  come  to  turn 
mourning  and  tears  to  the  side  of  the  Etrurians.”  He  then 
ordered  the  baggage  to  be  deposited,*  the  Sutrians  to  remain 

6 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  366. 

there  with  a  small  guard,  which  he  left,  and  the  soldiers  to  fol¬ 
low  him  in  arms  ;  dien,  advancing  to  Sutrium,  with  his  troops 
freed  from  incumbrance,  he  found,  as  he  expected,  every 
thing  in  disorder,  the  usual  consequence  of  success  ;  no  ad¬ 
vanced  guard  before  the  walls,  the  gates  open,  and  the  con¬ 
querors  dispersed,  carrying  out  the  booty  from  the  houses  of 
their  enemies  :  Sutrium  therefore  was  taken  a  second  time  on 
the  same  day.  The  Etrurians,  lately  vicarious,  were  cut  to 
pieces  in  every  quarter,  by  this  new  enemy  ;  nor  was  time 
given  them  to  assemble  together,  and  form  a  body,  or  even  to 
take  up  arms.  They  then  pushed  hastily  towards  the  gates, 
in  order,  if  possible,  to  throw  themselves  out  into  the  fields, 
when  they  found  them  shut,  for  such  had  been  the  dictator’s 
order  at  the  beginning.  On  this,  some  took  arms ;  others, 
who  happened  to  be  in  arms  before  the  tumult  began,  called 
their  friends  together  to  make  battle,  and  a  warm  engagement 
would  have  been  kindled  by  the  despair  of  the  enemy,  had 
not  criers  been  sent  through  every  part  of  the  city,  with  or¬ 
ders  to  proclaim,  that  they  should  lay  down  their  arms  ; 
“  that  the  unarmed  should  be  spared,  and  no  injury  done  to 
any  but  those  who  made  opposition.”  On  which,  even  those 
who  had  been  most  resolutely  bent  on  fighting,  when  their  si¬ 
tuation  was  desperate,  now  that  hopes  of  life  were  given, 
threw  down  their  arms,  and  sui^ndered  themselves  to  the 
enemy;  the  safest  method  in  their  present  circumstances. 
Their  number  being  very  great,  they  were  divided  under  se¬ 
veral  guards  ;  and  the  town  was,  before  night,  restored  to  the 
Sutrians  uninjured,  because  it  had  not  been  taken  by  force, 
but  had  surrendered  on  terms. 
IV*  Camillus  returned  to  the  city  in  triumph,  crowned  at 
once  with  conquest  over  three  different  enemies.  By  far  the 
greater  part  of  the  prisoners,  led  before  his  chariot,  were 
Etrurians  ;  and  these,  being  sold  by  auction,  such  a  vast  sum 
of  money  was  brought  into  the  treasury,  that,  after  payment 

BOOK  Vt 

7 

B,C.  386,] 
of  the  price  of  their  gold  to  the  matrons,  there  were  three 
gdiden  bowls  made  out  of  die  surplus,  which  being  inscribed 
with  the  name  of  Camillas,  lay,  before  the  burning  of  the  Ca¬ 
pitol,  as  we  are  well  informed,  in  the  recess  of  Jupiter’s  tem¬ 
ple,  at  Juno’s  feet.  In  that  yem*,  such  of  the  Veientians,  Ca- 
penatians,  and  Faliscians,  as  had,  during  the  wars  with  those 
nations,  come  over  to  the  Romans,  were  admitted  members 
of  the  state,  and  lands  were  assigned  to  these  new  citizens. 
Those  were  also  recalled  by  decree  of  senate  from  Veil,  who, 
to  avoid  the  trouble  of  building  at  Rome,  had  betaken  them¬ 
selves  thither,  and  seized  on  the  vacant  houses.  This  pro¬ 
duced  only  murmurs,  and  they  disregarded  the  order ;  but 
afterwards,  a  certain  day  being  fixed,  and  capital  punishment 
denounced  against  those  who  did  not  return  to  Rome,  refrac¬ 
tory  as  the  whole  had  been,  each  particular  person  was  re¬ 
duced  to  obedience,  through  fear  for  his  own  safety..  And 
now  Rome  increased,  not  only  in  number  of  inhabitants,  but 
in  buildings,  which  rose  up  at  the  same  time  in  every  part ; 
as  the  state  gave  assistance  in  the  expences,  the  settles  pressed 
forward  the  work,  as  if  a  public  one  ;  and  private  persons,  of 
themselves,  incited  by  their  feeling  of  the  want  of  accommo¬ 
dations,  hastened  to  finish  it ;  so  that  within  the  year,  a  new 
city  was  erected.  On  the  year  being  ended,  an  election  was  held 
of  military  tribunes,  with  consular  power.  Those 
...  .  .  .  Y  R  367 
elected  were  Titus  Qulntius  Cincinnatus,  Quintus  g  335 
Servilius  Fidenas  a  fifth  time,  Lucius  Julius  lulus, 
Lucius  Aquilius  Corvus,  Lucius  Lucretius  Tricipitinus,  and 
Servius  Sulpicius  Rufus.  They  led  one  army  against  the 
iEquans,  not  to  wage  war,  for  that  people  acknowledged  them¬ 
selves  conquered,  but,  in  the  warmth  of  animosity,  to  lay  waste 
their  country,  that  they  might  not  have  strength  for  any  new 
enterprises;  and  another,  into  the  territory  of  Tarquinii.  Here 
Cortuosa  and  Contenebra,  towns  belonging  to  the  Etrurians, 
were  taken  by  storm,  and  demolished.  At  Cortuosa  thefe  wms 

& 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

j;y.R.  36f. 

no  contest  j  attaddng  it  by  surprise^  they  took  it  at  the  first 
onset ;  the  town  was  then  plundered  and  burnt.  Contenehra 
sustained  a  siege  for  a  few  days,  and  it  was  continual  labour, 
unintermitted  either  by  night  or  by  day,  which  subdued  the 
townsmen  ;  for  the  Roman  army  bemg  divided  into  six  parts, 
each  division  maintained  the  fight,  for  one  hour  in  six,  in  ro¬ 
tation,  whereas  the  smallness  of  their  number  exposed  the 
same  townsmen  always,  fatigued  as  they  were,  to  a  contest 
with  an  enemy  who  were  continually  relieved.  They  gave 
way  at  length,  and  made  room  fur  the  Romans  to  enter  the 
city.  It  was  agreed  between  the  tribunes,  that  the  spoil 
should  be  converted  to  the  use  of  the  public  j  but  the  order 
not  being  issued  in  time,  during  the  delay,  the  soldiers  pos¬ 
sessed  themselves  of  the  spoil,  which  could  not  be  taken  from 
them,  without  occasioning  general  discontent.  In  the  same 
year,  that  the  additions  to  the  city  should  not  consist  of  pri¬ 
vate  buildings  only,  the  lower  parts  of  the  Capitol  were  re¬ 
built  with  hewn  stone  ;  a  work  deserving  notice,  even  amidst 
the  present  magnificence  of  the  city. 
V.  And  now,  while  the  citizens  were  busily  employed  in 
building,  the  tribunes  of  the  commons  endeavoured  to  draw 
crowds  to  their  harangues,  by  proposals  of  agrarian  laws. 
The  Pomptine  territory  was  held  out  as  a  lure  to  their  hopes, 
as  the  possession  of  it  was  then,  by  the  reduction  of  the  Vol- 
scian  power  by  CamiUus,  perfectly  secure,  which  had  not 
been  the  case  before.  They  laid  heavy  charges,  that  “  that 
territory  was  much  more  grievously  oppressed  by  the  no- 
“  bility,  than  it  had  been  by  the  Volscians  ;  for  the  latter  had 
only  made  incursions  into  it,  at  such  times  as  they  had  arms 
“  and  strength  ;  whereas  certain  persons  of  the  nobility  for- 
cibly  usurped  possession  of  land,  which  was  the  property  of 
the  public :  nor,  unless  there  were  a  division  of  know  made, 
‘‘  would  there  be  any  room  left  for  the  commores.’’  They 
tnade  no  great  impression  on  the  commons,  who  were  so  in- 

BOOK  VI. 

9 

J3.C.  BBS.] 

intent  on  bnildbg,  that  they  did  not  much  frequent  Fo¬ 
rum  ;  and,  besides,  were  so  exhausted  by  their  expences  in 
that  way,  that  they  were  careless  about  land,  which  they  had 
not  abilities  to  improve.  The  state  having  ever  been  strong¬ 
ly  affected  with  religious  impressions,  and  even  those  of  the 
first  rank  having,  at  that  time,  in  consequence  of  the  late  mis¬ 
fortunes,  become  superstitious,  the  government  was  changed 
to  an  interregnum,  in  order  that  the  auspices  might  be  taken 
anew.  There  were  interreges  in  succession,  Marcus  Man¬ 
lius  Capitolinus,  Servius  Sulpicius  Camerinus,  and  Lucius 
Valerius  Potitus.  The  last  held,  at  length,  an 
’  °  Y  R  368 
election  of  military  tribunes,  with  consular  power  ;  B  c  384 
and  appointed  Lucius  Papirius,  Caius  Cornelius, 
Caius  Sergius,  Lucius  ^milius  a  second  time,  Lucius  Me- 
nenius,  and  Lucius  Valerius  Poplicola.a  third  time.  These 
entered  into  office  immediately  on  the  expiration  of  the  inter¬ 
regnum.  In  that  year  the  temple  of  Mars,  vowed  during  the 
Gallic  war,  was  dedicated  by  Titus  Quintius,  one  of  the 
duumvirs  appointed  for  the  performance  of  religious  rites. 
Four  new  tribes  were  formed  of  the  new  citizens,  the  Stella- 
tine,  the  Tromentine,  the  Sabatine,  and  the  Narnian,  which 
made  up  the  number  of  twenty-five  tribes. 
VI.  Lucius  Sicinius,  plebeian  tribune,  pressed  the  business 
of  the  Pomptine  lands  in  the  assemblies  of  the  people,  who 
now  attended  in  greater  numbers,  and  were  also  more  easily 
led  to  wish  for  land  than  formerly.  Mention  was  introduced, 
in  the  senate,  of  declaring  war  against  the  Latines  and  Her- 
liicians,  but  that  business  was  postponed,  by  their  attention 
being  called  to  a  more  important  war,  Etruria  being  in  arms. 
They  had  recourse,  therefore,  to  the  expedient  of 
•  .  .  .  .  .  y  R  369 
electing  Camillus  a  military  tribune,  with  consular 
r-w*  .  .  I  JtJ  .  V.*  • 
power.  The  five  colleagues,  joined  with  him,  were 
Servius  Corpelius  Maluginensis,  Quintus  Servilius  Fidenas  a 
iixth  time,  Lucius  Quintius  Ci^innatus,  Lucius  Horatiirs 
VOL.  II. — C 

10 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  369. 

Pulvil>is,  and  Publius  Valerius.  The  cares  pf  the  public 
wfere,  in  the  very  beginning  of  the  year,  diverted  from  the 
fetrurian  war :  for  a  number  of  fugitives,  from  the  Pomptine 
district,  running  hastily  into  the  city,  in  a  body,  brought  in¬ 
telligence,  that  the  Antians  were  in  arms,  and  that  the  states 
af  the  Ladnes  had  privately  sent  their  young  men  to  co-ope- 
rate  with  them  in  the  war,  alleging  that  the  state  was  not  con¬ 
cerned  in  the  business,  but  only  did  not  hinder  volunteers  to 
engage  in  any  service  which  they  chose.  It  had  ceased  to  be 
the  practice  to  despise  any  enemy :  the  senate  therefore  thank¬ 
ed  the  gods  that  Catpillus  was  in  oflSce,  because,  had  he  been 
in  a  private  station,  it  would  have  been  necessary  to  have 
nominated  him  dictator:  his  colleagues  also  agreed,  that, 
when  any  danger  threatened,  the  entire  direction  of  affairs 
should  be  vested  in  him  singly,  and  determined  to  consign  all 
their  authority  into  his  hands  ;  nor  did  they  think,  that  any 
concession  which  they  made,  towards  exalting  his  dignity, 
derogated  in  the  least  from  their  own.  After  the  tribunes 
had  been  highly  commended  by  the  senate,  Camillus  too,  cov¬ 
ered  with  confusion,  returned  them  his  thanks,  and  proceeded 
to  say,  that  “  a  heavy  burthen  was  laid  on  him  by  the  Roman 
“  people,  who  had  created  him,  in  a  manner,  dictator,  now  a 
fourth  time  ;  a  very  great  one,  by  the  senate,  in  such  judg- 
‘‘  ments  as  that  body  had  expressed  concerning  him  ;  but  the 
“  greatest  of  all,  by  the  condescension  of  colleagues  of  such 
eminent  distinction.  Wherefore,  if  it  were  possible  to  add 
to  his  diligence  and  vigilance,  he  would  vie  with  himself^ 
and  labour  earnestly,  that  the  opinion  of  the  state  concem- 
ing  him,  so  universally  conceived,  might  be  as  lasting,  as 
it  was  honourable  to  him.  With  respect  to  the  war,  and  the 
Antians,  there  was  more  of  threats  in  it  than  of  danger ; 
nevertheless  his  advice  was,  that,  as  they  should  fear  no- 
thing,  so  they  should  despise  nothing.  The  city  of  Rome 
was  besieged  on  all  sides,  by  the  ill-will  and  hatred  of  itt 

BOOK  VL 

11 

B.C.  383.] 

“  neighbours*  The  business  of  the  commonwealth  would 
therefore  require  more  generals  and  more  armies  than  one. 
It  is  my  design,”  said  he,  “  that  you,  Publius  Valerius,  as 
‘‘  my  associate  in  command  and  counsel,  shall  march  with  me, 
“  at  the  head  of  the  legions,  against  the  enemy  at  Antium  ; 
that  you,  Quintus  Servilius,  after  forming  atmdier  army, 
and  putting  it  in  readiness,  shall  encamp  in  the  city,  and  be 
“  ready  to  act,  in  case  the  Etrurians,  as  lately,  or  these  new 
^  disturbers,  the  Latines  and  Hernicians,  should,  in  the  mean 
“  time,  make  any  attempts ;  I  am  perfectly  assured,  that  your 
conduct  will  be  worthy  of  your  father,  of  your  grandfather, 
of  yourself,  and  of  six  tribunates*  Let  a  third  army  be  en- 
“  listed  by  Lucius  Quintius,  for  the  guard  of  the  city^  out  of 
“  those  excused  from  service,  and  those  past  the  military  age. 
‘‘  Let  Lucius  Horatius  provide  arms,  weapons,  com,  and 
“  whatever  else  the  exigencies  of  war  may  demand.  You, 
Servius  Cornelius,  we,  your  colleagues,  appoint  the  presi- 
“  dent  of  this  grand  council  of  the  state,  the  guardian  of  re-^ 
ligion,  of  the  assemblies,  of  the  laws,  and  of  every  thing 
else  pertaining  to  the  city.”  All  of  them  cheerfully  pro¬ 
mising  their  best  endeavours,  in  the  several  departments  com¬ 
mitted  to  them,  Valerius,  whom  he  had  chosen  his  associate 
in  command,  added,  that,  he  should  consider  Camillu^  as 
dictator,  and  himself  as  his  master  of  the  horse,”  and  de¬ 
sired  them  therefore  to  regulate^ their  expectations  respect- 
ing  the  war,  according  to  the  opinion  which  they  entertain- 
ed  of  their  sole  commander.”  The  senate,  elated  with  Joy, 
one  and  all  declared,  that  “  they  really  cherished  the  best  ex- 
“  pectations  with  regard  to  war  and  peace,  and  every  branch 
of  public  business ;  nor  would  the  commonwealth  ever 
stand  in  need  of  a  dictator,  if  it  were  to  have  such  men  in 
“  office,  united  in  such  harmony  of  sentiment,  equally  ready 
**  to  obey  and  to  command,  and  who  rather  considered  fame 

12  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  360, 
“  as  their  joint  stock,  than  endeavoured  to  monopolize  it,  to 
the  exclusion  of  others.’^ 
VII.  A  cessation  of  civil  business  being  proclaimed,  and 
troops  levied,  Camillus  and  Valerius  marched  towards  Satri- 
cum,  to  which  place  the  Antians  had  drawn  together  not  only 
the  youth  of  the  Volscians,  chosen  from  among  the  new  gene¬ 
ration,  but  immense  numbers  from  the  Latines  and  Hernici- 
ans,  nations  who,  from  a  long  enjoyment  of  peace,  were  in  the 
fullest  vigour.  This  new  enemy  then  being  united  in  addition 
to  the  old,  shook  the  resolution  of  the  Roman  soldiery  :  and 
the  centurions  reporting  to  Camillus,  while  he  was  employed 
in  forming  his  line  of  battle,  that  ‘‘  the  minds  of  the  soldiers 
were,  disturbed  ;  that  a  backwardness  appeared  in  their  tak- 
“  ing  up  arms,  and  that  they  went  out  of  the  camp  with  re- 
luctance,  and  after  several  halts  ;  nay,  that  some  had  been 
‘‘  heard  to  say,  that  each  of  them  would  have  to  fight  against 
an  hundred  enemies  ;  that  so  great  a  multitude,  even  if 
unarmed,  could  hardly  be  withstood,  much  less  when  they 
were  furnished  with  arms  he  leaped  on  his  horse,  and  in 
the  front  of  the  battalions,  turning  to  the  line,  and  riding  be¬ 
tween  the  ranks,  asked  them,  what  is  the  meaning, Tsoldiers, 
“  of  this  dejection,  of  this  unusual  backwardness  ?  Are  ye 
unacquainted  with  the  enemy,  or  with  me,  or  with  your- 
selves  ?  The  enemy,  what  are  they,  but  the  continual  sub- 
‘‘  ject  of  your  bravery  and  your  glory  ?  On  the  other  hand, 
with  me  at  your  head,  not  to  mention  the  taking  of  Falerii, 
‘‘  and  Veii,  or  the  cutting  to  pieces  the  Gallic  legions,  by 
‘‘  whom  our  country  was  held  in  captivity,  you  have  lately 
celebrated  a  triple  triumph,  for  three  several  victories 
“  gained  over  these  same  Volscians,  Alquans,  and  Etrurians. 
Is  it  that  ye  do  not  recognize  me  as  your  leader,  because 
I  gave  you  the  signal  not  in  character  of  dictator,  but  of  tri- 
bune  ?  I  desire  not  the  highpt  degree  of  authority  over 
you  ;  and  with  respect  to  me,  you  ought  to  regard  nothing 

BOOK  VI. 

13 

B.C.  383.] 
“  but  myself:  forneither  did  the  dictatorship  ever  add  to  my 
‘‘  courage,  nor  even  exile  deprive  me  of  it.  We  are  all  there- 
fore  the  same,  and  since  we  bring  to  thi^  war  all  the  same 
advantages  which  accompanied  us  in  the  former,  let  us  ex- 
pect  the  same  issue.  Do  you  once  begin  the  light,  each 
party  will  do  what  they  have  learned  and  practised :  you 
will  conquer  ;  they  will  fly.” 
VIII.  Then,  giving  the  signal,  he  leaped  from  his  horse^ 
and  laying  hold  of  the  nearest  standard-bearer,  hurried  him 
onward  against  the  foe,  calling  aloud,  Soldier,  advance  the 
standaird.”  On  seeing  this,  that  Camillas  himself,  now  une¬ 
qual,  through  age,  to  acts  of  bodily  strength,  was  advancing 
against  the  enemy,  they  all  raised  the  shout,  and  rushed  for¬ 
ward  together,  every  one  crying  out  eagerly,  Follow  the 
general.”  It  is  said,  that  the  standard  was  even  thrown,  by 
order  of  Camillus,  into  the  ranks  of  the  enemy,  and  the  van 
hereby  excited  to  exert  themselves  for  its  recovery  ;  that  in 
this  spot,  the  Antians  were  first  compelled  to  give  way,  and 
that  the  panic  spread,  not  only  through  the  first  line,  but  even 
to  the  troops  in  reserve.  Nor  was  it  only  the  force  of  the 
soldiers,  animated  by  the  presence  of  their  leader,  which  dis¬ 
heartened  the  enemy,  the  very  sight  of  Camillus  struck  terror 
into  the  Volscians:  so  that  wherever  he  met  their  eyes,  vic¬ 
tory  was  no  longer  doubtful.  This  was  particularly  evident, 
when  hastily  mounting  his  horse,  he  rode  with  a  footman^s 
shield,  to  the  left  wing,  when  it  was  almost  driven  from  its 
ground,  and  by  his  appearance  restored  the  battle,  while  he 
pointed  to  the  rest  of  the  line  who  were  fighting  with  success. 
The  affair  was  now  decided.  On  the  one  side  the  enemy’s 
disordered  numbers  impeded  their  flight ;  on  the  other,  the 
wearied  soldiers  would  have  had  a  long  and  laborious  task,  in 
putting  to  the  sword  so  great  a  multitude,  when  heavy  rain 
suddenly  falling,  attended  with  a  violent  storm  of  wind,  pre¬ 
vented  the  pursuit  of  the  victory,  for  it  was  no  longer  a  fight. 

14 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  369. 

The  si^al  for  retreat  was  then  given,  and  the  following  night 
put  an  end  to  the  war,  without  any  farther  trouUe  to  the  Ro¬ 
mans  :  for  the  Latines  smd  Hemicians  abandoning  the  Vol- 
scians,  marched  away  to  their  homes  ;  having  found  such  an 
issue  of  their  enterprise  as  the  wickedness  of  it  deserved. 
The  Vokeians  seeing  themselves  deserted  by  those,  through 
reliance  on  whom  they  had  been  induced  to  revive  hostilities, 
abandoned  their  camp,  and  shut  themselves  up  within  the 
walls  of  Satricum  :  against  diese,  the  first  plan  of  operations, 
adopted  by  Camillas,  was  to  inclose  them  with  lines  of  cir- 
cumvallation,  and  to  carry  on  his  approaches  by  mounds,  and 
other  works :  but  finding  that  no  obstruction  was  ever  given 
to  these,  by  any  sally  from  the  town,  he  judged  that  the  ene¬ 
my  were  not  possessed  of  such  a  degree  of  spirit,  as  should 
induce  him,  in  apprehension  thereof,  to  wait  in  tedious  ex¬ 
pectation  of  victory  ;  and  therefore  exhorting  his  men  not  to 
waste  their  strength  by  a  long  course  of  labours,  as  in  the 
siege  of  Veii,  for  victory  was  within  their  reach  ;  and  the  sol¬ 
diers  showing  the  greatest  alacrity,  he  assailed  the  walls  on 
all  sides  by  scalade,  and  made  himself  master  of  the  town. 
The  Volscians  threw  down^eir  arms,  and  surrendered. 
IX.  But  the  general’s  thoughts  were  intent  on  a  matter  of 
greater  moment,  on  the  city  of  Antium.  That,  he  knew,  was 
the  grand  spring  which  set  the  Volscians  in  motion,  and  had 
given  rise  to  the  last  war.  But  as  a  city  of  so  great  strength 
could  not  be  taken  without  great  preparations  for  the  siege, 
and  a  large  train  of  engines  and  machines,  he  left  hi^  col¬ 
league  to  command  the  army,  and  went  to  Rome,  in  hopes  of 
persuading  the  senate  to  resolve  on  the  destruction  of  Anti¬ 
um.  In  the  middle  of  his  discourse  on  the  subject,  it  being, 
1  suppose,  the  will  of  the  gods,  that  the  state  of  Antium 
should  have  a  longer  duration,  ambassadors  arrived  from  Ne- 
pete  and  Sutrium,  imploring  aid  against  the  Etrurians,  and 
urging  that  the  opportunity  for  assisting  them  would  be 

BOOK  VI. 

15 

B.c.  mq 
quickly  to^.  Thither  did  fortune  divert  the  force  of  CamiU 
lus  from  Antium :  for  as  those  places  were  situated  opposite 
Etruria,  and  served  as  barriers,  or  gates,  as  it  were,  on  that 
side,  that  people,  on  the  one  hand,  whenever  any  new  enter¬ 
prise  Was  undertaken,  were  ever  anxious  to  get  possession  of 
them  j  and  the  Romans,  on  the  other,  to  recover  and  secure 
them.  The  senate  therefore  resolved,  that  application  should 
be  made  to  Camillus,  to  drop  the  design  against  Antium,  and 
tmdertake  die  Etrurian  war.  The  city  legions,  which  had 
been  under  the  command  of  Quintius,  were  decreed  to  him  : 
although  he  would  have  preferred  the  army  which  was  in  the 
country  of  the  Volscians,  which  he  had  made  trials,  and 
which  was  accustomed  to  his  command,  yet  he  ofFei^d  no  ob¬ 
jections  ;  he  only  insisted  on  Valerius  being  associated  with 
him  in  command.  Accordingly  Quintius  and  Horatius  were 
sent  to  succeed  Valerius,  in  the  country  of  the  Volscians. 
Camillus  and  Valerius  marching  from  the  city  to  Sutrium, 
found  one  part  of  the  town  already  taken  by  the  Etrurians  ; 
and,  in  the  other  part,  the  passages  to  which  were  barricaded, 
the  townsmen  with  great  difficulty  in  repelling  the  assault  of 
the  enemy.  The  approach  of  aid  from  Rome,  together  with 
the  name  of  Camillus,  universally  celebrated  among  friends 
and  foes,  not  only  gave  them  respite  for  the  present  from  the 
ruin  which  impended,  but  also  afforded  an  opportunity  of  ef¬ 
fectuating  their  relief.  Camillus  then,  dividing  his  army  into 
two  parts,  ordered  his  colleague  to  lead  round  his  division, 
to  that  side  which  was  in  possession  of  the  enemy,  and  to 
make  an  assault  on  the  walls  ;  not  so  much  in  expectation  that 
the  city  should  be  taken  by  scalade,  as  that,  whilst  the  ene¬ 
my  should  be  diverted  to  that  side,  the  townsmen,  now  fa¬ 
tigued  with  fighting,  might  gain  some  relaxation,  and  also 
that  he  himself  might  have  an  opportunity  of  entering  the 
city  ,  without  a  dispute :  both  which  consequences  taking  place, 
at  the  s%me  time,  and  terrifying  tho  Etrurians  by  the  double 

16 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  36^, 

danger  to  which  they  stood  exposed^  when  they  saw  the 
walls  of  one  part  assailed  with  the  greatest  fury,  and  the  ene¬ 
my  within  the  walls  of  the  othet,  they  were  struck  with  such 
consternation,  that  diey  threw  themselves  out,  in  one  body, 
by  a  gate  which  alone  happened  to  be  unguarded.  Great 
numbers  were  slain  in  their  flight,  both  in  the  city  ^nd  in  the 
fields ;  the  greatest  execution  done  by  the  soldiers  of  Camil¬ 
las  was  within  the  walls  :  those  of  Valerius  were  more  alert  in 
the  pursuit ;  nor  did  they  desist  from  the  slaughter,  until  it 
was  so  dark  that  they  could  see  no  longer.  Sutrium  being 
thus  recovered,  and  restored  to  the  allies,  the  army  was  con¬ 
ducted  to  Nepete,  of  which  the  Etrurians  had  now  the  entire 
possession,  having  received  it  by  capitulation. 
X.  It  was  expected,  that  the  recovery  of  this  city  would 
have  been  attended  with  greater  difficulty  ;  not  only  because 
the  whole  of  it  was  possessed  by  the  enemy,  but  also,  because 
it  was  in  consequence  of  a  party  of  the  Nepesinians  betray¬ 
ing  the  public,  that  the  surrender  had  been  made.  However, 
it  was  thought  proper  that  a  message  should  be  sent  to  their 
principal  men,  to  separate  themselves  from  the  Etrurians,  and 
show  on  their  own  part  the  same  faithful  attachment,  which 
they  had  implored  from  the  Romans.  But  their  answer  im¬ 
porting, thatthere  was  nothing  in  their  power,  for  that  the  Etru¬ 
rians  held  possession  of  the  walls  and  the  guards  of  the  gates, 
a  trial  was  first  made  to  terrify  the  townsmen,  by  laying  waste 
their  lands.  But  when  they  were  found  to  adhere  more  re¬ 
ligiously  to  the  terms  of  the  capitulation,  than  to  those  of  the 
alliance,  the  army  was  led  up  to  the  walls,  with  fascines,  made 
of  bushes,  collected  in  the  country,  with  which  the  ditches 
being  filled,  the  scaling  ladders  were  raised,  and  the  town  ta¬ 
ken  at  the  first  attack.  Proclamation  was  then  made  that  the 
Nepesinians  should  lay  down  their  arms,  and  that  the  un¬ 
armed  should  be  spared.  The  Etrurians,  armed  and  unarm¬ 
ed,  were  put  to  the  sword  without  distinction  :  of  th^  Nepe- 

n.C.  383.]  BOOK  VI-  I4r 
sinians,  likewise,  tbc  authors  of  the  surrender  were  beheaded. 
To  the  gutWess  multitude  their  effects  were  restored,  and  a 
garrison  was  left  in  the  town.  Having  thus  recovered  two  ^ 
allied  cities  from  the  enemy,  the  tribunes^  with  great  ^ory, 
led  home  the  victorious  army.  During  this  year,  satis^** 
tion  was  demanded  from  the  Latines  and  Hermcians,  and 
the  i^ason  required,  of  their  not  havings  for  some  years  paat, 
sent  the  supplies  of  soldiers  stipulated  by  treaty.  An  answer 
was  given  in  full  assembly  by  both  nations,  that  “  tterc  was 
‘‘  neither  design  nor  blame  to  be  imputed  to  the  public,  be- 
cause  some  of  their  young  men  carried  arms  in  the  service 
of  the  Volscians.  That  these,  however,  had  suffered  the 
penalty  of  their  improper  conduct ;  not  one  of  them  havmg 
returned  home.  As  to  the  supplies  of  soldiers,  the  reason 
“  of  their  not  sending  them  was,  their  continual  appreben- 
‘‘  sions  from  the  Volscians,  that  pest  still  clinging  to  their 
“  side,  which  so  many  successive  wars  had  not  been  able  to> 
exhaust.”  Which  answer  being  reported  to  the  senate,  th^ 
were  of  opinion,  that  a  declaration  of  war,  in  consequence  of 
it,  would  rather  be  unseasonable  than  ilUgrounded. 
XI.  In  the  following  year,  A  ulus  Manlius,  Publius  Cor* 
neliua,  Titus  and  Lucius  Quintii  Capitolini,  Lu-  ^  ^ 
cius  Papirius  Cursor  a  second  time,  anti  Caius  g 
Sergius  a  Second  time,  being  military  tribunes, 
with  consular  power,  a  grievous  war  broke  out  abn>ad, 
and  a  more  grievous  sedition  at  home :  the  war  was  ,set 
on  foot  by  the  Volscians,  assisted  by  a  revolt  of  the  La** 
tines  and  Hernicians:  the  sedition,  by  one,  from  whom  it 
could,  least  of  all,  have  been  apprehended  ^  a  miya  of  patri¬ 
cian  birth,  and  of  illustrious  character,  Marcos  Manlius  Ca- 
pitolinus ;  who,  being  of  a  temper  too  aspiring,  w*hile  be 
looked  with  contempt  on  the  other  men  of  chief  distinction, 
burned  with  envy  of  one,  who  was  most  eminently  distki* 
gnished,  at  the  same  time,  by  honours  and  by  merit,  Marcus 
voi..  II.— D 

18 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  370, 
Furius  Camillus.  It  gave  him  great  uneasiness,  that  he 
‘‘  should  be  the  only  man  considered  among  the  magistrates, 
^  ^  tfie  only  man  at  the  head  of  the  armies  ;  that  he  was  now 
^  exalted  to  such  eminence,  that  the  persons  elected  under 
the  same  auspices  with  himself,  he  used,  not  as  colleagues, 
“  but  as  subordinate  officers ;  while,  at  the  same  time,  if  a 
just  estimate  were  made,  it  would  have  been  impossible 
‘‘  for  Camillus  to  have  recovered  thejr  native  cky  from  the 
“  Gauls  who  besieged  k,  if  he  himself  had  not  first  saved  the 
“  Capitol  and  citadel.  The  other  indeed  attacked  the  Gauls 
“  when,  between  the  receiving  of  the  gold  and  the  expecta- 
‘‘  tion  of  peace,  they  were  off  their  guard:  but  he  had  beaten 
‘‘  them  off,  when  armed  for  fight,  and  taking  possession  of 
“  the  citadel.  In  the  other’s  glory,  as  far  as  bravery  was 
concerned,  every  soldier  who  conquered  along  with  him 
had  a  right  to  share  ;  in  his  own  victory,  no  man  living 
“  could  claim  a  part.”  Puffed  up  with  such  notions  as  these, 
and  being,  besides,  of  a  vicious  disposition,  vehement  and 
headstrong,  when  he  perceived  that  his  interest  had  not  that 
prevailing  influence  among  the  patricians  which  he  thought 
his  due,  he,  the  first  of  all  the  patricians,  became  a  partizan 
of  the  plebeians  ;  formed  schemes  in  conjunction  with  the 
magistrates  of  the  commons,  and,  while  he  criminated  the 
patricians,  and  allured  the  commons  to  his  side,  he  came  to 
be  actuated  by  ambition  for  popular  applause,  not  by  pru¬ 
dence,  and  to  prefer  a  great  to  a  good  ‘  character.  Not  con¬ 
tent  with  agrarian  laws,  which  had  ever  served  the  plebeian 
tribunes  as  matter  of  sedition,  he  attempted  to  undermine 
public  credit :  for  debt,  he  knew,  supplied  sharper  incentives, 
as  it  not  only  threatei^d  poverty  and  ignominy,  but  menaced 
personal  freedom  with  stocks  and  chains :  and  the  amount 
of  the  debts  which  the  people  had  contracted  by  building,  an 
undertaking  most  distressing  to  the  circumstances  even  of 
the  rich,  was  immense.  The  Volscian  war  therefore,  heavy 
in  itself,  and  charged  with  additional  weight  by  the  defec- 

BOOK  VI. 

19 

B.C.  382.] 
tion  of  the  Latines  and  Hernicians,  was  held  out  as  a  colour¬ 
able  pretext  for  having  recourse  to  a  higher  authority ;  while, 
in  fact,  they  were  the  reforming  plans  of  Manlius  which 
obliged  the  senate  to  create  a  dictator,  Aulus  Cornelius 
Cossus  being  created,  he  nominated  Titus  Quintius  Caplto* 
linus  master  of  the  horse. 
XII.  The  dictator,  although  he  perceiv'ed  that  he  should 
have  a  greater  struggle  to  maintain  at  home  than  in  the  field ; 
yet,  either  because  the  war  required  dispatch,  ogr  because  he 
thought  that,  by  a  victory  and  triumph,  he  might  add  to  the 
power  of  the  dictatorship  itself,  as  soon  as  the  levies  were 
completed,  proceeded  to  the  Pomptinc  territory  ;  where  he 
was  informed,  the  Volscians  had  appointed  the  assembling 
of  their  army.  To  persons  reading  in  so  many  former  books, 
of  wars  continually  waged  with  the  Volscians,  I  doubt  not 
that,  besides  satiety,  this  difficulty  also  will  occur,  whence 
the  Volscians  and  iEquans,  so  often  vanquished,  could  pro¬ 
cure  supplies  of  soldiers  ?  which  having  been  passed  over  in 
silence  by  the  ancient  writers,  whaf  can  I  possibly  advance, 
but  opinion?  and  that  every  one,  indeed,  can  form  for  him¬ 
self,  It  seems  probable,  however,  either  that  they  employed, 
according  to  the  present  practice  in  the  Roman  levies,  the 
several  different  generations  of  their  yoimg  men  successive¬ 
ly,  as  they  sprung  up,  during  the  intervals  between  wars ; 
or,  that  the  troops  were  not  always  enlisted  out  of  the  states 
of  the  nation  making  war;  or,  that  there  was  an  innumera¬ 
ble  multitude  of  freemen  in  thdse  places,  which,  at  present, 
were  it  not  for  the  Roman  slaves,  would  be  a  desert,  and 
where  scarcely  the  smallest  seminary  of  soldiers  remains. 
Certain  it  is,  all  authors  agreeing  therein,  that  notwithstand¬ 
ing  their  strength  had  lately  been  greatly  reduced  under  the 
conduct  and  auspices  of  Camillus,  yet  the  forces  of  the  Vol¬ 
scians  were  exceedingly  numerous ;  and  to  them  were  added 
the  Latines  and  Hernicians,  a  number  of  the  Circeians,  to- 

20 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R,  sro. 

gethcr  with  some  colonists  from  Vclitrae*  The  Roman  dic¬ 
tator  encamped  on  .the  first  day ;  and  on  the  following,  having 
taken  the  auspices  before  he  made  his  appearance,  and  sacri¬ 
ficing  a  victim,  implored  the  favour  of  the  gods.  With  joy 
in  his  countenance,  he  presented  himself  to  the  soldiers,  who 
were  now  at  day-break  taking  arms,  according  to  orders,  on 
Ae  s^al  for  battle  being  displayed,  and  said,  “  Soldiers, 
victory  is  ours,  if  the  gods  and  their  prophets  know  aught 
“  of  futurity.  Therefore,  as  becomes  meit  full  of  well- 
“  grounded  hopes,  and  about  to  engage  with  Aeir  inferiors, 
‘‘let  us,  fixing  our  spears  at  our  feet,  bear  no  other  arms 
“  than  our  swords.  I  do  not  wish  that  any  should  even  push 
“  forward  beyond  the  line  j  but  that  standing  firm  ye  receive 
“  Ae  enemy’s  onset  in  a  steady  posture.  When  they  shall 
“  have  discharged  their  ineffectual  weapons,  and,  breaking 
“  their  order,  rush  against  you  as  ye  stand,  then  let  your 
“  swords  glitter  in  their  eyes,  and  let  every  one  recollect, 
“  that  there  are  gods  who  support  the  Roman  cause  ;  gods, 
“  who  have  sent  us  to  battle  with  favourable  omens.  Do 
“  you.  Thus  Quin ti us,  keep  back  the  cavalry,  watching  at- 
“  tentivcly  the  beginning  of  the  conflict ;  as  soon  as  you  shall 
“  sec  the  armies  elosed  foot  to  foot,  then,  while  their  fears 
“  are  employed  on  some  other  object,  strike  dismay Jnto 
“  them  with  your  horsemen  ;  and,  by  a  brisk  charge,  dis- 
“  perse  the  ranks  that  dispute  the  victory.”  As  he  had  or¬ 
dered,  so  did  the  cavalry,  so  did  the  infantry  manage  the 
fight.  Nor  did  ei Aer  the  general  deceive  the  legions,  or  for¬ 
tune  the  general. 
XIII.  The  enemy,  grounding  their  confidence  on  no  other 
circumstance  than  their  number,  and  measuring  both  armies 
merely  by  the  eye,  entered  on  the  battle  inconsiderately,  and 
inconsiderately  gave  it  over.  Fierce,  only  in  their  shout,  and 
the  discharge  of  their  missive  weapons  at  the  first  onset,  they 
were  unAle  to  withstand  the  swords,  the  close  engagement 

BOOK  VI, 

2i 

B.C.  382.] 
foot  to  foot,  and  the  looks  of  the  Romans  darting  fire  through 
their  ardour  for  the  fight.  Their  first  line  was  driven  from 
its  ground ;  the  confusion  spread  to  the  troops  in  reserve ; 
and  the  charge  of  the  cavalry  increasing  the  disqrder,  the 
ranks  were  quickly  broken,  so  as  to  resemble  the  waves  of 
the  sea.  Thus  the  foremost  fell,  and  as  each  saw  death  ap¬ 
proaching,  they  quickly  turned  their  backs.  The  Romans 
followed  close,  and  as  long  as  the  enemy  retreated  in  bodies, 
the  trouble  of  the  pursuit  fell  to  the  share  of  the  infantry ; 
but  when  it  was  perceived,  that  they  every  where  threw 
Oway  their  arms,  and  were  scattered  over  the  countty^  th^n 
squadrons  of  horse  were  sent  out,  with  instructions  that  they 
should  not,  by  spending  time  in  attacking  single  persons, 
give  the  multitude  an  opportunity  of  escaping :  that  it  would 
be  sufficient  if  their  speed  were  retarded,  and  their  forces 
kept  employed  by  frequent  skirmishes,  until  the  infantary 
might  overtake  them,  and  complete  their  destruction.  The 
flight  and  pursuit  did  not  cease  until  night  came  on.  The 
camp  of  the  Volscians  was  also  taken  the  same  day,  and 
plundered,  and  the  whole  booty,  except  the  persons  of  free 
condition,  bestowed  on  the  soldiers.  The  greatest  number 
of  the  prisoners  were  Latines  and  Hernicians,  and  these  not 
men  of  plebeian  station,  who  could  be  supposed  to  have 
served  for  hire, .but  many  young  men  of  the  first  rank  were 
found  amongst  them ;  an  .  evident  proof,  that  aid  ha^  been 
given  to  the  Volscians  by  public  authority.  Several  of  the 
Circeians  were  likewise  found  there,  with  colonists  from 
Velitrae,  and  being  all  sent  to  Rome,  on  being  examined  by 
the  principal  senators,  they  made  a  plain  discover)',  as  they 
had  done  to  the  dictator,  of  the  defection  of  their  respective 
states. 
XIV.  The  dictator  kept  his  army  encamped  in  one  post, 
not  doubting  that  the  senate  would  order  war  to  be  made  on 
those  states ;  when  more  momentous  business,  arising  at 

22 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  370. 
home,  made  it  necessary  that  he  should  be  called  back  to 
Rome  ;  this  was  the  sedition  which  ripened  daily,  and  which 
was  become  more  than  commonly  alarming,  on  account  of 
the  person  who  fomented  it.  It  was  now  easy  to  perceive 
from  what  motive  proceeded  the  discourses  of  Manlius,  dis¬ 
guised  under  die  veil  of  popular  zeal,  but  pregnant  with 
mischief.  Qn  seeing  a  centurion,  who  was  highly  distin¬ 
guished  for  his  behaviour  in  the  army,  led  to  prison,  in  con- 
-sequence  of  a  judgment  given  against  him  for  debt,  he  ran 
up,  with  his  band  of  attendants,  into  the  middle  of  the  Fo- 
riim,  and  laid  hands  on  him,  exclaiming  against  the  tyranny 
of  the  patricians,  the  cruelty  of  the  usurers,  the  miseries  of 
the  qommons,  and  the  merits  and  hard  fortune  of  the  man. 
“  Then,  indeed,  it  was  in  vain,”  said  he,  ‘‘  that  with  this 
right  hand  I  saved  the  capitol  and  citadel,  if  I  must  see 
^  my  fellow-citizen  and  fellow-soldier,  as  if  a  prisoner  to  the 
victorious  Gauls,  dragged  into  slavery,”  He  then  paid  the 
debt  to  the  creditor  in  the  view  of  the  people,  and  gave  the 
man  kis  liberty,  after  purchasing  him,  in  the  regular  form, 
with  the  scales  and  brass,  whilst  the  latter  besought  both 
gods  knd  men  to  grant  a  recompense  to  his  deliverer,  Mar¬ 
cus  Manlius,  the  parent  of  the  Roman  commons  ;  and  being 
instantly  received  into  the  tumultuous  crowd/ he  himself 
increased  the  tumult,  shewing  the  scars  of  the  wounds  which 
he  had  received  in  the  Veientian,  Gallic,  and  other  succeed¬ 
ing  wars ;  telling  them,  that  ‘‘  his  services  in  the  army,  and 
“  the  rebuilding  his  ruined  dwelling,  had  been  the  means  of 
**  overwhelming  him  with  accumulated  interest  of  a  debt ; 
the  interest  always  precluding  the  possibility  of  discharging 
the  principal,  though  he  had  already  paid  the  amount  of 
the  first  sum  many  times  over.  That  it  was  owing  to  the 
“  generosity  of  Marcus  Manlius  that  he  now  beheld  the  light 
“  of  day,  the  Forum,  and  the  faces  of  his  fellow-citizens. 
Every  obligation,  due  to  parents,  he  owed  to  him ;  to  him, 

BOOK  VI. 

23 

B.C.  382.] 
‘‘  therefore,  he  devoted  whatever  remained  of  his  persoi^ 
‘‘  his  life,  and  his  blood ;  whatever  ties  should  bind  him  to 
his  country,  to  |mblic  or  private  guardian  deities,  by  all 
**  these  united  he  was  bound  to  that  one  man.”  While  the 
commons  were  deeply  affected  by  these  expressions,  another 
scheme  was  introduced,  of  still  greater  efficacy,  towards  pro¬ 
moting  a  general  commotion.  A  piece  of  ground  in  the 
country  of  the  Veientians,  the  principal  part  of  Manlius’s 
patrimony,  he  ordered  to  be  sold  by  auction ;  adding,  that 
“  I  will  not  suffer  one  of  you,  my  fellow-citizens,  while  I 
“  have  any  property  remaining,  to  have  judgments  given 
**  against  him,  and  to  be  ordered  Into  custody  of  a  creditor.’’ 
This,  above  all,  inflamed  their  minds  to  such  a  degree,  that 
they  seemed  ready  to  follow  the  asserter  of  their  liberty 
through  every  measure,  whether  right  or  wrong.  Besides 
this,  he  made  speeches  at  his  own  house,  as  if  he  were  ha¬ 
ranguing  an  assembly  of  the  people,  full  of  imputations 
against  the  patricians,  in  which  he  threw  out,  among  the 
rest,  without  regarding  an}’  distinction  between  truth  and‘ 
falsehood,  that  treasure,  consisting  of  the  gold  rescued 
“  from  the  Giauls,  was  concealed  by  the  patricians  f  that  they 
“  were  not  content,  now,  with  keeping  possession  of  the  pub- 
“  lie  lands,  unless  they  converted  the  public  money  likewise 
to  their  own  use  ;  and  that  if  this  were  brought  to  light,  it 
“  would  be  sufficient  to  clear  the  commons  of  their  debts.’’ 
On  this  prospect  being  presented  to  them,  they  at  once  con-» 
ceived  ft  to  be  a  scandalous  proceeding,  that  when  gold  was 
to  be  procured  for  the  ransom  of  the  city  from  the  Gauls, 
the  collection  had  been  made  by  a  general  contribution,  and 
that  the  same  gold,  when  taken  from  the  enemy,  should  be¬ 
come  the  prey  of  a  few.  The  next  step,  therefore,  was,  to 
inquire  in  what  place  a  treasure  of  such  magnitude  was  kept 
concealed :  to  this,  he  declined  giving  an  answer  at  present, 
saying,  he  would  explain  that  point  in  due  time ;  on  which 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[y;r.  sro. 

M 
ail  other  concerns  were  neglected,  and  the  attention  of  every 
man  directed  solely  to  this^  and  it  was  easy  to  foresee,  that 
neither  people’s  gratitude,  in  case  the  information  were  well 
founded,  nor  their  displeasure,  should  it  prove  false,  would 
be  confined  within  the  bounds  of  moderation. 
XV.  While  things  were  in  this  state,  the  dictator,  being 
called  home  from  the  army,  came  into  the  city.  Next  day  he 
called  a  meeting  of  the  senate  ;  when,  having  made  sufficient 
trial  of  the  people’s  inclinations,  he  forbade  the  senate  to  de¬ 
part  from  him,  and  being  attended  by  the  whole  body,  he 
fixed  his  throne  in  the  Gomitium,  and  sent  a  serjeant  to 
Marcus  Manlius  ;  who,  on  being  summoned  by  order  of  the 
dictator,  after  giving  the  signal  to  his  party,  that  a  contest 
was  at  hand,  came  to  the  tribunal  surrounded  by  a  very  nu¬ 
merous  band.  On  one  side  stood  the  senate,  on  the  other 
the  commons,  as  if  in  order  of  battle,  watching  attentively 
each  their  own  leader.  Then  silence  being  made,  the  dicta¬ 
tor  said,  I  wish  that  I,  and  the  Roman  patricians,  may  agree 
“  with  the  commons  on  every  other  subject,  I  am  very 
‘‘  confident  we  shall  with  respect  to  you,  and  the  business  on 
w^hich  I  am  to  interrogate  you.  I  understand  that  expec- 
“  tatioDs  have  been  raided  by  you,  in  the  minds  of  the  citi- 
“  zens,  that,  without  injury  to  credit,  their  debts  may  be  dis- 
charged  by  means  of  the  Gallic  gold  secreted  by  the  prin- 
cipal  patricians.  To  which  proceeding,  so  far  arr)  I  from 
giving  any  obstruction,  that,  on  the  contrary,  I  exhort  you, 
“  Marcus  Manlius,  to  deliver  the  Roman  commons  from  the 
“■  burthen  of  interest,  and  to  tumble  from  off  these  heaps  of 
^  peculated  wealth,  those  men  who  lie  brooding  over  it.  But 
if  you  refuse  to  perform  this,  either  because  you  wish  to 
be  yourself  a  sharer  in  the  peculation,  or  because  your  in- 
formation  is  groundless,  I  shall  order  you  to  be  led  to 
prison  ;  nor  will  I  suffer  the  multitude  to  be  any  longer 
disquieted  bv  you  wuth  fallacious  hopes.”  To  this  Manlius 

BOOK  VI. 

B.C.  382.] 

^9 

answered,  that  ‘Mt  had  not  escaped  his  observation  that 
‘‘  Cormiius  was  created  dictator,  not  for  the  purpose  of  act- 
‘‘  ing  against  the  Volscians,  who  were  enemies  as  often  as  it 
“  answered  any  purpose  to  the  patricians,  nor  against  the 
“  Latines  and  Hernicians,  \rhom  they  were  driving  into  hos- 
“  tiiities  by  false  imputations,  but  against  himself  and  the 
“  Roman  commons.  And  now,  the  war  which  had  been 
‘‘  feigned  to  subsist,  being  dropped,  an  assault  was  made 
‘‘  upon  him  :  now  the  dictator  acted  as  the  professed  patron 
“  of  usurers  against  the  commons.  Now  the  favour  of  the 
**  multitude  towards  him  was  made  a  handle  for  criminal 
‘‘  charges,  and  for  effecting  his  destruction.  The  crowd  that 
‘‘  attends  my  person,”  said  he,  ‘‘  offends  you,  Aulus  Come- 
lius,  and  you,  conscript  fathers.  Why  then  do  ye  not 
draw  it  away  from  me  by  doing  acts  of  kindness  ?  by  be- 
coming  surety,  by  delivering  your  countrymen  from  the 
‘‘  stocks  ?  by  hindering  them,  when  cast  in  suits  and  ordered 
into  custody  of  creditors,  to  be  carried  to  prison  ?  by  re- 
lieving  the  necessities  of  others  out  of  your  own  superflu- 
^  ities  ?  But  why  do  I  exhort  you  to  expend  your  property  ? 
“  Only  fix  a  new  capital,  deduct  from  the  principal  what  has 
been  paid  as  interest,  and  then  the  crowd  about  me  will 
“  not  be  more  remarkable  than  about  any  other.  But  why 
“  do  I,  alone,  interest  myself  for  my  fellow-citizens?  To 
**  this,  I  have  no  other  answer  to  make,  than  if  you  should 
ask  why  I,  alone,  saved  the  capitol  and  the  citadel  ?  I  then 
“  gave  every  aid  in  my  power  to  the  whole  community,  and 
will  do  so  still  to  each  individual.  Now,  as  to  the  Gallic 
“  treasures,  the  manner  in  which  I  am  questioned  causes 
“  difficulty  in  a  matter  which,  in  itself,  has  none.  Why  do 
‘‘  ye  ask,  what  ye  already  know  ?  Why  do  ye  order  others 
‘‘  to  shake  out  what  lies  in  your  own  laps,  rather  than  lay  it 
“  down  yourselves,  unless  to  conceal  some  treacherous 
scheme  ?  The  more  earnestness  ve  shew  for  inquiry,  the 
VOL.  n. — E 

26  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  370, 
“  more  I  fear,  lest  ye  should  be  able  to  blind  the  eyes  of  the 
“  observers.  Wherefore  compulsicm  ought  not  to  be  used  to 
**  make  me  discover  your  hoard,  but  to  yourselves,  to  make 
“  you  produce  it  to  the  public.” 
XVL  The  dictator  ordered  him  to  lay  aside  all  evasion, 
and  insisted  on  his  either  proving  the  truth  of  his  informa¬ 
tion,  or  acknowledging  himself  guilty  of  having  charged  the 
senate  falsely  of  a  fraudulent  concealment ;  and  on  his  de¬ 
claring  that  he  would  not  speak  at  the  pleasure  of  his  ene¬ 
mies,  ordered  him  to  be  led  to  prison.  Being  arrested  by  the 
Serjeant,  he  exclaimed,  O  Jupiter,  supremely  good  and 
great,  imperial  Juno,  Minerva,  and  all  ye  gods  and  god- 
‘‘  desses  who  inhabit  the  capitol  and  citadel,  do  ye  suffer 
your  soldier  and  guardian  to  be  harassed  in  this  manner  ? 
‘‘  Shall  this  hand,  with  which  I  beat  off  the  Gauls  from  your 
“  temples,  be  now  loaded  with  chains  ?”  Neither  the  eyes 
nor  ears  of  any  present  could  well  endure  the  indignity  offer¬ 
ed  him :  but  the  people  of  this  state  had  taught  themselves 
to  consider  the  authority  of  certain  magistrates  as  indispu¬ 
table  ;  nor  dared  either  the  plebeian  tribunes,  or  the  commons 
themselves,  to  open  their  lips,  or  lift  up  their  eyes,  against 
the  dictatorial  power.  On  Manlius  being  thrown  into  prison, 
it  appears,  that  a  great  part  of  the  commons  put  on  mourn¬ 
ing  :  and  that  great  numbers  of  the  people,  neglecting  their 
hair  and  beard,  dejectedly  flocked  about  its  gates.  The  dic¬ 
tator  had  triumphed  over  the  Volscians;  and  by  that  tri¬ 
umph  had  attracted  a  greater  share  of  ill-will  than  of  glory  : 
for  it  was  a  general  murmur,  that  he  had  acquired  at  home, 
“  not  in  war  ;  and  that  it  was  a  victory  over  a  citizen,  not 
over  an  enemy  ;  that  only  one  thing  was  wanting  to  com- 
plete  his  arrogance,  that  Marcus  Manlius  should  be  led 
“  before  his  chariot.”  And  now  the  affair  fell  little  short  of 
open  sedition  ;  when,  for  the  purpose  of  softening  it,  the 
senate,  without  any  solicitation,  became  suddenly  bountiful > 

BOOK  VI. 

27 

B.C.  382.] 
ordering  a  colony  of  two  thousand  Roman  citizens  to  be  con¬ 
ducted  to  Sutrium,  and  two  acres  and  a  half  of  land  to  be  as¬ 
signed  to  each  ;  which  being  represented  as  trifling  in  itself, 
conferred  on  a  few,  and  that  too  as  a  bribe  for  betraying  Marcus 
Manlius,  the  sedition  was  irritated  by  the  intended  remedy. 
The  crowd  of  Manlius’s  followers  was  now  beconae  more 
remarkable  by  their  mourning  dress,  and  the  frequent  ap¬ 
pearance  of  persons  under  prosecution :  while  the  dread  of 
the  dictator’s  power  was  removed  by  his  resignation ;  it  had 
set  men’s  thoughts  and  tongues  at  liberty. 
XVII.  Many  were  heard,  therefore,  to  speak  out  freely  in 
public,  upbraiding  the  multitude,  that  they  always  conti- 
nued  their  attachment  to  their  defenders,  until  they  raisfed 
“  them  to  the  top  of  a  precipice ;  and  then,  in  the  hour  of 
“  danger,  deserted  them.  Thus  had  Spurius  Cassius  been 
‘‘  undone,  while  he  was  inviting  the  citizens  to  the  possession 
of  lands.  Thus  Spurius  Mselius  ;  when,  by  the  expendi- 
‘‘  ture  of  his  own  property,  he  warded  off  famine:  and  thus 
was  Marcus  Manlius  betrayed  into  the  hands  of  his  ene- 
“  mies,  and,  while  drawing  forth  to  liberty  and  light  one  half 
‘‘  of  the  state,  sunk  and  buried  under  usury.  That  the  com- 
mons  fattened  their  favourites,  in  order  that  they  might  be 
“  slaughtered.  Was  such  a  punishment  as  this  to  be  endured, 
‘‘  because  a  man  of  consular  dignity  did  not  answer  at  the 
“  nod  of  a  dictator  ?  Admitting  that  what  he  said  before  was 
“  false,  and  therefore  he^had  no  answer  to  make,  what  slave 
was  ever  punished  with  imprisonment  for  a  lie  ?  Had  they 
“  no  recollection  of  that  night,  which  had  so  nearly  proved 
fatal,  for  ever,  to  the  Roman  name  ?  None,  of  the  band  of 
Gauls,  climbing  up  the  Tarpeian  rock  ?  None,  of  Marcus 
Manlius  himself,  such  as  they  had  seen  him  in  arms,  cover- 
ed  with  sweat  and  blood,  after  rescuing,  in  a  manner  Jove 
“  himself,  out  of  the  enemy’s  hands  ?  Had  recompense  been 
made  to' the  saviour  of  their  country  by  their  half  pounds 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  370. 

2S 
of  bread  ?  And  would  they  suffer  a  person,  whom  they  had 
almost  deified,  whom,  at  least  with  respect  to  the  surname 
“  of  Capitolinus,  thcj  had  set  on  an  almost  equal  footing  with 
Jupiter,  to  waste  his  life  in  chains,  in  prison,  in  darkness, 
subjected  to  the  will  of  an  executioner  ?  That  all  had  found 
**  such  effectual  support  from  a  single  person,  and  now  that 
‘‘  single  person  found  no  support  at  all  from  such  great  num-' 
bers.”  The  crowd  did  not,  even  during  the  night,  disperse 
from  the  spot ;  and  they  threatened  to  break  open  the  prison, 
when,  conceding  what  would  have  been  taken  by  force,  the 
senate,  by  a  decree,  discharged  Manlius  from  confinement. 
But  this  .proceeding,  instead  of  putting  an  end  to  the  sedi¬ 
tion,  supplied  it  with  a  leader.  About  the  same  time  the 
Latines  and  Hernicians,  and  also  the  colonists  of  the  Circeii 
and  Velitrae,  endeavouring  to  clear  themselves  of  the  charge 
of  being  concerned  in  the  Volscian  war,  and  re-demanding 
the  prisoners,  in  order  to  punish  them  according  to  their  own 
laws,  met  with  severe  replies  ;  the  colonists  with  the  severer, 
because,  being  Roman  citizens,  they  had  framed  the  abomi¬ 
nable  design  of  attacking  their  own  country.  They  were 
therefore  not  only  refused  with  respect  to  the  prisoners,  but 
had  notice  given  them,  in  the  name  of  the  senate  (who,  how¬ 
ever,  did  not  proceed  to  such  a  length  with  regard  to  the 
allies,)  to  depart  instantly  from  the  city,  from  the  presence 
and  the  sight  of  the  Roman  people  ;  lest  the  privilege  of  am¬ 
bassadors,  instituted  for  the  benefit  of  foreigners,  not  of  fel¬ 
low-citizens,  should  afford  them  no  protection. 
XVIII.  The  sedition,  headed  by  Manlius,  reassumed  its 
former  violence,  and  on  the  expiration  of  the  year 
B*C  381  *  election  was  held,  when  military  tribunes,  with 
consular  power,  were  elected  out  of  the  patri¬ 
cians  :  these  were  Servius  Cornelius  Maluginensis,  a  third 
time,  Publius  Valerius  Potitiis  a  second  time,  Marcus  Fu- 
rius  Camillus  a  sixth  time,  Servius  Sulpicius  Rufus  a  second 

B.C.  381.] 

BOOK  VI. 

29 

time,  Caius  Papirius  Crassus,  smd  Titus  Quintius  Cincinna- 
tus  a  seccmd  time.  Peace  being  established  with  foreign  na¬ 
tions,  in  the  beginning  of  this  year,  was  higldy  agreeable  to 
both  patricians  and  plebeians  ;  to  the  latter,  because,  as  they 
were  not  called  to  serve  in  the  army,  and  had  such  a  power¬ 
ful  leader  at  their  head,  they  conceived  hopes  of  being  able 
to  abolish  usury ;  to  the  former,  because  their  thoughts  would 
not  be  drawn  away,  by  any  ^dangers  abroad,  from  applying 
remedies  to  the  evils  subsisting  at  home.  Both  parties, 
therefore,  exerting  themselves  much  more  strenuously  than 
ever,  a  decisive  contest  approached  apace.  Manlius,  on  his 
I>art,  calling  together  the  commons  at  his  house,  held  consul¬ 
tations,  night  and  day,  with  the  principal  persons  amongst 
them,  on  the  methods  of  effecting  a  revolution  in  affairs,  be¬ 
ing  filled  with  a  much  higher  degree  both  of  courage  and 
resentment,  than  he  had  possessed  before.  The  ignominy, 
recently  thrown  on  him,  operating  on  a  mind  unaccustomed 
to  affronts,  had  inflamed  his  resentment ;  his  courage  was 
augmented  by  the  consideration,  that  Cossus  had  not  ven¬ 
tured  to  proceed  in  the  same  manner  towards  him,  as  Quin- 
tius  Cincinnatus  had  done  towards  Spurius  Maelius ;  and 
that,  besides,  not  only  the  dictator  had  endeavoured,  by  ab¬ 
dicating  his  office,  to  avoid  the  general  odium  excited  by  his 
imprisonment,  but  even  the  senate  itself  had  not  been  able 
to  withstand  it.  Elated  with  these  reflections,  and  exaspe¬ 
rated  at  the  same  time,  he  laboured  to  inflame  the  spirits  of 
the  commons,  which,  of  themselves,  were  sufficiently  heated. 
How  long,”  said  he,  will  ye  continue  ignorant  of  your 
‘‘  own  strength,  a  knowledge  which  nature  has  not  denied 
‘‘  even  to  brutes  ?  Only  calculate  your  numbers,  and  those  of 
“  your  adversaries.  But  supposing  that,  in  attacking  them, 
“  each  of  you  w  ere  to  meet  an  antagonist,  yet  1  should  ima- 
gine,  that  ye  would  contend  more  vigorously  in  behalf  of 
liberty,  than  they  in  behalf  of  tyranny.  For  whatever  num- 

30 

HISTORY  OP  ROME. 

[Y.R.  m. 

“  ber  of  clients  ye  compose  round  your  several  respective 
patrons,  so  many  of  you  will  there  be  against  each  single 
“  foe.  Only  make  a  shew  of  war,  and  ye  shall  have  peace. 
“  Let  them  see  you  ready  to  make  use  of  force,  and  they  will 
‘‘  voluntarily  relax  their  pretensions.  All  must  concur  in 
some  effort,  or  separately  submit  to  every  kind  of  ill-treat- 
“  ment.  How  long  will  ye  look  to  me  for  aid?  I  certainly 
‘‘  will  not  be  wanting  to  any  of  you ;  it  is  your  part  to  take 
care  that  sufficient  aid  be  not  wanting  to  me.  Even  I,  your 
“  champion,  when  my  enemies  thought  proper,  was  at  once 
“  reduced  to  nothing ;  and  ye,  all  together,  beheld  the  person 
“  thrown  into  chains,  who  had  warded  off  chains  from  each 
individual  of  you.  What  am  I  to  hope,  if  my  enemies 
‘‘  should  attempt  something  more  grievous  against  me  ?  The 
fate  of  Cassius  and  Maelius?  Ye  act  right,  in  shewing 
“  yourselves  shocked  even  at  the  mention  of  this :  may  the 
‘‘  gods  avert  it.  But  they  will  never  come  down  from  hea- 
vea  on  my  behalf :  they  must  inspire  you  with  proper  sen- 
timents,  that  ye  may  avert  it ;  as  they  inspired  me,  in  arms 
and  in  peace,  to  defend  you,  both  from  barbarous  foes,  and 
‘‘  from  tyrannical  fellow-citizens.  Has  so  great  a  people  a 
spirit  so  mean  as  to  be  always  satisfied  with  being  protected 
“  against  its  enemies  ?  And  are  ye  never  to  know  any  dispute 
‘‘  with  the  patricians,  except  about  the  degree  of  tyranny 
which  ye  are  to  allow  them  to  exercise  over  you?  Yet  this 
“  temper  is  not  implanted  in  you  by  nature ;  ye  are  become 
“  their  property  through  habit.  For,  what  is  the  reason,  that 
towards  foreigners  ye  shew  such  vigour  of  mind,  as  to 
think  yourselves  entitled  to  bear  rule  over  them  ?  Because 
ye  have  been  accustomed  to  vie  with  them  for  empire.  But 
against  the  others  ye  are  content  to  make  a  few  feeble  es- 
“  says  towards  obtaining  liberty,  rather  than,  by  manly  exer- 
**  tions,  to  maintain  it.  Nevertheless,  whatever  sort  of  lead- 
“  .ers  ye  have  had,  and  whatever  has  been  your  own  conduct. 

BOOK  VI. 

31 

B.C.  381.] 
ye  have  hitherto,  either  by  force  or  good  fortune,  carried 
‘‘  every  point,  of  what  magnitude  soever,  which  ye  have  at- 
tempted.  It  is  now  time  to  aim  at  higher  objects.  Only 
“  make  trial  of  your  own  good  fortune,  and  of  me,  whom  ye 
‘‘  have  already  tried,  I  hope  to  your  advantage.  Ye  will, 
“  with  less  difficulty,  raise  up  one,  to  rule  the  patricians,  than 
‘‘  ye  have  raised  up  others,  to  oppose  their  rule.  Dictator- 
“  ships  and  consulships  must  be  levelled  to  the  ground,  that 
“  the  Roman  commons  may  raise  up  their  heads.  Give  me, 
“  therefore,  your  support ;  stop  all  judicial  proceedings  re- 
specting  money.  1  profess  myself  the  patron  of  the  com- 
“  mons — a  title  which  I  am  authorized  to  assume,  both  by 
“  my  zeal  and  my  fidelity.  If,  on  your  part,  ye  choose  to 
“  dignify  your  leader  with  any  more  distinguishing  appella- 
tion  of  honour  or  command,  ye  will  render  him  the  better 
able  to  accomplish  the  objects  of  your  wishes.”  This,  we 
are  told,  was  the  first  introduction  of  his  scheme  for  attain¬ 
ing  regal  power ;  but  we  have  no  clear  account  who  were  his 
accomplices,  nor  to  what  length  the  design  was  carried. 
XIX.  On  the  other  side,  the  senate  were  seen  deliberating 
on  the  secession  of  the  commons  to  one  particular  house,  and 
that,  as  it  happened,  standing  in  the  citadel ;  and  on  the  im¬ 
portant  danger  which  threatened  the  liberty  of  the  public. 
Great  numbers  exclaimed  that  they  wanted  a  Servilius  Aha- 
la,  who  would  not  irritate  a  public  enemy,  by  ordering  Man¬ 
lius  to  be  led  to  prison,  but  would  finish  an  intestine  war 
with  the  loss  of  one  citizen.  A  resolution  was  at  length 
adopted,  comprised  in  milder  terms,  but  comprehending  the 
same  force  :  that  the  magistrates  should  take  care  that  the 
***  commonwealth  received  no  detriment  from  the  pernicious 
designs  of  Marcus  Manlius.”  On  this,  the  consular  and 
plebeian  tribunes  consulted  together  on  the  measures  neces¬ 
sary  to  be  pursued  in  the  present  exigency  ;  for  even  these 
latter  magistrates,  seeing  that  their  own  power  must  come  to 

32 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  371. 

an  end,  as  also  the  liberty  of  the  public,  had  put  themselves 
under  the  direction  of  the  senate.  And  now  no  other  expe¬ 
dient  occurring  but  that  of  force,  and  the  shedding  of  blood, 
Marcus  Maenius  and  Quintus  Publius,  plebeian  tribunes, 
spoke  to  this  effect:  “  Why  do  we  make  that  a  contest  be- 
“  tween  the  patricians  and  plebeians,  which  ought  to  be  be- 
“  tween  the  state  and  one  pestilent  citizen  ?  Why  do  we  at- 
“  tack  the  commons  in  conjunction  with  him,  whom  we  could 
attack,  with  more  safety,  through  the  means  of  those  very 
“  commons ;  so  that  he  should  sink  under  the  weight  of  his 
**  own  strength  ?  Our  recommendation  is,  to  institute  a  legal 
‘‘  prosecution  against  him.  Nothing  is  less  popular  than  re- 
gal  power :  as  soon  as  the  multitude  shall  perceive  that 
‘‘  the  contest  is  not  with  them ;  and  that  instead  of  advocates, 
they  are  to  be  judges  ;  and  shall  behold  the  prosecutors, 
“  plebeians ;  the  accused,  a  patrician  ;  and  that  the  charge 
‘‘  is,  that  of  aiming  at  regal  power;  they  will  show  more 
‘‘  zeal  in  defence  of  their  own  liberty,  than  they  will  attach- 
“  ment  to  any  person  whatever.” 
XX.  This  proposal  meeting  universal  approbation,  a  pro¬ 
secution  was  commenced  against  Manlius.  At  first  it  raised 
a  great  ferment  among  the  commons ;  more  especially  when 
they  saw  the  accused  in  a  mourning  habit,  unaccompanied, 
not  only  by  any  of  the  patricians,  but  by  those  who  were 
connected  with  him  by  blood  or  affinity ;  nay,  even  deserted 
by  his  own  brothers,  Aulus  and  Titus  Manlius :  and  indeed 
it  had  never  before  occurred,  on  an  occasion  of  such  danger, 
that  a  man’s  nearest  relations  did  not  put  on  a  dress  of  sor¬ 
row.  It  was  mentioned,  that  when  Appius  Claudius  was 
thrown  into  prison,  Caius  Claudius,  who  was  at  enmity  witl^ 
him,  and  the  whole  Claudian  family,  appeared  in  mourning. 
That  a  conspiracy  was  now  formed  to  destroy  this  favourite 
of  the  people,  because  he  was  the  first  who  had  come  over 
from  the  patricians  to  the  commons.  On  the  day  of  trial,  I 

B.C.  3»1.] 

do  not  fbd,  te  .a&y-«ifer,-  w1iia«'*1«iiafeiiipLaiifei^^ 
accused^  tjy  -die  yroaecattbra, 
charge  'of  rhii'iije^lriiig 
I  have  no'*'do«tltr'<Mf#ttief'^'^¥e 
merita  of  -the  canae^  ’Wre"  - 
being  iihniedlM^v'ooii4e«atied'- 
have  thoaght 
such  g^eat  andigltfriN^ 
were  not  ofl!7»s»if;fM5#cCa»^ii#%^t^%s*'#^ 
matter --'of 
^wer;'-  '.ifis 

M  BtSTOm  3m'’MOmE.  CYJI.SW- 
* 
eftni'tt  tfae  hssvexy  oi  bis 
■ffjutiisrtifj'  .te  .MiiBWMa^^y 'hueimu  maricedwitlirvaii  isocommoB 
r 
W*  ti^Hi  ifr  jjie  Mfled-<k>wa  Jitter, 
gadiv^s*^  htnii»l»s  ||ti^W!St<in^py^tua- 
Ms6f  }  aad  ^  8ra»  aea^sHig^  wish  which  diey 
^  iBfijsrcd  hiiB,  wlate  h»  stt»d  ha  defence  ti«s  fortress, 
fbr  ^  preservimoB  cd  slie^-Boa»mpeopk,daey=<woBld  aov, 
kjio-die-bmist».¥d  diateame 
iaSw«yn  |j€i^ie }  aasMi  he  t)es«m|^  ¥ach  p«x^»  preMOt,  in  par- 
id»uJar,«  ithe  wfenk  tha:,  with  dieir  eyes  fixed 
^  the  Capitid  sead  ciadel,  and  thek  f%ea  inraed  to  die  im- 
^®rtt4god8,,diey  would  formiheii  |iMi|pif!«t«t»cenBinghim. 
.SlLa  the  psofde  waare  sutanaoned  by  ia  fihe  fieM  of 
Mats,  and  as  ^  abused  stretched  ^  Ws  fetoA  tothe  Ca- 
|ntol,  and  instead  of  addressing  his  ass®,  AteCt* 
od^teto  to  ^  gods,  die  mteae®  «K(«c|As^^>l^awi^ 

s»®ae^itig  ha  the  Peteliae  mt  the 

It  mmre  s^toeef  «d  wtob 
hi^  Judges,  1 
take  mailers 
him  dbwu  i^rma  ^  Tm-primi  wckr 
die  casKs  uf  or®  mm^b^sm^ 
gloiy^  miA  of  Ae 
mdrlc^  <rf  ltife|ii^  iirefe  ^icjed  uu^him®  fm* 
stiiud  whete  uf  Mca^^hi 

BOOK  rm: 

&&  mt.] 

m 

an.order  was  hf  lk&  ptofde,  f^i^ieuqs 
sbcndd  dwell  in  the  or  Canted:  a  i^  the  same 
time  bmng  passed,  to  ^hibit  at  die  MmMm 
from  ever  after  bejn^ing  the  mmo  trf  Mareas  Stidi 
was  the  end  of  a  man,  who,  had  lie  im  been  h&m  m.^  b&i 
smie,  would  havetner^d  tk& A  dwt 
dme  after,  the  peopk;  feeddeeth^  €«%  IMa  were 
filkd  with  deep  regret  for  ids  1^*  A  pesaMssme^  ttmf  whidb 
^^esentiy  followed,  widiout  apparent  cause  <rf  so  a 
was  a^buted,  by  m^t  men,  the  punislnaimt  m» 
Mmdhis.  ^  The  Ca^<d,”  th^  ol^ta'ved,  **  bad 
been  polluted  with  the  idood  of  iui  preserver ;  and  it  had 
given  displeasure  to  the  gods,  that  the  pers<Hi,by  whom  their 
temples  had  been  rescued  out  of  the-  hands  of  die  ^temy, 
should  be  brought  before  their  eyes,  ia  a  to  stiffer 
punishment.” 
XXL  The  pestilence  was  succeeded  by  a  scarcity  of  &e 
fruits  of  the  eardi ;  mid  the  remnl  of  both  cala- 
Y  R«3r2  ...  ^ 
B  C*380  spreading  abroad,  a  variety  of  wars  aasued 
in  the  following  year,  in  which  Lucius  Valerius  a 
fourdi  time,  Aulus  Manlius  a  thiid  dme,  Servius  Sidpiotus  a 
third  time,  Lucius  Lucretius,  Lucius  iEtnilius  a  third  dt^ 
and  Marcus  Trebonius  were  milttaty  trdHm^,  with  ccumufaw 
power.  Besides  the  Volsctans,  destined  by  some  fmality  to 
give  perpetual  employment  to  the  Boman  soldieiy  |  mid  ^ 
colonies  of  Circeii  and  Velitm,  i<mg  medimdng  a  revtdtj 
mid  Latium,  whose  conduct  gave  room  for  strspkkm,  a  new 
enemy  suddenly  sprmig  up  ia  the  people  of  Lammtm^  a  ct<^ 
whose  fidelity  had  hidieibo  been  r^amkably  steady.  Ibe  ^ 
nate,  judgkig  that  dds  fmm  cms^^ptimus  notions  en- 
tettained  by  thm  tm  ^eing  that  fh^  revolt  of  the  p^ 
pie  of  Velkras,  memh^  of  die  Btmian  state,  remained  so 
long  unpunished,  decreed,  dmtwn  assembly  should  be  hiM^ 
somi  im  |K^ble,  ctmemdmg  a  declaration  of  war  diat 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  372. 

36 
tod  to  k^iwe^ie  commons  to  engage  in  that  service 
Vliththe  greater  readhiesa^  they  appointed  five  commissioners 
Iir4iiake  a  of  the  Pomptine  lands,  and  three  to 
a^^miy  to  Then  it  was  proposed  to  the 
fNeople,  that  they  shonld  order  the  declaration  of  war  ;  and 
&e  plebeian  tribunes  in  vain  oideavouring  to  dissuade  them, 
the  tribes  unamimoasly  passed  it*  During  that  year,  prepar¬ 
ation  were  made  fior  hostilidi^,  but,  on  account  of  the  pesti¬ 
lence,  the  troops  were  not  led  into  the  field.  This  delay  af- 
fiardeti^si^cient  time  to  the  colonists,  to  take  measures  to 
appease  the  anger  of  the  senate  ;  and  the  greyer  part  Of  tltor 
people  were  inclined  to  ^nd  a  suppliant  embassy  to  Rome  ; 
which  would  have  taken  place,  had  not,  as  is  often  the  case, 
the  interest  of  the  public  been  involved  with  the  danger  of 
individuals  ;  and  had  not  the  authors  of  the  revolt,  dreading 
lest  themselves  cfflly  might  be  considered  as  answerable  for 
the  guilt,  and  be  delivered  up  as  victims  to  the  resentment  of 
the  Romans,  infused  into  the  colonists  an  aversion  from  peace-  • 
ful  councils.  They  therefore  found  means,  not  only  to  ob¬ 
struct  the  proposed  embassy  in  the  senate,  but  to  excite  a 
great  part  of  the  commons  to  make  predatory  excursions  into 
the  Roman  territory,  which  new  injury  broke  off  all  hopes  of 
peace.  This  year  also,  a  report  was  first  propagated  of  the 
Pr^nestimis  having  revolted ;  and  when  the  people  of  Tus- 
culum,  and  Gabii,  and  Lavki,  on  whose  lands  they  had  made 
incurskmt,  brought  the  charge  against  them,  the  senate,  in 
tiieir  answer,  showed  so  littk  resentmait,  as  made  it  evident, 
Aat  tiiey  gave  the  less  credit  to  the  charges,  because  they 
wished  them  not  u>  be  true* 
XXli.  In  the  foQowing  yesp",  the  two  Papirii,  Spurius  and 
Inucicrs,  new  military  tribunes,  with  consular  power, 
led  the  legions  to  Veliurse,  leaving  tiieir  four  col-  g*^*!^!* 
leagues  in  foe  tribimaship,  Servius  Gotnehus  Ma- 
lugincusis  a  fourfo  time,  Quinti^  Servtiius,  Servius  Sulpi- 

B.C 

yf.  - 

civtf;  tsa^k  ^ibey  to  aieexi  ike  safety 
te  in  ca^  is6^geace  ofay 
£ir<6»{  &«-now«v«ry 
4mr^wa^.  At  VeHti«, 
ai  tritibb  ^ey  ’ante  ^iposed  by 
a  mMw  oji^aries;  ratiar  ^ao  tteit 
of  t^oQliEiAaistikt''!aiid  boibtlw  ol^baagaioc^,  waa'tlie  ‘rest* 
son  of  lita  «y(n^4|oittBig  ikx  the  sooseaf,  as  h  was  ^beir 
oniy  rdii^^iar'tfteir  ^gbt.  Tbe  tribune#  did  i»t  proce^ 
to  lay  si^to^)^  totm,  becaos#  the  i«ae  was  oncertaiir; 
and  beaadea,  ^iey^£dfiot  -'dimk'tliat  they  ou^t  to  posh  the 
war  to  the  ^festniotioti  of  die  colony.  The  letters  »aq«t 
to  Rome  to  dma^ate,  widi  news  of  the  vietory,  ^upr^sed 
greater  aEte«iqra§^iiK  dm  P^oestii*  enemy,  than  against 
those  irf  itettseqnence  of  whfch,  %  decree  d  the 
senate,  mad  older  of  ifee  peo^e,  warwsB  declared  agaitrit  the 
Prsenestians.'  tmat  year,  in  c^juncti<Hi  with  Ae 
Volscians,  took  Sattrionm,  a  etdmiy  of  die  Roman  people,  by 
storm,  after  an  ^dmmrdefebtm  mmie  by  the  ccdonists,  and 
in  their  tretRaveml;  ^  inisoners  made  a  baihaitnis  tite  <rf 
■  Y  Jl  S74u  Ittcenscd  diereat,  the  Romos 
jg  Q  ^jr^  '  d^ed  Farias  Cmndhis  a  sevcndi  time, 
'  trMnme^  die  ctdleagnes  joined  with  Mm 
were  the  {fi^9%^dimh''i^S|^Ilense$^  A.tdns  and  £<n(aim,  and 
imeios  Lacredoa,  ad  Marcos 
"Amhii^mmf ‘®1*e  war  wddi  the  Volscians  was  decreed  to  Ga* 
drs'  mtfinai'y  cooMe.  JLueins  Foritm  was  chb* 
sen  by^lnji^’lmm  die  test  dm  tsilnrae#,  hk  assistaiit, 
a  apiiolidliem  sriiidipitiTed-uot  soadvantageon#  to  the  pub^ 
Mj  aS"p*®^6kdks''df  lasmtir  th  Camifius,  In  every  branch  of 
m^that  whidt-tet^eCted  the  public,  as  he  t^ 
ittored  their  Cas»e,‘  when  neai^  ruined  by  the  temeihjrof 
Furins  j  ad  In  took-  which  t^uicenied  dien»(dves  in  partitid* 
lari  as,  ftomdieearrorof  #at  iiian,f«C'%(mght  diet^iri  of 

3« 

HISTOWF  WWDMEa 

{^hay*  Cam^BBt  jiira»  ]Km  ftris  the  itad/hai 
MKeaded  st  Am;  elee^es  totelEe^  tistu&^sRlH  V«rder  «»be 
ea^iiued,  OB  eccount  hk  hedkit^  bi^  wie;1M«eeii«ed  hy<#e 
i«m!mou«  desire  td  the  fieij^e.  sfi  tAs^Ubccdties 
ed^e  t  bk  vigcMnoBs  MtU  faioeiBed  a 
teeast  which  glowed  with  yoadifol  'udoar  |  ai^  ifcoBgh  be 
todc  litde  share  im  civH  yet  the  htHiBeee  of  war  xt>«a> 
ed  his  spirit.  Eriisdag  fiKtr  legtons,  td  feur  dtotteuld  men 
each,  and  ordering  the  troops  to  assessUe  newt  day  at  the  Es- 
({uiboe  gate,  he  inarched  towards  SsdiicutB.  There  the 
qaerors  of  the  colony  waited  for  him,  wwlse  diseai^ed,  ci^ 
Ming  in  their  number  of  men,  in  which  they  had  ceosiderdjly 
the  advantage  :  and  when  they  understood  that  the  Homans 
were  approaching,  marched  out  immediately  to  Ae  held,  de¬ 
termined  without  any  delay  to  put  dl  em  the  hazard  of  cam 
decisive  efibrt ;  which  manner  of  {n-mBoedtog,  they  thought, 
would  pot  it  out  of  the  power  of  the  enemy  to  compensate 
fwr  the  smallness  of  their  number  by  tim  rikUl  of  their  great 
commander,  mi  which  they  pieced  their  oale  reliance. 
XXIil.  The  same  ardour  prevailed  likewise  m  the  troops 
<rfthe  Homans,  and  in  one  of  their  gmerabj  nOriras  there 
thing  which  prevented  diem  from  hazarding  immedi¬ 
ate  engagement,  but  the  wisdom  a^  that  general, 
wte»  «>ught,  by  protrat^ng  the  who*,  to  find  opportu¬ 
nity  wherein  their  strength  might  reedve  aid  Tl«‘ 
more  cm  that  account  did  the  enemy  isge  drniB^  and  now,  mtt 
ody  drew  out  their  troops  in  order  twf  hattle^bdore  dmir  own 
camp,  Imt  advanced  into  tbs  middle  of  the  pimn,  and  brok¬ 
ing  up  trenches  near  the  Roman  battafidns,  made  ostentattotty 
show  of  boldness  derived  from  ^ir  strength. '  The  scAiiers 
were  highly  provoked  at  this,  and  nmeh  more  highly  Eucias 
Forius,  the  other  mditary  tribunet  who,'*he8Wes.a  natuTtfly 
sanguine  temper,  and  Us  do»  <d  life,  ana  eUt^ 

^  who  axe 
^l^^ji^miimmB&0oio^^  ^wm^t  foood^. 
fi:^  g{  he  m^igated 
eotte^oe^ft  |a(%titoit  m  »:- 
<cmm  ^  hii^f^lagey  t%e  «m.vrhidi  h^  coidd  pos- 
liW^iniipeiKhi  ^  #sit  war  was  ^  provbce^^ i^outh, 
ft^uish^  asul  tqg^^er  with 
:1%!§br  I  that  he^  wh^  cerbinly  had  been  a  moi^  active 
tecome  a  aaere  diot»  ;  though  k  hi^  het» 
1^  €mimm,  kumedii^ly  on  ch^u^  up.wilh  an  enemy^  to 
wpiach  from  tiiem  the  j^^sesskm  iji  tii&ir  camps  and  cities  at 
1^  a^el ;  wow  he  wasted  time^  lying  inactive  with* 
And  wh^  accessimi  to  his  own  strength^  or 
of  ti^  enemy^  did  he  hope  for  ?  Wi^  op* 

%  what  sea^cm^  wrhat  jdai^  for  piactising  stratagem  ? 
^  aci^n^  were  tt^  cold  vmd  Imigitid.  CamiUus, 
pHtty  had  et^ed  a  stdBciem  tiime  both  of  life 
.  brt  was  the  propriety  of  suffering  the 
^  ^ate,  whkh  tmgb  to4^  hnmortal,  to  sink  into 

of  old  age  to^dier  wkh  one  mortal  body.^^  &y 
bad  drw^n  to  hkni^tf  ^  a^ntiem  of  the 

icmx^  and  wben^  in  ihey  cdled  for 
haitie^  he  saml  to  Wa  co^^^e^  ^C^klus,  we  caimotwifo* 
the  viofoime  of  die  ^ddiersi  wsd  ti^er^my^  wfo^e  c^* 
tone  we  faive  k^reased  bf  our  ddi^a*  insidto  us  with  arro* 
ganeei^Ni^aid^  ^  Give  up  your  smglejadgmmit 
to  gfaim^  <me»  aad  yoursdf  to  be  oveieonie  hi 
|tou  may  the  earner  o^erctMue  in  forttie/*  To 
r^Ued,  that  ^  in  aU  the  wars  wWch,  to  that 
hadk^  w^ed  imder  his  single  auspices,  nekfaer  hba* 
seif  mw  the  Smaa^^ptaaide  hadfoimd  reason  to  be  dis{dei^d, 
^her  with  hia  or  hk  t  at  present,  he  was 
w^nulde,  that  he  Imd  a  colle^[ue, :fo  command  md  mithcndc^', 
ei|ual  to  ium^tf  in  vi|^Hir  ^  age,  superior ;  as  to  what  re- 

"  ”  r,  > 

SBirati  &A^ta(^aem^ 
to-wfene  to  &r#i- 
'the -'icneajy  i^pSsoac!i«Stt<fcc 
Ae  J^isategsj#- 
gtotii^  where 
i;  terror  Au#  rrafci*^ 
,-Ae«ie^v%i?^ 

Ao,'  wjho'haii>«}(^er^^ 

«b4  A^-loi 
jAd,,w^  a‘ 

BOOK  VL 

U 

BX.  BTS..} 
hastily  opposing  the  reserved  troops  on  their  way,  called 
out,  Is  this,  soldiers,  the  fight  that  ye  demanded  ?  What 
man,  what  god  can  ye  blame  ?  The  foarmer  temerity  was  all 
your  own ;  your  own  this  present  cowardice.  As  yc  have 
followed  another  leader,  follow  now  Camillus  5  and,  as  ye 
are  accustomed  to  do,  under  my  conduct,  conquer.  Why  do 
ye  look  towards  the  rampart  and  camp  ?  Not  a  man  of  you, 
unless  victorious,  shall  find  admittance  there.^’  Shame,  at 
stopped  their  precipitate  flight :  then^  when  they  saw 
the  standards  wheel  about,  and  a  line  formed  to  front  the 
enemy  ;  when  a  leader,  who,  besides  being  distinguished  by 
so  many  triumphs,  was  venerable  even  on  account  of  his  age, 
exposed  himself  in  the  front  of  the  battalions,  where  there 
was  the  greatest  share  both  of  labour  and  danger ;  every  one 
began  to  upbraid  both  himself  and  others,  and  mutual  exhor* 
tation  spread,  in  a  brisk  shout,  through  the  whole  length  of 
the  line.  Ngr  was  the  other  tribune  deficient  in  activity. 
Being  sent  to  the  cavalry  by  his  colleague,  while  he  was  re¬ 
forming  the  line  of  infantry,  he  did  not  offer  to  rebuke  them » 
for  the  share  which  he  had  in  their  fault  had  rendered  any  thing 
he  could  say  of  little  weight.  Instead  of  command,  therefore, 
he  had  recourse  entirely  to  in  treaties  ;  beseeching  each,  and 
and  all  together,  to  “  redeem  him  from  misconduct,  who  was 
answerable  for  the  events  of  that  day.  In  spite,*’  said  he, 
“  of  the  advice  and  endeavours  of  my  colleague,  I  have  as¬ 
sociated  myself  in  the  rashness  of  the  many,  rather  than  lis¬ 
tened  to  the  prudence  of  one.  Camillus  sees  matter  of  gloiy 
to  himself,  on  either  side  to  which  your  fortune  may  incline ; 
but  I,  unless  the  fight  is  restored,  shall  feel  the  evil,  in  com¬ 
mon  with  you  all,  and  shall  alone  experience  all  the  infamy  i 
the  most  wretched  lot  that  could  befal  me.”  It  was  thought 
best,  while  the  line  was  still  unsteady,  that  the  cavalry  should 
dismount,  and  charge  the  enemy  on  foot.  Accordingly,  dis¬ 
tinguished  beyond  others  by  their  arms  and  their  spirit,  they 
VOL.  II. — G 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  sr4. 

t>n  the  jmrt  ^ere  they  saw  the  hifimtry  most 
^t^sed :  tsor  was  ther^  one  among  them,  whether  officer  or 
hdl^Rer,  ivho  dhl  not^sphry  the  utmost  efforts  of  courage :  the 
iid,  ther^fcre,  whidt  Aeir  vigorous  exertions  of  hravery  sup- 
l^ed,  soon  determined  the  event.  The  Vclsctims  were  driven 
l^adloog  in  real  flight  over  the  same  ground,  where  they  had 
just  bdfore  retired  with  covmterfcited  fear :  great  XHmd>ers  trf 
^ert  Were  slain,  both  in  battle,  and  afterwards  in  the 
pursuit :  of  the  rest,  however,  who  were  found  in  the  camp, 
which  the  enemy  took  before  they  hdted,  more  were  made 
prisbhers  than  put  to  death. 
JeXV.  Here,  in  taking  an  account  of  the  prisoner,  several 
’fusctilatts  being  observed,  they  were  separated  from  the  rest, 
and  IsTdught  to  the  tribunes;  and,  being  examined,  confessed 
“that  th^  had  served  in  the  war  under  the  authority  of  the 
^t6.  tfereupon  Camillas,  alarmed  at  die  apprehenafon  of 
a  War  So  "near  home,  declared,  that  he  would  immediately 
dsitry  the  prisoners  to  Rome,  that  the  senate  might  not  be 
ignorant  6f  the  revolt  of  the  Tusculans  from  the  confedera- 
tf  i  meanwhile,  his  colleague,  if  he  thought  proper,  should 
Cdmfdand  the  camp  and  the  array.  One  day  bad  been  suffi¬ 
cient  to  teach  him,  not  to  prefer  his  own  counsels  to  better. 
Iftowever,  neither  himself,  nor  any  person  in  the  army  sup¬ 
posed,  that  Cartiillus  would,  without  marks  tff  displeasure, 
p^ss  over  his  misconduct,  by  which  the  public  had  been 
ftiroWn  into  such  perilous  hazard ;  and,  as  well  in  the  army, 
Rdine,  the  account  uniformly  received  and  universally 
^alhnitted,  was,  that,  with  respect  to  the  different  degrees  of 
success,  experienced  in  the  country  of  the  Volscians,  the 
bkme  of  the  troops  being  woi'sted  in  fight,  and  quitting  the 
field,  was  to  be  imputed  to  Lucius  Fun  us,  and  that  the  whole 
honour  of  their  victory  belonged  to  Camillas.  On  the  pri¬ 
soners  being  brought  before  the  senate,  it  was  decreed,  that 
war  should  be  made  on  the  Tusculans,  and  Camillas  was 

BOOK  V|, 

4? 

B.c.  m.} 
j^paiDt^d  to  the  command  in  that  expedition :  on  winch,  he 
requested  to  be  allowed  one  assistant  in  the  business,  and 
having  received  permission  to  nan^e  any  of  his  cqllcagv^a» 
whom  he  thought  proper,  contrary  to  ?Al  mop’s  expectalw 
he  chose  Lucius  Furius  j  by  which,  he  bpth  ahev^^d  ^ 
disgrace  of  his  colleague,  and>  at  the  same  time,  acqmred 
great  honour  to  himself.  However,  diere  was  no  war  wid^ 
the  Tusculans.  By  a  strict  adherence  to  peaceabk  mepaprcs, 
diey  warded  off  the  force  of  the  Romans,  which  it  had  be^ 
impossible  for  them  to  have  done  by  arms ;  for,  on  entering 
their  territory,  no  removals  were  made  from  the  places  adja¬ 
cent  to  the  roads,  no  interruption  in  the  cultivation  of  the 
grounds,  the  gates  of  their  city  stood  open,  crowds  pf  the 
inhabitants  came  forth  in  their  gowns  to  meet  the  generals? 
and  provisions  for  the  troops  were  b?*ought  with  cheerfulness 
into  the  camp,  both  from  the  city  and  the  country.  CanuUps 
pitched  his  camp  before  the  gates,  and  being  desirous  to  know, 
whether  the  same  appearance  of  peace  prevailed  within  the 
walls,  which  was  held  out  in  the  country,  went  into  the  city  j 
and  when  he  saw  the  doors  and  the  shops  open,  and  all  kinda 
of  wares  exposed  to  sale ;  tradesmen  busy  in  their  respective 
employments,  the  schools  of  learning  buzzing  wid^  the  voices 
of  the  scholars,  and  the  streets  filled  with  the  pppulacp  of 
every  sort,  among  whom  were  women  and  children  going 
different  ways,  as  their  several  occasions  called  them, 
when,  in  short,  he  perceived  no  circumstmice  which  bore  any 
appearance  of  fright,  or  even  of  surprise ;  he  looked  round 
to  find  in  what  manner,  and  where  the  preparation  for  war 
had  been  made,  for  there  was  not  the  least  trace  of  any  thing 
having  been  either  removed,  or  jdaced  to  oppose  him  in 
way :  all,  indeed,  was  in  an  uniform  ^ate  of  peace,  so  that 
one  could  hardly  suppose,  that  even  the  rumour  of  war  had 
reached  them. 

44 

HISTORY  OF  ROME* 

[Y.R.  374. 

XXVI.  Overcome,  therefore,  by  the  submissive  demean- 
aerr  of  the  enemy,  he  ordered  their  senate  to  be  called,  and 
said  to  them :  Men  of  Tusculum  ;  ye  are  the  only  persons 
who  have  hitherto  discovered  the  real  strength,  and  the  true 
arms,  wherewith  ye  might  secure  yourselves  from  the  resent¬ 
ment  of  the  Romans.  Go  to  Rome,  to  the  senate.  The 
fErthers  will  consider  whether  your  former  conduct  more 
merited  punishment,  or  your  present  forgiveness.  I  shall 
not  arrogate  to  myself  the  gratitude  which  ye  will  owe  for 
favour  conferred  by  the  public.  From  me,  ye  shall  have 
liberty  to  solicit  pardon.  The  senate  will  grant  such  return 
to  your  prayers,  as  they  shall  judge  proper.’^  When  the 
Tusculans  came  to  Rome,  and  the  senate  of  that  people,  who, 
very  lately,  were  faithful  allies,  appeared  in  the  porch  of  the 
senate-house,  with  sorrow  in  their  countenances,  the  senators, 
moved  with  compassion,  immediately  ordered  them  to  be 
called  in,  in  a  manner  expressive  of  hospitality,  rather  than 
of  enmity.  The  Tusculan  dictator  spoke  to  this  effect; 
Conscript  fathers  ;  we,  against  whom  ye  have  proclaimed 
and  were  about  to  wage  war,  just  as  ye  see  us  now,  standing 
in  the  porch  of  your  house,  went  forth  to  meet  your  com¬ 
manders  and  your  legions.  This  was  our  habit,  this  the 
habit  of  eur  commons ;  and  ever  shall  be,  unless,  at  any 
time,  we  shall  receive  arms  from  you,  and  in  your  cause. 
We  return  thanks  to  your  generals  and  your  troops  for  having 
given  credit  to  their  own  eyes,  rather  than  to  public  rumour ; 
^d  for  committing  no  hostilities  themselves,  where  they 
found  none  subsisting.  The  peace,  by  which  our  conduct 
has  been  governed,  the  same  we  request  from  you.  War, 
we  beseech  you  to  avert  to  that  quarter,  where,  if  any  where, 
war  subsists.  The  power  of  your  arms  against  us,  if  after 
submission  we  are  to  experience  it,  we  will  experience  un¬ 
armed.  This  is  our  determination ;  may  the  immortal  gods 
render  it  as  successful  as  it  is  dutiful.  As  to  what  regards 

BOOK  VI. 

43 

B.C.  378.3 
the  charges,  hy  irtiich  were  moved  to  declare  war  a^mst 
us,  although  it  Is  needless  to  refute  with  words,  what  has 
been  contradicted  by  facts,  yet,  admining  that  they  were 
true,  after  ^ving  such  evident  proofs  of  repentance,  we 
should  think  ourselves  safe  in  pleading  guilty  before  you. 
Consider  us  then  as  guilty  towards  you,  since  ye  are  persems, 
to  whom  such  satisfaction  may  be  made  with  propriety 
These  were  nearly  the  words  of  the  Tusculans.  They  ob¬ 
tained  peace  at  the  present,  and  not  very  long  after,  the  free¬ 
dom  of  the  state  also.  The  legions  were  then  withdrawn 
from  Tusculum. 
XXVII.  Camillus,  after  having  highly  signalized  himself 
by  his  conduct  and  bravery  in  the  Volscian  war,  by  his  suc¬ 
cessful  m^agement  in  the  Tusculan  expedition,  and  in  both, 
by  his  singular  moderation  towards  his  colleague,  went  out 
of  office,  having  elected  military  tribunes  for  the 
ensuing  year,  l-ucius  and  Publius  Valerius,  Lucius  g  3^7 
a  fifth  time,  Publius  a  third,  and  Caius  Sergius  a 
third  time,  Lucius  Menenius  a  second  time,  Spurius  Papi- 
rius,  and  Servius  Cornelius  Maluginensis.  Censors  became 
necessary  this  year  principally  on  account  of  the  various  re¬ 
presentations  made  of  the  debts ;  the  tribunes  of  the  com¬ 
mons  exaggerating  the  amount  of  them,  with  design  to  in¬ 
crease  the  general  discontent,  while  it  was  under-rated  by 
those  whose  interest  it  was,  that  the  difficulty  of  procuring 
payment  should  appear  to  be  owing  rather  to  the  want  of 
honesty  than  of  ability  in  the  debtors.  The  censors  appoint¬ 
ed  were  Caius  Sulpicius  Camerinus,  and  Spurius  Postumius 
RegiUensis :  after  they  had  entered  on  the  business,  it  was 
interrupted  by  the  death  of  Postumius,  as  it  was  not  allow¬ 
able  to  employ  a  substitute  as  colleague  with  a  censor.  Sul¬ 
picius,  therefore,  abdicating  the  office,  others  were  named  to 
it;  but  some  defect  being  discovered  in  the  manner  of  their 
appointment,  they  were  not  received  ;  and  to  appoint  a  third 

4S  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  IfM.  m. 
mm  nol  oUowed,  as  ^  gods  sec^ioed  ^  saimit 
oCcoasors  for  daat  year,  idebciaa  iribuibias  i^w  ositibiiii*- 
edy  that  sach  mockery  of  the  comva^oxm  was  to  be  eiulured ; 
that  the  stmate  declined  a  pubUc  ii^oiry,  which  would  as¬ 
certain  each  man’s  property,  as  that  would  discover  that  one- 
half  of  the  commonwealth  was  held  in  a  state  of  depressicm 
by  the"* other ;  whde,  in  the  mean  time,  the  commons,  over¬ 
whelmed  with  debt,  were  exposed  continually  to  the  arms  of 
one  enemy  after  another.  Wars  were  now  industriously 
sought  on  all  sides,  without  any  distinction.  From  Antium 
the  legions  were  led  to  Satricum,  from  Satricum  to  Velitr®, 
from  thence  to  Tusculum.  The  Latines,  the  Hemicians,  the 
Prsenestians,  were  now  threatened  widi  hostilities ;  and  this, 
out  of  hatred  to  the  citizens,  rather  than  for  injuries  ;  with 
design  to  wear  out  the  commons  under  arms,  not  suffering 
them  either  to  take'  breath  in  the  city,  or  to  have  leisure  to 
reflect  on  their  liberty,  or  to  take  their  places  in  an  assembly, 
where  they  might  sometimes  hear  a  tribune’s  voice,  discours¬ 
ing  about  the  reduction  of  interest,  and  the  removal  of  other 
grievances.  But,  for  their  part,  if  they  could  find  in  the 
commons  a  spirit  capable  of  emulating  the  liberty  of  their 
fathers,  they  would  neither  suffer  any  Roman  citizen  to  be 
made  over  to  a  creditor  for  money  lent,  nor  any  levy  of 
troops  to  be  made,  until,  the  debts  being  examined,  and  some 
method  adopted  for  lessening  them,  every  man  should  know 
what  was  his  own,  and  what  another’s ;  whether  his  persmi 
was  still  to  enjoy  freedom,  or  whether  that  too  was  due  to 
the  stocks-”  The  prize,  held  out  to  sedirion,  quickly  esmited 
it ;  for  numbers  were  continually  made  over  to  creditors ; 
and,  accounts  being  received  of  the  Praenestines  being  in 
arms,  the  senate  voted  new  legions  to  be  levied,  to  both 
which  proceedings  obstructions  beg^n  to  be  raised,  at  once 
by  the  interposition  of  the  tribunitian  power,  and  the  united 
efforts  of  the  commons.  For  neidter  did  the  tribunes  suffer 

mooK  VI. 

47 

B.C.  377.3 
ware  a<^U)%ed  to  their  cctditars  to  be  carried  to 
prison,  nor  did  the  younger  citrus  give  in  their  names  for 
the  war;  while  tte  senate  were  less  scdidtous  at  present 
sdbout  eirforcing  the  laws  concerning  the  lending  of  money, 
than  about  effecting  the  levy ;  for  now  they  were  mfomted 
that  the  enemy  had  marched  from  Prseneste,  and  taken  fmt 
in  the  Sabine  territory.  That  very  intelligence,  however, 
rather  irritated  the  nribunes  to  persi^  in  the  opposition  which 
ti»y  had  set  up,  than  deteired  them ;  nor  was  any  thing  8u£- 
dem  to  afey  the  discontents,  but  ihe  approach  of  hostilities 
almost  to  the  very  waUs. 
XXV HI.  For  tte  Pr^enestines  having  learned  that  there 
was  no  army  levied  at  Home,  no  general  fixed  on,  and  that 
the  patricians  and  commons  were  taken  up  with  quarrels 
among  ^mselv^,  their  le^uiers  deemed  this  a  fortunate  op¬ 
portunity  for  molestation  ;  and,  having  made  a  hasty  march, 
ravaging  the  country  ali  along  as  they  passed,  they  advanced 
their  standards  to  idle  Codine  gate.  Great  was  the  con<- 
stemation  in  the  city ;  the  alarm  was  given  through  every 
part ;  pe<^le  ran  together  to  the  walls  and  gates,  and  timing 
at  lei^^  their  thoughts  from  sediti<m  to  war,  they  created 
Titus  Quintfus  Cincinnatus  dictator,  who  nominated  Aulus 
Sempronius  Atratinus  master  of  the  horse.  No  sooner  was 
this  heard,  than  the  enemy,  such  was  the  terror  of  that  office, 
reitired  from  the  walls ;  while,  on  the  dictator’s  edict  being 
issued,  the  Roman  youth  attended  without  excuse.  During 
the  time  that  the  levy  was  going  on  at  Rome,  the  enemy 
camped  not  far  from  the  river  Allia,  whence  they  carried  their 
depredations  through  all  the  country  round,  boasting  among 
themselves,  that  they  had  chosen  a  pest  fatal  to  the  city  of 
Rome,  whose  troops  would  be  dismayed,  and  fly  from  thence, 
as  they  bad  done  in  the  Gallic  war.  For,  “  if  the  Romans 
were  afraid  of  a  day,  which  was  deemed  inauspicious,  and 
marked  with  the  name  of  that  place,  how  much  more  than 

48 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R. 

the  AUian  day  would  they  dread  the  AUm  itself,  the  mcmu- 
u^nt  of  so  great  a  disaster  i  The  fierce  looks  of  the  Gauls, 
and  the  sound  of  their  voices,  would  ceitainly  recur  to  their 
eyes  and  ears.’’  Possessed  with  these  groundless  notions  of 
circumstances  as  groundless,  they  rested  their  hopes  on  the 
fortune  of  the  place.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Romans  con¬ 
sidered  that  **  in  whatever  place  their  Latine  enemies  stood, 
they  knew  very  well  that  they  were  the  same  whom  they  had 
utterly  vanquished  at  the  lake  Regillus,  and  had  held  under 
peaceable  subjection  for  now  an  hundred  years:  that  the  AlUa, 
being  that  way  distinguished,  would  rather  stimulate  them  to 
blot  out  the  remembrance  of  their  misfortune,  than  raise  ap¬ 
prehensions  of  any  ground  being  inauspicious  to  their  suc¬ 
cess.  Were  they  even  to  meet  the  Gauls  themselves  on  that 
spot,  they  would  fight,  as  they  fought  at  Rome,  for  the  re¬ 
covery  of  their  country  ;  as,  the  day  after  at  Gabii,  where 
they  took  cflPectual  care,  that  not  a  single  enemy,  who  had  mi¬ 
tered  the  walls  of  Rome,  shouW  carry  home  an  account  either 
of  their  successes  or  defeats.” 
XXIX,  With  these  sentiments  on  each  side,  they  met  at 
the  Allia.  As  soon  as  the  Roman  dictator  came  within  sight 
of  the  enemy,  who  were  drawn  up  and  ready  for  action,  he 
said,  “  Aulus  Sempronius,  do  you  perceive  that  those  men 
have  taken  post  at  the  AlUa,  relying,  no  doubt,  on  the  fortune 
of  the  place  ?  Nor  have  the  immortal  gods  afforded  them  any 
surer  ground  of  confidence,  or  any  more  effectual  support. 
But  do  you,  relying  on  arms  and  courage,  make  a  brisk  charge 
on  the  middle  of  their  line.  When  they  shall  be  thrown  into 
disorder,  I  will  bear  down  on  them  with  the  legions.  Ye 
gods  ]  who  witnessed  the  treaty,  be  favourable  to  our  cause, 
and  exact  the  penalty  due  for  the  affront  offered  to  your¬ 
selves,  and  also  for  the  deception  imposed  on  us,  through  an 
appeal  to  your  divinity,”  The  Praenestines  were  unable  to 
stand  against  either  the  cavalry  or  the  infantry :  the  first  shout 

..VX'NEY 

B,c.  srr.] 

BOOK  VI* 

49 

and  charge  broke  dieir  ranks*  In  a  little  time,  no  part  of  their 
line  remaining  endre,  they  turned  their  backs,  and  fled  in  such 
consternation,  diat  they  even  passed  by  their  own  camp,  and 
never  relaxed  dicir  speed,  until  Praneste  was  in  view.  There, 
rallying,  they  took  possession  of  a  post,  which  they  fortified 
after  a  hasty  manner,  dreading,  lest,  if  they  retreated  within 
the  walls,  the  country  should  be  immediately  wasted  with 
fire,  and  when  every  other  place  was  desolated,  siege  should 
be  laid  to  the  city.  But  no  sooner  did  the  victorious  Ro¬ 
mans  approach,  after  plundering  the  camp  at  the  Allia,  than 
they  abandoned  this  foxtress  also,  and  shut  themselves  up  in 
the  town  of  Praeneste,  scarcely  thinking  the  walls  a  sufficient 
security.  There  were  eight  other  towns  under  the  dominion 
of  the  Praenestines  :  these  were  attacked  in  succession,  and 
taken^  without  any  great  difficulty,  and  the  army  led  to  Veli- 
trae.  That  also  was  taken  by  storm.  They  then  came  to 
Praeneste,  the  main  source  of  the  war,  and  it  fell  into  their 
hands,  not  by  force,  but  capitulation.  Titus  Quintius  having 
thus  gained  the  victory  in  one  pitched  battle,  having  taken 
from  the  enemy,  by  storm,  two  camps  and  nine  towns,  and 
Praeneste  on  surrender,  returned  to  Rome  ;  and,  in  his  tri¬ 
umph,  carried  into  the  Capitol  the  statue  of  Jupiter  Irapera- 
tor,  which  he  had  brought  away  from  Praeneste.  It  was  dedi¬ 
cated  between  the  recesses  of  Jupiter  and  Minerva,  and  on  a 
tablet,  fixed  under  it  as  a  monument  of  his  exploits,  were  en¬ 
graved  nearly  these  words :  “  Jupiter,  and  all  the  gods,  grant¬ 
ed  that  Titus  Quintius,  dictator,  should  take  nine  towns  in 
nine  days.”  On  the  twentieth  day  after  his  appointment  he 
abdicated  the  dictatorship* 
XXX.  An  election  was  then  held  of  military  tribunes,  with 
consular  power,  when  equal  numbers  of  patricians 
and  plebeians  were  chosen.  The  patricians  were,  g 
Publius  and  Caius  Manlius,  with  Lucius  Julius  ; 
the  plebeians,  Caius  Sextilius,  Marcus  Albinius,  and  Lucius 
VOL.  II. — H 

o  y 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

CY.R.  3r& 

jAdH^bdus.  To  the  Manin,  because  they  were  superiw  to  the 
in  point  of  descent^  and  to  Julius  in  interest,  dbc 
"Yolscians  were  asstgited  as  a  province,  out  of  the  ordinary 
imrse,  without  casting  of  lots,  or  mutual  agreement  t  of 
iniudi  step  both  they  themselves,  and  die  s^3^te,  who  made 
the  disposal,  had  afterwards  reasma  to  re|^t.  Without  taking 
ane^ures  to  obtain  the  proper  iMelligence,  they  sent  «mt  some 
cohorts  to  fomge.  Marching  hastily  to  support  th<^,  in  cem- 
sequence  of  a  false  report  brought  to  them,  of  their  being 
ensnared,  without  even  retsuning  the  author  trf  the  report,  and 
who  ws^  not  a  Homan  but  a  Ladne  soldier,  th^  diemselves 
fell  into  an  ambuscade  ;  where,  whilst  diey  gave  and  receiv¬ 
ed  many  wounds,  maintaining  resistance  on  disadvantageous 
ground  merely  by  dint  of  valour,  the  enemy,  in  mtotber  quatr 
ter,  made  an  assault  on  the  Rmnan  camp,  which  lay  in  a  low 
situation.  The  generals,  by  their  rashness  and  umkilfulness, 
had  thrown  affairs,  in  both  phices,  into  roost  imminent  dan¬ 
ger  ;  and  diat  any  part  of  the  army  was  saved  was  owing  to 
the  fortune  of  the  Roman  people,  and  the  bravery  of  the  sol- 
diers,  capable  of  acting  with  steadiness,  even  without  a  com- 
m^der./When  an  account  of  these  transactions  was  brought 
to  Rome,  it  ws^,  at  first,  thought  necessary  that  a 
should  be  mmsinated :  but  intelligaice  being  received  Rt>m 
the  countiy  ot  die  Volsdans  that  matters  were  quiet,  and  it 
being  eddem  that  they  knew  not  how  to  dike  advamage  iff 
smxess  and  opfKirtttitity,  even  tlte  troops  and  genends  whidi 
were  there  were  r^:aBed  |  and  a  cessatimi  iff  hostilities  con¬ 
tinued  dtmng  the  remmn^  of  the  year,  as  dr  regarded 
that  people.  The  only  interruption  of  tranquillity  which  oc- 
euw^  smd  that  towards  die  end  of  the  year,  was  the  revival 
of  hostilities  hy  the  Praenestihes,  who  had  prevailed  mi  die 
states  of  dte  I^atines  to  coM^perate  with  them.  Dming  diis 
year,  new  colonists  were  inrolled  for  Setia,  the  eolory  d«^- 
sdves  com]daining  of  a  scarcity  of  men.  Internal  trmiquil« 

Boot  VL 

B*C.  376.] 

Ihy,  which  was  pjwured  bf  the  influmce  of  Ae  plebeian 
military  tribunes,  and  Ae  res|»ct  paid  to  Aeir  Agnity  by 
Aose  of  Aeir  own  condition,  proved  »mie  consolatiim  fc«*  the 
failure  of  success  in  war. 
XXXI,  In  the  beginning  of  the  next  year,  the  flames 
sedition  blazed  out  with  great  vkdence ;  the  mili-  _ 
^  Y  R  377 
tary  tribune,  with  consular  power,  being  Spurius 
Furius,  ^intus  Scrvilius  a  second  time,  Caius 
Licinius,  Fublius  Clcslius,  Marcus  Honuius,  and  Lucius 
Geganius.  This  sedition  again  arose  from  the  debts ;  for 
the  purp<»e  of  ascertaining  which,  Spurius  Servilius  Priscus 
and  Quintus  Clcelius  Siculus  were  appointed  censors,  but 
were  hindered,  by  a  war,  from  proceeding  in  the  business : 
for  hasty  messengers,  at  flrst,  and  Aen  people  who  fled  from 
Ae  country, .  brought  information  that  the  Volscian  legions 
had  entered  the  borders,  and  were  committing  depredations 
through  Ae  Roman  territory.  Alarming  as  Ais  intelligence 
was,  so  far  was  their  fear  of  a  foreign  enemy  from  restraining 
the  violence  of  their  domestic  feuds,  that,  on  the  contrary,  it 
gave  occasion  to  the  tribunitian  power  to  exert  itself  with 
greater  vehemence  in  obstructing  Ae  levies,  until  these  coa« 
ditions  were  imposed  on  the  senate :  that,  during  the  cemti* 
numice  of  Ae  war,  no  one  should  pay  a  tax,  nor  Aould  any 
judicial  process  ht  carried  on  respecting  money  due.  This 
relaxation  being  obtained  for  Ae  commons,  there  was  no  far¬ 
ther  delay  in  the  levies.  When  Ae  new  legions  were  enlist¬ 
ed,  it  was  resolved  that  Aey  should  be  divided,  two  dif¬ 
ferent  armies  led  into  the  Vokeian  territory.  Spurius  Furius 
and  Marcus  Horatius  |n*oceedcd  to  Ae  right,  towards  Antium 
and  the  sea-i^sti  Quintus  Servilius  and  Lucius  Geganius 
to  the  left,  towards  Ecetra  and  Ae  mountains.  On  neiAer 
side  did  the  enemy  meet  them.  Devastadcois  were  therefore 
made,  not  like  those  which  the  Volscians  had  committed  in 
the  manner  of  banditti,  snatching  an  opportunity,  and  hur- 

52 

HISTORY  or  ROME.  [Y.R.  $77, 

ried  by  their  fears,  relying  on  the  dissensions  among  tte 
R^ans,  and  dreading  their  valour ;  but  with  a  regular  amy, 
and  giving  full  scope  to  their  resentment,  more  detrimental, 
too,  by  reason  of  their  continuance  j  for  the  Volsdans,  dread¬ 
ing  lest  an  army  should  come  out  from  Rome  against  them, 
had  made  their  meursions  only  into  the  skirts  of  the  frontiers; 
the  Romans  loitered  in  their  country,  in  hopes  of  bringing 
them  to  an  engagement.  Every  house,  therefore,  was  burnt, 
2md  several  villages  also  ;  not  a  fruit-tree  was  left,  nor  the 
seed  in  the  ground  to  give  a  prospect  of  a  harvest.  All  the 
men  and  cattle  found  without  the  walls  were  driven  off  as 
sl>oil,  and  the  troops,  from  both  quarters,  were  led  back  to 
Rome. 
XXXII.  Thus  a  short  interval  had  been  allowed  to  the 
debtors,  but  no  sooner  was  quiet  restored  abroad,  than  the 
courts  were  filled  anew  with  lawsuits  against  them :  and  so 
distant  was  every  hope  of  lessening  the  burth«i  of  former 
debts,  that  they  were  obliged  to  contract  new  ones,  by  a  tax 
for  building  a  wall  of  hewn  stone,  which  the  censors  had 
contracted  for.  To  this  hardship  the  commons  were  neces- 
-sitated  to  submit,  because  there  were,  at  the  time,  no  levi^ 
which  the  tribunes  might  obstruct ;  nay,  such  an  ascendancy 
had  the  nobility,  that  they  obliged  them  to  choose  all  the 
military  tribunes  out  of  the  patricians,  Lucius 
y  R  378  ^  . 
B  C  374  Publius  Valerius  a  fourth  time,  Caius 
Veturius,  Servius  Sulpicius,  Lucius  mid  Caius 
Quin  tins  Cincinnatus.  By  the  same  influence,  a  resolutiem 
was  carried,  without  opposition,  that,  to  make  head  against 
the  Latines  and  Vcflscians,  who,  with  their  forces  united, 
were  encamps  at  &itricum,  all  the  young  men  should  be 
obliged  to  take  the  military  oath ;  and  that  three  armies 
shovdd  be  formed ;  one,  for  the  4»rotection  of  the  city ;  ano¬ 
ther,  which,  in  case  any  disturbance  should  arise  elsewhere, 
might  be  sent  where  the  sudden  exigencies  of  war  slmuid 

BOOK  VI. 

S3 

B.C.  3r4.3 
require.  The  third,  and  by  far  the  most  powerful,  Publius 
Valerius  and  I.ucius  iEmilius  led  to  Satricura,  and  Jthere, 
finding  the  enemy  drawn  up  in  order  of  battle,  on  level 
ground,  they  instantly  came  to  an  engagement.  But  a  heavy 
rain,  attended  with  a  violent  storm  of  wind,  put  a  stop  to  the 
fight ;  when,  though  victory  had  not  declared  for  them,  they 
yet  had  a  fair  prospect  of  it.  Next  day  the  battle  was  re¬ 
newed,  and,  for  a  considerable  time,  the  Latine  legions  parti¬ 
cularly,  who,  during  the  long  continuance  of  the  confederacy, 
had  learned  the  Roman  discipline,  maintained  their  ground 
with  equal  braver}^  and  success.  At  length,  a  charge  of  the 
cavalry  disordered  their  ranks,  and  before  this  could  be  reme¬ 
died,  the  infantry  advanced  upon  them.  Wherever  the  Ra¬ 
man  line  attacked,  the  enemy  were  pushed  from  their  ground ; 
and  when  once  the  advantage  turned  against  them,  they 
found  the  Roman  force  irresistible.  They  were  therefore 
utterly  routed  ;  and  flying  to  Satricum,  which  was  two  miles 
distant,  had  many  of  their  men  slain,  chiefly  by  the  cavalry. 
Their  camp  was  taken  and  plundered.  The  night  after  the 
l^Htle,  they  went  oflT  from  Satricum  to  Antium,  in  a  manner 
more  like  a  flight  than  a  march :  and  though  the  Roman 
army  followed,  almost  in  their  steps,  yet  fear  proved  fleeter 
than  fury ;  so  that  they  had  got  within  their  walls,  before  the 
Romans  could  harass  or  impede  their  rear.  Several  days 
were  spent  in  wasting  the  country;  for  the  Romans  were  not 
properly  furnished  with  military  engines  for  attacking  walls, 
nor  the  others  in  a  condition  to  hazard  a  battle. 
XXXIII.  At  this  time  a  dissension  arose  between  the  An- 
tians  and  the  Latines :  for  the  Antians,  quite  reduced  by  a 
war  which  had  lasted  from  their  birth,  began  to  think  of 
submission.  The  Latines,  having  but  lately  revolted,  after  a 
long  enjoyment  of  peace,  and  their  spirits  being  still  fresh, 
were,  therefore,  the  more  resolutely  determined  to  persevere 
in  the  war.  Their  dispute  lasted  no  longer,  than  until  each 

at 

HIStORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  3fg, 
party  p^eived  ^t^they  might  accmnplish  their  owb  views, 
trithout  obstrucdmi  from  the  other.  The  Latines,  by  leaving 
the  place,  freed  themselv^  from  the  imputation  of  being 
concerned  in  a  poice  which  they  deemed  dishonourable.  The 
Antians,  as  soon  as  those  were  removed,  whose  presence 
impeded  their  ssdutary  designs,  surrendered  themselves  and 
their  territory  to  the  Romans.  The  rage  of  the  Latines,  on 
finding  that  they  could  neither  do  any  damage  to  the  Romans 
in  war,  nor  keep  the  Volscians  any  longer  in  arms,  vented 
ItseU*  in  setting  fire  to  the  city  of  Satricum,  which  had  been 
their  first  |dacc  of  refuge  after  defeat.  Not  a  building  in  that 
city  remained ;  for  they  threw  their  firebrands  indiscrimi¬ 
nately  on  those  that  belonged  to  gods  and  to  men,  except  the 
temple  of  mother  Matuta :  and  .from  this  they  were  with¬ 
held,  not  by  any  scruples  of  dieir  own,  or  reverence  towards 
the  gods,  but  by  a  tremendous  voice,  which  issued  through 
the  temple,  with  severe  denunciations  erf  vengeance,  unless 
they  removed  their  abominable  fires  to  a  distance  from  the 
temples.  Inflamed  with  the  same  rage,  they  proceeded  to 
Tusculum,  in  resentment  of  its  having  forsaken  the  general 
association  of  the  Latines,  and  joined  itself  to  the  Romans, 
not  only  as  an  ally,  but  even  as  a  member  of  their  state.  No 
notice  being  received  there  of  their  intention,  they  rushed  in 
by  the  gates,  and,  on  the  first  shout,  made  themselves  masters 
of  the  whede  town,  excepting  the  citadel.  Into  this  the  towns¬ 
men  had  made  their  escape,  with  their  wives  and  children, 
and  sent  messengers  to  Rome,  to  acquaint  the  senate  with 
their  misfortune.  With  no  less  expedition  than  became  the 
honour  of  the  Roman  people,  an  army  was  despatched  to 
Tusculum,  commanded  by  Lucius  Quintius  and  Servius  Sul- 
picius,  military  tribunes.  They  found  the  gates  of  Tusculum 
shut,  and  the  Latines  acting  the  parts  both  of  besiegers  and 
Ijesieged ;  on  one  side,  defending  the  walls  of  the  town  ;  on 
the  other,  carrying  on  the  attack  of  the  citadel;  at  once 

BOOK  VI. 

B.C.  374.] 

51? 

striking  terror  into  others^  and  feeling  it  then^elves.  The 
approach  of  the  Romans  made  a  great  alteration  in  the  minds 
of  both  parties :  the  despondency  of  the  Toscidans  it  con¬ 
verted  into  the  most  joyful  alacrity ;  and  the  assured  confi¬ 
dence  entertained  by  the  Latines,  that  they  should  quickly- 
become  masters  of  the  citadel,  as  they  were  already  of  the 
town,  into  an  anxiety  almost  hopeless  for  their  own  safety. 
The  shout  was  now  raised  by  the  Tusculans  from  the  cita¬ 
del,  and  returned,  by  a  much  louder  one,  from  the  Rom^ 
army.  The  Latines  were  hard  pressed  on  all  sides ;  nor 
could  they  either  sustain  the  force  of  the  Tusculans,  pouring 
down  on  them  from  the  higher  ground,  or  repel  the  Romans 
advancing  to  the  walls,  and  forcing  the  bars  of  tl^  gates. 
The  walls,  first,  were  mastered  by  scalade ;  the  g^tes  were 
then  broke  open  ;  and  the  two  enemies,  pressing  them  in 
front  and  in  rear,  no  strength  being  left  for  fight,  no  room 
for  escape,  they  were  surrounded  and  cut  to  pieces  to  a  man. 
Tusculum  being  thus  recovered  from  the  enemy,  the  army 
returned  to  Rome. 
XXXIV.  In  proportion  to  the  degree  of  tranquillity  which 
prevailed  this  year  abroad,  in  consequence  of  the  successes 
obtained  in  war,  did  the  violence  of  the  patricians,  and  the 
distresses  of  the  commons,  increase  daily  in  the  city ;  the 
necessity  of  immediate  payment,  of  itself,  impairing  the  abi¬ 
lity  to  pay:  so  that,  having  no  means  left  of  answering  any 
demands  out  of  their  property,  they  were  cast  in  suits,  and 
ordered  into  custody.  Thus,  at  the  expense  of  their  reputa¬ 
tions  and  persons,  they  satisfied  their  creditors  ;  punishment 
being  substituted  in  the  place  of  money.  In  consequence  of 
this,  they  sunk  into  such  despondency,  not  only  the  lowest, 
but  even  the  principal  plebeians,  that  no  man  could  be  found 
adventurous  enough  either  to  stand  candidate,  among  patri¬ 
cians,  for  the  military  tribuneship  (a  privilege  which  they 
had  used  such  mighty  efforts  to  obtain) ;  or  even  to  sue  for 

56 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  m. 
and  undertake  the  plebeian  magistracies :  insomuch  dmt  it 
aeemed  as  if  the  patricians  had  now  recovered,  for  ever,  the 
possession  of  that  honour ;  and  that  it  had  been  only  usurped, 
for  a  few  years,  by  the  commons.  The  excessive  joy,  which 
that  party  would  have  reaped  from  this  event,  was  prevented 
by  a  cause,  which  was  but  trifling,  as  is  very  often  the  case, 
in  compansem  with  the  important  ctm^uences  which  it  pn>^ 
duced.  Marcus  Fidl>ius  Ambustus  was  a  man  of  considera¬ 
ble  wmg^  suaaong  those  of  his  own  rank,  and  also  among  the 
commons,  because  they  considiered  him  as  one  who  was  not 
at  all  disposed  to  treat  them  with  contempt :  he  had  two 
daughmrs  married,  the  elder  to  Stervius  Sulpicius,  the  younger 
to  Caius  Licenius  Stolb,  of  high  reputation,  but  a  plebeian : 
hvA  the  very  circumstance  of  Fabius  not  having  scorned  thia 
alliance  had  procured  him  favour  in  the  minds  of  the  popu« 
lace.'  It  happened,  that  while  the  two  sisters  were  amusing 
themselves  in  conversation  at  the  house  of  Servius  Sulpicius, 
then  military  tribune,  on  Sulpicius’s  return  home  from  the 
Forum,  one  of  his  lictors,  according  to  custom,  rapped  at  the 
door  with. his  rod:  the  younger  Fabia,  who  was  a  stranger 
to  the  custom,  being  frightened  at  this,  was  laughed  at  by 
her  sister,  who  was  surprised  at  her  ignorsunce  of  the  matter. 
That  laugh,  however,  left  a  sting  in  the  otheris  breast;  as 
the  merest  trifles  will  often  affect  the  female  mind.  The 
crowd  also  of  attendants,  and  of  people  offering  their  service, 
I  suppose,  made  her  think  her  sister  happy  in  her  marriage, 
and  repine  at  her  own ;  according  to  the  so  generally  pre¬ 
vailing  foible,  for  it  is  certain  that  scarcely  any  can  bear  to 
be  surpassed  by  those  nearest  dietr  own  level.  While  she 
was  under  great  disquietude,  from  this  recent  mortification, 
her  father  happened  to  see  her,  and  asked,  “  Is  all  well 
and  though  she  dissembled,  at  the  cause  of  her  uneasi¬ 
ness,  because  it  was  neither  very  consistent  with  the  affection 
of  a  sister,  nor  verj'  honourdff^  to  her  hual^d,  he,  by  ten- 

BOOK  VI. 

St 

BXi.  3r4.3 
der  inquiries,  at  length  brought  her  to  ccmfesa,  thi^  her  un¬ 
happiness  arose  from  being  united  to  an  inferior,  from  being 
married  into  a  hou^  whieh  neidier  dignities  nor  honours 
could  enter.  Ambustus,  then,  consoling  his  daughter,  bid 
her  keep  up  her  spirits  :  for  that  she  should  shortly  see,  in 
her  own  house,  the  same  honours  which  she  saw  at  her  sis- 
ter^s.  He  then,  with  his  son-in-hiw,  began  to  frame  his  de¬ 
signs,  and  in  conjunction  with  Lucius  Sextius,  a  young  man 
of  active  talents,  to  whose  hopes  there  appeared  no  Im^di- 
ment,  except  the  want  of  patrician  descent. 
XXXV.  The  juncture  appeared  seasonable  for  the  intro¬ 
duction  of  innovations,  on  account  of  the  immense  burthen 
of  debt,  from  which  evil  the  commons  could  have  no  hope 
of  relief,  except  some  of  their  own  order  were  placed  in  die 
administration  of  government.  To  that  point  they  saw  it 
necessary  to  direct  their  most  vigorous  exertions.  The  com* 
mons,  by  spirited  endeavours  and  perseverance,  had  already 
gained  one  step  towards  it ;  from  whence,  if  they  struggled 
forward,  they  might  arrive  at  the  summit,  a^d  be  placed  cm 
an  equal  footing  with  the  patricians,  in  honour  well  as  in 
merit.  It  was  reserved,  that  at  present  there  should  be  ple¬ 
beian  tribunes  created ;  in  which  office  the  commons  might 
find  the  means  of  opening  for  themselves  a  way  to  the  other 
distinctions.  Accordingly,  Caius  Licinius  and  Lu¬ 
cius  Sextius  were  elected  tribunes,  and  proposed 
several  new  laws,  every  one  of  which  was  injurious 
to  the  power  of  the  patricians,  and  in  favour  of  die  interest 
of  the  plebeians.  One  related  to  debt,  enacting,  that  what¬ 
ever  had  been  paid  as  interest,  being  deducted  from  tte  prin¬ 
cipal,  the  remainder  should  be  discharged  in  three  years,  by 
so  many  equal  instalments.  ^  Another,  setting  bounds  to 
landed  property,  enacted,  that  no  one  should  possess  more 
than  five  hundred  acres  of  Imd :  a  third,  that  there  should 
be  no  election  of  mUitary  tribunes  j  and  that  one  of  the  coo- 
VOL.  II. — I 

HISTORY  OF  ROME* 

SB 

[Y*R.  37% 

suU  should,  indispeus^ly^  be  chosen  out  of  the  comnums ; 
ali  points  erf  die  utmost  consequence,  and  not  to  be  accom* 
plished  widiout  powerful  struggllis*  When  the  patricians 
were  thus  challenged  to  contend,  at  once,  for  all  tho^  ob¬ 
jects  which  excite  the  warmest  desires  in  the  human  heart, 
they  were  terrified  and  dismayed ;  nor  could  they,  either  in 
their  public  or  private  consultations,  devise  any  other  reme¬ 
dy  than  the  one  which  they  had  frequently  tried  before,  a 
protest*;  accordingly,  diey  engaged  some  of  the  tribunes  to 
oppose  the  propositions  of  their  colleagues.  These,  having 
collected  about  them  a  band  of  patricians  for  their  support, 
as  soon  as  they  saw  the  tribes  summoned  by  Licinius  and 
Sextius,  to  give  their  suffrages,  refused  to  suffer  either  the 
proposition  to  be  read,  or  any  of  the  usual  forms,  in  taking 
the  votes  of  the  people,  to  be  gone  through.  After  assem¬ 
blies  had  been  often  called  to  no  purpose,  and  the  proposi¬ 
tions  were  now  considered  as  rejected,  Sextius  said  to  them. 
It  is  very  well ;  since  it  is  determined  that  a  protest  shall 
carry  such  force  in  it,  we  will  defend  the  commons  with  the 
same  weapon.  Come,  patricians,  proclaim  an  assembly  for 
the  election  of  military  tribunes  ;  I  will  take  care  that  those 
words,  I  FORBID  IT,  shall  not  be  very  pleasing  in  your 
ears,  though  ye  listen  with  such  delight  to  our  colleagues 
chaunting  them  at  present.”  Nor  did  his  threats  fall  without 
effect  j  except  for  sediles  and  plebeian  tribunes,  there  were 
no  elections  held,  Licinius  and  Sextius  being  re-elected 
plebeian  tribunes,  suffered  not  any  curule  magistrates  to  be 
appointed ;  and,  during  the  space  of  five  years,  the  city  was 
kept  without  magistrates  in  those  offices,  the  commons  con¬ 
stantly  re-electing  the  two  tribunes,  and  these  preventing  the 
election  of  military  tribunes. 
XXXVI.  There  had  been  a  seasonable  cessation  of  wars ; 
but  the  colonists  of  Velitrae,  grown  wanton  through  ease,  and 
knowing  that  there  was  no  army  on  foot  at  Rome,  made  se¬ 
veral  incursions  into  the  Roman  territory,  and  even  laid  siege 

BOOK  VI. 

SB 

B.c.  srs.] 
to  Tusculum.  When,  on  this  event,  the  Tusculana^  their 
old  allies  and  new  fellow-citizens,  implored  assistance,  not 
only  the  patricians,  but  even  the  commons,  were  moved, 
principally  by  a  sense  of  honour ;  and  the  plebeian  tribunes 
withdrawing  their  opposition,  an  election  of  military  ^  ^ 
tribunes  was  held  by  an  interrex,  when  Lucius  Fu-  oV  * 
.  a  .  .  Jd.U.oo/. 
nus,  A  ulus  Manlius,  Seivius  Sulpicius,  Servius 
Cornelius,  and  the  two  Valeri i,  Publius  and  Caius,  weVe 
chosen  into  that  office.  These,  in  raising  the  levies,  found 
not  the  same  tractable  temper  in  the  commons  which  they 
had  shewn  in  the  election:  however,  having,  after  very  warm 
disputes,  completed  the  number  of  troops,  they  began  their 
march,  and  compelled  the  enemy,  not  only  to  retire  from 
Tusculum,  but  to  shelter  within  their  own  walls  ;  and 
Veiitrse  was  then  besieged  by  a  much  greater  force  than  had 
threatened  Tusculum.  Yet  the  commanders,  who  conduct¬ 
ed  the  siege,  were  not  able  to  bring  it  to  a  conclusion  before 
the  new  military  tribunes  were  elected :  these  were 

Y.R.386. 
B.C.366. 

Quintus  Scrvilius,  Caius  Veturius  a  second  time, 
Aulus  and  Marcus  Cornelius,  Quintus  Quintius, 
and  Marcus  Fabius.  Neither  did  these,  in  their  tribunate, 
perform  any  thing  m^orable  at  Velitrae.  The  dangerous 
state  of  affairs  at  home  called  more  powerfully  for  their  at¬ 
tention  :  for,  besides  Sextius  and  Licinius,  the  proposers  of 
the  laws,  now  re-elected  the  eighth  time  to  the  office  of  ple¬ 
beian  tribune,  Fabius  likewise,  the  military  tribune,  father- 
in-law  of  Stolo,  without  disguise,  professed  himself  a  sup¬ 
porter  of  those  laws  of  which  he  had  been  an  adviser :  and 
whereas  there  had  been,  at  first,  among  the  plebeian  tribunes, 
eight  protesters  against  the  laws,  there  were  now  only  five  ; 
and  these,  as  usual  with  men  who  desert  their  party,  were 
embarrassed  and  perplexed.  In  expressions  borrowed  from 
t^ers,  they  alleged,  as  a  pretext  for  their  protesting,  merelv 
what  they  had  been  privately  instructed  to  say,  that  ^  a  laigc 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

(Y Jl.  S«. 
fliftXie  the  commons  wei^  sd^ent  in  arm^r  at  Veii^  ; 
die  assembly  ought  to  be  deferred  until  the  scddiers  re« 
Ipumed,  in  order  that  the  entire  body  of  die  conuhons  might 
Imvc  an  oppottunity  of  giving  dieir  i^tes^  in  mi^rs  wherdm 
they  trere  so  deeply  intoned.’’  Sextius  and  Lkimus^  in 
conjunedon  with  the  other  pai^  of  their  coUeaguea,  and  Fa- 
bius,  one  of  the  military  tribuneaf^iaving,  from  the  experi¬ 
ence  of  so  many  years,  acquired  the  art  of  managii^  die 
minds  of  the  emnmons,  called  on  the  principal  patriciaioi, 
and  teaxed  diem  with  interrogatories,  on  each  of  the  si^ 
jects  proposed  to  the  people :  **  Were  they  so  shameless  as 
lo  require,  that  when  the  proportion  of  a  plebeian  was  only 
two  acres  of  land,  they  should  be  allowed  to  possess  above 
five  hundred  acres  each?  That  a  single^  man  should  enjoy 
die  share  of  near  three  hundred  citixens ;  while  a  plebeian 
had  scarcely  an  extent  of  land  sufficient  for  a  stinted  habtta- 
don,  or  a  place  of  burial  ?  Did  they  think  it  reasonable,  that 
the  commons,  inextricably  embarrassed  by  the  accumulaticm 
of  interest,  should  surrender  their  persons  to  the  stocks,  and 
to  the  harsh  treatment  of  creditors,  rather  than  that  they  should 
be  allowed  a  discharge  of  the  debt,  on  paying  off  the  princi¬ 
pal  ?  That  men  should  daily  be  drivefi  in  flocks  from  the  Fo¬ 
rum,  after  being  made  over  to  their  creditors  ?  That  the 
houses  of  the  nobility  should  be  fiUed  with  such  prisoners  ? 
And  that,  in  the  habitation  of  every  patrici^,  there  should 
be  a  private  prison  ?” 
XXXVII.  After  painting  those  matters  in  the  most  invi¬ 
dious  and  pitiable  ccAours,  to  an  audience,  wheredF  each  indi¬ 
vidual  in  dread  that  die  case  might  become  his  own,  and 
ekdting,  m  the  hearers,  even  greater  indignation  dum  they 
felt  dnsmselves,  they  went  on  to  insist,  dvat  ^  tltere  never 
could  be  any  stop  put  to  the  patricians  engrossing  the  lands 
to  themselves,  and  crushing  die  commons  under  the  weight 
©f  im&Tt&t,  die  latter  shotdd  constitute  cne  of  die  con- 

B@OK  VI. 

ei 

*4X360.} 
mib  oi£fc  cf  oum  body,  to  be  a  gpoardtaii  of  dieir  Bberty. 
That  ^  tribwEmofdie  ccmaujm  were  mw  despised,  l^caase 
those  mv^Bss^  with  ^t  fomst^  by  the  preseas^  pracdc^  of 
protests,  raided  lls  own  strength  tneffiiwitms.  It  wa»  im- 
{K>3«Ue  to  d^  cm  eqmd  while  the  otho^s  h^ld  in  didr 
hands  the  power  ctf  command,  and  they,  only  that  of  giving 
protection.  Unless  admitted  to  a  tiwe  in  tl)^  government, 
the  commons  conld  never  enjoy  an  equal  pmrtion  in  the  com* 
monwe^h.  Nor  ou^t  it  to  be  thought  sufficient  tiiat  ple- 
^beians  should  be  allowed  to  stand  candidates  at  the  election 
of  consuls ;  none  of  them  would  ever  be  elected,  unless  it 
were  made  an  indispensabk  rule  that  one  consul  must,neGes* 
sarily,  be  taken  from  among  the  commons.  Had  they  now 
forgotten,  tiiat  though  the  practice  of  electing  military  tri* 
bunes,  rather  than  comids,  had  been  instituted,  for  the  very 
purpose  of  opening  the  highest  honours  to  the  plebeians,  yet, 
during  a  space  of  forty-four  years,  not  one  plebeian  had  been 
elected  into  that  office  I  How  then  could  they  believe,  that 
when  there  were  but  two  places  be  filled,  those  men  woidd 
voluntarily,  bestow  a  share  of  the  honour  on  the  commons, 
who  were  accustomed  to  monopolize  the  wh^  eight  places 
at  tiie  election  of  military  tribunes }  That  they  would  safer 
a  pammge  to  be  laid  open  to  the  consukhip,  who,  for  such  a 
loigth  of  time,  had  kept  the  tribimeship  so  dosely  fenced  up  i 
They  must  acquire  by  a  law,  whsU  they  could  not  accomplitii 
by  influence  at  elections  ;  and  one  consul’s  place  must  be  set 
apart,  bey<md  the  reach  of  c€mtest,fo  which  the  commons  may 
have  access :  since,  as  loi^  as  k  is  left  subject  to  dispute,  |t 
wUl  ever  become  the  prize  of  foe  more  powerful.  Nor  could 
foe  nobles  now  prelend  to  say,  what  formerly  they  had  been 
femd  of  asserting,  thaA  tiiere  were  not  to  be  found,  among  tiie 
pkbeians,  men  qudified  for  the  curule  offices.  For,  was  the  ad¬ 
ministration  of  government  conducted  with  less  diligence  and 
vi^nrr  since  the  tribunate  of  Publius  Licinius  Calvus,  foe  first 

62 

HISTOHY  OF1ROME. 

[Y-R.sae, 

fdebeiaB  elected,  than  during  theme  years  in  which  none  but 
patricians  wei^  milit^  tribunes  t  Nay,  on  the  contrary,  se¬ 
veral  patriciam^  on  the  expiration  <rf  their  office,  had  been 
condeznxied  for  misconduct,  but  never  one  fdebeian.  Quaes¬ 
tors  too,  in  like  manner  as  military  tribunes,  began,  a  few 
years  before,  to  be  elected  out  of  the  commons  :  nor  had  the 
Roman  people  seen  reason  to  be  displeased  with  any  one  of 
them.  The  consulship  now  remained  to  be  attained  by  the 
plebeians*;  that  was  the  bulwark,  that  the  basis  of  their 
liberty.  Could  they  once  arrive  at  that,  then,  indeed,  the  Ro¬ 
man  people  would  be  satisfied  that  kings  were  really  banish¬ 
ed  from  the  city,  and  liberty  settled  on  a  sure  foundation. 
For,  from  that  day,  every  advantage,  in  which  the  patricians 
now  surpassed  them,  would  come  into  the  possession  of  the 
commons ;  command  and  honour,  military  glory,  birth,  nobi¬ 
lity,  all  highly  valuable  to  themselves  in  the  present  enjoy¬ 
ment,  and  which  they  could  leave,  with  an  increase  of  value, 
to  their  children.”  Finding  such  discourses  favourably  at¬ 
tended  to,  they  published  Another  proposition ;  that  instead 
of  two  commissioners  for  performing  religious  rites,  ten 
should  be  appointed,  half  of  whom  should  be  plebeians,  half 
patricians  ;  and  they  deferred  the  meeting,  which  was  to  de¬ 
cide  on  all  these  matters,  until  the  troops,  then  engaged  in 
the  aiege*of  Velitrae,  should  return. 
.XXXVIII,  The  year  expired  before  the  legions  were 
Y  R  38^  l»**ought  home  from  Velitrae  ;  and  consequently, 
b!c.365  affair  of  die  laws  remained  suspended,  and 
was  banded  over  to  the  new  military  tribunes :  for 
as  to  the  plebeiap  tribunes,  the  commons  re-elected  the  same ; 
particularly  the  two  who  had  proposed  the  laws.  The  mili¬ 
tary  tribunes  elected  were  Titus  Quintius,  Servius  Corne¬ 
lius,  Servius  Suipicius,  Spurius  Servilius,  Lucius  Fapirius, 
^d 'Lucius  Veturius.  Immediately  on  the  commencement 
of  the  new  year,  the  contest  atwnit  the  kws  was  pushed  to 

BOOK  VL 

63 

BkC.  365.] 
extremity!  md  whea,  cm  ilm  tribes  being  asscmUed,  the 
proposers  of  the  laws  persisted  in  their  proceeding,  in  spite 
of  the  protests  of  their  pacriciami  were  so 
alarmed  that  they  recurred  for  aid  to  their  last  resource,  an 
office  superior  to  all  others  in  power,  and  a  citizen  superior 
to  all  othet^  in  reputation,  it  was  resolved  that  a  dictator 
should  be  appointed;  Accordingly  Marcus  Furius  Camillas 
was  nominated,  and  he  chose  Lucius  iEmilius  master  of  the 
horse.  On  the  other  side,  the  proposers  of  the  laws,  in 
position  to  this  great  effort  of  their  adversaries,  with  deter¬ 
mined  resolution,  collected  every  means  of  so-ength^  in  aid 
of  the  plebeian  cause  ;  and,  summoning  an  assembly  of  the 
people,  cited  the  tribes  to  give  their  votes.  The  dictator,  at¬ 
tended  by  a  band  patricians,  having  taken  his  seat,  with 
many  angry  and  menacing  expressions,  the  business,  at  first, 
produced  the  usual  contest  among  the  plebeian  tribunes  ; 
some  of  them  supporting  the  law,  and  others  protesting 
against  it.  But  their  protest,  which  by  right  ought  to  have 
prevailed,  being  nevertheless  overpowered  by  the  people’s 
warm  attachment  to  the  laws  themselves,  and  to  the  promo¬ 
ters  of  them  ;  and,  the  first  tribes  having  pronounced,  Be 
it  as  you  propose  Camillas  said,  ‘‘  Roman  citizens,  rin^ 
the  headstrong  passions  of  your  tribunes,  not  dieir  legal  au¬ 
thority,  rule  your  proceedings ;  and  since,  after  having  at  dm 
expense  of  a  secession,  procured  the  privilege  of  protestiiig, 
ye  now  yourselves  invaUdate  it,  by  the  same  violence  through 
which  ye  obtained  it  j  I,  as  dictator,  out  of  regard,  as  wdi 
to  your  particular  interest,  as  to  the  general  interest  of  the 
commonwealth,  will  support  the  right  of  protesting :  and,  by 
the  power  of  my  authority,  will  defend  your  rights  of  pro¬ 
tection,  which  ye  endeavour  to  betray.  Wherefore,  if  Caius 
Licinius  and  Lucius  Sextius  will  give  way  to  the  protest  of 
their  colleagues,  I  shall  be  far  from  introducing  the  authority 
of  a  patrician  magistrate  into  an  assembly  of  the  commons- 

HISTORY  m  mOME. 

[YM.  3^. 

m  to  m  ^ir  at* 
aeeii^  to  h^mt  bm»  mk  the  slate,  as  if  it  were  tmder  capti* 
to  Aea^  i  will  aot  stsdfer  ttibuniuati  power  to  be 
iaot^t  to  di3sohitiO!i  by.  ks  own  adu”  The  tribunes,  in 
contempt  of  diie  dedaratkm,  still  proc^diog  in  the  business 
widi  unabated  a^tivi^,  Camillus  was  so  highly  provol^i, 
that  he  sent  his  lieton  to  dispente  the  commons;  adding 
dsre^,  Aat  ^  if  &ey  persii^d,  he  would  compel  every  one 
of  the  younger  moo  to  take  the  military  oadi,  and  would  in* 
standy  lead  m  army  out  of  the  city.”  This  struck  gyeat  ter¬ 
ror  inte  tibe  populace :  but  the  opporition  served  rather  to 
infiame  thra  lessen  the  resolution  of  their  leaders.  How¬ 
ler,  before  the  dispute  was  brought  to  any  decisitm,  die 
dieteter  abdicated  his  office ;  either,  because  some  informal¬ 
ity  was  discove^d  in  his  appmntment,  as  some  writers  have 
smd ;  or  because  die  plebeian  tribunes  proposed  to  the  com* 
mafmf  and  the  commons  p^sed  it  into  an  order,  that  if  Mar¬ 
cus  Furius  Camillus  performed  any  act  as  dictator,  he  should 
be  five  hundred  thousand  asses.*  But  Ae  fdSowing 
ooub^rationB  induce  me  to  believe,  that  he  was  deterred 
^tng  radier  by  a  defect  in  die  auspices,  than  by  such 
m  tmprec^dmtcd  order :  first,  the  temper  of  the  man  him- 
sdf|  tb^  Publius  Manlius  being  immediately  substituted  in 
idb  room.  What  end  could  it  answer,  to  appoint  hkn  for 
^  dispute  in  which  Camillas  had  been  worked? 
faesid^  die  year  foikiwing,  the  same  Camillus  was  created 
<&:tator,  and  ht  certainly  could  not,  withotrt  shame,"  have 
resuiiied  an  auAmrlty,  which  had  l^en  foiled  in  his  hmids 
^^ear  before.  At  the  teo,  wh^  the  proposkion  about 
fiem^  him  is  reported  to  have  been  published,  he  must  either 
have  Imd  power  sufficient  to  have  prevented  the  passing  of 
this  Oitler,  by  which  he  saw  himself  degraded,  or  else  he 

16141, 11».  8d. 

BOOK  VI. 

65 

B.C.  365.] 
could  not  have  been  able  to  oppose  the  others,  on  account  of 
which  this  was  introduced  ;  for  through  the  whole  course  of 
the  various  disputes,  in  regard  to  the  authority  of  the  tri¬ 
bunes,  and  that  of  the  consuls  even  down  to  our  memory,  the 
dictatorship  ever  held  a  decided  pre-eminence  over  both. 
XXXIX.  During  the  interval  between  the  abdication  of 
the  former  dictator,  and  the  new  one,  Manlius,  entering  into 
office,  as  if  it  were  an  interregnum,  the  tribunes  summoned 
an  assembly  of  the  people ;  and  it  was  there  discovered, 
which  of  the  laws  proposed  were  favourites  of  the  public, 
and  which  of  the  proposers.  For  the  commons  passed  those 
which  respected  interest  of  money,  and  the  lands,  and  reject¬ 
ed  the  one  respecting  a  plebeian  consul ;  both  which  decisions 
would  have  been  carried  into  effect,  had  not  the  tribunes  in¬ 
sisted,  that  they  had  put  the  question  to  the  assembly,  on 
the  whole  of  the  laws  collectively.  Publius  Manlius  then 
turned  the  advantage  to  the  side  of  the  commons,  by  nomi¬ 
nating  as  his  master  of  the  horse,  a  plebeian,  Caius  Licinius, 
who  had  been  military  tribune.  This,  we  are  informed,  gave 
much  displeasure  to  the  patricians,  to  whom  the  dictator 
apologized  for  his  conduct,  alleging  the  near  relationship  be¬ 
tween  him  and  Licinius ;  at  the  same  time  asserting,  that  the 
post  of  master  of  the  horse  was  no  way  superior  to  that  of 
consular  tribune.  When  the  assembly  for  electing  plebeian 
tribunes  was  proclaimed,  Licinius  and  Sextius  conducted 
themselves  in  such  a  manner,  that,  while  they  professed  an 
unwillingness  any  longer  to  be  continued  in  office,  they  ap¬ 
plied  to  the  commons  the  most  powerful  incentives,  towards 
the  effectuating  of  that  purpose,  which,  from  their  dissimula¬ 
tion  in  the  above  particular,  they  seemed  little  desirous  to 
promote.  Telling  them,  that  “  they  were  now  standing  the 
ninth  year,  as  it  were  in  battle  array  against  the  nobilit^% 
with  the  greatest  danger  to  their  own  particular  interests, 
and  without  any  advantage  to  the  public.  That,  as  they  wejr  e 
VOL.  TI. - K 

66 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  387. 

now  grown  old,  so,  together  with  them,  both  the  proposi¬ 
tions  which  they  had  published,  and  the  whole  tribunitian 
power,  were  fallen  into  a  state  of  languor.  At  first,  the  at* 
tack  was  carried  on,  against  their  propositions,  by  the  pro¬ 
test  of  their  colleagues  ;  then,  by  banishing  the  younger 
citizens  to  the  war  of  Velitrse ;  at  last,  the  dictatorial  thun¬ 
der  had  been  levelled  against  themselves.  At  present,  neither 
colleagues,  nor  war,  nor  dictamr  stood  in  their  way :  for  the 
latter  had  even,  by  nominating  a  plebeian  master  of  the  horse, 
given  them  an  omen  of  a  plebeian  consul.  The  commons 
were  the  only  obstruction  to  themselves,  and  to  their  own 
interests.  They  could,  if  they  chose  it,  immediately,  have 
the  city  and  the  forum  free  from  creditors,  and  the  lands 
free  from  unjust  occupiers.  And  when  would  they  ever  con¬ 
sider  these  kindne^es  with  proper  gratitude,  if,  at  the  very 
time  when  they  were  receiving  plans  for  their  own  advantage, 
they  precluded  the  authors  of  them  from  all  hope  of  distinc¬ 
tion  ?  It  was  not  suitable  with  the  candour  of  the  Roman 
people,  to  require  that  the  burthen  of  interest  money  should 
be  taken  off  from  them,  and  that  they  should  be  introduced 
into  the  possession  of  the  lands  unjusth  occupied  by  the 
powerful,  and  at  the  same  time  leave  the  persons,  through 
whose  means  they  acquired  those  lands,  to  grow  old  in  the 
quality  of  tribunitians*;  not  only  without  honours,  but  even 
without  hope  of  them.  Wherefore,  let  them,  first,  determine 
in  their  own  mind  what  choice  they  would  make,  and  then 
notify  that  choice,  in  the  election  of  their  tribunes.  If  they 
chose  that  the  propositions  published  by  them  should  be  pass¬ 
ed  collectively,  then  there  would  be  some  reason  for  re-elect¬ 
ing  the  same  tribunes ;  for  they  would  carry  into  effect  their 
own  wishes.  But,  if  they  chose  that  nothing  more  should 
pass,  than  what  each  found  necessary  to  his  private  affairs, 
there  would  then  be  no  occasion  for  the  invidious  mode  of 
re-election  j  and,  as  they  would  fail  of  obtaining  the  tribune- 

BOOK  VI. 

67 

B.C.M5.] 
ship^  so  would  the  people  of  obtaining  the  matters  proposed 
to  them.” 
XL.  On  hearing  such  peremptory  language  from  the  tri¬ 
bunes^  and  whilst  amazement,  at  the  insolence  of  their  beha¬ 
viour,  held  the  rest  of  the  patricians  motionless  and  silent, 
Appius  Claudius  Crassus,  grandson  of  the  decemvir,  is  said 
to  have  stood  forth  to  combat  their  argument ;  and,  prompt¬ 
ed,  rather  by  hatred  and  anger,  than  by  hope  of  success,  to 
have  spoken  to  this  effect ;  Roman  citizens,  to  me  it  would 
be  neither  new  nor  surprising,  if  I  should  hear  applied  to  ray- 
self  on  the  present  occasion,  the  same  charge,  which  has  al¬ 
ways  been  objected,  by  seditious  tribunes,  to  our  family  ;  that 
the  Claudian  race,  even  from  the  very  beginning,  has  shown 
a  more  zealous  attachment  to  the  dignity  of  the  patricians, 
than  to  any  other  object  in  the  state  ;  and  that  they  have  con¬ 
stantly  opposed  the  interests  of  the  commons.  One  of  these 
assertions,  neither  I,  nor  any  of  the  Ciaudii,  will  deny  ;  that, 
from  the  time  when  we  were  first  adopted,  and  admitted  into 
the  order  of  the  patricians,  we  have  earnestly  endeavoured 
that  the  dignity  of  those  families,  among  which  ye  were  pleas¬ 
ed  to  place  us,  might  truly  be  said  to  have  been  augmented, 
rather  than  diminished,  through  our  means.  As  to  the  other 
declaration,  I  can  take  upon  me  to  insist  and  maintain,  in  be¬ 
half  of  myself  and  of  my  ancestors,  that,  unless  we  are  to 
suppose  that  actions,  which  tend  to  the  general  good  of  the 
state,  are  injurious  to  the  commons,  as  if  they  were  inha¬ 
bitants  of  another  city,  we  ntver,  either  in  our  private  ca¬ 
pacity,  or  in  office,  proceeded  knowingly,  in  any  instance, 
to  the  detriment  of  those  commons  :  and  that  there  can¬ 
not,  consistently  with  truth,  be  mentioned  any  one  act,  or 
word,  of  ours,  contniry  to  your  interest ;  though  some  in¬ 
deed  there  may  have  been  contrary  to  your  inclinations.  But 
even  were  I  not  of  the  Claudian  family,  nor  sprung  from  pa¬ 
trician  blood,  but  an  individual  in  the  general  mass  of  citi¬ 
zens,  only  supposing  me  sensible  that  I  was  descended  from 

68 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  38r, 

free-born  parents,  and  that  I  lived  in  a  free  state,  could  I, keep 
silence  in  such  a  case  as  this ;  when  Lucius  Sextius,  and 
Caius  Licinius,  perpetual  tribunes,  as  it  seems,  have  during 
the  nine  years  in  which  they  have  reigned,  acquired  such  a 
degree  of  arrogance,  as  to  declare,  that  they  will  not  allow 
you  freedom  of  suffrage,  either  in  elections  or  in  enacting 
laws  ?  On  a  certain  condition,  one  of  them  says,  ye  shall  re¬ 
elect  us  tribunes,  a  tenth  time.  What  else  is  this,  than  if  he 
said,  what  others  court,  we  disdain,  so  far,  that,  without  a 
valuable  consideration,  we  will  not  accept  of  it  ?  And  now,  I 
pray  you,  what  is  that  consideration,  for  which  we  may  have 
you  perpetually  tribunes  of  the  commons  ?  Why,  he  tells  you 
it  is,  that  ye  admit  all  our  propositions  collectively,  be  they 
pleasing  or  displeasing,  profitable  or  unprofitable.  Let  me 
intreat  you,  ye  Tarquinii,  who  are  tribunes  of  the  commons, 
to  suppose  that  I,  one  of  the  citizens,  called  out  in  reply  to 
you  from  the  middle  of  the  assembly :  with  your  good  leave, 
let  us  be  permitted  to  choose,  out  of  these  propositions,  such 
as  we  judge  salutary  to  ourselves,  and  to  reject  others.  No, 
says  he,  ye  shall  have  no  such  permission.  Must  ye  enact, 
concerning  interest  of  money  and  lands,  which  tends  to  the 
good  of  every  one  of  yourselves,  and  must  not  the  prodigy 
of  seeing  Lucius  Sextius  and  Caius  Licinius  consuls  take 
place  in  the  city  of  Rome,  because  ye  view  it  with  scorn  and 
abhorrence  ?  Either  admit  all,  or  I  propose  nothing.  Just  as 
if,  before  a  person  pressed  with  hunger,  one  were  to  lay  food 
and  poison  together,  and  then  to  order  him  either  to  abstain 
from  what  would  minister  to  life,  or  to  mix  along  with  it  what 
would  cause  death.  If  then  this  state  were  really  free,  would 
not  the  whole  assembly  have  replied  to  you  thus  ;  begone 
with  your  tribuneships  and  your  propositions.  What?  If 
you  do  not  propose  that  which  is  advantageous  to  the  people 
to  admit,  can  there  be  no  other  found  to  procure  them  advan¬ 
tages  ?  If  any  patrician  (or  what  they  wish  to  be  thought 

BOOK  VI. 

69 

B.C  365.] 
more  invidious)  if  a  Claudian  should  say,  either  admit  all,  or 
I  propose  nothing ;  what  man  among  you,  citizens,  would 
endure  it  ?  Will  ye  never  learn  to  attend  to  facts,  rather  than 
persons  ?  For  ever  listen  with  partial  ears  to  every  thing  ut¬ 
tered  by  men  of  their  office,  and  with  prejudice  to  what  is 
said  by  any  of  us  ?  But,  surely,  their  language  is  very  differ¬ 
ent  from  what  becomes  members  of  a  republic  ;  and  what 
shall  we  say  of  their  proposal,  which  they  are  so  incensed  at 
your  rejecting  ?  It  is  exactly  of  a  piece,  citizens,  with  their 
language.  He  says,  I  desire  it  may  be  enacted,  that  it  shall 
not  be  lawful  for  you  to  elect  into  the  consulship  such  persons 
as  ye  may  approve  :  for  can  he  mean  otherwise  who  orders, 
that  one  consul  must  necessarily  be  taken  from  the  plebeians, 
and  does  not  allow  you  the  power  of  electing  two  patricians  ? 
If  wars  were  to  be  waged  now,  such  as  the  Etrurian  for  in¬ 
stance,  when  Porsena  lay  on  the  Janiculum  ;  or,  as  the  Gallic 
lately,  when,  except  the  Capitol  and  citadel,  ail  places  were 
in  possession  of  the  enemy,  and  that  Lucius  Sextius  stood 
candidate  for  the  consulship  with  Camillus,  would  ye  be  able 
to  bear,  that  Sextius  should,  without  any  competition,  be  made 
consul,  while  Camillus  would  be  obliged  to  struggle  against 
the  danger  of  a  repulse  ?  Is  this  to  introduce  a  community  of 
honours  ?  to  make  it  lawful  for  two  plebeians,  but  unlawful 
for  two  patricians,  to  be  chosen  consuls.  To  make  it  neces¬ 
sary  to  elect  one  plebeian,  but  allowable  to  pass  by  all  the 
patricians  ;  what  sort  of  fellowship,  what  sort  of  confederacy 
is  this?  Are  you  not  satisfied  with  obtaining  a  part  of  that 
in  which  hitherto  you  have  had  no  concern  ;  must  you  be 
laying  violent  hands  on  the  whole  ?  I  fear,  says  Sextius,  that 
if  ye  are  at  liberty  to  elect  two  patricians,  ye  will  elect  no 
plebeian.  What  is  this  but  to  say,  because  ye  would  not,  of 
your  own  choice,  elect  unworthy  persons,  I  will  impose  on 
you  a  necessity  of  admitting  them  w^ithout  choice.  What 
follows,  hut  that,  if  one  plebeian  be  named,  together  with  two 

75 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  387. 
patricians,  he  is  not  even  under  an  obligation  to  the  people, 
may  say,  that  he  was  appointed  by  the  law,  smd  not  elect¬ 
ed  by  their  suffrages  ? 
XLL  The  power  of  extorting,  not  of  suing  for  honours, 
is  what  they  aim  at ;  and  to  attain  the  most  exalted  without 
incurring  the  obligations  even  of  the  lowest ;  they  choose  also 
to  make  their  way  to  them  by  means  of  accidental  su6ce8se8, 
rather  than  by  merit.  Is  there  any  man  who  can  think  it  an 
affront  to  have  his  character  inspected  and  estimated  ?  Who 
can  deem  it  reasonable,  that  he  alone,  amidst  struggling  com¬ 
petitors,  should  have  a  certainty  of  obtaining  honours  ?  Who 
would  exempt  himself  from  your  judgment?  Who  would 
render  your  suffrages  necessary  (\^  suffrages  I  must  say)  in¬ 
stead  of  voluntary  ;  servile  instead  of  free  ?  Not  to  mention 
Licinius  and  Sextius,  the  years  of  whose  perpetuated  power,  as 
if  they  were  kings,  ye  number  in  the  Capitol;  what  man  is 
there  this  day,  in  the  state,  so  mean  that  he  might  not,  by  the 
opportunities  created  by  this  law,  make  his  way  to  the  con¬ 
sulship,  with  greater  ease,  than  we  or  our  children  ?  Since, 
in  some  cases,  it  will  not  be  in  your  power  to  elect  us,  though 
ye  wish  it,  and  ye  will  be  under  a  necessity  of  electing  them, 
though  against  your  will.  Of  the  injury  offered  to  merit,  I 
shall  say  no  more,  for  merit  regards  only  the  human  race. 
But  what  shall  I  say,  with  respect  to  religion,  and  the  aus¬ 
pices  ;  the  affront  and  injury  offered  to  which,  reflect  imme¬ 
diately  on  the  immortal  gods  ?  That  this  city  was  founded 
under  auspices ;  that  all  business,  civil  and  military,  foreign 
and  domestic,  is  conducted  under  them,  who  can  be  ignorant  ? 
In  whom  therefore  is  the  privilege  of  auspices  vested  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  constitution  of  ’our  forefathers  ?  In  the  patricians 
undoubtedly.  For  no  plebeian  magistrate  is  even  so  elected. 
So  peculiar  to  us  are  the  auspices,  that  the  patrician  magis¬ 
trates,  whom  the  people  may  approve,  can  be  in  no  other 
manner  elected  ;  while  we  ourselves,  without  the  suffrages 

BOOK  VL 

71 

B.C.  365.] 
of  the  people,  create  an  interrex,  under  auspices  ;  and,  in  pri¬ 
vate  stations  also  hold  such  privilege,  which  they  do  not,  even 
when  in  office.  Does  not  he  then,  in  effect,  abolish  the  aus¬ 
pices,  who  by  creating  plebeian  consuls,  takes  them  out  of  the 
hands  of  the  patricians,  the  only  persons  capable  of  holding 
them  ?  They  may  now  mock  at  religion,  and  say,  where  is 
the  great  matter,  if  the  chickens  do  not  feed  ?  If  they  come 
out  too  slowly  from  the  coop?  If  a  bird  chaunt  an  ominous 
note  ?  These  are  trivial  matters ;  but  by  not  disregarding 
these  trivial  matters,  our  ancestors  raised  this  state  to  the 
highest  eminence.  In  the  present  times,  ds  if  we  stood  in  no 
need  of  the  favour  of  the  gods,  we  violate  all  religious  insti¬ 
tutions.  Let  therefore  pontiffs,  augurs,  kings  of  the  sacri¬ 
fices,  be  chosen  at  random.  Let  us  place  the  tiara  of  Jupi¬ 
ter’s  flamen  on  any  one  that  offers,  provided  he  be  a  man. 
Let  us  commit  the  Ancilia,  the  shrines,  the  gods,  and  the 
charge  of  their  worship,  to  persons  to  whom  they  cannot, 
without  impiety,  be  intrusted.  Let  neither  laws  be  enacted, 
nor  magistrates  elected  under  auspices.  Let  not  the  appro¬ 
bation  of  the  senate  be  requisite,  either  to  the  assemblies  of 
the  centuries,  or  of  the  Curias.  Let  Sextius  and  Licinius, 
like  Romulus  and  Tatius,  reign  in  the  city  of  Rome,  in  return 
for  their  generosity  in  plundering  from  other  men’s  fortunes  : 
in  giving  away  other  men’s  money  and  lands,  does  it  not  oc¬ 
cur  to  you,  that  by  one  of  these  laws,  great  part  of  the  pos¬ 
sessions  must  be  converted  into  desolate  wilds,  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  the  owners  being  expelled  from  them:  by  the  other, 
that  credit  would  be  annihilated,  by  which  all  human  society 
must  be  at  an  end.  For  every  reason,  then,  I  am  of  opinion, 
that  ye  ought  to  reject  those  propositions  altogether.  What¬ 
ever  is  your  determination,  may  the  gods  grant  it  a  happy 
issue.” 
XLIJ.  The  speech  of  Appius  produced  no  other  effect, 
than  the  putting  off  tlie  decision  on  the  propositions  to  ano- 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  388. 

7% 
ther  time.  Sextius  and  Licinius,  being  again  re-elected  tri¬ 
bunes,  the  tenth  time,  procured  a  law  to  be  enacted,  that,  of 
the  decemvirs  for  superintending  religious  matters,  half 
should  be  chosen  from  among  the  commons.  According¬ 
ly,  five  patricians  were  elected,  and  five  plebeians.  Which 
step  being  gained,  the  way  seemed  open  to  the  consulship. 
Satisfied  with  this  victory,  the  commons  conceded  so  far  to 
the  patricians,  that,  no  mention  being  made  of  consuls  for  the 
present,  military  tribunes  should  be  elected..  The  ^  ^ 
election  fell  on  Aulus  and  Marcus  Cornelius  a  se-  ^  q  264 
cond  time,  Marcus  Geganius,  Publius  Manlius, 
Lucius  Veturius,  and  Publius  Valerius  a  sixth  time.  Ex¬ 
cept  the  siege  of  Velitrae,  an  affair  of  which  the  issue  was 
rather  tedious  than  doubtful,  the  Romans  were  undisturbed 
by  any  foreign  concerns  ;  when  a  sudden  report  of  the  Gauls 
approaching  in  arms,  occasioned  so  great  an  alarm,  that  Mar¬ 
cus  Furius  Camillus  was  appointed  dictator  the  fifth  time, 
and  he  nominated  Titus  Quintius  Pennus  master  of  horse. 
*  Claudius  asserts,  that  a  battle  was  fought  with  the  Gauls 
this  year,  on  the  banks  of  the  river  Anio,  and  that,  at  this 
time,  happened  the  famous  combat  on  the  bridge,  in  which 
Titus  Manlius,  engaging  with  a  Gaul  who  had  challenged 
him,  slew  him  in  the  sight  of  the  two  armies,  and  spoiled 
him  of  a  chain.  But  I  am  led,  by  the  authority  of  many 
writers  to  believe,  that  these  events  happened  at  least  ten 
years  later ;  and  that  a  pitched  battle  was  now  fought  with 
the  Gauls  by  the  dictator  Camillus,  in  the  territory  of  Alba* 
The  victory  was  neither  doubtful,  nor  obtained  with  diffi¬ 
culty  by  the  Romans ;  although,  from  people’s  recollection 
of  former  misfortunes,  the  coming  of  the  Gauls  had  diffused 
very  great  terror.  Many  thousands  of  the  barbarians  were 
slain  in  the  field,  and  great  numbers  in  the  storming  of  their 
camp.  The  rest  dispersing,  mostly  towards  Apulia,  escaped, 
partly  by  continuing  their  flight  to  a  great  distance  ;  and 
partly  by  being,  through  dismay  and  terror,  scattered  widely, 

BOOK  VI. 

7o 

B.C.  364.] 
in  diflFerent  quarters.  The  dictator  had  a  triumph  decreed 
him,  with  the  concurrence  of  the  senate  and  commons. 
Scarcely,  however,  had  he  got  rid  of  the  business  of  this 
war,  than  he  found  employment,  from  a  more  violent  com¬ 
motion  at  home :  and  the  issue  of  an  obstinate  struggle  was, 
that  the  dictator  and  senate  were  overpowered,  and  the  pro¬ 
positions  of  the  tribunes  admitted.  In  consequence,  an  elec¬ 
tion  of  consuls  was  held,  in  spite  of  the  opposition  of  the  no¬ 
bility,  in  which  Lucius  Sextius  was  made  consul,  the  first  of 
plebeian  rank.  Nor  did  the  disputes  end  even  here.  The 
patricians  refusing  to  give  their  approbation,  the  affair  was 
likely  to  produce  a  secession  of  the  commons,  with  dreadful 
consequences ;  when  their  dissensions  were  accommodated 
on  terms,  by  the  interposition  of  the  dictator.  The  nobility 
made  concessions  to  the  commons,  with  respect  to  the  ple¬ 
beian  consul,  and  the  commons  to  the  nobility  with  respect 
to  one  praetor  to  be  elected  out  of  the  patricians,  to  adminis¬ 
ter  justice  in  the  city.  Concord  being,  by  these  means,  res¬ 
tored  between  orders,  after  such  a  long  continuance  of 
mutual  animosity,  the  senate  were  of  opinion,  that  such  an 
event  deserved  to  be  signalized  by  an  exhibition  of  the  most 
magnificent  games!  and  by  the  addition  of  another  day,  to  the 
usual  three ^  of  the'Latine  festival ;  expecting  on  this  occa¬ 
sion,  if  on  any  whatever,  to  find  a  general  willingness  to  show 
that  testimony  of  gratitude  to  the  immortal  god$*  But  the 
plebeian  sediles  refused  to  undertake  the  business:  on  which 
the  younger  patricians,  with  one  accord,  cried  out,  that  out 
of  their  desire  of  paying  due  honour  to  the  deities,  they 
would  with  pleasure  perform  it,  provided  they  were  appoint¬ 
ed  sediles.  Their  offer  was  accepted,  with  universal  thanks, 
and  the  senate  decreed,  that  the  dictator  should  propose  to 
the  people,  to  appoint  two  of  the  patricians  to  the  office  of 
sdiles  ;  and  that  the  senate  would  give  their  approbation  to 
all  the  elections  made  in  that  year. 
VOL.  II. — L 

THE 

HISTORY  OF- ROME. 

BOOK  VII. 
The  offices  of  praetor  and  curule  aedile  instituted.  A  pestilential  disorder 
rages  in  the  city ;  of  which  dies  the  celebrated  Furius  Camillas.  Scenic 
representations  first  introduced.  Curtins,  armed,  on  horseback,  leaps 
into  a  gulph  in  the  Forum,  Titus  Manlius,  having  slain  in  single  com¬ 
bat  a  Gaul,  who  challenged  any  of  the  Roman  soldiere  to  fight,  takes 
from  him  a  golden  chain  which  he  wears,  and  is,  from  thence,  called 
Torquatus.  Two  new  tribes  added,  called  the  Pomptine  and  Pttbhlian. 
Licinius  Stolo  is  found  guilty,  upon  a  law  carried  by  himself  oi  poieess- 
ing  more  than  five  hundred  acres  of  land.  Marcus  yalerias,  wmamedi 
Corvinus,  from  having,  with  the  aid  of  a  crow,  killed  a  Gaul,  who  chal¬ 
lenged  him,  is  next  year  elected  consul,  though  but  twenty -three  years 
old.  A  treaty  of  friendship  made  with  the  Carthaginians.  The  Campa¬ 
nians,  overpowered  by  the  Samnites,  surrender  themselves  to  the  Roman 
people,  who  declare  war  against  the  Samnites.  P.  Decius  Mus  saves  the 
Roman  army,  brought  into  extreme  danger  by  the  consul  A.  Cornelius. 
Conspiracy  and  revolt  of  the  Roman  soldiers  in  the  garrison  of  Capua* 
They  are  brought  to  a  sense  of  duty,  and  restored  to  their  country,  by 
Marcus  Valerius  Corvus,  dictator.  Successful  operations  against  the 
Hernicians,  Gauls,  Tiburtians,  Privemians,  Tarquinians,  Samnites,  and 
Volscians. 
I.  THIS  year  will  ever  be  remarkable  for  the  consulship 
of  a  man  of  no  ancestry  ;  and  remarkable,  also,  for 
B  C  363  institution  of  two  new  public  oflSces,  the  prae- 
torship  and  the  curulc  sedileship.  These  honours 
the  patricians  claimed  to  themselves,  as  a  compensation  for 
their  concession  of  one  consul’s  place  to  the  plebeians.  The 

B.C.  363,] 

BOOK  vn. 

75 

% 

commons  gave  the  consulship  to  Ludus  SextiHs,  the  intro¬ 
ducer  of  the  law  by  which  it  was  The  patricians, 
by  their  influence  among  the  people,  gained  the  praetorship 
for  Spurius  Furius  Camillus  son  of  Marcus  j  and  the  aedile- 
shlp,  for  Cneius  Quintius  Capitolinas  and  Publius  Cornelius 
Scipio,  men  of  their  own  rank.  The  patrician  colleague, 
given  to  Lucius  Sextius,  was  Lucius  iEmilius  Mamercinus. 
In  the  beginning  of  the  year,  rumours  were  spread  concern¬ 
ing  the  Gauls,  who,  after  having  been  dispersed  over  Apu¬ 
lia,  were  now  said  to  be  collecting  themselves  into  a  body ; 
and  also  concerning  a  revolt  of  the  Hernicians.  But  all 
kinds  of  business  were  purposely  deferred,  lest  the  plebeian 
consul  should  have  an  opportunity  of  performing  any  service, 
and  silence  was  as  much  observed  on  every  subject,  as  though 
it  had  been  proclaimed.  The  tribunes,  however,  did  not 
suffer  it  to  pass  unnoticed,  that  the  patricians,  by  way  of  re¬ 
quital  for  one  plebeian  consulship,  had  assumed  to  them¬ 
selves  three  patrician  magistrates,  sitting  in  curule  chairs, 
and  clad  in  robes  of  state  like  consuls ;  the  praetor  even  ad¬ 
ministering  justice,  as  a  colleague  to  the  consuls,  and  elected 
under  the  same  auspices.  In  consequence  of  this,  the  senate 
were  afterwards  ashamed  to  order,  that  the  curule  sediles 
should  be  chosen  from  among  the  patricians.  It  was  at  first 
agreed  that  plebeians  should  be  appointed  every  second  year, 
but  in  after  time  the  choice  was  left  open.  In  the  consulate 
of  Lucius  Genucius  and  Quintus  Servilius,  who  immediately 
succeeded,  though  affairs  were  tranquil  both  at  home  and 
abroad,  yet,  as  if  at  no  time  there  could  be  an  exemption 
from  danger  and  alarm,  a  pestilence  broke  out  with  great 
violence ;  a  censor,^a  curile  sedile,  and  three  plebeian  tribunes, 
are  said  to  have  fallen  victims  to  it,  while  its  ravages  among 
the  populace  were  proportionably  numerous ;  but  this  cala¬ 

mity  was  rendered  memorable  chiefly  by  the  death 
of  Marcus  Furius  Camillus,  whose  loss,  though  at 
an  advanced  period  of  life,  was  much  to  be  regret- 

Y.R.390. 
BX.362* 

76 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 
ted:  he  wa^  in  truA,  a  man  singulariy  emmca^  m  evety 
cimnge  of  fortune  ;  before  he  went  into  banislmieiit,  Ae  first 
person  in  the  state,  as  well  in  civil  as  military  departments ; 
in  exile,  still  more  illustrious,  whether  we  ctmsider  Ae  dis¬ 
aster  by  which  Ae  nation  was  induced  to  saj^ticate  his  re¬ 
turn  ;  or  his  own  successful  ctniduct,  by  which,  on  being  res¬ 
tored  to  his  country,  he  effected  that  country’s  liberation, 
and  justified  his  own  fair  claim  to  celebrity.  He  then,  through 
a  course  of  twenty-five  years  after,  uniformly  maintained  a 
character  dfcfual  to  this  high  rank  of  glory,  allowed  cm  idi 
hands  as  deserving  of  being  reckoned,  next  to  Romulus,  a 
second  founder  of  the  city  of  Rome. 
II.  The  pestilence  continuing  during  both  t}\is  and  the  fol¬ 
lowing  year,  in  which  Caius  Sulpicius  Paeticus 
B  C*36l  Caius  Licinius  Stolo  were  consuls  j  nothing 
memorable  was  transacted,  only  that,  for  the  pur¬ 
pose  of  soliciting  the  favour  of  the  gods,  the  Lectisternium 
was  performed  the  third  time  since  the  building  of  the  city. 
But  the  disorder  receiving  no  alleviation,  either  from  human 
wisdom  or  divine  aid,  the  strength  of  the  people’s  minds  be¬ 
came  almost  overpowered  by  superstition,  and,  it  is  said,  that 
on  this  occasion,  among  other  devices  for  appeasing  the 
wrath  of  heaven,  scenic  plays  were  introduced  j  a  new  thing 
to  a  warlike  people ;  for  hitherto  there  had  been  only  Ae 
shows  of  the  Circus.  However,  this  kind  of  performance 
was,  as  in  general  all  beginnings  are,  but  a  trifling  matter, 
and  even  that  borrowed  from  abroad.  Actors  were  sent  for 
from  Etruria,  who,  though  without  any  poetical  language, 
or  any  gestures  corre spend etat  to  such  language,  yet  regu¬ 
lating  their  motions  by  Ae  measures  of  the  music,  exhibited, 
in  the  Tuscan  manner,  something  far  from  ungraceful.  The 
younger  citizens  soon  began  to  imitate  these  ;  Arowing  out, 
at  the  same  time,  among  each  other,  ludicrous  expressions  in 
coarse  verses^  and  wiA  gestures  adapted  to  the  words ;  this 

BOOK  VIL 

B,C.  Ml.] 

Tf 

JkM  of  performxmce  Aen  being  received  widi  approbation, 
in  the  course  of  fr^uent  practice  gained  much  improvem^. 
The  native  i^Jiformers  were  called  Histriones,  from  the  Tus¬ 
can  word  Hts^,  Signifying  a  player  ;  and  they  did  not,  as 
formerly,  prcmcmnce  alternately,  without  regard  to  order, 
verses  Bke  tiie  Fescennine,  artless  and  unpolished,  but  re¬ 
presented  comic  medleys,*  composed  in  regular  metre,  witii 
the  several  parts  of  the  performance  properly  adjusted  to  the 
music  ;  the  delivery  of  the  words  and  the  gesticulation  being 
performed  in  conceit  with  the  music.  Several  years  after 
this,  Livius,  who  was  the  first  to  lay  aside  medleys,  and  to 
digest  a  story  into  a  regular  plot,  being  also,  as  all  were  at 
that  time,  the  actor  of  his  own  pieces  ;  and,  having  broken 
his  voice  by  being  obliged  to  repeat  them  too  often,  after  re* 
questing  the  indulgence  of  the  public,  placed  a  boy  before 
the  musician,  to  chaunt,f  while  he  himself  performed  the 
gesticulations.  And  this  he  executed  with  much  freer  action, 
because  disengaged  from  attention  to  the  management  of  his 
voice.  Hence  originated  the  practice  of  the  chaunting  being 
performed  by  another,  to  the  gesticulation  of  the  actors, 
wh(M«  voices  were  eased  of  all  but  the  dialogue.  When,  by 
this  regtdation,  the  scenic  business  was  directed  to  other  ob¬ 
ject  titan  laughter  and  intemperate  mirth,  and  the  amuse¬ 
ment  was,  by  degrees,  converted  into  an  art,  the  younger 
citizens,  leaving  to  professed  actors  the  exhibition  of  plays, 
began,  according  to  the  ancient  practice,  to  throw  out  alter¬ 
nately  ludicrous  jests,  comprised  in  verse,  which  thence  got 

♦  Satura  signified  a  dish  filled  with  a  variety  of  fruits,  and  other  kinds 
of  food,  offered  to  Ceres,  at  the  time  of  her  festival,  and  was  used  to  de¬ 
note  a  poetic  medley,  comprising  a  variety  of  topics  and  matter.  Livius 
Andronicus,  a  freed  man  of  Marcus  Livius  Salinator,  began  to  write  about 
the  year  of  Rome  512, 
f  It  was  customary,  at  the  end  of  every  act,  to  chaunt  a  set  of  verses,  ac* 
cos^med  by  the  music,  and  with  correspondent  gesticulations. 

^  HtSTORY  OP  ROME.  [Y Jl.  392. 
the  same  of  exodia,  or  interludes,  and  were  cedketed  prin¬ 
cipally  out  of  the  Atellan  farces.^  This  kind  of  entertain* 
ment,  thus  borrowed  from  Oscia,  these  younger  citizens  kept 
in  their  own  hands,  not  suffering  it  to  be  debased  by  pro¬ 
fessed  players.  For  this  reason  the  rule  was  estaUished, 
which  is  still  observed,  that  the  actors  of  these  Atellan  farces 
are  not  degraded  from  their  tribe,  and  are  capable  of  serving 
in  the  army,  as  if  no  way  concerned  in  the  business  of  the 
stage.  Among  the  trifling  beginnings  of  other  matters,  1 
thought  it  not  amiss  to  give  a  view  of  the  origin  of  theatrical 
exhibitions  also,  in  order  to  show,  from  a  moderate  seuing 
put,  to  what  an  intolerable  extravagance  they  have  proceed- 
ed ;  such  extravagance,  indeed,  as  scarcely  to  be  supported 
by  opulent  kingdoms. 
III.  However,  this  introduction  of  stage  plays,  intended 
as  a  pious  expiation,  neither  relieved  men’s  minds  from  reli¬ 
gious  dread,  nor  their  bodies  from  the  disorder:  so  far 
otherwise,  that  an  inundation  of  the  Tiber  happening  to 
overflow  the  Circus,  and  to  interrupt  a  play  in  the  middle 
of  the  performance,  that  incident  excited  the  utmost  degree 
of  teiTor,  as  it  was  deemed  a  token  of  the  displeasure  of  the 
gods,  and  that  they  disdained  the  atemements  dfered  to  their 
wrath.  Wherefore,  in  the  next  consulate,  of  Cneius 
Y  R  392 
B  C  360*  Grcnucius,  and  Lucius  J£milius  Mamercinus  a  se¬ 
cond  time,  pec^k’s  minds  being  more  harassed  in 
searching  for  expiatiotm,  than  their  bodies  by  the  skkne^.it 
was  collected,  from  the  memory  of  some  of  the  more  aged, 
that  a  pestilence  had  formerly  ceased,  on  the  nail  being  driven 
bf  a  dictator.  The  senate  were  so  superstitious  on  the  occa¬ 
sion,  to  order  a  dictator  to  be  appointed,  for  the  purpose 
*  The  Atellan  farces  were  borrowed  from  Atella,  a  town  in  Oscia,  which 
^'as  a  distnet  of  Campania,  comprehending  the  two  states  of  the  Auruncians 
and  Sidicinians. 

BOOK  VIL 

79 

of  driving  ifce  :  Lucius  M^ius  Imperiosus  was  accord¬ 
ingly  nominated,  and  he  appointed  Lucius  Pinarius  master 
of  the  horse.  There  is  an  obscdete  law,  written  in  antique 
letters  and  words,  that  whoever  is  supreme  officer,  should 
drive  a  nail  on  the  ides  of  September.  It  used  to  be  driven 
into  the  right  side  of  the  temple  of  Jupiter,  supremely  great 
and  good,  in  that  part  where  the  statue  of  Minerva  stands. 
This  nail,  it  is  said,  served  as  a  mark  of  the  number  of  years 
elapsed,  use  of  letters  being  rare  in  those  times  ;  and  the 
law  directed  the  ceremony  to  the  temple  of  Minerva,  because 
the  use  of  numbers  was  an  invention  of  that  goddess.  Cin- 
cius,  a  diligent  inquirer  into  such  monuments  of  antiquity, 
assures  us,  that  there  were  to  be  seen,  among  the  Volscians 
ako,  nails  fixed  in  the  temple  of  the  Tuscan  goddess  Nortia, 
by  which  they  kept  account  of  the  number  of  years.  Marcus 
Horatius,  being  then  consul,  first  performed  this  ceremony, 
in  obedience  to  the  law,  at  the  temple  of  Jupiter,  supremely 
good  and  great,  in  the  year  after  the  expulsion  of  the  kings. 
Afterwards,  the  solemnity  of  driving  the  nail  was  transferred 
from  the  consuls  to  a  dictator,  because  this  was  a  superior 
office :  the  custom  was  dropped  in  after  times,  but  it  wa^  now 
deemed  an  affair  of  sufficient  importance  in  itself,  to  require 
the  nomination  of  a  chief*  Manlius,  who  was  appointed  for 
the  purpose,  as  if  he  had  been  commissioned  to  manage  the 
afiairs  eff  die  state  in  general,  and  not  merely  to  acquit  it  of 
a  ndipam  duty,  being  ambitious  of  commanding  an  army 
against  the  Hemicians,  hanissed  the  youth  by  a  rigorous  se¬ 
verity  in  levying  troops,  until  at  length  all  the  plebeian  tri¬ 
bunes  united  to  oppose  him  j  and  then  overcome,  cither  by 
force  or  shame,  he  resigned  the  dictatorship, 
IV.  Notwithstanding  which,  in  the  beginning  of  the  next 
year,  Quintus  Servilius  Ahala,  and  Lucius  Genu-  ^  ^ 
cius  a  second  time,  being  const:^,a  criminal  prose-  g  Q  359 
cation  was  commenced  against*  Manlius,  by  Mar- 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  39a. 

Pomponius,  a  plebeian  tribune.  His  rigour  in  the  levies, 
which  he  had  carried,  not  only  to  the  fining  of  the  citizens, 
but  even  to  the  wounding  of  their  persons,  (those  who  re¬ 
fused  to  answer  to  their  names  being  some  beaten  with  rods, 
others  loaded  with  chains,  had  excited  a  general  hatred 
against  him  ;  but  more  c^noxious  than  all  were  his  impetu¬ 
ous  temper,  and  the  surname  of  Imperiosus,  which  he  had 
assumed  out  of  an  ostentation  of  severity,  a  quality  which 
appeared  not  more  conspicuously  in  his  behaviour  to  stran¬ 
gers,  than  to  the  persons  most  closely  connected  with  him, 
and  to  those  of  his  own  blood. — One  of  the  charges  brought 
against  him,  by  the  tribune,  was,  that  he  had  banished  his 
son,  a  youth  convicted  of  no  dishonourable  act,  from  the  city, 
from  his  house,  from  his  tutelar  gods,  from  the  Forum ;  pro¬ 
hibited  him  the  enjoyment  of  the  light,  and  of  the  conversa¬ 
tion  of  his  equals  ;  having  reduced  him  to  work  like  a  slave, 
in  a  kind  of  prison  or  work-house,  and  thus  had  one  of  most 
distinguished  birth,  of  dictaiorian  rank,  learned,  from  his 
daily  sufferings,  that  he  was  bom  of  a  father  really  imperious. 
And  for  what  fault  ?  Because  he  was  not  endowed  with  elo¬ 
quence,  nor  ready  in  discourse.  And  whether  ought  the 
father,  if  he  had  a  particle  of  humanity  in  him,  to  apply  gen¬ 
tle  remedies  to  a  natural  defect,  or  to  attempt  to  correct  it 
by  punishment,  and  cause  it  to  be  more  noticed  by  a  course 
of  harsh  treatment  ?  Even  beasts,  if  any  of  their  offspring 
chance  to  be  unhappily  formed,  are  nevertheless  careful  in 
nourishing  and  cherishing  it.  But  Manlius  aggravated  the 
misfortune  of  his  son,  and  clogged  the  slowness  of  his  ca¬ 
pacity  with  additional  impediments ;  and  whatever  spark  of 
natural  ability  he  possessed,  took  the  method  to  extinguish 
it  by  accustoming  him  to  a  rustic  life  and  clownish  manners, 
keeping  him  among  his  cattle.” 
V.  By  these  charges  every  one  was  highly  incensed  against 
Manlius,  except  the  young  .man  himself ;  on  the  contrar}", 

BOOK  VII. 

81 

B.C.  359.] 
grkviDg  that  he  should  be  the  cause  of  hatred  and  accusa¬ 
tions  against  his  parent,  in  order  to  demonstrate  to  gods  and 
men  that  he  wished  support  to  his  father,  rather  than  to  his 
enemies,  he  formed  a  design,  which,  though  not  reconcileable 
to  the  rules  of  civil  society,  was  yet  commendable  in  its  prin¬ 
ciple  of  filial  duty.  Having  provided  himself  with  a  dagger, 
he  came  to  the  city,  without  the  knowledge  of  any  one,  early 
in  the  morning,  and  proceeding  directly  to  the  house  of 
Marcus  Pomponius  the  tribune,  told  the  porter  that  he 
wanted  to  sec  his  master  immediately,  and  desired  him  to 
acquaint  him  that  Titus  Manlius,  the  son  of  Lucius,  was 
there.  He  was  immediately  introduced :  for  the  other  hoped 
that  he  came  inflamed  with  resentment  against  his  father, 
and  had  brought  either  some  new  matter  for  accusation,  or 
some  scheme  for  accomplishing  the  design.  Manlius  then, 
after  mutual  salutations,  told  him  that  he  wished  to  confer 
with  him,  on  some  business,  in  private.  All  who  were  pre¬ 
sent  being  ordered  to  withdraw  to  a  distance  from  the  apart¬ 
ment,  he  drew  his  dagger,  and  standing  over  the  couch  with 
the  weapon  ready  to  strike,  threatened  to  stab  him  that  mo¬ 
ment,  if  he  did  not  swear,  in  the  words  which  he  should  dic¬ 
tate,  that  he  “  never  would  hold  a  meeting  of  the  commons 
for  the  purpose  of  prosecuting  his  father/’  The  tribune, 
affrighted  at  seeing  the  steel  glittering  before  his  eyes,  him¬ 
self  alone  and  unarmed,  the  other  a  young  man,  his  superior 
in  strength,  and,  what  was  no  less  terrifying,  full  of  savage 
ferocity  from  consciousness  of  his  strength,  swore  in  the 
terms  enjoined  him  ;  and  afterwards  alleged  this  sorry  pro¬ 
ceeding,  as  his  reason  for  desisting  from  his  undertaking. 
Nor  did  the  people  conceive  any  displeasure  at  so  bold  an 
attempt  of  a  son  in  behalf  of  his  parent,  although  they  would 
have  been  much  better  pleased  to  have  had  an  opportunity  of 
passing  sentence  on  a  culprit  of  such  a  cruel  and  tyrannical 
disposition  i  and  it  was  thought  the  more  commendable  in 
VOL.  TI. - M 

52 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  395. 

him,  that  the  excessive  rigour  of  his  father  had  not  erased 
from  his  mind  the  love  of  him.  Wherefore,  besides  the 
father  being  excused  from  standing  a  trial,  that  very  affair 
was  also  productive  of  honours  to  the  son ;  and,  on  its  being 
determined  that  year,  for  the  first  time,  that  the  tribunes  of 
the  soldiers  for  the  legions  should  be  appointed  by  vote  of 
the  people,  (For  until  then,  the  commanders  used  to  appoint 
them  of  their  own  authority,  as  they  do  at  present  those 
termed  Ruffuli,)  he  obtained  the  second  place  among  six, 
though  not  recommended  to  public  favour  by  any  merit, 
either  in  a  civil  or  military  line,  having  spent  his  youth  in 
the  country,  and  out  of  the  way  of  any  intercourse  with  the 
world. 
VI.  In  the  same  year,  we  are  told,  the  earth,  near  the 
middle  of  the  Forum,  in  consequence  either  of  an  earthquake, 
or  some  other  violent  cause,  sunk  down  to  an  immense 
depth,  forming  a  vast  aperture ;  nor  could  the  gulph  be  filled 
up  by  all  the  earth  which  they  could  throw  into  it,  though 
every  one  exerted  himself  in  bringing  it  thither,  until,  pur¬ 
suant  to  advice  of  the  gods,  they  set  about  enquiring  what  it 
was  which  constituted  the  principal  strength  of  the  Roman 
people  ;  for,  according  to  the  responses  of  the  soothsayers, 
that  must  be  devoted  to  this  place,  if  they  wished  that  the 
Roman  commonwealth  should  be  everlasting.  Then  they 
tell  us,  that  Marcus  Curtius,  a  youth  highly  distinguished  by 
his  military  exploits,  reproved  them  for  deliberating  whether 
Rome  was  possessed  of  any  greater  good  than  arras  and 
valour ;  and,  on  this,  silence  being  made,  throwing  his  eyes 
round  to  the  temples  of  the  gods  within  view  of  the  Forum, 
and  to  the  Capitol,  and  extending  his  hands,  at  one  time 
towards  heaven,  at  another,  towards  the  infernal  gods, 
through  the  gaping  aperture  of  the  earth,  he  devoted  him¬ 
self  as  a  victim.  Then,  having  dressed  himself  in  complete 
armour,  and  mounted  a  horse  accoutred  with  the  most  gor- 

BOOK  VIL 

83 

B,C.  359.] 
gcous  furniture  which  could  be  procured,  he  plunged  into 
the  opening,  and  die  multitude,  men  and  women,  threw  in 
over  him  their  offerings,  and  quantities  of  the  fruits  of  the 
earth ;  and  thus  it  is  said  the  lake  received  its  name,  and 
not,  as  is  supposed  by  some,  from  Mettius  Curtius,  the  an¬ 
cient  soldier  of  Titus  Tatius.  If  there  were  any  way  of 
coming  at  the  truth,  no  diligence  should  be  wanting,  on  my 
part,  in  the  pursuit  of  it :  but  now,  when  the  distance  of  time 
precludes  all  certain  evidence,  we  must  abide  by  the  reports 
of  tradition,  and  account  for  the  name  of  the  lake  from  this 
latter  fable.  This  great  prodigy  being  expiated,  the  senate, 
during  the  same  year,  taking  the  affair  of  the  Hernicians  into 
consideration,  voted,  (after  sending  heralds  to  demand  satis¬ 
faction,  without  effect,)  that  on  the  first  proper  day,  the  sense 
of  the  people  should  be  taken  on  the  subject  of  a  declaration 
of  war  against  them,  and  the  people,  in  full  assembly,  order¬ 
ed  it.  That  province  fell,  by  lot,  to  the  consul  Lucius  Genu- 
cius :  and  now  the  whole  state  was  in  anxious  suspense ;  be¬ 
cause,  being  the  first  plebeian  who,  in  quality  of  consul,  was 
to  wage  war  under  his  own  auspices,  the  issue  of  the  expedi¬ 
tion  would  furnish  an  opportunity  of  judging  of  the  wisdom 
or  imprudence  of  introducing  a  community  of  honours.  For¬ 
tune  so  ordered  it,  that  Genucius  marching  against  the  ene¬ 
my  with  a  powerful  force,  fell  into  an  ambush,  where  the 
legions  being  seized  with  a  sudden  panic,  and  routed,  the 
consul  was  surrounded  and  slain  by  persons,  who  knew  not 
at  the  time  who  they  had  killed.  When  the  news  of  this 
was  brought  to  Rome,  the  patricians,  who  were  not  so  much 
grieved  at  the  calamity  of  the  public,  as  they  were  elated  at 
the  ill  success  attending  the  command  of  a  plebeian  consul, 
every  where  exclaimed,  ‘‘  Let  them  go  now  and  elect  ple¬ 
beian  consuls ;  yet  transfer  the  auspices,  they  could  not 
without  impiety.  The  patricians  might  indeed,  by  a  vote  of 
the  people,  be  driven  from  the  possession  of  their  own  pe- 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  393, 

34 
culiar  honours  ;  but  had  this  inauspicious  law  been  able  to 
prevail  likewise  against  tlic  immortal  gods  ?  These  had  inter¬ 
posed  to  vindicate  their  own  authority,  their  own  auspices  : 
for  rlo  sooner  had  these  been  defiled  by  a  person  prohibited 
by  divine  and  human  laws,  than  the  destruction  of  their  army, 
together  with  their  commander,  had  given  them  warning,  not 
to  conduct  elections  in  such  a  manner  hereafter,  as  to  con¬ 
found  the  rights  of  birth.”  The  senate-house  and  the  Forum 
resounded  with  such  expressions.  Appius  Claudius,  who 
had  argued  against  the  law,  and  therefore,  with  greater  au¬ 
thority,  blamed  the  people  now  for  the  issue  of  a  scheme,  of 
which  he  had  manifested  his  disapprobation,  was,  at  the  ge¬ 
neral  desire  of  the  patricians,  nominated  dictator  by  the  con¬ 
sul  Servilius,  and  proclamation  was  issued  for  a  levy  and  a 
cessation  of  business. 
VII.  Before  the  arrival  of  the  dictator,  and  the  new  le¬ 
gions,  at  the  place  where  the  Hernicians  lay,  Caius  Sulpicius, 
the  lieutenant-general,  who  held  the  command,  making  use 
of  an  opportunity  which  offered,  fought  the  enemy  with  bril¬ 
liant  success.  After  the  death  of  the  consul,  the  Hernicians 
had  advanced  towards  the  Roman  camp,  in  a  contemptuous 
manner,  confident,  beyond  doubt,  of  becoming  masters  of  it ; 
on  which  the  soldiers,  burning  with  rage  and  indignation,  and 
encouraged  by  the  lieutenant-general,  sallied  out  upon  them. 
The  Hernicians  were  so  widely  disappointed  in  their  hopes 
of  approaching  the  rampart,  that  they  were  obliged  to  retire 
in  great  confusion.  Soon  after,  by  the  arrival  of  the  dictator, 
the  new  arm}^  was  joined  to  the  old,  and  the  forces  doubled. 
The  dictator,  by  bestowing  commendations,  in  a  public 
speech,  on  the  lieutenant-general  and  the  soldiers,  by  whose 
bravery  the  camp  had  been  defended,  animated  still  farther 
the  courage  of  those,  who  heard  their  own  praises  justly  set 
forth,  and  stimulated  the  rest  to  emulation  of  their  merit. 
Nor  were  the  preparations  for  action  less  vigorous  on  the  side 

BOOK  VIL 

85 

B.C.  359.] 
of  the  ;  mmdfid  of  the  honour  wMch  Aty  hid  before 
acquired^  and  not  i^orant  of  the  addition  to  the  ^^ngth  of 
the  Romans,  they  applied  themselves  to  augmei^  tirar  own 
likew}^.  The  whole  Hemictan  race,  every  man  erf  military 
age,  wi^  called  out.  Eight  cohorts  were  formed,  coi^isting 
each  of  four  hundred  men,  the  ablest  which  could  chosen 
out  of  all  their  number.  This  select  body,  the  flower  of  their 
youth,  they  also  filled  with  hope  and  spirits  by  a  decree,  that 
they  should  receive  double  pay  :  they  were,  besides,  excused 
from  military  works,  in  order  that,  being  reserved  entirely 
for  the  single  labour  of  fighting,  they  might  be  sensible  that 
they  ought  to  make  exertions  beyond  wl^t  was  expected 
from  the  generality  of  men :  even  an  extraordinary  post  in 
the  field  was  allotted  them,  that  their  valour  might  be  th« 
more  conspicuous.  A  plain  of  two  miles  in  breadth  sepa* 
rated  the  Roman  camp  from  that  of  the  Hemicians  :  in  the 
middle  of  this,  the  spaces  being  nearly  equal  on  both  sides, 
they  came  to  an  engagement.  The  fight  was  maintained,  for 
some  time,  without  any  apparent  advantage,  the  Roman 
cavalry  making  many  fruitless  attempts  to  disorder  the  ene¬ 
my’s  line  by  their  charge  :  but  when  they  found  that,  acting 
as  cavalry,  they  could  produce  no  effect  in  proportion  to  their 
efforts,  the  horsemen,  after  first  consulting  the  dictator,  and 
obtaining  his  permission,  dismounted  from  their  h<H*ses,  rush¬ 
ed  forward,  with  a  loud  shout,  before  the  line,  and  recom¬ 
menced  the  fight  in  a  new  mode.  Nor  could  they  have  been 
resisted,  had  not  the  extraordinary  cohorts,  their  equals  in 
vigour  both  of  body  and  mind,  thrown  themselves  in  their 
way. 
VIII.  The  contest  then  lay  between  the  nobility  of  the  two 
nations.  Whatever  the  common  chance  of  war  carried  off 
from  the  one  side  or  the  other,  was  a  loss  to  be  estimated  on 
a  much  higher  scale  than  that  of  the  numbers.  The  rest,  an 
armed  populace,  as  if  they  had  delegated  the  fight  to  their 

86 

HISTORY  OP  ROME. 

[Y.R.  395. 

nobles,  rested  the  issue  of  their  own  cause  on  the  bravery  of 
the  others.  Many  fcii  on  both  sides  ;  more  were  wounded. 
At  length  die  horsemen,  chiding  each  other,  began  to  ask, 
‘‘  In  what  mmxktr  they  were  to  act  next  I  since,  neither  on 
horseback  had  they  made  an  impression  on  the  enemy,  nor 
on  foot  were  performing  any  service  of  consequence  ?  What 
other  method  of  fighting  did  they  wait  for  ?  To  what  purpose 
was  their  rushing  forward  so  fiercely  before  the  line,  and 
their  combating  in  a  post  which  did  not  belong  to  them 
Animated  by  these  mutual  reproaches,  they  raised  the  shout 
anew,  pressed  forward,  and  compelled  the  enemy,  first  to 
shrink^  then  to  give  way,  and  at  last  fairly  drove  them  off  the 
field.  It  is  not  here  easy  to  say  what  circumstance  turned 
the  advantage  against  strength  so  equally  matched  with  their 
own  ;  unless  it  were,  that  the  fortune,  which  continually  at¬ 
tended  each  nation,  had  power  both  to  exalt  and  to  depress 
courage.  The  Romans  pursued  the  Hying  Hemicians  to  their 
camp ;  but  they  did  not  choose  to  attack  it,  because  it  was 
then  late  in  the  day.  Some  delay  in  finishing  the  sacrifices 
with  success  had  detained  the  dictator,  so  that  he  could  not 
give  the  signal  before  noon,  and,  in  consequence,  the  battle 
had  lasted  until  night.  Next  day,  the  camp  of  the  Hemicians 
was  found  deserted,  and  many  of  their  wounded  left  behind. 
Their  main  body,  as  they  fled,  was  attacked  by  the  Signians, 
who  observing,  as  they  passed  by  their  walls,  that  their  stand¬ 
ards  were  but  thinly  attended,  routed  and  dispersed  them 
through  the  country  in  precipitate  flight.  Nor  did  the  Ro¬ 
mans  gain  the  victory  without  bloodshed  ;  a  fourth  part  of 
their  soldiers  perished,  and,  what  was  a  loss  of  no  less  impor¬ 
tance,  several  of  the  Roman  horsemen  fell. 
IX.  In  the  year  following,  the  consuls,  Caius  Sulpicius, 
and  Caius  Licinius  Calvus,  led  an  army  against 
B  C  358  Hemicians,  and,  not  finding  the  enemy  in  the 
field,  took  Ferentinum,  one  of  their  cities,  by 

BOOK  VIL 

B.C.  358.] 

87 

storm  ;  when,  on  their  return  from  thence,  the  Tiburtians 
shut  their  gates  against  them.  This  behaviour  finally  deter- 
mined  the  Romans,  many  complaints  having  been  made  on 
both  sides,  before  this,  to  declare  war  against  the  people  of 
Tibur,  after  demanding  satisfaction  by  heralds.  We  learn, 
from  very  good  authority,  that  Titus  Quintius  Pennus  was 
dictator  this  year,  and*  Servius  Cornelius  Maluginensis  mas¬ 
ter  of  the  horse.  Macer  Licinius  writes,  that  he  was  nomi- 
mated  by  the  consul  Licinius,  for  the  purpose  of  holding  the 
elections  ;  because,  observing  that  his  colleague  hastened  the 
elections,  in  order  to  have  them  over  before  the  commence¬ 
ment  of  the  campaign,  with  design  to  procure  his  own  re- 
election  to  the  consulship,  he  judged  it  necessary  to  thwart 
his  ambitious  designs.  This  account,  being  calculated  to  en¬ 
hance  the  honour  of  his  own  family,  renders  the  authority  of 
Licinius  of  the  less  weight ;  as  I  find  no  mention  of  that  cir¬ 
cumstance  in  the  earlier  annals,  I  am  inclined  to  think,  that 
the  dictator  was  appointed  rather  on  account  of  the  Gallic 
war.  There  is  no  doubt  that,  in  that  year,  the  Gauls  were 
encamped  at  the  third  stone  on  the  Salarian  road,  at  the  far¬ 
ther  side  of  the  bridge  of  the  Anio.  The  dictator  having, 
in  consequence  of  the  alarm  of  a  Gallic  tumult,  proclaimed  a 
cessation  of  civil  business,  obliged  all  the  younger  citizens  to 
take  the  military  oath  ;  and,  marching  out  of  the  city  with  a 
very  powerful  army,  encamped  on  the  hither  bank  of  the 
Anio.  -The  bridge  lay  betw'een  the  armies",  neither  party 
choosing  to  break  it  down,  lest  it  should  be  construed  as  an 
indication  of  fear.  Frequent  skirmishes  were  fought  for  the 
possession  of  the  bridge,  but  so  indecisive,  that  it  could  not 
be  clearly  discovered  to  which  party  it  belonged.  While  af¬ 
fairs  were  in  this  posture,  a  Gaul,  of  a  stature  remarkably 
large,  advanced  on  the  bridge,  then  unoccupit-d  ;  and,  'With  a 
loud  voice,  called  out,  Let  the  brav^est  man  that  Rome  can 
produce,  come  forth  here  to  battle,  that  the  event  of  a  com- 

HISTORY  OP  ROME. 

88 

[Y.R.  394. 

bat  between  u»  two  may  determine  which  of  the  nations  is  to 
be  held  superior  in  war.” 
X.  The  young  Roman  nobility  were  for  a  long  time  si¬ 
lent,  ashamed  to  refuse  the  challenge,  yet  unwilling  to  claim 
the  first  post  of  danger.  Then  Titus  Manlius,  son  of  Lucius, 
the  same  who  had  freed  his  father  from  the  persecution  of 
the  tribune,  advancing  from  his  station  to  the  dictator,  said, 
‘‘  General,  I  would  on  no  account  leave  my  post  to  fight 
without  your  orders,  not  though  I  should  see  a  certain  pros¬ 
pect  of  victory :  but  if  you  permit  me,  I  wish  to  show  that 
brute,  who  makes  such  an  insolent  parade  in  the  front  of  the 
enemy’s  army,  that  I  am  sprung  from  that  family  which  beat 
down  an  army  of  Gauls  from  the  Tarpeian  rock.”  The  dic¬ 
tator  answered,  Titus  Manlius,  I  honour  your  bravery, 
and  your  dutiful  regard  to  your  father,  and  to  your  country  ; 
go,  and  with  the  help  of  the  gods,  show  the  Roman  name 
invincible.”  The  youth  was  then  armed  by  his  companions, 
took  a  footman’s  shield,  and  girded  on  a  Spanish  sword, 
adapted  to  close  fight.  As  soon  as  they  had  fitted  on  his 
armour  and  ornaments,  they  conducted  him  out  towards  the 
Gaul,  who  showed  a  savage  joy,  and  (the  ancients  have  thought 
that  circumstance  also  worth  mention)  even  thrust  out  his 
tongue  in  derision.  They  then  retired  to  their  posts,  and 
the  two  champions  were  left  in  the  middle  space,  in  the  man¬ 
ner  of  a  spectacle,  rather  than  according  to  the  rules  of  com¬ 
bat,  very  unequally  matched,  in  the  eyes  of  such  as  judged 
by  sight  and  appearance.  The  one  had  a  body  of  enormous 
size,  glittering  in  a  vest  of  various  colours,  having  armour 
painted  and  inlaid  with  gold :  the  other  was  of  the  middle 
stature  among  soldiers,  and  his  mein  devoid  of  ostentation, 
in  arms  calculated  for  ready  use  more  than  for  show.  On  his 
side  there  was  no  song  of  defiance,  no  capering,  or  vain 
flourishing  of  arms,  but  his  breast,  replete  with  resolution 
and  silent  rage,  reserved  all  its  fierceness  for  the  decision  of 

BOOK  VIL 

89 

BX.  358.] 

the  contest.  They  took  their  ground  between  the  two  ar¬ 
mies,  while  the  minds  of  such  great  numbers  of  men  on  both 
sides  were  suspended  between  hope  and  fear.  The  Gaul, 
like  some  huge  mass,  ready  to  crush  the  other  under  it, 
stretching  forward  his  shield  with  his  left  hand,  discharged 
an  ineffectual  blow  on  the  edge  of  his  sword,  with  great  noise, 
on  the  armour  of  Manlius,  as  he  approached  ;  while  the 
Roman,  pushing  aside  the  lower  part  of  his  antagonist's 
shield  with  his  own,  and  insinuating  himself  between  that 
and  his  body,  closed  in  with  him  in  such  a  manner,  as  to  be 
in  no  danger  of  a  wound.  He  then  raised  the  point  of  his 
sword,  and  with  one,  and  then  a  second  thrust,  piercing  the 
belly  and  groin  of  his  foe,  laid  him  prostrate  on  the  ground, 
of  which  he  covered  a  vast  extent.  The  body,  without  offer¬ 
ing  it  any  other  indignity,  he  despoiled  of  a  chain  only,  which, 
bloody  as  it  was,  he  threw  round  his  own  neck.  Astonish¬ 
ment  and  dismay  held  the  Gauls  motionless.  The  Romans, 
in  rapture,  advanced  from  Uieir  posts  to  meet  their  champion, 
and  with  congratulations  and  praises  conducted  him  to  the 
dictator.  Among  the  unpolished  jests  which  they  threw, out, 
according  to  the  soldiers’  custom,  composed  in  a  manner 
somewhat  resembling  verses,  the  appellation  Torquatus  was 
heard  joined  with  his  name  ;  which,  being  generally  adopt¬ 
ed,  has  since  done  honour  to  the  descendants  of  that  whole 
line.  The  dictator  also  presented  him  with  a  golden  crown, 
and,  in  a  public  speech,  extolled  the  action  in  the  highest 
terms. 
XI.  In  fact,  that  combat  was  of  so  great  consequence  with 
respect  to  the  general  issue  of  the  campaign,  that,  on  the 
night  following,  the  army  of  the  Gauls,  abandoning  their 
camp  in  hurry  and  confusion,  removed  into  the  territory  of 
Tibur ;  and  from  thence,  soon  after,  Into  Campania,  having 
first  concluded  an  alliance  with  the  Tiburtians,  for  the  pur- 
VOL.  II. — N 

90 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  395. 

pose  of  carrying  on  the  war,  and  received  from 
B  C  35 r  liberal  supplies  of  provisions.  This  was  the 
reason,  that  in  the  next  year  Caius  Poetelius  Bal- 
bus,  consul,  notwithstanding  that  province  of  the  Hemicians 
had  fallen  to  the  lot  of  his  colleague  Marcus  Fabius  Ambus- 
tus,  led  an  army,  by  order  of  the  people,  against  the  Tibur- 
tians,  to  whose  assistance  the  Gauls  came  back  from  Cam¬ 
pania,  and  dreadful  ravages  were  committed  in  the  territories 
of  Lavici,  Tusculum,  and  Alba,  in  which  the  Tiburtians 
openly  took  the  lead.  Though  the  state  had  been  content  with 
a  consul  at  the  head  of  the  army,  against  such  an  enemy  as 
the  Tiburtians,  the  alarm  of  a  Gallic  war  made  it  requisite, 
that  a  dictator  should  be  created.  Quintus  Servilius  Ahala 

being  accordingly  appointed,  he  nominated  Titus  Quintius 
master  of  the  horse  ;  and,  by  direction  of  the  senate,  vowed 
to  celebrate  the  great  games,  if  in  that  war  he  should  be 
crowned  with  success.  The  dictator  then,  ordering  the  con¬ 
sular  army  to  remain  where  it  was,  in  order  to  keep  the  Ti¬ 
burtians  at  home,  by  obliging  them  to  employ  their  arms  in 
their  own  defence,  enlisted  all  the  younger  citizens,  none 
declining  the  service.  A  battle  was  fought  with  the  enemy 
at  no  great  distance  from  the  Colline  gate,  in  which  the  entire 
strength  of  the  city  was  employed,  in  the  sight  of  their  pa¬ 
rents,  wives,  and  children.  Such  incitements  to  courage  as 
the  preservation  of  their  dearest  relatives,  which  operate 
powerfully,  even  when  those  relatives  are  absent,  being  now 
placed  before  their  eyes,  roused  every  sentiment  of  honour 
and  every  feeling  of  affection.  After  great  slaughter  on  both 
sides,  the  army  of  the  Gauls  was  at  length  defeated.  They 
directed  their  flight  towards  Tibur,  which  the  Gauls  consi¬ 
dered  as  the  grand  stay  of  the  war ;  but  being  met  in  disor¬ 
der,  not  far  from  that  city,  by  the  consul  Pcetelius,  and  the 
Tiburtians  marching  out  to  their  aid,  they  were  all  driven 
within  the  gates.  Thus  both  the  dictator  and  the  consul  con- 

BOOK  VIL 

91 

B.c.  ssr.] 
ducted  their  operations  most  successfully,  Fabius  likewise, 
the  other  consul,  at  first,  in  slight  skirmishes,  and,  at  last,  in 
one  remarkable  engagement,  wherein  the  Hernicians  attacked 
him  with  their  whole  force,  entirely  defeated  them.  The 
dictator,  after  passing  magnificent  encomiums  on  the  con¬ 
suls,  and  declining  in  their  favour  the  honours  due  to  his 
own  exploits,  abdicated  the  dictatorship.  Postelius  enjoyed 
a  double  triumph  over  the  Gauls  and  the  Tiburtians.  Fabius 
was  contented  with  entering  the  city  in  ovation.  The  Tibur¬ 
tians  treated  the  triumph  of  Poetelius  with  derision ;  for, 
where,’’  they  asked,  “  had  he  tried  their  strength  in  the 
field  ?  a  few  of  their  people,  who  had  gone  out  at  the  gates^ 
as  spectators  of  the  flight  and  confusion  of  the  Gauls,  on 
finding  themselves  also  attacked,  and  that  every  one  who 
came  in  the  way  was  slain,  without  distinction,  had  retired 
into  the  city.  Did  the  Romans  deem  this  a  matter  worthy 
of  a  triumph  ?  They  had  thought  it  a  great  and  marvellous 
exploit  to  raise  a  tumult  at  an  enemy’s  gates,  but  they 
should  soon  experience  greater  trepidation  round  their  own 
walls.” 
XII.  Accordingly,  in  the  year  following,  when  Marcus 
Popillius  Laenas,  and  Cneius  Manlius,  were  con- 
sals,  setting  out  from  Tibur  in  the  dead  of  the  3  0  355 
night,  with  forces  prepared  for  action,  they  came 
to  the  city  of  Rome,  where  the  people,  being  roused  hastily 
from  sl^ep,  were  filled  with  consternation,  by  the  suddenness 
of  the  affair,  and  the  alarm  happening  in  the  night,  great 
numbers  also  being  ignorant  who  were  the  enemy  or  whence 
they  came.  IJowever,  they  quickly  ran  to  arms,  posted 
guards  at  the  gates,  and  manned  the  walls  j  and  when  day¬ 
break  showed  no  other  enemy  before  the  city  but  the  Tibur¬ 
tians,  and  those  not  very  considerable,  the  consuls  marching 
out  by  two  different  gates,  attacked  their  army  on  both  flanks 
as  they  were  just  advancing  to  the  walls.  It  then  appeared. 

92 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  297. 

that  they  had  come  with  greater  reliance  on  the  opportunity 
for  a  surprise,  than  on  their  own  valour  j  for  they  scarcely 
withstood  the  first  onset  of  the  Romans.  Their  coming 
proved,  in  the  event,  even  fortunate  to  the  Romans,  a  dis¬ 
sension  which  was  on  the  point  of  breaking  out  between  the 
patricians  and  plebeians  being  suppressed  by  their  apprehen¬ 
sions  from  a  war  so  near  at  home.  Another  irruption  into 
their  territory,  and  by  another  enemy,  succeeded  this  ;  more 
terrible,  however,  to  the  country,  than  to  the  city.  The  Tar- 
quinians  over-ran  the  Roman  frontiers,  committing  depreda¬ 
tions,  principally,  on  the  side  contiguous  to  Etruria:  and, 
after  restitution  had  been  demanded  in  vain,  the  new  con¬ 
suls,  Caius  Fabius,  and  Caius  Plautius,  by  order  of  the  peo- 
Y  R  '^97  declared  war  against  them :  that  province  fell 
B  C  355  Fabius,  the  Hernicians  to  Plautius.  A  rumour 
of  a  Gallic  war  also  prevailed.  But  amid  these 
causes  of  apprehension,  they  derived  some  consolation  in  a 
peace  with  the  Latines,  granted  at  their  own  request,  and 
also  from  a  large  supply  of  soldiers  sent  by  that  nation  in 
compliance  with  an  ancient  treaty,  the  terms  of  which  had 
been  disregarded  for  many  years  past.  This  addition  oi 
strength  was  such  an  effectual  support  to  the  cause  of  the 
Romans,  that  they  heard  with  the  less  concern,  soon  after, 
that  the  Gauls  had  come  to  Prasneste,  and,  afterwards,  that 
they  were  encamped  near  Pedum.  It  was  determined  that 
Caius  Sulpicius  should  be  created  dictator ;  he  was  accord¬ 
ingly  nominated  by  the  consul,  Caius  Plautius,  who  was 
called  home  for  the  purpose ;  and  Marcus  Valerius  was  ap¬ 
pointed  master  of  the  horse.  These  led  against  the  Gauls 
the  ablest  of  the  soldiers,  chosen  out  of  the  two  consular  ar¬ 
mies.  This  war  proved  much  more  tedious  than  was  suitable 
to  the  views  of  either  party.  At  first,  the  Gauls  only  were 
in  haste  to  come  to  an  engagement ;  but,  in  a  little  time,  the 
Roman  soldiery  far  surpassed  them  in  their  eagerness  for  the 

BOOK  VII. 

93 

B.C,  355.] 
fight.  The  dictator  thought  it  highly  improper,  when  no 
urgent  occasion  required  it,  to  hazard  a  battle  against  an  ene¬ 
my,  whose  strength,  time,  and  an  incommodious  situation, 
would  daily  impair,  while  they  lay  there  inactive,  without 
either  a  magazine  of  provisions,  or  a  fortification  of  any 
strength ;  and  who  were,  besides,  of  such  a  constitution,  both 
of  body  and  mind,  that  their  whole  force  consisted  in  brisk 
exertions,  but  flagged  on  a  short  delay.  On  these  conside¬ 
rations,  the  dictator  protracted  the  war,  and  denounced  a 
severe  punishment  if  any  should  engage  without  orders. 
With  this  the  soldiers  were  highly  displeased,  censuring,  in 
their  private  conversations,  sometimes  the  dictator,  and 
sometimes  the  senate  in  general,  for  not  having  ordered  the 
war  to  be  conducted  by  the  consuls.  ‘‘  An  excellent  gene¬ 
ral,”  they  said,  ‘‘  had  been  chosen,  an  extraordinar}^  com¬ 
mander,  who  expected,  that,  without  any  eftbrt,  victory 
would  fly  down  from  heaven  into  his  lap.”  Afterwards,  they 
began  openly  in  the  day  to  utter  the  same  expressions,  and 
others  still  more  outrageous,  saying,  that,  without  regard¬ 
ing  the  generaPs  orders,  they  would  either  fight  the  enemy, 
or  go  in  a  body  to  Rome.”  The  centurions,  too,  mixed 
themselves  with  the  soldiers  ;  nor  did  they  confine  their  mur¬ 
murs  to  their  own  circles,  but,  at  length,  in  the  head-quar¬ 
ters,  and  about  the  general’s  tent,  uttered  their  sentiments  in 
one  general  confused  clamour ;  until,  the  crowd  increasing 
to  the  size  of  a  general  assembly,  it  was  at  last  shouted  froih 
every  side,  that  they  should  go  that  instant  to  the  dictator, 
and  that  Sextus  Tullius  should  speak  in  behalf  of  the  army, 
in  such  manner  as  became  his  courage. 
XIIL  T^ullius  was  now,  the  seventh  time,  in  the  post  of 
first  centurion  of  a  legion  ;  nor  was  there  a  man  in  the  army, 
at  least  among  the  infantry,  more  eminently  distinguished 
by  his  behaviour.  At  the  head  of  the  body  of  the  soldier}’, 
he  proceeded  to  the  tribunal,  and  while  Sulpicius  wondered 

94 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  m. 

iu>t  more  at  the  crowd,  than  at  Tullius,  a  soldier  most  re- 
markable  for  obedience  to  command,  being  the  leader  of  that 
crowd,  he  addressed  him  thus : — “  Dictator,  permit  me  to 
inform  you,  that  the  whole  army,  thinking  themselves  con¬ 
demned,  in  your  judgment,  as  cowards,  and  kept  without 
arms,  almost  as  if  they  had  been  sentenced  to  ignominy,  have 
entreated  me  to  plead  their  cause  before  you.  In  truth,  could 
it  even  be  objected  to  us,  that,  on  any  occasion,  we  had  de¬ 
serted  our  post,  turned  our  backs  to  an  enemy,  or  shame¬ 
fully  lost  our  standards,  I  think  we  might,  notwithstanding, 
reasonably  expect  to  obtain  so  much  favour  from  you,  as 
that  you  would  allow  us  by  our  bravery  to  atone  for  our 
fault ;  and,  by  a  new  acquisition  of  glory,  to  blot  out  the 
memory  of  our  disgrace.  Even  the  legions,  defeated  at  the 
Allia,  marching  out  afterwards  from  Veil,  recovered  by  their 
valour,  the  country  which  they  had  lost  through  cowardice. 
We,  by  the  blessing  of  the  gods,  your  good  fortune,  and  that 
of  the  Roman  people,  have  both  our  cause  and  our  glory  un¬ 
impaired  ;  although  I  scarcely  dare  to  mention  glory,  whilst 
the  enemy  scoff  at  us  with  every  kind  of  insult,  as  hiding 
ourselves,  like  women,  behind  a  rampart.  And  what  grieves 
us  still  more,  is,  that  you,  our  general,  should  entertain  so 
mean  an  opinion  of  our  army,  as  to  suppose  us  without 
spirit,  without  arms,  without  hands  ;  and  that,  before  you 
have  made  any  trial  of  your  strength,  you  should  despair  of 
«s,  as  if  you  considered  yourself  the  commander  of  a  set  of 
maimed  and  disabled  men.  For  what  else  can  we  believe  to 
be  .the  reason,  that  you,  a  general  of  long  experience,  re¬ 
markable  for  spirit  in  war,  sit,  as  the  saying  is,  with  folded 
hands  ?  But  however  this  may  be,  it  is  fitter  that  you  should 
doubt  our  courage  than  we  yours.  If,  however,  this  plan  be 
not  your  own  ;  if  it  be  enjoined  by  public  authority  ;  and  if 
some  scheme  concerted  among  the  patricians,  and  not  the 
Gallic  war,  detains  us  in  banishment  from  the  city,  and  from 

BOOK  VII. 

95 

B.C.355.] 
our  homes,  I  beseech  you,  that  what  I  say  on  this  head,  you 
will  not  consider  as  spoken  by  soldiers  to  their  general,  but 
to  the  patricians  by  the  commons,  who  declare,  that  as  ye 
have  your  separate  plans;  so  will  they  have  theirs.  In  such 
case,  who  can  blame  us,  if  we  look  on  ourselves  as  your 
soldiers,  not  as  your  slaves ;  as  men  sent  to  war,  not  into 
exile  ;  as  men  who,  if  any  one  were  to  give  the  signal,  and 
lead  them  to  the  field,  would  fight  as  becomes  Romans  ;  but 
who,  if  there  were  no  occasion  for  their  arms,  would  rather 
pass  a  time  of  peace  at  Rome,  than  in  a  camp  ?  Let  this  be 
deemed  as  addressed  to  the  patricians.  Of  you,  general,  we, 
your  soldiers,  intreat  that  you  will  give  us  an  opportunity  of 
fighting.  We  wish  to  conquer,  and  under  your  command : 
to  present  you  with  distinguished  laurels  ;  to  enter  the  city 
with  you  in  triumph,  and  following  your  chariot  with  con¬ 
gratulations  and  rejoicings,  to  approach  the  temple  of  Jupi¬ 
ter  supremely  good  and  great,”  The  speech  of  Tullius  was 
followed  by  the  entreaties  of  the  multitude,  who,  from  every 
side,  loudly  requested  that  he  would  give  the  signal,  that  he 
would  order  them  to  take  arms. 
XIV.  This  proceeding,  however  laudable  in  its  principle, 
was  yet  conducted  in  a  manner  which  the  dictator  could  by 
no  means  approve.  He  yet  undertook  to  comply  with  the 
wishes  of  the  soldiers ;  and  inquired  of  Tullius  in  private, 
what  sort  of  transaction  this  was,  and  on  what  precedent 
they  had  acted?  Tullius  earnestly  besought  Sulpicius  to  be¬ 
lieve  that  he  had  not  forgotten  either  his  duty  as  a  soldier, 
or  the  high  respect  due  to  his  general:  assuring  him  that 
“  his  reason  for  not  declining  to  put  himself  at  the  head  of 
the  incensed  soldiery,  who  were  all  actuated  by  the  same 
spirit,  was,  lest  some  other  might  stand  forth,  and  such  as  a 
multitude  in  commotion  generally  appoint.  That,  as  to  him¬ 
self,  most  certainly,  he  would  do  nothing  without  the  direc¬ 
tion  of  the  general ;  on  whom,  nevertheless,  it  was  highly 

96 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  *  [Y.R.  397. 

incumbent  to  use  every  precaution  on  his  part,  for  retaining 
the  army  in  obedience  to  command.  That  minds  so  exas¬ 
perated  would  not  brook  delay,  and  that  they  would  them¬ 
selves  choose  a  time  and  place  for  fighting,  if  not  granted  to 
them  by  the  general.”  While  they  were  talking  in  this  man¬ 
ner,  it  happened  that  as  a  Gaul  was  attempting  to  drive  off 
some  cattle  that  were  feeding  on  the  outside  of  the  rampart, 
two  Roman  soldiers  took  them  from  him.  Stones  were 
thrown  by  the  Gauls,  then  a  shout  was  raised  at  the  next  Ro¬ 
man  post,  and  several  ran  cut  from  both  sides.  The  affair 
was  now  likely  to  end  in  a  general  battle,  had  not  the  contest 
been  quickly  stopped  by  the  centurions.  This  accident, 
however,  served  to  confirm  the  testimony  of  Tullius  in  the 
judgment  of  the  dictator ;  and  the  matter  admitting  no  far¬ 
ther  delay,  notice  was  given  that  they  were  to  fight  on  the 
day  following.  The  dictator,  however,  as  he  was  going  out 
to  the  field,  confiding  in  the  courage  more  than  in  the  num¬ 
bers  of  his  men,  began  to  look  about  and  study  how  he  might, 
by  some  artifice,  strike  terror  into  the  enemy.  His  sagacious 
mind  struck  out  a  new  device,  which  many  commanders, 
both  of  our  own  and  foreign  nations,  have  since  practised, 
some  even  in  our  times.  He  ordered  the  panniers  to  be 
taken  off  from  the  mules,  two  side-cloths  only  being  left  on 
each,  and  on  these  he  mounted  the  muleteers  dressed  up  in 
arms,  of  which  some  had  been  taken  from  the  enemy,  the 
rest  belonged  to  the  sick.  Having  thus  equipped  about  one 
thousand  of  these,  he  mixed  with  them  an  hundred  horse¬ 
men,  and  ordered  them  to  go  up  during  the  night,  into  the 
mountains  above  the  camp,  to  conceal  themselves  in  the 
woods,  and  not  to  stir  from  thence,  until  they  should  receive 
a  signal  from  him.  As  soon  as  day  appeared,  he  began  to 
extend  his  line  along  the  bottom  of  the  mountain,  with  the 
purpose  of  making  the  enemy  draw  up  with  their  faces 
towards  the  ascent :  he  thus  completed  his  preparatory  mea- 

BOOK  VII. 

BX.  355.] 

97 

sures  for  infusing  terror,  which  terror,  groundless  as  it  was, 
proved  rather  more  serviceable  to  him,  than  his  real  strength. 
'Hie  leaders  of  the  Gauls  at  first  believed  that  the  Romans 
would  not  come  down  to  the  plain ;  afterwards,  when  they 
saw  them  begin  on  a  sudden  to  descend,  they  also,  on  their 
part,  eager  for  the  contest,  rushed  on  to  battle,  and  the  fight 
began  before  the  signal  had  been  given  by  the  generals. 
XV.  The  Gauls  made  their  fiercest  attack  on  the  right 
wing,  which  would  not  have  been  able  to  withstand  them, 
had  not  the  dictator  happened  to  be  on  the  spot,  who  re¬ 
proached  Sextus  Tullius  by  name,  and  asked  him,  Was 
that  the  manner  in  which  he  had  engaged  that  the  soldiers 
should  fight?  Where  were  those  shouts,  with  which  they 
had  demanded  arms  ?  Where  their  threats  that  they  would 
engage  without  the  general’s  orders  ?  Behold  their  general 
now,  calling  them  with  a  loud  voice  to  battle,  and  advancing 
in  arms  before  the  front  of  the  line.  Would  any  of  those  fol¬ 
low  him,  who  just  now  were  to  have  led  the  way  ;  fierce  in 
the  camp,  but  dastardly  in  the  field  ?”  These  reproaches  were 
just  ’;  the  men  were,  therefore,  so  deeply  stung  with  shame, 
that,  totally  regardless  of  danger,  they  rushed  against  the 
weapons  of  their  adversaries.  This  onset,  made  with  a  de¬ 
gree  of  madness,  first  disordered  the  enemy ;  and  the  caval¬ 
ry  charging  them  while  in  disorder,  forced  them  to  give  way.  * 
Sulpicius,  when  he  saw  their  line  wavering  on  that  side,  went 
round  with  some  troops  to  the  left  wing,  where  he  observed 
them  collected  in  a  close  body,  and  gave  the  signal  agreed 
on  to  those  who  were  stationed  on  the  mountains ;  whereupon 
a  new  shout  ,was  raised  on  that  quarter  also,  and  they  were 
seen  coming  down  the  mountain  in  an  oblique  direction 
towards  the  camp  of  the  Gauls  ;  these,  then,  dreading  lest 
they  should  be  cut  off  from  their  camp,  ceased  fighting,  and 
ran  towards  it  with  precipitation;  but  being  met  in  the  way 
by  Marcus  Valerius,  the  master  of  the  horse,  who,  after  hav- 
VOL,  II. — O 

98 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  397 

ing  routed  their  left  wing,  was  pushing  forward  to  the  in- 
trenchment,  they  turned  dieir  flight  towards  the  mountains 
and  woods.  Here  the  greater  part  of  them  were  intercepted 
by  the  muleteers,  who  personated  horsemen  j  and  of  those^ 
whose  fears  had  carried  them  into  the  woods,  a  terrible 
slaughter  was  made,  after  the  battle  was  ended.  Nor  did 
any  one,  since  Camillus,  obtain  a  more  complete  triumph 
over  the  Gauls  than  Caius  Sulpicius.  From  the  spoils  he 
consecrated  a  very  large  quantity  of  gold,  in  the  Capitol,  in¬ 
closing  it  within  a  wall  of  hewn  stone.  The  same  year,  the 
consuls  also  engaged  with  the  enemy,  but  with  different  suc¬ 
cess  :  for  the  Hernicians  were  entirely  defeated,  and  subdued 
by  Caius  Plautius;  whereas  Fabius,  his  colleague,  came  to 
an  engagement  with  the  Tarquinians  without  caution  or  pru¬ 
dence.  Nor  was  the  loss  sustained  in  the  field,  on  the  occa¬ 
sion,  so  much  to  be  regretted,  as  that  the  Tarquinians  put  to 
death  three  hundred  and  seven  Roman  soldiers,  their  prison¬ 
ers  ;  by  which  barbarity  the  disgrace  of  the  Roman  people 
was  rendered  the  more  conspicuous.  To  this  disaster  were 
added  devastations  of  the  Roman  territories,  made,  in  sud¬ 
den  incursions,  by  the  Privernatians,  and  afterwards,  by  the 
people  of  Velitra.  This  year  two  tribes,  the  Pomptine  and 
Publilian,  were  added  to  the  others.  The  votive  games 
•vowed  by  Marcus  Furius  Camillus,  in  his  dictatorship,  were 
performed.  And  a  law  was  now  first  proposed  to  the  people 
by  Caius  Patilius,  plebeian  tribune,  in  pursuance  of  the  di¬ 
rections  of  the  senate,  concerning  the  corrupting  of  voters  at 
elections,  by  the  passing  of  which  they  thought  a  sufficient 
restraint  was  laid  on  the  vicious  practices  of  new  men  par¬ 
ticularly,  who  had  been  accustomed  to  frequent  the  markets, 
and  other*places  of  meeting,  for  that  purpose. 
XVI.  Not  equally  pleasing  to  the  patricians  was  a  law, 
carried  in  the  year  following,  when  Caius  Mar- 
B  C  354  Cneius  Manlius  were  eonsuls,  by  Mar¬ 
cus  Duilius,  and  Lucius  Msenius,  plebeian  tri- 

BOOK  VII. 

9§ 

B.C.  354  ] 
buncs,  fixing  the  in^rest  of  money  at  the  rate  of  twelve  for 
each  hundred  by  the  year,  and  which  the  commons  admit* 
ted,  and  passed  with  much  the  greater  eageraess.  In  addi* 
tion  to  the  wars  detcimined  on  in  the  foregoing  ye^,  a  new 
one  arose  with  the  Faliscians  ;  against  whom,  two  charges 
were  made :  first,  that  their  youth  had  fought  in  conjunction 
with  the  Tarqumians;  *the  second,  that  they  had  refused,  on 
the  demand  of  the  Roman  heralds,  to  restore  those  soldiers, 
who,  after  the  defeat,  had  escaped  to  Falerii,  That  province 
fell  to  Cneius  Manlius.  Marcius  led  an  army  into  the  terri¬ 
tory  of  Privemum,  which  was  in  a  flourishing  state,  and 
abounding  in  plenty,  through  a  long  continuance  of  peace  ; 
and  there  he  enriched  his  soldiers  with  abundance  of  spoil. 
To  the  great  quantity  of  effects,  he  added  an  act  of  munifi¬ 
cence  ;  for,  by  sequestering  no  part  for  the  use  of  the  pub¬ 
lic,  he  favoured  the  soldier  in  the  acquisition  of  private  pro¬ 
perty.  The  Privemians  having  taken  post  in  a  strongly  for¬ 
tified  camp  under  their  walls,  he  called  the  soldiers  to  an  as¬ 
sembly,  and  said  to  them,  I  now  bestow  upon  you  the 
spoil  of  the  camp  and  city  of  the  enemy,  provided  ye  pro¬ 
mise  me,  that  ye  will  exert  yourselves  with  bravery  in  the 
field,  and  show  that  ye  are  not  better  disposed  to  plunder 
than  to  fight.”  They  called  for  the  signal  with  loud  shouts; 
and,  full  of  spirits  and  with  the  utmost  confidence,  advanced 
to  battle.  There  Sextus  Tullius,  whom  we  mentioned  above, 
called  out  in  the  front  of  the  line,  General,  behold  how 
your  troops  perform  their  promises  to  you.”  Then,  laying 
aside  his  javelin,  he  rushed  forward  with  his  drawn  sw  ord. 
The  whole  van  followed  Tullius,  and,  by  their  first  onset, 
overthrew  the  enemy,  thence  pursuing  them  as  they  fled  to 
the  town ;  and,  when  they  were  just  raising  the  scaling  lad¬ 
ders  to  the  walls,  the  city  surrendered.  A  triumph  wras  per¬ 
formed  over  the  Privemians.  By  the  Other  consul  nothing 
memorable  was  done^  only  that,  holding  an  assembly  of  the 

100 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  398. 

tribes  in  the  camp  at  Sutrium,  a  proceeding  unprecedented, 
he  procured  a  law  to  be  passed  concerning  the  twentieth  of 
the  value  of  persons  set  free  by  manumbsion.  As  this  law 
produced  no  small  increase  of  revenue  to  the  treasury,  which 
was  very  low,  the  senate  gave  it  their  approbation.  However, 
the  plebeian  tribunes,  not  so  much  displeased  with  the  rule 
as  with  the  precedent,  had  a  law  enacted,  by  which  it  was 
made  a  capital  offence  for  any  person,  in  future,  to  hold  an 
assembly  of  the  people,  at  a  distance  from  the  city :  for  they 
said,  “  if  that  were  allowed,  there  was  nothing,  how  preju¬ 
dicial  soever  to  the  community,  which  might  not  be  passed 
into  a  law  by  soldiers  sworn  to  obey  their  consuls^”  This 
year,  Caius  Licinius  Stolo,  being  prosecuted  on  his  own  law, 
by  Marcus  Popillius  Lsenas,  was  fined  ten  thousand  asses 
for  holding  in  partnership  with  his  son  a  thousand  acres  of 
land,  and  for  attempting,  by  emancipating  his  sonf,  to  elude 
the  law. 

XVII.  The  new  consuls  who  succeeded,  Marcus  Fabius 
^  Ambustus  and  Marcus  Popillius  Laenas,  both  a 
Y.R. 399.  .  ^  ’ 
B  C  353  time,  had  two  wars  on  their  hands,  one 
with  the  Tiburtians  of  no  great  difficulty,  in  which 
Lsenas  commanded,  who,  after  forcing  the  enemy  to  take 
shelter  in  their  town,  laid  waste  their  country :  the  other  con¬ 
sul  was  routed,  in  the  beginning  of  the  fight,  by  the  Falisci- 
ans  and  Tarquinians.  These  continued  to  excite  the  greatest 

*  321.  Ss,  lOd. 
t  The  method  of  emancipating  a  son  was  this :  the  father  made  a  ficti¬ 
tious  sale  of  his  son  to  a  person,  who  then  manumitted,  i.  e.  gave  him  his 
fieedom  in  due  form ;  and  this  process,  being  performed  thrice,  released 
the  son  from  the  Jurisdiction  of  the  father.  It  has  been  already  mentioned, 
that  fathers  had  an  entire  property  in,  and  juri»Jiction,  even  to  life  and 
death,  over  their  sons,  who  were  in  a  condition  UtUe,  if  at  aU,  better  than 
that  of  slaves.  One  sale  and  manumission  released  a  daughter,  or  a  grand 
child. 

BOOK  VII* 

101 

BX.  353.3 

terrors  by  means  of  their  priests,  ivho,  carrying  lighted  torches 
and  the  figures  of  serpents,  and  advancing  with  the  gestures 
of  furies,  utterly  disconcerted  the  Roman  soldiers  by  their 
extraordinary  appearance  ;  so  that  they  ran  back  to  their  en¬ 
trenchments,  in  all  the  hurry  of  dismay,  like  men  seized  with 
phrenzy  or  thunder-struck.  Afterwards,  when  the  consuls, 
lieutenant-generals,  and  tribunes,  began  to  ridicule  and  up¬ 
braid  them  for  being  frightened  like  children  at  strange  sights, 
which  could  do  them  no  injury,  shame  wrought  such  a  sud¬ 
den  change  in  their  minds,  that  they  rushed,  as  if  blindfold, 
on  those  very  objects  from  which  they  had  fled.  Having 
quickly  dispersed  those  insignificant  instruments  of  the  ene¬ 
my,  and  fallen  in  with  those  who  were  in  arms,  they  drove 
their  whole  line  from  the  field,  and  before  the  day  was  at  an 
end,  getting  possession  of  their  camp,  where  they  found  an 
immense  booty,  returned  to  their  own  with  victory,  uttering 
ludicrous  reflections,  in  the  military  style,  both  on  the  stra¬ 
tagem  of  the  enemy  and  their  own  fright.  The  whole  Etru¬ 
rian  nation  then  rose  up  in  arms,  and,  headed  by  the  Tar- 
quinians  and  Faliscians,  advanced  as  far  as  Salinae.  To  make 
head  against  such  an  alarming  force,  Caius  Marcias  Ruti- 
lus  was  nominated  dictator,  the  first  plebeian  who  held  that 
office,  and  he  chose,  for  his  master  of  the  horse,  Gains  Plau-^ 
tius,  a  plebeian  likewise.  It  excited  great  indignation  in  the 
minds  of  the  patricians,  that  the  dictatorship,  along  with  the 
other  offices,  should  now  become  common  ;  and  they  labour¬ 
ed,  with  all  their  might,  to  prevent  any  thing  requisite  to  the 
war  from  being  decreed  or  prepared  for  the  dictator  ;  for 
which  reason  the  people  ordered,  with  the  greater  readiness, 
every  thing  which  the  dictator  proposed.  Marching  his 
forces  from  the  city  on  both  sides  of  the  Tiber,  and  trans¬ 
porting  his  troops  on  rafts,  occasionally,  as  his  intelligence 
of  the  enemy  required,  he  surprized  many  of  their  straggling 
parties,  scattered  over  the  counfrv  in  search  of  plunder  :  at- 

tm 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  399. 

tacking  their  camp  abo  b;^  surprise,  he  made  himself  master 
of  it ;  and  eight  thousaml  of  the  enemy  being  made  prisoners, 
and  the  rest  either  slain  or  driven  out  of  the  Roman  territo¬ 
ry,  he  triumphed  by  order  of  the  peojde,  contrary  to  the  ap- 
pn^aticm  of  the  senate.  The  nobility,  being  unwilling  that 
the  election  of  consuls  should  be  held  either  by  a  plebeian 
dictator  or  consul,  and  the  other  consul,  Fabius,  being  de¬ 
tained  abroad  by  the  war,  an  interregnum  took  place.  There 
were  then  interre|^,  in  succession,  Quintas  Servilius  Ahala, 
Marcus  Fabius,  Cneius  Manlius,  Caius  Fabius,  Caius  Sul- 
picius,  Lucius  iEmilius,  Quintus  Servilius,  and  Marcus  Fa- 
faitts  Ambustus.  In  the  sec<Hid  interregnum,  a  contention 
arose  on  account  of  two  patricians  being  elected  consuls ; 
and,  on  the  tribunes  protesting,  the  interrex  Fabius  said,  that 
^  was  set  down  in  the  twelve  tables,  that  whatever  the  peo¬ 
ple  ordered  last,  that  should  be  law,  and  in  force  ;  and  that 
the  people’s  votes  were  their  orders.”  The  tribunes  not 
being  able,  by  their  protests,  to  obtain  any  other  advantage, 
than  that  of  putting  off  the  election,  two  patricians  were  at 
length  chosen  consuls,  Caius  Sulpicius  P«ticus  a 
B  C  3^  third  time,  and  Marpus  Valerius  Publicola,  and 
on  the  same  day  entered  into  office. 
-XVIII.  In  the  four  hundredth  year  from  the  building  of 
the  city  of  Rome,  and  the  thirty-fifth  since  its  recovery  from 
the  Gauls,  the  consulship  was  taken  out  of  the  hands  of  the 
commons,  at  the  end  of  eleven  years  ;  and  consuls,  who  were 
bcjfth  patricians,  the  interregnum  ceasing,  entered  on  their 
office,  Caius  Sulpicius  Paeticus  a  third  time,  and  Marcus 
Valerius  Publicola.  During  this  year,’  Empulum  was  taken 
from  the  Tiburtians  without  much  difficulty ;  but  whether 
this  was  owing,  as  some  writers  assert,  to  the  war  being 
waged  there  under  the  auspices  of  both  consuls  ;  or,  whether 
it  arose  from  the  lands  of  the  Tarquinians  being  wasted  by 
the  consul  Sulpicius,  at  the  same  time  that  Valerius  led  his 

BOOK  VII. 

103 

BX.  352.] 
legions  against  the  Tiburtians,  is  uncertain.  The  consuls, 
however,  had  a  jpore  difficult  contest  to  maintain  at  home 
against  the  commons  and  tribunes.  As  they  were  both  patri* 
Clans,  they  thought  themselves  bound,  as  well  in  regard  to 
their  honour  as  to  their  resolution,  to  deliver  the  consulships 
over  to  two  patricians  likewise:  for  that  if  the  consulship 
were  now  made  a  plebeian  magistracy,  they  must  yield  it  for 
ever.  They  therefore  held  it  proper  to  retain  entire  a  right, 
which  they  had  received  entire  from  their  fathers.  The  com* 
mens,  on  the  other  hand,  made  loud  remonstrances  ;  “  Why 
did  they  live  ?  Why  were  they  reckoned  in  the  number  of  citi* 
zens,jf  they  could  not  maintain  by  their  united  efforts,  what 
had  been  procured  by  the  firmness  of  two  men,  Lucius  Sex- 
tius  and  Caius  Licinius  ?  It  were  better  to  endure  kings  or 
decemvirs,  or,  if  such  there  were,  any  title  of  government 
still  more  obnoxious,  than  to  have  both  their  consuls  of  the 
patrician  order,  and  not  to  be  allowed  to  command  and  obey 
in  turn.  Shall  one  half  of  the  citizens  be  placed  in  perpetual, 
command,  and  think  the  commons  bom  for  no  other  purpe^e 
than  to  be  their  slaves  The  tribunes  were  not  remiss  in 
fomenting  these  disorders ;  but  all  were  in  such  a  ferment, 
that  hardly  w'ere  any  distinguished  particularly  as  leaders. 
After  they  had  several  times  gone  down  to  the  field  of  elec¬ 
tion  to  no  purpose,  and  after  many  days  of  meeting  had 
been  wasted  in  debates,  the  commons,  being  at  last  overcome 
by  the  perseverance  of  the  consuls,  took  this  method  of  vent¬ 
ing  their  resentment  at  the  disappointment :  the  tribunes  ex¬ 
claimed,  that  there  was  an  end  of  liberty,  and  that  now  they 
ought  to  leave  not  only  the  field,  but  the  city  also,  since  it  was 
held  under  captivity  and  oppression  by  the  arbitrary  power 
of  the  patruiians.;  and  then  they  were  follow^ed  by  the  plebei¬ 
ans  in  a  melancholy  crowd.  The  consuls,  though  deserted  by 
a  part  of  the  people,  yet,  nevertheless,  with  the  small  num- 

104 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  401. 
ber  who  remained,  finished  the  election.  Both  the 
fi  C  appointed  were  patriciani^  Marcus  Fabius 
Ambustus  a  third  time,  and  Titus  Quintius.  In 
some  annals  I  find,  instead  of  Titus  Quintius,  Marcus  Po* 
pillius  consul. 
XIX.  Two  wars  were  carried  on  this  year  with  success. 
The  Tiburtians  were  reduced  by  foVce  of  arms  to  submis¬ 
sion  ;  the  city  of  Sassula  was  taken  from  them  ;  and  the  rest 
of  their  towns  would  have  shared  the  same  fate,  had  not  the 
whole  nation  laid  down  their  arms,  and  surrendered  them¬ 
selves  to  the  consul.  He  triumphed  over  the  Tiburtians.  In 
other  respects,  the  victory  was  used  with  much  moderation  : 
but  the  Tarquinians  were  treated  with  rigorous  severity. 
After  a  great  slaughter  had  been  made  of  them  in  the  field, 
there  were  chosen  out  of  the  vast  number  of  prisoners,  three 
hundred  and  fifty-eight  of  the  most  distinguished  birth,  to 
be  sent  to  Rome :  the  rest  of  the  multitude  were  put  to  the 
sword  :  nor  were  the  people  more  merciful  to  those  who 
were  sent  to  Rome :  they  were  all  beaten  with  rods,  and  be¬ 
headed  in  the  middle  of  the  Forum.  Such  was  the  punish¬ 
ment  retaliated  on  the  enemy,  in  return  for  their  murdering 
the  Romans  in  the  Forum  of  Tarquinii.  These  successes  in 
war  induced  the  Samnites  to  solicit  their  friendship  ;  their 
ambassadors  received  a  courteous  answer,  and  a  treaty  of  al¬ 
liance  was  concluded  with  them.  The  Roman  commons  did 
not  experience  the  same  prosperity  at  home  as  in  war ;  for, 
although  the  burthen  of  interest-money  had  been  lightened, 
by  fixing  the  rate  at  one  for  the  hundred,  the  poor  were  une¬ 
qual  to  the  discharge  of  the  principal  alone,  and  were  put  in 
confinement  by  their  creditors.  The  thoughts  of  the  com¬ 
mons,  therefore,  were  do  much  engrossed  -by  their  private 
distresses,  as  to  exclude  all  solicitude  about  both  the  consuls 
being  patricians,  or  the  business  of  elections,  or  any  party 
concerns.  The  consulate  therefore  remained  with  the  patri^  * 

BOOK  Vti. 

105 

d.c.  sm.] 
clans,  and  Caius  f  dpicius  Pa&ticus  a  fourth  tmie^  and  Mar¬ 
cus  V alcflus  PttbRcdia  a  second  time,  were  elected . 
While  the  state  was  occupied  with  the  fitt-urian  g 
wir,  entered  on  in  consequence  of  a  report  pre¬ 
vailing  that  the  peop4e  of  Caere,  but  of  compassion  to  their 
relations,  had  joined  the  Tarquinians;  ambassadors  fro|n  the 
Latincs  diverted  their  attention  to  the  Volscians,  bringing 
information  that  these  had  enlisted  and  armed  a  number  of 
troops,  with  which  they  threatened  to  invade  their  borders, 
whence  they  would  certainly  carry  forward  their  depredations 
into  the  Roman  territories.  The  senate  therefore  determined 
not  to  neglect  either  affair ;  they  ordered  legions  to  be  enlist¬ 
ed  for  both  purposes,  and  the  consuls  to  cast  lots  for  their 
provinces.  The  greater  share  of  their  attention  was  nor¬ 
wards  directed  to  the  Etrurian  war,  when  it  was  discovered, 
from  the  letters  of  the  consul  Sulpicius,  to  whose  lot  Tar- 
quinii  had  fallen  as  his  province,  that  the  country  round  the 
Roman  Saiinae  'had  been  laid  waste  :  that  part  of  the  plunder 
had  been  conveyed  into  the  country  of  the  Caeritians ;  mid 
that  the  young  men  of  that  nation  were  certainly  among  the 
plunderers.  Wherefore,  recalling  the  consul  Valerius,  who 
had  been  sent  to  oppose  the  Volscians,  and  was  then  encamp¬ 
ed  on  the  frontiers  of  Tusculum,  the  senate  ordered  him  to 
nominate  a  dictator.  He  nominated  Titus  Manlius,  son  of 
Lucius,  who,  having  appointed  Aulus  Cornelius  Cossus  his 
master  of  the  horsey  and  thinking  the  consular  army  sufficient, 
with  the  approbation  of  the  senate,  and  by  order  of  the  peo¬ 
ple,  declared  war  against  the  Caeritians. 
XX.  These  were  then  first  seized  with  real  dread  of  a  war, 
not  considering  that  the  Romans  were  provoked  to  it  by  the 
ravages  committed  on  their  territort*.  They  perceived  how 
unequd  their  own  strength  was  to  such  a  contest,  repented 
heartily  of  their  depredations,  and  cursed  the  Tarquinians, 
the  advisers  of  their  revolt.  Nor  did  any  entertain  a  thought 
VOT..  IT. — P 

106 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [YJl.402, 

oS  zttm  and  hostilities,  but  every  one  earnestly  recomnaended 
that  ambassadors  should  be  sent  to  solicit  pardon  of  their 
error.  Their  ambassadors  having  applied  to  the  senate,  and 
being  by  them  referred  to  the  people,  implored  the  gods, 
whose  sacred  property  they  had  taken  into  their  care  in  the 
Gallic  war,  and  treated  with  all  due  reverence,  that  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  in  their  present  flourishing  state,  might  feel  for  them 
the  same  commiseratiem  which  they  had  formerly  felt  for  the 
Roman  pcojde  in  their  distress ;  and,  turning  to  the  temple 
of  Vesta,  appealed  to  the  bonds  of  hospitality  subsisting  be¬ 
tween  themselves  and  the  priests  and  vestals,  to  the  forming 
of  which  they  had  contributed  on  their  part  with  pure  and  reli¬ 
gious  zeal :  ^  Could  any  one  believe,  that  people  who  had 
sudi  merits  to  plead,  would,  on  a  sudden,  without  reason, 
commence  enemies  ?  .  Or,  if  they  had  been  guilty  of  some 
hostile  act,  that  it  was  design,  and  not  rather  mistake  occa¬ 
sioned  by  frenzy,  that  could  induce  them  to  act  in  such  a 
manner,  as  would  cancel  their  ancient  kindnesses  by  recent 
injuries  j  especially  as  those,  on  whom  they  were  conferred, 
had  shown  so  grateful  a  sense  of  them  ?  Could  it  be  sup¬ 
posed,  that  they  would  choose  to  themselves,  as  an  enemy, 
the  Roman  people,  while  flourishing  in  prosperity,  and  most 
successful  in  arms,  with  whom,  when  oppressed  by  calami¬ 
ties,  they  had  formed  a  friendship  ?  Let  them  not  call  that 
a  studied  matter,  which  really  arose  from  necessity.  The 
Tarqutnians,  marching  through  their  territory  in  hostile  ar¬ 
ray,  although  they  had  asked  for  nothing  but  a  passage,  com¬ 
pelled  some  of  their  peasants  to  accompany  them  in  that  pre¬ 
datory  expedition,  the  guilt  of  which  was  now  charged  on 
them.  If  it  were  the  pleasure  of  the  Romans,  that  these 
should  be  delivered  into  their  hands,  they  were  ready  to  de¬ 
liver  them  ;  or,  if  that  they  should  be  punished,  they  wovild 
inflict  the  punishment.  They  then  intreated,  that  Caere,  the 
sanctuary  of  the  public  worship  of  the  Roman  people,  the 

BOOK  VII. 

107 

B.C.  3S0.] 
refuge  of  its  priests,  and  the  receptacle  of  Rome’s  sacred 
effects,  might,  out  of  regard  to  the  rights  of  hospitality  con¬ 
tracted  with  the  vestals,  and  to  die  gods  whose  worship  was 
there  preserved,  be  left  unhurt,’  and  unstained  with  the  impu¬ 
tation  of  having  commenced  hostilities.”  The  people  were 
moved,  not  so  much  by  the  merits  of  their  present  case,  as 
by  their  old  deserts,  to  overlook  the  injury,  rather  than  the 
kindness.  Peace  was  therefore  granted  to  the  people  of 
C®re,  and  a  resolution  passed,  that  it  should  be  referred  to 
the  senate  to  pass  a  decree,  granting  them  a  truce  of  an  hun¬ 
dred  years.  The  force  of  the  war  was  then  meant  to  be  turned 
against  the  Faliscians,  who  were  guilty  of  the  same  crime ; 
but  the  enemy  were  no  where  to  be  found.  Depredations 
were  made  in  all  parts  of  their  country,  but  it  was  not  thought 
proper  to  besiege  the  towns  ;  and,  the  legions  being  brought 
home  to  Rome,  the  remainder  of  the  year  was  spent  in  re¬ 
pairing  the  walls  and  the  towers :  the  temple  of  Apollo  was 
also  dedicated. 
XXI.  In  the  latter  end  of  the  year,  a  dispute  between  the 
patricians  and  plebeians  suspended  the  election  of  c^snls  ; 
for  the  tribunes  declared,  that  they  would  not  suffer  it  to  be 
held,  unless  conformably  to  the  Licinian  law,  and  Manlius 
was  obstinately  determined  rather  to  abolish  the  consulship 
entirely  out  of  the  state,  than  to  lay  it  open  to  all  promiscu¬ 
ously.  The  election,  therefore,  being  frequently  adjourned, 
and  the  dictator  going  out  of  office,  the  matter  ended  in  an 
interregnum.  The  interreges  found  the  commons  highly  im 
censed  against  the  patricians,  so  that  the  contest  between  the 
parties  was  prolonged  to  the  eleventh  interrex.  The  pretext 
of  the  tribunes  was,  the  support  of  the  Licinian  law.  The 
commons  had  a  cause  of  uneasiness  in  a  matter  which  touch¬ 
ed  them  more  nearly,  the  increasing  weight  of  interest-mo¬ 
ney  ;  and  the  ill  temper,  contracted  front  their  private  griev¬ 
ances,  broke  out  in  the  public  disputes,  of  which  the  patri- 

108 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[YJl.  403. 

ciaas  became  so  weari^,  that  for  coiKord’s  sake, 
y.R,403  .  *  .  .  •  ’ 
B*C  349  ordered  die  iaterrcx  Lucius  Cornelius  Sci^ 
pio  to  couform  to  the  Liciman  law  in  the  electkm 
erf  COUSINS.  To  Publius  Valerius  Publicola,  a  plebeian  col¬ 
league  was  assigned,  Caius  Marcius  Rutilus.  When  a  dis- 
positimi  to  harmony^  once  began  to  prevail,  the  new  consuls 
directed  dieir  endeavours  to  the  prcKuring  relief  in  the  ^rfBair 
of  interest-money  also,  which  seemed  the  only  obstacle  in 
the  way  of  universal  quiet;  accordingly,  they  made  the  pay¬ 
ment  of  the  debts  a  public  concern,  appointing  five  commis¬ 
sioners  for  the  management  thereof,  whom,  from  their  deal¬ 
ing  out  the  money,  they  called  bankers.  These,  by  their 
^uity  and  diligence,  rendered  themselves  deserving  of  hav¬ 
ing  their  names  recorded,  with  honour,  in  every  history  <rf 
the  times.  ^  They  were  Caius  Duilios,  Publius  Decius  Mus, 
Marcus  Papirius,  Quintus  Publilius,  and  Titus  iEmilius,  who 
went  through  a  business  of  a  most  dtificult  nature,  (at  first 
dissatisfactory,  in  general,  to  both  parties,  always,  certainly, 
to  one,)  with  moderation,  and,  moreover,  at  the  "expense  of 
the^iuhlic,  rather  than  of  the  creditors  ;  for  the  more  tardy 
debts,  and  such  as  were  rendered  troublesome,  rather  by  un¬ 
willingness  than  want  of  ability  in  the  debtors  to  satisfy  them, 
were  either  discharged  by  the  treasury,  on  security  being 
first  given  to  the  public  (tables  being  placed  in  the  Forum 
with  mcmey  for  tl^  purpose) ;  or  were  settled  by  cona posi¬ 
tion,  after  an  equitable  valuation  of  the  effects  of  the  debtor. 
that,  not  only  without  injury,  but  finally  without  com¬ 
plaint  from  any  party,  was  an  immense  amount  of  debts  clear¬ 
ed  off.  After  this,  a  false  alarm  of  an  Etrurian  war,  grountkd 
on  a  Tumour  that  the  twelve  states  had  conspired  to  that 
purpose,  cKcasioned  the  nomination  of  a  dictator.  Caius  |u. 
lius  was  appoimed  in  the  camp,  for  the  decree  of  senate  was 
sent  thither  to  the  consuls,  and  Lucius  iEmilius  was  joined 

mOK  VH. 

109 

B.a  349.] 
as  master  of  the  hor^.  However,  every  inroad  re¬ 
mained  in  quiet. 
XXII.  At  borne,  an  attempt,  made  by  Julius,  to  prociire 
the  election  of  two  ^tricians  to  die  cmisuldiip,  brought  die 
government  to  an  interregmim.  The  two  intermediate  inter- 
reges,  Caius  Sulpicius  and  Marcus  Fabius,  effected  what  the 
dictator  had  endeavoured  in  vain,  the  election  of  ccmsuls  out 
of  the  patricians,  the  temper  of  the  commons  being  now  ap¬ 
peased  by  the  late  kindness  shown  them  in  the  lightening  q£ 
their  debts.  Caius  Sulpicius  Paedcus  himself, 
who  was  the  first  interrex,  and  now  out  of  office, 
wa»  chosen  with  Titus  Quintius  Pennus.  Some 
gave  the  surname  of  Csdo,  others  that  of  Caius  to  Quin- 
tivEs.  They  both  marched  against  the  enemy :  Quintius 
against  die  Falisciam,  Sulpicius  against  the*  Tarquirian^ ; 
and,  not  meeting  either  enemy  in  the  field,  turned  the  rage  of 
war  on  the  lands,  plundering  and  burning  every  thing 
throughout  the  country :  by  which  kind  of  operations,  as  by 
a  slow  consumption,  both  those  states  were  so  enfeebled,  that 
they  were  obliged  to  abate  of  their  obstinacy,  and  send  to  re¬ 
quest  a  truce  |  first,  from  the  consuls,  and  afterwards,  with 
their  permission,  from  the  sensue :  they  obtained  cme  for 
featy  years.  The  public  being  thus  freed  from  all  cemeem 
sfoout  the  two  nations  which  threatened  therr  quiet,  it  was  re¬ 
served,  that,  while  they  enjoyed  some  repose  from  war,  a 
general  survey  should  be  made,  on  account  of  the  many 
alterations  in  property,  cmised  by  the  payment  of  the  debts. 
But,  when  the  assembly  was  proclaimed  for  the  appointing 
of  censors,  Caius  Marcius  Rutilus,  who  had  been  die  first 
plel^ian  dictator,  declaring  himself  a  candidate  for  the  cen¬ 
sorship,  disturbed  the  harmony  of  the  public :  and  this  step 
he  seemed  to  have  taken  at  an  unfavourable  juncture,  because 
it  Imppened  that  both  the  consuls  were  then  patricians,  who 
declared  that  they  would  not  allow  his  pretensions.  How- 

lie 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.405r. 

ever,  he  effected  his  purpose,  partly  through  his  own  reso¬ 
lute  perseverance,  and  partly  through  the  aid  of  the  tribunes ; 
for  they  supported  him,  with  their  utmost  power,  in  the  re¬ 
covery  of  a  right,  which  they  had  lost  in  the  election  of  con¬ 
suls.  Besides,  as  the  worth  of  the  man  himself  set  him  on  a 
level  with  any  of  the  highest  honours,  so  the  commons  were 
also  desirous,  that  their  title  to  a  share  in  the  censorship 
should  be  established  through  the  same  person,  who  had 
opened  their  way  to  the  dictatorship.  At  the  election  no  dis¬ 
sent  was  shewn  to  the  s^pointment  of  M^cius  along  with 
Cneius  Manlius.  There  was  likewise  a  dictator  appointed 
this  >ear,  Marcus  Fabius  ;  not  in  consequence  of  any  alarm 
of  war,  but  to  prevent  the  observance  of  the  Licinian  law,  in 
the  choice  of  consuls.  The  dictatorship,  however,  gave  no 
gfeaHjr  efl[icac5^to  this  scheme  of  the  patricians,  as  to  the  elec¬ 
tion  of  consuls,  than  it  had  in  that  of  censors. 
XXIII.  Marcus  Popiilius  Lsnas  Vas  chosen  consul  on  the 
part  of  the  commons,  Lucius  Cornelius  Scipio  on 
B  C  347*  patricians.  Fortune  even  threw  the 
greater  share  of  lustre  on  the  plctwian  consul  • 
for,  on  the  receipt  of  intelligence  that  a  vast  army  of  Gauls 
had  pitched  their  camp  in  the  Latine  territory,  Scipio  then 
labouring  under  a  heavy  fit  of  sickness,  the  Gallic  war  was 
given,  out  of  course,  to  Popiilius.  He  levied  forces  with 
great  diligence,  ordered  the  younger  citizens  to  assemble  in 
arms,  at  the  temple  of  Mars,  outside  the  Capuan  gate,  and 
the  Quaestors  to  carry  out  the  stsmdards  from  the  treasury  to 
the  same  place  ;  and,  having  completed  four  le^rnis,  gave 
the  surplus  of  the  men  to  the  praetor  Publius  Valerius *Pub- 
licola  ;  recommending  it  to  the  senate,  to  raise  another  army 
as  a  reserve  against  the  uncertain  contingencies  of  war.  Then, 
having  completed  every  necessary  preparation  and  arrange¬ 
ment,  he  proceeded  towards  the  enemy.  In  order  to  acquire 
a  knowledge  of  their  strength,  before  he  should  hazard  a  de- 

BOOK  VII. 

Ill 

BX,  34r.] 
cisive  action,  he  began  to  form  an  intrenchment  on  a  hilU  the 
nearest  possible  to  the  camp  of  the  Gauls.  These  being  of  a 
race  naturally  fierce  and  eager  for  fighting,  as  soon  as  they 
saw  the  Roman  standar4s  at  a  distance,  drew  out  their  forces 
in  order  for  battle,  as  if  they  were  immediately  to  engage: 
but,  when  the  opposite  army  did  not  descend  to  the  plain, 
(the  Romans  being  secure  both  from  the  height  of  the  ground, 
and  by  entrenchments,)  imagining  that  they  were  dispirited 
with  fear,  and  also  that  they  might  be  attacked  with  greater 
advantage,  being  particularly  busy  on  their  fortifications,  they 
advanced  with  a  furious  shout.  On  the  side  of  the  Romans, 
the  works  suffered  no  interruption,  the  veterans  being  the 
persons  employed  therein  ;  but  the  battle  was  supported  by 
the  younger  soldiers  and  spearmen,  who  had  been  formed  in 
front  of  the  others,  armed  and  ready  for  the  fight.  Besides 
their  own  superior  Valour,  the  Romans  had  the  advantage  of 
the  higher  ground,  so  that  the  spears  and  javelins  did  not  all 
fall  without  effect,  as  is  generally  the  case  when  thrown  on 
the.  same  level,  but  flying  with  the  greater  force  and  steadi- 
ness,  by  means  of  their  own  weight,  almost  every  one  of  them 
took  effect ;  so  that  the  Gauls  were  weighed  down  with  the 
Weapons  with  which  they  either  had  their  bodies  transfixed, 
or  their  shields  rendered  too  heavy  for  them  to  support,  from 
the  number  sticking  in  them.  Though  they  had  advanced 
against  the  ?teep,  almost  in  full  speed  at  first,  yet  they  be¬ 
came  irresolute,  and  halted.  This  delay  abated  their  cour¬ 
age,  while  it  augmented  that  of  the  opposite  party  ;  they 
were  then  pushed  backwards  headlong  from  the  height,  the 
carnage  ensuing  in  consequence  being  more  horrid  than  even 
that  made  by  the  enemy  ;  for  greater  numbers  were  bruised 
to  death,  by  falling  one  on  the  other  with  their  ponderous 
shields,  than  were  slain  by  the  sword. 
XXIV.  But  the  victory  was  not  yet  decided  in  favour  of 
the  Romans.  On  coming  down  to  the  plain,  they  found  an- 

HISTQSY  0F  HOME. 

tl2 

[T.R.40JS 

o&er  jformidaide  opposkioD  still  to  be  ovem»«c :  for  the  imm« 
hers  of  tfie  Gnuls  being  so  great  as  to  previmt  them  fmn 
feeling  thciT  loss,  they  led  on  fresh  troops  agatmt  the  irkt©^ 
nous  enemy,  as  if  a  new  army  had  sf^tmgtip  from  the  rmbs 
of  tibe  other.  The  Homans  therefore  desisted  from  the  pw» 
suit ;  seeing  that,  after  ail  their  fatigue^  another  laborious 
dontest  remained  for  them  to  netintmn ;  besides,  that  the 
consul  having  his  left  sfsoulder  pierced  almost  through  with 
a  javelin,  while  he  exposed  himself  incautiously  in  the  van, 
had  retired  for  a  short  time  froip  the  line.  They  were  now 
lotting  victory  slip  out  of  their  hands  by  dday,  when  the  con¬ 
sul,  having  got  his  wound  dressed,  rode  back  to  the  front  of 
the  line,  and  called  out,  “  Soldiers,  why  do  ye  thus  stand  ? 
Ye  have  not  to  do  with  a  Latine  or  Sabine  enemy,  whom, 
when  ye  have  conquered  him  by  your  arms,  ye  can,  perhaps, 
make  an  ally :  they  are  brutes  against  whom  we  have  drawn 
the  sword ;  we  must  destroy  them,  or  they  wiU  destroy  us. 
Ye  have  repulsed  them  from  your  camp  ;  ye  have  driven 
them  headlong  down  the  declivity;  ye  stand  on  the  pros¬ 
trated  bodies  of  your  enemy  ;  cover,  then,  the  plains  with  the 
same  carnage,  with  which  ye  have  covered  the  mountains ; 
wait  not  until  they  fly  from  you,  advance  your  standards,  and 
charge  your  enemy.’’  Roused  again  to  action  by  these  ex¬ 
hortations,  they  drove  back  the  foremost  companies  of  the 
Gauls,  and  then,  forming  in  wedges,  broke  thfough  the  cen¬ 
tre  of  their  line.  The  barbarians  being  thus  disunited,  and 
having  no  regular  system  of  command  or  subordination  of 
officers,  in  their  confusion  destroyed  each  other  as  before. 
After  being  dispersed  over  the  plains,  and  carried  by  the  pre¬ 
cipitancy  of  their  flight,  even  beyond  their  own  camp,  they 
bent  their  way  towards  the  citadel  of  Alba  ;  which,  among 
the  hills  nearly  equal  in  height,  happened  to  strike  their  eyes 
as  the  highest  eminence.  The  consul  did  not  contine  the 
pursuit  farther  than  to  their  camp,  being  greatly  weakened 

BOOK  VII, 

113 

B.c.  34r.3 
by  his  wounds,  and  at  the  same  time  unwilling  to  expose  his 
troops,  already  fatigued,  to  new  toil ;  especially  as  the  high 
grounds  were  now  occupied  by  the  enemy.  Bestowing,  there¬ 
fore,  on  the  soldiers  the  entire  plunder  of  the  camp,  he  led 
them  back  to  Rome,  exulting  in  victory,  and  enriched  with 
the  spoils  of  the  Gauls.  The  consul’s  wound  occasioned  a 
delay  of  his  triumph,  and  the  same  cause  made  the  senate 
wish  for  a  dictator,  for  both  the  consuls  being  sick,  a  magis¬ 
trate  was  wanted  to  hold  the  election.  Lucius  Furius  Camil¬ 
las  being  nominated  accordingly,  and  Publius  Cornelius  Sci- 
pio  appointed  his  master  of  horse,  he  restored  to  the  patri¬ 
cians  their  original  possession  of  the  consulship :  in  return 
for  which  service,  being  himself  elected  consul,  through  the 
zeal  exerted  by  the  patricians,  he  declared  Appius  Claudius 
Crassus  his  colleague. 
XXV.  Previous  to  the  new  consuls  entering  into  office,  the 
triumpl\of  Popillius  over  the  Gauls  was  celebrated, 
with  the  highest  applause  from  the  commons,  who, 
in  making  their  observations  among  themselves,  fre¬ 
quently  asked,  did  any  one  see  reason  to  be  sorry  for  having  a 
plebeian  consul  ?  At  the  same  time  they  censured  the  dictator 
severely,  who,  they  said,  had  received  the  consulship  as  a  bribe, 
for  having  infringed  the  Licinian  law,  in  a  manner  more  dis¬ 
honourable  on  account  of  his  selfish  ambition,  than  even  of  the 
injury  offered  to  the  public ;  as,  while  he  was  invested  with  the 
office  of  dictator,  he  made  himself  consul.  This  year  was 
rendered  remarkable  by  many  and  various  commotions.  The 
Gauls,  unable  to  endure  the  severity  of  the  winter,  came 
down  from  the  Alban  mountains,  and  spread  themselves  over 
the  plains,  and  the  parts  near  the  sea,  plundering  wherever 
they  came.  Tht  sea  was  infested  by  fleets  of  the  Grecians, 
as  were  the  coast  of  Antium,  the  Laurentian  district,  and 
the  mouth  of  the  Tiber;  and  it  so  fell  out  that  these  pirates 
even  fought  an  obstinate  battle  with  the  plunderers  on  land; 
VOL.  II. — Q 

114  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  LY.R.  406, 
after  which  they  separated,  the  Gauls  to  their  camp,  and  the 
Grecians  to  their  ships,  doubtful,  on  both  sides,  whether  they 
should  consider  themselves  as  victors  or  vanquished.  At 
the  same  time,  the  most  alarming  apprehensions  were  exci¬ 
ted  by  assemblies  of  the  Latine  states  being  held  at  the  grove 
of  Ferentina  ;  and  by  the  answer,  which  they  gave  in  plain 
terms,  to  the  order  of  the  Romans  for  a  supply  of  soldiers ; 
“  that  they  should  cease  to  issue  orders  to  people  of  whose 
assistance  they  stood  in  need ;  that  the  Latincs  would  take 
arms,  rather  in  support  of  their  own  liberty,  than  of  the  do¬ 
minion  of  others.”  The  senate  being  greatly  disturbed  at 
this  defection  of  their  allies,  in  addition  to  the  two  former 
wars,  which  they  had  already  on  their  hands,  and,  perceiving 
the  necessity  of  keeping  them  under  restraint  by  fear,  since 
the  faith  of  treaties  had  proved  ineffectual,  ordered  the  con¬ 
sul  to  exert  the  whole  power  of  his  office,  to  the  utmost 
stretch,  in  levying  troops  ;  observing,  that  they  inust  now 
rely  for  support  on  an  army  of  their  own  countrymen,  since 
their  allies  had  deserted  them.  We  are  told,  that,  by  collect¬ 
ing  men  from  all  quarters,  {not  only  the  youth  of  the  city, 
but  of  the  country  likewise,)  there  were  ten  legions  com¬ 
pleted,  consisting  each  of  four  thousand  two  hundred  foot, 
and  three  hundred  horse ;  such  a  body  of  new  raised  troops, 
as,  in  case  of  danger  from  a  foreign  power,  the  whole  world, 
though  directed  to  one  point,  could  not  easily  furnish.  So 
true  it  is,  that  our  improvements  have  been  confined  to  those 
particulars,  on  which  alone  we  bestow  our  labour  and  our 
wealth.  Among  the  melancholy  events  of  this  year,  one  of 
the  consuls,  Appius  Claudius,  died  in  the  midst  of  the  pre¬ 
parations  for  war,  and  the  whole  administration  of  affairs  fell 
on  Camillus ;  over  whom,  though  standing  single  in  the  con¬ 
sulship,  the  senate  did  not  think  it  decent  that  a  dictator 
should  be  appointed,  as  well  in  consideration  of  the  high 
respectability  of  his  character,  which  ought  to  exempt  him 

BOOK  VIL 

115 

B.C.  S46.] 
from  being  placed  in  a  state  of  subordination,  as  of  the  aus* 
picious  omen  afforded  by  his  surname  with  regard  to  a  Gallic 
war.  The  consul  then  stationed  two  legions  to  guard  the 
city,  divided  the  other  eight  with  the  praetor  Lucius  Pinarius, 
and,  emulating  his  father’s  bravery,  assumed  to  himself  the 
Gallic  war  without  the  decision  of  lots  j  ordering  the  prs^tor 
to  guard  the  sea  coast,  and  prevent  the  landing  of  the  Gre¬ 
cians.  When  he  had  inarched  down  into  the  Pomptine  ter¬ 
ritory,  not  choosing  to  come  to  an  engagement  on  the  level 
grounds,  when  no  circumstance  made  it  necessary,  and  judg¬ 
ing  that  the  enemy  would  be  effectually  subdued,  by  being 
prevented  from  the  acquisition  of  plunder,  as  they  had  no 
other  resource  than  what  they  obtained  in  that  way,  he  chose 
out  a  situation  convenient  for  a  fixed  encampment, 
XXVI.  Here,  while  the  men  passed  the  time*  in  quid 
in  their  quarters,  a  Gaul  of  extraordinary  size,  splendidly 
armed,  advanced  towards  them  ;  and  striking  his  shield  with 
his  spear,  having  caused  silence,  he  challenged,  by  an  inter¬ 
preter,  any  one  of  the  Romans  to  enter  the  lists  with  him  in 
arms.  There  was  a  tribune  of  the  soldiers  called  Marcus 
Valerius,  a  young  man,  who,  thinking  himself  not  less  quali¬ 
fied  for^n  honourable  enterprise  of  the  kind  than  Titus  Man¬ 
lius,  after  first  inquiring  whether  it  would  be  agreeable  to 
the  consul,  advanced  in  armour  into  the  middle  space.  The 
contest  between  these  men  was  the  less  noticed,  because  of 
an  interposition  of  the  power  of  the  gods:  for,  just  as  the 
Roman  began  the  combat,  a  crow  pitched  suddenly  on  his 
helmet,  looking  towards  his  antagonist,  which,  as  an  augur y 
sent  from  heaven,  the  tribune  at  first  received  with  joy,  and 
then  prayed  that  ‘‘  whatever  god  or  goddess  had  sent  hirPi 
the  auspicious  bird  would  be  favourable  and  propitious  to 
him.”  What  is  wonderful  to  be  told,  the  bird  not  only  kept 
the  seat  where  it  had  once  pitched,  but  as  often  as  the  ren- 
.^ounter  yvns  rtm^wed,  raising  itself  on  its  wings,  attacked 

116 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.406. 

face  and  eyes  of  his  antagonist,  the  Gaul,  with  its  beak  and 
talons,  who  became  so  much  terrified  by  the  sight  of  such  a 
prodigy,  that  he  was  slain  by  Valerius.  The  crow*  then  flew 
up  on  high  towards  the  east,  until  it  was  out  of  sight.  Hither¬ 
to  the  advanced  guards  on  both  sides  had  remained  quiet: 
but  when  the  tribune  began  to  strip  the  spoils  from  the  body 
of  his  fallen  enemy,  the  Gauls  no  loager  confined  themselves 
to  their  post,  and  the  Romans  ran  with  still  greater  speed  to 
the  conqueror,  when  a  scuffle  arising  round  the  body  of  the 
prostrate  Gaul,  a  desperate  fight  ensued.  And  the  con¬ 
test  was  supported,  not  by  the  companies  from  the  nearest 
posts,  but  by  the  legions  pouring  out  from  both  sides.  While 
the  Roman  soldiers  exulted  at  the  victory  of  the  tribune,  and 
likewise  at  such  attention  and  favour  shown  them  by  the 
gods,  Camillus  ordered  them  to  march  on  to  battle,  and 
pointing  to  the  tribune  deeprated  with  the  spoils,  “  Soldiers, 
imitate  him,”  said  he,  ‘‘  and  strew  heaps  of  Gauls  round 
their  fallen  champion.”  Both  gods  and  men  contributed 
their  aid  to  insure  success  in  that  engagement,  and  a  com¬ 
plete  and  acknowledged  victory  was  obtained  over  the  Gauls, 
according  to  the  forebodings  entertained  by  both  parties  from 
the  issue  of  the  combat.  The  first  party  of  Gauls  maintained 
the  battle  with  fury  ;  but  the  remainder,  before  they  came 
within  a  weapon’s  cast,  turned  their  backs,  and  fled.  They 
were  dispersed  through  the  territories  of  the  Volscians,  and 
of  Falerii ;  from  thence  they  made  towards  Apulia  and  the 
upper  sea.  The  consul  calling  an  assembly,  besides  bestow¬ 
ing  praises  on  the  tribune,  presented  him  with  ten  oxen,  and 
a  golden  crown ;  and  then  being  ordered  by  the  senate,  to 
attend  in  person  to  the  war  on  the  coast,  he  joined  his  camp 
to  that  of  the  praetor.  There,  as  the  business  did  not  pro¬ 
mise  a  speedy  conclusion,  from  the  dastardly  conduct  of  the 
Grecians,  who  would  not  venture  into  the  field,  he,  by  direc¬ 
tion  of  the  senate,  nominated  Titus  Manlius  Torquatus,  die- 

BOOK  VIL 

B.C.346.] 

iir 

tator,  for  the  purpose  of  the  elections.  The  dictator  accord¬ 
ingly,  after  appointing  Aulus  Cornelius  Cossus  master  of  the 
horse,  held  the  elections  ;  and,  with  the  warmest  applause  of 
the  people,  declared  consul,  though  absent,  his  rival  in  his 
own  line  of  glory,  Marcus  Valerius  Corvus,  for  that  surname 
was  given  him  from  thenceforth  ;  he  was  then  only  twenty- 
three  years  old.  The  colleague  joined  with  Cor¬ 
vus  was  a  plebeian,  Marcus  Popillius  Laenas,  who  « 
was  now  to  enjoy  that  office  a  fourth  time.  Be¬ 
tween  the  Grecians  and  Camillus  nothing  memorable  occur¬ 
red.  The  former  were  not  warriors  by  land,  nor  the  latter 
by  sea.  At  length  the  Greeks,  not  being  suffered  to  leave 
their  ships,  and,  besides  other  necessaries,  their  water  also 
failing,  withdrew  from  Italy.  To  what  nation  or  what  state 
that  fleet  belonged,  there  is  no  certain  account.  I  am  most 
inclined  to  believe,  that  it  was  sent  by  the  tyrants  of  Sicily  ; 
for  the  farther  Greece,  at  that  time,  besides  being  weakened 
by  intestine  wars,  stood  much  in  dread  of  the  power  of  the 
Macedonians. 
XXVII.  After  the  armies  were  disbanded,  peace  prevailed 
abroad,  and  concord  subsisted  between  the  orders  at  home  ; 
but,  lest  their  happiness  should  be  too  great,  a  pestilence  at¬ 
tacked  the  state,  which  obliged  the  senate  to  order  the  de¬ 
cemvirs  to  inspect  the  Sibylline  books;  and,  by  their  direc¬ 
tion,  a  lectistemium  was  performed.  This  year,  a  colony 
was  led  by  the  Antians  to  Satricum ;  and  the  city,  which  the 
Latines  had  demolished,  rebuilt.  There  was  also  a  treaty 
concluded  at  Home  with  ambassadors  of  the  Carthaginians, 
who  had  come  to  solicit  friendship  and  alliance.  The  same 
tranquillity  continued  at  home  and  abroad,  during  the  con¬ 
sulate  of  Titus  Manlius  Torquatus  and  Caius  Plau- 
Y  R  408 
tius.  The  only  business  which  occufred  out  of 
15.C..>44 
course,  was,  that  the  interest  of  money,  instead  of 

1*18 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  409. 

twelve,  was  reduced  to  six  for  the  hundred  and  the  pay¬ 
ment  of  the  debts  adjusted  in  such  a  manner,  that  one-fourth 
part  being  paid  at  the  present,  the  other  three  parts  should 
be  discharged  in  three  years,  by  so  many  equal  payments. 
Notwithstanding  which,  numbers  of  the  commons  were  still 
distressed  ;  but  the  senate  paid  more  regard  to  public  credit, 
than  to  the  difficulties  of  particular  persons.  The  greatest 
relief  to  their  circumstances  was  the  cessation  of  the  taxes 
and  levies.  In  the  third  year  after  the  rebuilding  of  Satricum 
by  the  Volscians,  Marcus  Valerius  Corvus,  being  a  second 
time  consul, with  Caius  Pcetelius,on  intelligence  received  from 
Latium.that  ambassadors  from  Antium  were  going 
Y  R  40*^^ 
round  the  states  jof  the  Latines,  to  excite  them  to  ^  ‘243 
war,  he  was  ordered  to  march  an  army  against  the 
Volscians,  before  the  enemies  should  be  joined  by  others  ;  and 
he  proceeded  to  Satricum  with  his  troops  ready  for  action.  Tr* 
this  place  the  Antians,  and  other  Volscians,  had  advanced  tc 
meet  him,  with  forces  which  they  had,  some  time  before,  got  in 
readiness,  to  oppose  any  enterprize  which  might  be  undertaken 
on  the  side  of  Rome  ;  and  both  parties  being  inflamed  witr 
an  inveterate  hatred,  an  engagement  commenced  without  de¬ 
lay.  The  Volscians,  a  nation  who  enter  into  war  with  more 
ardour  than  they  support  it,  being  vanquished  in  the  fight, 
fled  precipitately  to  the  walls  of  Satricum  ;  but  not  relying, 
with  any  great  confidence,  even  on  the  protection  of  t host- 
walls,  and  the  city  being  encompassed  by  a  continued  line  oi 
troops,  who  were  on  the  point  of  taking  it  by  scalade,  the\* 
surrendered  themselves  prisoners,  to  the  number  of  four 

*  In  this  place,  and  in  the  sixteenth  cliapter,  Livy  uses  the  expressions 
unciai^mt  and  se?nunciarum  feenusy  in  a  sense  veiy  different  from  the  com¬ 
mon  acceptation.  In  general,  as  was  considered  as  the  integer,  cojise- 
quently,  unaanim  should  mean  as  l-12th  per  month,  one  per  cent,  for  the 
year.  But  he  here  considers  tincia  as  the  integer,  meaning  one  cent, 
per  month,  t2  per  cent,  bvihe  year 

B.C.343.] 

BOOK  VII. 

119 

thousand,  besides  the  unarmed  multitude.  The  town  was 
burned,  the  temple  of  JMother  Matuta  only  being  exempted 
from  the  flames.  The  entire  spoil  was  given  to  the  soldiers. 
The  four  thousand  who  surrendered,  were  not  considered  as 
part  of  the  spoil :  these,  the  consul,  in  his  triumph,  drove 
before  his  chariot  in.chains  ;  and,  from  the  sale  of  them  af¬ 
terwards,  brought  a  large  sum  of  money  into  the  treasury. 
Some^  writers  allege,  that  this  body  of  prisoners  consisted  of 
slaves  ;  and  it  is  more  probable  that  they  were  so,  than  that 
men,  who  had  capitulated,  should  be  set  up  to  sale. 
XXVIII.  These  consuls  were  succeeded  by  Marcus  Fa- 
Y  R  410  Dorso,  and  Servius  Sulpicius  Camerinus.  The 
B*C*342*  -^u**ii^cians  soon  after  commenced  hostilities,  by 
a  sudden  predatory  irruption  j  and  apprehensions  * 
being  entertained,  that  this  act  of  one  state  was  part  of  a 
scheme  formed  by  the  whole  Latine  nation,  Lucius  Furius 
was  created  dictator,  as  if  all  Latium  were  already  in  arms. 
He  nominated  Cneius  Manlius  Capitolinus  master  of  the 
horse  ;  and  a  cessation  of  civil  business  being  proclaimed,  as 
usual  on  alarms  of  a  dangerous  nature,  and  levies  being 
made,  without  allowing  any  exemption,  the  legions  were  led, 
with  all  possible  expedition,  against  the  Auruncians,  who 
were  found  to  possess  the  spirit  of  freebooters  rather  than  of 
soldiers  ;  so  that  they  were  utterly  vanquished  in  the  first 
engagement.  However,  the  dictator,  considering  that  they 
had  brought  on  hostilities  by  their  incursions,  and  that  they 
had  no  apparent  desire  to  decline  the  fight,  wished  to  engage 
the  aid  of  the  gods  in  his  favour ;  and,  in  the  heat  of  the  bat¬ 
tle,  vowed  a  temple  to  Juno  Moneta  ;  and  then  returning  to 
Rome,  under  the  obligation  of  this  vow,  in  consequence  ot 
his  success,  he  abdicated  the  dictatorship.  The  senate  or¬ 
dered  two  commissioners  to  be  appointed  to  erect  the  temple, 
with  a  magnificence  becoming  the  Roman  people  :  the  site 
chosen  for  it  was  that  spot  in  the  citadel,  whereon  had  stood 

120 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

LY.R,41E 

the  house  of  Marcus  Manlius  Capitolinus.  The  consuls^ 
making  use  of  the  dictator’s  troops  for  carrying  on  the  Vol- 
scian  war,  took  Sora  from  the  enemy  by  surprise.  The  tem¬ 
ple  of  Moneta  was  dedicated  in  the  next  year  after  it  had 
been  vowed,  Caius  Marcius  Rutilus  a  third  time^ 
B  C  Titus  Manlius  Torquatus  a  second  time,  be¬ 
ing  consuls.  The  dedication  was  immediately 
followed  by  a  prodigy,  similar  to  the  ancient  one  of  the  Al¬ 
ban  iuke  ;  for  a  shower  of  stones  fell,  and,  during  the  day, 
nigbi  heemed  to  cover  the  sky:  the  state  being  filled  with 
pious  fears,  and  the  books  being  inspected,  the  senate  came 
to  a  resolution  that  a  dictator  should  be  nominated,  for  the 
purpose  of  directing  the  religious  rites.  Publius  Valerius 
*  *  Publicola  w^as  accordingly  nominated,  and  Quintus  Fabius 
Ambustus  appointed  his  master  of  the  horse.  It  was  thought 
proper,  that  not  the  tribes  only  should  offer  supplications,  but 
even  the  neighbouring  nations  ;  and  a  regular  course  was 
fixed  for  them,  and  on  what  day  each  should  perform  that 
duty.  Some  severe  sentences  are  recorded,  which  were 
passed  this  year  by  the  people  against  usurers,  on  charges 
brought  by  the  aediles.  An  interregnum  took  place  in  the 
same  year,  for  which  no  particular  reason  has  been  given. 
At  the  conclusion  of  the  interregnum,  both  consuls 
B  C  3^  were  elected  out  of  the  patricians,  Marcus  Vale¬ 
rius  Corvus  a  third  time,  and  Aulus  Cornelius 
Cossus  ;  and  this  seems  to  have  been  the  purpose  intended 
by  it. 
XXIX.  Henceforvrard  will  be  related  wars  of  greater  im¬ 
portance,  whether  we  consider  the  strength  of  the  powers, 
the  length  of  their  continuance,  or  the  distance  of  the  coun¬ 
tries  in  which  they  were  carried  on  :  for  in  this  year,  arms 
were  first  taken  up  against  the  Samnites,  a  nation  powerful 
in  wealth  and  arms.  After  the  Samnitian  war,  in  which  a 
variety  of  fortune  was  experienced,  Pyrrhus  appeared  as  an 

BOOK  VIL 

121 

B.C.  340.] 
enemy  ^  "after  Pyrrhus,  the  Carthaginians.  What  a  series  of 
important  events !  How  often  have  the  extremities  of  ds^ger 
been  undergone,  before  the  structure  of  this  empire  could  be 
raised  to  its  present  magnitude,  which  the  world  can  scarce¬ 
ly  endure  !  The '  cause  of  the  w£«'  with  the  Samnites  origin¬ 
ated,  with  respect  to  the  Romans,  in  the  affairs  of  others ; 
not  immediately  between  themselves,  who  had,  till  then, 
been  united  in  alliance  and  friendship.  The  Samnites  had, 
unjustly,  merely  because  they  were  superior  in  strength, 
made  war  on  the  Sidicinians.  The  weak,  being  obliged  to 
seek  assistance,  united  themselves  to  the  Campanians,  who, 
bringing  to  the  support  of  these  their  allies  rather  a  nominal 
than  any  real  strength,,  enervated  as  they  were  by  luxury', 
were  defeated  in  the  Sidicinian  territory,  by  men  inured  to 
arms.  Thus  they  thencefoifth  drew  on  themselves  the  whole 
burthen  of  the  war :  for  the  Samnites,  neglecting  the  Sidici- 
nians,  turned  their  arms  on  the  Campanians,  as  chief  of  the 
neighbouring  states,  from  whom  they  expected  to  gain  vic¬ 
tory  with  equal  ease,  and  a  greater  share  both  of  spoil  and 
glory.  After,  posting  a  strong  guard  on  Tifata,  a  ridge  of 
hills  hanging  over  Capua,  they  marched  down  from  thence, 
with  their  army  formed  in  a  square,  ready  for  action,  in  Jo  the 
plain  which  lies  between  Capua  and  Tifata.  There  another 
battle  was  fought,  in  which  the  Campanians  were  defeated, 
and  driven  into  the  the  town ;  and,  seeing  no  prospect  of 
support  at  hand,  the  fiower  of  their  youth  being  greatly  re¬ 
duced  in  number,  they  were  under  a  necessity  of  imploring 
aid  from  the  Romans. 
XXX.  Their  ambassadors,  being  introduced  to  the  senate, 
spoke  nearly  to  this  effect ;  **  Conscript  Fathers,  the  Campa¬ 
nian  nation  has  sent  us,  its  ambassadors,  to  solicit,  at  your 
hands,  perpetual  friendship  and  present  succour.  Had  this 
request  been  made  when  our  affairs  were  in  a  prosperous 
state,  the  connection,  though  it  might  have  been  more  readily 
VOL.  Tl. — R 

122 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R,  412. 

effected,  would  have  been  bound  by  a  weaker  tie.  *  For,  in 
that  case,  as  we  should  have  been  sensible  that  wc  met  in 
friendship  on  terms  of  equality,  though,  perhaps,  with  as 
friendly  dispositions  as  at  present,  yet  we  might  have  been 
less  submissive  and  compliant  to  your  inclinations.  In  the 
present  case,  attached  to  you  in  consideration  of  your  com-r 
passion  towards  us,  and  defended,  by  your  aid,  from  the  pe¬ 
rils  which  surround  us,  we  become  bound  to  show  also,  ia 
our  conduct,  a  due  sense  of  the  benefit  received  ;  otherwise^ 
we  must  be  deemed  ungrateful  and  unworthy  of  any  assist¬ 
ance  either  from  gods  or  men.  Nor,  certainly,  can  we  sup¬ 
pose,  that  the  circumstance  of  the  Samnites  having,  first, 
become  friends  and  allies  to  you,  is  of  efficacy  to  preclude 
our  being  received  into  your  friendship  5  or  that  it  gives  them 
any  advantage  over  us,  except  in  point  of  priority,  and  order 
of  precedence  ;  for  there  is  no  cautionary  provision  in  your 
treaty  with  the  Samnites,  prohibiting  your  forming  other  al¬ 
liances.  It  has  ever,  indeed,  been  deemed  by  you,  a  suffi¬ 
cient  title  to  your  friendship,  that  the  per^son  who  sought  it, 
wished  to  be  your  friend.  Now,  the  Campanians,  who,  al¬ 
though  our  present  circumstances  forbid  ostentatious  lan¬ 
guage^  yield  to  no  other  nation  except  yourselves,  either  in 
the  magnificence  of  our  city,  or  the  fertility  of  our  soil,  if 
admitted  to  your  friendship,  bring  no  small  accession,  we 
think,  to  the  advantages  which  ye  already  enjoy.  Whenever 
the  iEquans  and  Volscians,  the  perpetual  enemies  of  this 
city,  shall  take  arms,  we  will  be  on  their  rear  ;  and  what  ye 
shall  have  performed  in  behalf  of  our  safety,  the  same  wc 
shall,  on  every  occasion,  perform  in  behalf  of  your  dominion, 
and  your  glory.  When  those  nations,  which  lie  between  you 
and  us,  shall  be  subdued,  (which  period,  we  may  infer,  both 
from  your  prowess  and  your  good  fortune,  is  not  very  dis¬ 
tant,)  ye  will  then  have  an  uninterrupted  extent  of  dominion 
reaching  to  our  borders.  It  is  a  mortifying  and  a  melancholy 

BOOK  VII. 

12S 

B.C.  340.] 
truth,  which  our  situatiou  forces  us  to  acknowledge,  Con¬ 
script  Fathers,  that  our  affairs  are  in  such  a  state,  that  we 
must  become  the  property  either  of  friends  or  enemies.  .If 
ye  defend  us,  yours  ;  if  ye  abandon  us,  that  of  the  Samnites. 
Consider,  therefore,  whether  that  Capua,  and  all  Campania, 
shall  become  an  addition  to  your  strength,  or  to  that  of  the 
Samnites.  Romans,  it  is  undoubtedly  reasonable  that  your 
compassion  and  assistance  should  lie  open,  as  a  resource,  to 
all  men;  but  still  more  especially  to  those,  who,  by  perform¬ 
ing  the  same  good  offices  to  others  imploring  their  aid,  have, 
by  exertions  beyond  their  strength,  brought  themselves  into 
such  distresses  as  ours.  Although,  while  we  fought,  in  ap¬ 
pearance,  for  the  Sidicinians,  we  were,  in  reality,  fighting  for 
ourselves :  because  that  nation,  which  is  in  our  neighbour¬ 
hood,  was  plundered  by  the*Samnites  in  a  most  cruel  man¬ 
ner  ;  and  because  we  were  apprehensive  that  the  flames,  after 
consuming  the  Sidicinians,  would  spread  from  thence  to  our¬ 
selves  ^or  they  do  not  attack  us,  as  feeling  themselves  ag¬ 
grieved,  but  they  rejoice  at  a  pretext  being  afforded  them  for 
it.  If  their  ol^ct  were  the  gratification  of  resentment,  and 
not  of  satiating  their  ambition,  would  it  not  be  enough  that 
they  cut  our  legions  to  pieces,  once  in  the  territory  of  the 
Sidicinians,  and  a  second  time  in  Campania  itself?  What 
kind  of  resentment  must  that  be,  which  could  not  be  satisfied 
by  all  the  blood  spilt  in  two  general  engagements  ?  Add  to 
this  the  devastation  of  our  country ;  men  and  cattle  driven 
away  as  ^poil ;  our  country-houses  burned  or  otherwise  de¬ 
stroyed  ;  every  thing,  in  short,  nearly  annihilated  by  fire 
and  sword.  This,  we  say,  was  surely  enough  to  gratify  re¬ 
sentment,  yet  their  ambition  must  be  gratified  also.  It  is 
that  which  hurries  them  on  to  the -siege  of  Capua:  they  wish 
either  to  lay  that  most  beautiful  city  in  ruins,  or  to  hold  the 
possession  of  it  themselves.  But  make  it,  Romans,  your 
own,  by  your  generous  kindness,  nor  suffer  them  thus  unjust- 

124 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  412. 

ly  to  hold  it.  Wc  speak  not  to  a  people  disposed  to  ^^Itne 
just  and  neccssm-y  wars,  yet  allow  us  to  observe,  that,  if  dis¬ 
posed  to  assist  us,  ye  will  not  even  have  occasion  to  use  your 
arms.  The  insolence  of  the  Samnites  has  reached  to  our 
level ;  higher  it  docs  not  soar.  So  that  even  the  prospect  of 
your  as^stance  will  be  our  security.  And  whatever,  thence¬ 
forward,  we  shall  possess,  whatever  we  ourselves  shall  be, 
we  must  ever  esteem  it  all  as  yours.  For  you  will  the  fields 
of  Campania  be  ploughed ;  for  you  the  city  of  Capua  be 
stored  with  inhabitants }  ye  will  be  reckoned  by  us  among 
our  founders,  ^our  parents,  and  our  gods.  Not  one  of  your 
own  colonies  shall  surpass  us  in  obsequiousnesss  and  fidelity 
towards  you.  Grant,  then,  Conscript  Fathers,  to  the  prayers 
of  the  Campanians,  the  nod  of  favour ;  your  irresistible,  your 
providential  aid ;  bid  us  hope  that  Capua  will  be  saved. 
Multitudes  of  every  denomination  escorted  us  on  our  setting 
out.  Full  of  vows  and  tears  we  left  every  place.  Think, 
then,  in  what  a  state  of  eager  expectation  are  now  the  senate 
and  people  of  Campania,  our  wives  and  our  children.  Doubt¬ 
less,  at  this  moment,  they  are  standing  at  the^gates,  watching 
the  road  which  leads  from  hence,  impatient*to  know  what 
answer,  Conscript  Fathers,  ye  may  order  us  to  bring  back 
to  them.  One  kind  of  answer  brings  them  safety,  life,  and 
liberty:  another — ^there  is  horror  in  the  thought.  Determine, 
then,  about  us,  as  about  people,  who  are  either  to  be  your 
friends  and  allies,  or  not  to  exist  at  all.” 
.  XXXI.  The  ambassadors  then  withdrawing,  the  senate 
took  the  affair  into  cemsideration.  A  great  many  were  of  opi¬ 
nion,  that  their  city  of  Capua,  the  largest  and  most  opulent 
in  Italy  ;  and  their  land,  the  most  fertile,  and  situated  near 
the  sea,  would  serve  the  ‘Roman  people  as  a  granary,  from 
whence  they  might  be  supplied  with  all  the  various  kinds  of 
provisions,  yet  they  paid  greater  regard  to  the  faith  of  their 
engagements,  tl^n  to  these  great  advantages  ;  and  the  con- 

BOOK  VIL 

125 

B.C.  340.] 
sul,  by  direction  of  the  senate,  gave  this  answer: 
^  Campsmians,  the  senate  deems  you  deserving  of  their  as- 
sismnce.  But,  in  contracting  a  friendship  with  you,  it  is  pro¬ 
per  to  guard  against  the  violatim  of  any  prior  alliance.  The 
&unfutes  are  associated  widi  us  by  treaty.  ’We  refuse, 
therefta*e,  to  take  arms  against  the  Samnites,  which  would  be 
a  breach  of  duty,  first  towards  the  gods,  and  then  towards 
men.  But,  as  is  consistent  with  both  those  duties,  we  Will 
send  ambassadors  to  those  our  friends  and  allies,  to  request 
that  no  violence  may  be  offered  to  you.’’  To  this,  the  chief 
of  the  embassy  replied,  according  to  instructions  which  they 
had  brought  from  home :  ^  Though  ye  do  not  think  proper 
to  defend  us  and  our  rights  against  violence  and  injustice,  ye 
will  surely  defend  your  own.  We  therefore  surrender  into 
your  jurisdiction.  Conscript  Fathers,  and  that  of  the  Roman 
people,  the  inhabitants  of  Campania,  the  city  of  Capua,  our 
lands,  the  temples  of  the  gods,  and  all  things  else  appertain¬ 
ing  to  us,  divine  and  human.  Whatever  sufferings  we  shaft 
henceforward  undergo,  will  be  the  sufferings  of  men  who  have 
put  themselves  under  your  dominion.”  Having  spok^  thus, 
they  all  stretched  forth  their  hands  towards  the  conseis, 
and,  with  floods  of  tears,  prostrate^  themselves  in  the  porch  of 
the  senate-house.  The  senate  were  deeply  affected  at  this 
instance  of  the  vicissitude  of  human  grandeur ;  seeing  that 
nation  which  possessed  an  exuberance  of  wealth,  and  was 
universally  noted  for  luxury  and  pride,  and  to  whom,  a  short 
time  since,  the  neighbouring  states  look^  up  for  support,  so 
utterly  depressed  in  spirit,  as  voluntarily  to  resign  themselves, 
and  all  that  belonged  to  them,  into  the  power  of  others. 
They  therefore  thought  themselves  boutidnn  honour  not  to 
abandon  those  who  were  now  become  their  subjects  ;  and 
that  it  would  be  unjustifiable  behaviour  in  the  Samnites,  if 
they  persisted  in  carrying  on  hostilities  against  a  city  and 
country  which,  in  consequence  of  the  surrender,  had  become 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  412. 

tibe  la^operty  of  the  Roman  people.  It  in  consequence 
reserved,  that  ambassadoi^  should  be  sent  immediately  to  that 
nation.  These  were  instructed  to  make  known  “  Ac  request 
irf  the  Campanians ;  the  answer  of  the  senate,  in  which  due 
regard  was  paid  to  the  friendship  of  the  Samnites  ;  and  the 
surrender  made  in  conclusion.  To  request,  that  in  conside* 
ration  of  Ae  alliance  and  intercourse  subsisting  between  the 
states,  Aey  would  spare  Aeir  subjects,  and  not  carry  arms 
into  a  country  which  now  made  a  part  of  Ae  Roman  state* 
And,  if  gentle  remonstrances  did  not  produce  the  desired  ef¬ 
fect,  that  Aey  should  then  denounce  to  the  Samnites,  as  the 
will  of  the  senate  and  people  of  Rome,  that  they  should  re¬ 
tire  from  the  city  of  Capua,  and  Ae  Campanian  territory.’’ 
When  these  things  were  represented  to  the  ambassadors  in 
the  assembly  of  the  Samnites,  they  not  only  answered  fiercely, 
that  they  would  continue  the  war,  but  their  magistrates,  going 
out  of  the  senate-house,  while  the  ambassadors  were  standing 
on  the  spot,  c^led  the  commanders  of  their  cohorts,  smd, 
with  a  loud  voice,  gave  them  orders  to  march  instantly  into 
the  Campanian  territory,  and  plunder  it. 
XXXI I.  When  the  result  of  this  embassy  was  reported  at 
Rome,  the  senate,  laying  pide  ail  other  business,  dispatched 
heralds  to  demand  satisfaction ;  which  not  being  complied 
with,  and  war  being,  in  consequence,  declared  in  the  custom¬ 
ary  manner,  they  decreed  that  the  affair  should,  without  loss 
of  time,  be  submitted  to  the  consideration  of  the  pec^e. 
This  was  done  accordingly,  and,  in  pursuance  of  their  order,  * 
the  consuls  instantly  began  their  march  ;  Valerius  to  Campa¬ 
nia,  Cornelius  to  Sunium.  The  former  pitched  his  camp 
near  mount  Gaurus,  the  later  at  Saticula.  The  legions  of  Ae 
Samnites  met  Valerius  first;  (or  they  supposed  Aat  Ae 
whole  weight  of  the  war  would  be  directed  to  that 
They  were,  at  the  same  time,  stimulated  by  t^^  against  the 
Campanians,  for  having  shown  themselves  so  ready,  at  one 

BOOK  VII. 

t2T 

B.C.  340.] 
time  to  give,  at  another  to  call  in  aid  against  them.  But  no 
sooner  did  they  see  the  Roman  camp,  than,  with  one  voice, 
they  furiously  demanded  the  signal  from  their  leaders;  main¬ 
taining,  confidently,  that  the  Romans  should  meet  the  same 
fate,  in  supporting  the  Campanians,  which  had  attended  the 
latter,  in  supporting  the  Sidieinians.  Valerius,  after  spend¬ 
ing  a  few  days  in  slight  skirmishes,  for  the  purpose  of  making 
trial  of  the  enemy,  displayed  the  signal  for  battle,  exhorting 
his  men,  in  few  words,  not  to  let  the  new  war  and  the  new" 
enemy  dispirit  them.  ‘‘  Ih  proportion  as  they  carried  their 
arms  to  a  greater  distance  from  the  city,  they  would,  in  every 
stage  of  their  progress,  meet  nations  more  and  more  unwar¬ 
like.  -  They  ought  not  to  estimate  the  value  of  the  Sapnites 
by  the  losses  of  the  Sidieinians  and  Campanians.  Let  the 
combatants  be  of  what  kind  soever,  one  side  must  necessarily 
be  worsted.  As  to  the  Campanians,  they  were  undoubtedly 
vanquished  by  debility,  flowing  from  excessive  luxur)%  and 
by  their  own  pusillanimity,  rather  than  by  the  strength  of  their 
enemy.  And,  after  all,  of  what  weight  were  two  successful 
wars  on  the  side  of  the  Samnites  during  so  many  ages,  in  the 
balance  against  the  glorious  achievements  of  the  Roman  peo¬ 
ple,  who  reckoned  nearly  a  greater  number  of  triumphs  thm 
of  years  from  the  foundation  of  their  city,  and  who  had  ex-* 
tended  the  sway  of  their  victorious  arms  over  all  around 
them ;  the  Sabines,  Etruria^  the  Latines,  the  Hernicians,  the 
iEquans,  the  Volscians,  the  Auruncians?  who,  after  slaying 
myriads  of  Gauls,  in  so  many  battles,  forced  them,  at  last, 
to  fly  to  their  ships  ?  As  every  soldier  ought  to  go  courage¬ 
ously  into  the  field,  animated  by  the  national  renown  in 
arms,  so  ought  he,  at  the  same  time,  to  consider  the  com¬ 
mander,  under  whose  conduct  and  auspices  he  is  to  fight, 
whether  he  be  one  capable  of  attracting  attention  merely 
by  his  pompous  exhortations,  spirited  in  words  alone,  and 
unqualified  for  military  labours :  or  one  who  well  knows  how 

12« 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[YJR.  41% 

ta  wield  arms,  to  advance  before  die  standards^  and  to  en* 
i^UDter  the  thickest  of  the  fight.  Soldiers,”  said  he,  “I 
wish  you  to  be  led  by  my  actions,  not  by  my  words ;  and  to 
take,  not  only  orders,  but  example  also,  from  me.  It  was 
imt  by  intrigues,  nor  by  cabals,  usual  among  the  nobles,  but 
by  this  right  hand,  that  1  ^ocured  to  myself  three  consul¬ 
ships,  and  the  highest  praises  of  my  countrymen.  There 
was  a  time  when  it  might  have  been  said  of  me, — You  en¬ 
joyed  these  dignities  because  you  were  a  patrician,  and  des¬ 
cended  from  the  deliverers  of  ^our  country ;  and  because 
your  family  had  the  consulship  in  the  same  year  wherein  the 
city  first  had  a  consul. — This  might  have  been  said.  But  at 
present  the  consulship  lies  open  to  us  patricians,  and  to  you 
plebeians,  without  distinction;  nor  is  it,  as  formerly,  the 
prize  of  birth,  but  of  merit.  Look  forward,  therefore,  sol¬ 
diers,  to  the  very  summit  of  honours.  Although  ye  have 
given  me,  among  yourselves,  and  in  consequence  of  the  ap- 
prdl^on  of  the  gods,  the  new  surname  of  Corvus,  the  an¬ 
cient  one  of  our  family,  the  Publicolae,  is  not  erased  from  my 
memory.  I  do,  and  ever  did,  cultivate  the  favour  of  the 
Roman  commons,  in  war  and  in  peace  ;  in  a  private  station, 
and  in  public  offices,  both  high  and  low  ;  in  that  of  tribune, 
equally  as  in  that  of  consul ;  and  with  the  same  tenor  of 
conduct  through  all  my  several  consulships.  As  to  the  pre¬ 
sent  business,  join  your  endeavours  with  mine,  to  obtain,  by 
the  favour  of  the  gods,  a  new  and  signal  triumph  over  diese 
Samnites.” 
XXXllI.  Never  was  there  a  commander  who  put  himself 
on  a  more  familiar  footing  with  his  soldiers,  perfmming  every 
subaltern  duty,  without  reluctance.  In  the  nalitaiy  sports, 
wherein  it  is  the  custom  for  equals  to  vie  with  equals  in 
speed  and  strength,  he  was  condescending  and  afiable  ;  sifc- 
cess  or  defeat  made  no  alteration  in  him,  nor  did  he  disdain 
any  competitor  whate%*er.  In  his  actions,  b^ieficent  accord- 

BOOK  VII. 

129 

B.C.  340.3 

ing  to  the  occs^ion  ;  in  his  conversation,  as  attentive  to  the 
ease  and  freedom  of  others,  as  to  his  own  dignity ;  and,  what 
is  in  die  highest  degree  attractive  of  public  esteem,  the  same 
mode  of  conduct,  by  which  he  had  gained  the  magistracy, 
was  pursued  by  him  throughout  the  whole  of  his  administra¬ 
tion.  The  troops,  therefore,  universally  applauding  the  ex¬ 
hortations  of  their  commander,  marched  out  of  the  camp 
with  incredible  alacrity.  The  battle  commenced  with  as 
equal  hopes,  and  as  equal  strength,  on  both  sides,  as  any  that 
ever  was  fought ;  each  party  full  of  confidence  in  themselves, 
without  despising  their  adversary.  The  Saranites  were  em¬ 
boldened  by  their  late  exploits,  and  the  having  gained  two 
victories  within  the  space  of  a  few  days :  the  Romans,  on  the 
other  side,  by  the  glorious  achievements  of  four  hundred 
years,  and  success  coeval  with  the  foundation  of  their  city ; 
both  parties,  however,  felt  some  unusual  concern  on  engaging 
with  a  new  enetny.  The  conflict  gave  proof  of  the  spirit 
which  they  possessed ;  for  they  maintained  it  for  a  consider¬ 
able  time,  without  either  giving  way  in  the  least.  The  con¬ 
sul,  since  the  enemy  could  not  be  overpowered  by  force,  en¬ 
deavoured,  by  a  charge  of  his  cavalry,  to  disorder  their  fore¬ 
most  battalions  ;  but  when  he  saw  their  irregular  efforts  at¬ 
tended  with  no  success,  being  obliged  to  wheel  their  squad-' 
rons  in  a  narrow  compass,  and  that  they  could  not  open  to 
themselves  a  passage,  he  rode  back  to  the  van  of  the  legions, 
and,  leaping  from  his  horse,  said  to  them,  “  Soldiers,  the 
task  belongs  to  infantry";  come  on,  then;  as  ye  shall  see  me 
making  way  with  my  sword  to  the  main  body  of  the  ^emy ; 
so  let  each,  with  all  his  might,  beat  down  those  who  oppose 
him.  Soon  then  shall  that  ground,  where  their  erected  spears 
are  now  glittering,  be  effectually  cleared  by  a  wide-extended 
slaughter.’^  By  the  time  he  had  uttered  these  words,  the 
cavalry^  by  his  order,  turned  to  the  wings,  and  left  the  way 
open  for  the  legions.  The  consol  advanced  first,  and  slew 
VOL.  II. — S 

ISO 

HISTOHY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  412. 

the  person  whom  he  happened  to  engage.  Fired  at  this 
sight,  every  one  on  the  right  and  left  of  him,  assaulted  his 
opposite  foe  with  extraordinary  fury.  The  Samnites,  though 
they  received  a  greater  number  of  wounds  than  they  gave, 
obstinately  stood  their  ground.  The  battle  had  now  contin¬ 
ued  a  considerable  tin^,  and  great  slaughter  was  made  round 
the  standards  of  the  Samnites,  yet  in  no  part  were  any  of 
them  seen  to  fly ;  so  determined  were  they  to  be  vanquished 
by  death  alone.  The  Romans,  therefore,  finding  their  strength 
beginning  to  relax,  and  that  only  a  small  part  of  the  day  re¬ 
mained,  rushed  upon  the  enemy  Now  was  the  first  appear¬ 
ance  of  the  Samnites  giving  ground,  and  of  the  matter  being 
likely  to  end  in  their  flight  ;  great  numbers  were  made  pri¬ 
soners  or  slain  ;  nor  would  many  of  them  have  survived, 
had  not  night  stopped  the  pursuit,  for  it  was  no  longer  a  bat¬ 
tle.  On  the  one  side,  the  Romans  acknowledged  that  they 
never  had  fought  with  a  more  determined  enemy ;  and  on 
the  other,  the  Samnites,  on  being  asked  what  was  the  cause 
which  first  impelled  men  so  firm  at  the  outset  to  fly,  made 
answer,  that  it  was  occasioned  by  the  eyes  of  the  Romans, 
which  appeared  to  flash  with  fire,  together  with  their  despe¬ 
rate  looks  and  furious  aspect ;  for  that  in  fact  they  felt  more 
terror  from  these,  than  from  any  other  circumstance.  And 
this  terror  was  confirmed,  not  only  in  the  issue.of  the  battle, 
but  by  their  marching  away  during  the  night.  Next  day,  the 
Romans  took  possession  of  the  deserted  camp,  into  which 
the  Campanians  poured  in  a  body  to  congratulate  them. 
XXXIV.  But  the  joy  caused  by  this  event  had  nearly  been 
allayed  by  a  terrible  ’disaster  in  Samnium  ;  for  the  consul 
Cornelius,  departing  from  Saticula,  incautiously  led  his  army 
into  a  mountainous  tract,  passable  only  through  a  deep  de¬ 
file,  and  occupied  on  all  sides  by  the  enemy  :  nor  did  he  per¬ 
ceive  their  troops  posted  over  his  head,  until  it  was  too  late 
for  his  men  to  retreat  with  safety  ;  while  the  Samnites  wait- 

BOOK  VII. 

131 

B.C.  340,] 
ed  only  until  he  should  bring  down  the  whole  of  his  army 
into  the  valley,  Pid>lius  Decius,  a  tribune  of  the  soldiers, 
observed  one  hill  higher  than  the  rest,  hanging  over  the  ene- 
my^s  camp,  too  steep  to  be  climbed  by  an  army  encumbered 
with  baggage,  but  not  difiicult  to  troops  li^tly  accoutred. 
Addressing,  therefore,  the  consul,  who  was  in  great  pertur¬ 
bation,  he  said,  ‘‘  Aulus  Cornelius,  do  you  see  that  high  point 
above  the  enemy  ?  That  is  the  bulwark  of  our  hopes  and 
safety ,» if  we  are  expeditious  in  making  ourselves  masters  of 
a  post,  which  nothing  but  blindness  could  have  hindered  the 
enemy  from  seizing.  I  ask  only  the  first  rank  and  spearmen 
of  one  legion  ;  when  I  shall  have  arrived^  at  the  summit  with 
these,  then  do  you  proceed  forward,  free  from  all  apprehen¬ 
sion,  and  preserve  yourself  and  the  army.  For  the  enemy 
will  not  have  in  their  power  to  move  without  bringing  des¬ 
truction  on  themselves,  as  they,  from  occupying  the  lower 
ground,  will  be  exposed  to  every  weapon  w  e  throw.  As  for 
ourselves,  either  the  fortune  of  the  Roman  people,  or  our  own 
courage,  will  extricate  us,”  He  was  highly  commended  by 
the  consul,  and  having  received  the  body  of  troops  which  he 
desired,  made  his  way  through  the  mountains  by  concealed 
paths ;  nor  was  he  noticed  by  the  enemy,  until  he  came  near 
the  spot  which  he  wished  to  gain  :  they  were  then  univer¬ 
sally  seized  with  astonishment  and  affright ;  so  that,  attract¬ 
ing  the  eyes  of  all  to  himself,  he  gave  time  to  the  consul  to 
lead  off  his  troops  to  more  favourable  ground,  while  he  took 
post  himself  on  the  highest  summit.  The  Samnitea,  march¬ 
ing  their  forces  sometimes  towards  one  side,  sometimes  to¬ 
wards  the  other,  lost  the  opportunity  of  effecting  either  busi¬ 
ness  ;  for  they  could  neither  pursue  the  consul,  except 
through  the  same  defile  in  which  they  lately  had  him  under 
the  power  of  their  weapons,  nor  march  up  their  men  against 
the  acclivity,  to  the  eminence  occupied  by  Decius,  over  their 
heads.  They  were  enraged  principally  against  those  %vho 

132 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[y.R.412. 

had  snatched  from  them  the  opportunity  of  acting  with  suc¬ 
cess,  and  the  nearness  of  their  situation,  and  the  smallness  of 
the  party,  would  have  led  them  to  seek  for  vengeance  there  : 
but  they  could  resolve  on  nothing :  at  one  time  it  was  intend¬ 
ed  to  surround  the  hill  on  all  sides  with  troops,  and  thus  cut 
off  Decius  from  the  consul ;  at  another,  to  leave  open  a  pas¬ 
sage,  and  then  to  fall  on  him,  when  he  should  have  descend¬ 
ed  into  the  defile  ;  night  however  came  upon  them,  before 
they  had  determined  which  measure  to  pursue.  Decius,  at 
first,  entertained  hopes  that  he  might  engage  them  advan¬ 
tageously,  as  they  should  advance  against  the  steep  ;  and  was 
afterwards  surprized  that  they  did  not  proceed  to  attack  him, 
or,  if  they  were  deterred  by  the  difficulty  of  the  ground,  that 
they  did  not  surround  him  with  works.  At  length,  calling 
the  centurions  to  him,  he  said,  ‘‘  What  a  want  of  military 
skill,  and  what  indolence  do  they  not  discover  ?  How  did  such 
men  as  these  gain  a  victory  over  the  Sidicinians  and  Cam¬ 
panians  ?  See  how  their  battalions  move  to  and  fro,  sometimes 
collected  into  one  spot,  sometimes  drawn  out  for  a  march ; 
not  a  man  doing  any  thing,  although,  by  this  time,  they  might 
have  surrounded  us  with  a  rampart.  As  this  is  the  case, 
we  should  too  much  resemble  them,  if  we  remained  here 
longer  than  is  expedient.  Come  on,  then  ;  follow  me,  that, 
while  there  is  yet  some  little  day-light  remaining,  we  may  dis¬ 
cover  in  what  places  they  post  their  guards,  and  if  there  is  a 
passage  for  us  left  open.”  Of  all  these  matters  he  took  an 
accurate  view,  clad  in  a  soldier’s  vest ;  the  centurions,  whom 
he  took  with  him,  being  also  in  the  dress  of  common  soldiers, 
lest  the  enemy  should  take  notice  of  the  commander  going 
the  round, 
XXXV,  Having  placed  watch-guards  in  proper  places,  he 
commanded  notice  to  be  issued,  by  ticket*,  to  all  the  rest, 
•  The  common  method  of  communicatiug  the  watch-word,  and  such  or¬ 
ders  as  required  expedition,  was,  to  write  them  on  a  small  tablet  or  ticket. 

BOOK  VII. 

133 

B.C.  340.]  . 
that^  on  the  signal  being  given,  by  the  cornet  sounding  the 
second  watch,  they  should  come  to  him  silently  in  arms. 
When  they  had  assembled  there,  according  to  their  orders, 
he  addressed  them  thus  :  “  Soldiers,  silence  is  necessary,  ye 
must  therefore  listen  to  me,  without  testifying  your  approba¬ 
tion  in  the  usual  manner.  When  I  shall  have  fully  explained 
my  sentiments  to  you,  then  such  of  you,  as  agree  in  opinion 
with  me,  will  pass  over,  without  noise,  to  the  right ;  on  which 
ever  side  the  majority  shall  be,  that  judgment  shall  be  fol¬ 
lowed.  Now  hear  what  I  have  to  propose.  The  enemy  have 
surrounded  you ;  but  not  in  consequence  of  your  taking  re¬ 
fuge  here  in  cowardice.  By  valour  ye  seized  this  spot ;  by 
valour  ye  must  make  your  way  from  it.  By  coming  hither, 
ye  have  saved  a  most  valuable  army  to  the  Roman  people  5 
by  forcing  your  passage  hence,  save  yourselves.  It  becomes 
your  character  that,  though  few  in  number,  ye  aflFord  succour 
to  multitudes,  while  ye  yourselves  need  no  aid.  The  enemy 
whom  ye  have  to  deal  with,  is  the  same  who,  yesterday,  stu¬ 
pidly  neglected  to  make  use  of  the  opportunity,  which  for¬ 
tune  had  put  in  their  hands,  of  cutting  off  our  whole  army  ; 
who  never  sitw  this  hill  hanging  with  such  advantage^  over 
their  heads,  until  they  found  us  in  possession  of  it ;  and  who, 
with  all  the  thousands  of  which  their  forces  consist,  neither 
prevented  the  ascent  of  such  a  small  party  as  our’s,  nor,  when 
we  became  masters  of  the  place,  surrounded  us  with  entrench¬ 
ments,  though  there  was  so  much  of  the  day  remaining. 
Those  whom  ye  baffled  in  such  a  manner,  while  they  were 
awake,  it  is  your  business  to  elude,  w]}en  they  are  buried  in 
sleep.  Nay,  there  is  a  necessity  for  it :  for  in  such  a  situa¬ 
tion  are  our  affairs,  that  my  part  is  rather  to  point  out  what 
necessity  enforces,  than  to  offer  you  counsel.  For  whether 
tessera,  which  the  tribunes  sent  to  the  centurion,  by  whom  it  was  seir 
on  to  the  next;  and  thus  it  passed  to  all  the  centurions  in  order,  until  ? 
came  to  the  last,  who  returned  it  to  the  tribune. 

134 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  412. 
ye  are  to  stay,  or  to  remove  from  this  pkce,  admits  not  of  de¬ 
liberation.  Fortune  has  kft  us  nothing  here,  besides  our 
arms  and  courage  to  make  use  of  them :  and  consequently, 
we  must  perish  through  hunger  and  thirst,  if  we  fear  the 
sword  of  the  enemy,  beyond  what  becomes  men  and  Romans. 
There  is,  therefore,  but  one  way  to  safety  ;  and  that  is,  to 
sally  forth.  This  we  must  do  either  by  day,  or  by  night. 
But  there  is  another  consideration,  that  cuts  off  all  hesitation  ; 
which  is,  that  if  we  wait  for  the  light,  we  can  have  no  hope 
that  the  enemy,  who,  at  present,  encompass  the  hill  on  all 
sides,  as  ye  see,  with  their  bodies  exposed  at  disadvantage, 
will  not  hem  us  in  with  a  continued  rampart  and  trench.  If 
night  then  be  favourable  to  a  sally,  as  it  appears  to  be,  this 
certainly  is  the  fittest  hour  of  it.  Ye  assembled  here  on  the 
signal  of  the  second  watch ;  a  time  in  which  your  foes  are 
sunk  in  the  profoundest  deep.  Ye  will  pass  among  them, 
either  in  silence,  entirely  escaping  their  notice,  or  ready,  if  - 
they  should  perceive  you,  to  terrify  them  with  a  sudden  shout. 
Only  follow  me,  whom  ye  have  hitherto  followed.  The  same 
fortune  which  conducted  us  hither,  will  conduct  us  home. 
And  now,  such  of  you  as  are  of  opbion,  that  this  is  a  salu¬ 
tary  plan,  come  over  with  me,  to  the  right.’’ 
XXXVI.  Every  man  of  them  went  over,  and  followed 
Decius,  who  bent  his  way  through  the  spaces  which  lay  open 
between  the  guards.  They  had  now  passed  the  middle  of 
the  camp,  when  a  soldier,  striding  over  the  bodies  of  the 
watchmen,  who  lay  asleep  on  the  ground,  by  striking  one  of 
their  shields,  occasioned  a  noise  ;  on  which  the  watchman 
being  roused,  stirred  the  next  to  him,  and  each,  as  he  awoke, 
called  up  the  rest,  ignorant  whether  these  were  friends  or 
foes,  whether  the  party  had  sallied  from  the  hill,  or  the  con¬ 
sul  had  taken  their  camp.  Decius,  finding  that  he  was  dis¬ 
covered,  ordered  bis  men  to  raise  a  shout,  and  thus  dis¬ 
heartened  them  with  affright  before  they  had  shaken  off  the 

BOOK  VII. 

135 

BX.  340.] 
heaviness  of  sleep,  perplexing  them  to  such  a  degree,  that 
they  were  incapable  of  taking  arms  briskly,  so  as  to  make 
head  against,  or  to  harass  him  in  pursuit.  During  this  con¬ 
sternation  and  confusion  of  the  Samnites,  the  party  of  Ro- 
m^s,  killing  such  of  the  guards  as  fell  in  their  way,  made 
good  their  passage  to  the  camp  of  the  consul.  There  was  a 
considerable  part  of  the  night  yet  to  come,  and  they  now 
seemed  to  be  in  safety,  when  Decius  said  to  them,  ‘‘  Roman 
soldiers,  I  honour  your  bravery :  ages  to  come  shall  extol 
both  your  enterprize  and  your  return.  But,  in  order  that 
others  may  be  gratified  with  a  view  of  such  eminent  merit, 
light  is  requisite ;  nor  is  it  fitting  that  you  be  concealed  under 
darkness  and  silence,  while  returning  into  the  camp  with 
such  distinguished  glory.  Here  let  us  wait  in  quiet  for  the 
day.”  His  words  were  obeyed  ;  and,  as  soon  as  morning 
appeared,  a  messenger  being  sent  forward  into  the  camp,  to 
the  consul,  the  troops  there  were  roused  from  sleep  to  exces¬ 
sive  joy  ;  and  the  news  being  conveyed  round  by  ticket,  that 
those  men  were  returning,  in  safety,  who  had  exposed  them¬ 
selves  to  such  imminent  danger  for  the  preservation  of  them 
all,  they  poufed  out  in  a  body  eagerly  to  meet  them  ;  praised 
them,  congratulated  them,  called  them  each,  and  all  together, 
their  preservers  ;  gave  thanks  and  praises  to  the  gods,  and 
almost,  worshipped  Decius.  Thus  did  the  tribune  enjoy  a 
kind  of  triumph  in  the  camp,  as  he  marched  through  the 
middle  of  it,  with  his  party  in  arms,  all  men  fixing  their  eyes 
on,  and  honouring  him  in  the  same  manner  as  the  consul. 
hen  they  arrived  at  the  general’s  tent,  the  consul  summon¬ 
ed  an  assembly  by  sound  of  trumpet ;  but  which  (after  hav¬ 
ing  begun  to  expatiate  on  the  merits  of  Decius)  he  adjourned, 
on  the  interposition  of  Decius  himself;  who  recommended^ 
that  every  other  business  should  be  postponed,  while  it  was 
in  their  power  to  improve  the  occasion  which  presented  it¬ 
self.  He  then  advised  the  consul  to  attack  the  enemy  while 

1J6 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

(Y.R.  412. 

they  were  under  consternation,  and  scattered  round  the  hill 
in  detached  parties :  adding,  that  he  even  believed  that  num¬ 
bers  who  had  been  sent  out  in  pursuit  of  him,  were  straggling 
through  the  forest.  The  legions  were  accordingly  ordered 
to  take  arms,  and,  marching  out  of  camp,  the  forest  being 
now  better  known  by  means  of  scouts,  were  led  towards  the 
enemy  through  a  more  open  tract.  By  sudden  and  unexpect¬ 
ed  attacks,  the  soldiers  of  the  Samnites  being  dispersed  up 
and  down,  and  most  of  them  unarmed,  as  was  supposed,  they 
first  drove  them  in  a  panic  into  the  camp,  and  then,  after 
beating  off  the  guards,  took  the  camp  itself.  The  shout  spread 
quite  round  the  hill,  and  put  all  the  parties  to  flight  from 
their  several  posts.  Thus  a  great  part  of  them  yielded  the 
victory  to  an  enemy  whom  they  did  not  see.  Those,  whose 
fears  had  driven  them  within  the  ramparts,  amounting  to 
thirty  thousand,  were  all  put  to  the  sword.  The  camp  was 
plundered. 
XXXVII.  The  business  being  thus  concluded,  the  consul 
again  called  an  assembly,  and  pronounced  a  paneg\Tic  on 
Decius  ;  representing  his  actions,  not  merely  as  he  had  be¬ 
gun  to  recite  them,  but  as  consummated  since,  by  a  new  dis¬ 
play  of  merit ;  and,  besides  other  military  gifts,  presented 
him  with  a  golden  crown,  and  a  hundred  oxen,  one  of  them 
white,  of  extraordinary  beauty,  richly  ornamented,  and  hav- 
ing  gilded  horns.  To  the  soldiers,  who  had  been  on  the  party 
with  him,  he  assigned  a  double  portion  of  com  for  ever,  with 
an  ox  and  two  vests  to  each.  Beside  the  consul’s  donations, 
the  legions  set  on  Decius’s  head  a  crown  of  grass,  denoting 
deliverance  from  a  blockade,  accompanying  the  present  with 
a  military  shout  of  approbation.  Another  crown,  expressive 
of  the  same  compliment,  was  put  on  his  head  by  his  own 
party.  Decorated  with  these  honourable  emblems,  he  sacri¬ 
ficed  the  beautiful  white  ox  to  Mars,  and  bestowed  the  hun¬ 
dred  others  on  the  soldiers  who  had  accompanied  him  in  the 

BOOK  VII. 

137 

BX.  340.] 
expedition.  To  the  same  soldiers.the  legions  made  a  c<Mitri- 
bution,  each  man  of  a  pound  of  corn,  and  a  pint  of  wine ;  all 
this  was  performed  with  an  extraordinary  degree  of  cordial¬ 
ity,  accompanied  with  the  military  shout,  a  token  of  universal 
approbation.  The  third  battle  was  fought  near  Suessula, 
where  the  army  of  the  Samnites,  which  had  been  routed  by 
Marcus  Valerius,  being  joined  by  all  the  able  young  men  of 
their  nation,  whom  they  called  from  home,  determined  to  try 
their  fortune  in  a  final  contest.  From  Suessula  hasty  mes¬ 
sengers  came  to  Capua,  and  horsemen  from  thence  at  full 
speed  to  the  consul  Valerius,  to  beg  for  succour.  The  troops 
were  quickly  put  in  motion,  and,  leaving  a  strong  guard 
with  the  baggage  in  the  camp,  proceeded  on  their  march 
with  rapidity.  They  chose  for  their  camp  a  very  narrow 
spot,  at  a  small  distance  from  the  enemy,  as  they  were  not 
attended  by  a  crowd  of  servants,  and  having  no  other  cattle 
than  horses.  The  Samnites,  without  delay,  drew  up  in  or¬ 
der  of  battle ;  and  when  they  found  that  no  army  was  sent 
to  meet  them,  advanced,  in  readiness  for  action,  to  the  Ro¬ 
man  camp.  When  they  saw  the  soldiers  on  the  rampart,  and 
when  the  scouts  brought  accounts  from  every  quarter  into 
how  narrow  a  compass  the  camp  was  contracted,  they  thence 
inferred  that  the  number  of  the  enemy  was  but  small.  The 
whole  army  began  to  exclaim,  that  they  ought  to  fill  up  the 
trenches,  tear  down  the  rampart,  and  break  into  the  camp  ; 
and  in  that  rash  manner  they  would  have  proceeded,  had  not 
their  leaders  restrained  their  impetuosity.  However,  as  their 
own  great  numbers  bore  hard  on  their  supplies,  and,  as  in 
consequence  of  their  lying  so  lopg  at  Suessula,  and  of  the 
battle  being  now  deferred,  they  had  a  prospect  of  being  short¬ 
ly  in  want  of  every  thing,  they  resolved,  that  while  the  ene¬ 
my  remained  shut  up,  and  in  appearance  through  fear,  their 
troops  should  be  led  out  into  the  country  to  forage.  They 
had  supposed  too,  that  the  Homans,  having  marched  in  haste, 
VOL.  II. — T 

138 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[YM.  412. 

could  have  brought  tio  more  com  with  them  than  they  were 
able  to  carry  on  their  shoulders,  akmg  with  their  arms,  so 
that  they  would,  in  a  little  time,  be  reduced  to  actual  distress. 
When  the  consul  observed  that  the  enemy  were  dispersed 
over  the  country,  and  that  the  guards  which  they  had  left 
were  not  numerous,  after  exhorting  his  soldiers  in  few  words, 
he  led  them  to  an  attack  of  their  camp,  and  having  taken  it, 
(a  greater  number  being  slain  in  their  tents,  than  at  the  gates, 
or  on  the  rampart,)  he  ordered  the  standards  taken  from  them 
to  be  collected  together.  Then,  leaving  two  legions  to  guard 
them,  with  strict  injunctions  to  abstain  from  plundering  until 
he  should  return,  he  set  out  with  his  troops  in  regular  order; 
and,  sending  on  the  cavalry  before  him,  to  drive  the  scatter¬ 
ed  Samnites  together,  as  if  with  hunting  toils,  made  great 
slaughter  of  them :  for,  in  their  fright,  they  could  neither  fix 
on  any  signal  to  collect  their  troops  in  a  body,  nor  resolve 
whether  they  should  repair  to  the  camp,  or  fly  to  a  greater 
distance.  Such  was  their  consternation,  and  such  the  pre¬ 
cipitancy  of  their  flight,  that  there  were  brought  to  the  con¬ 
sul  not. less  than  forty  thousand  shields,  though  there  was 
nothing  like  that  number  of  slain ;  and  of  military  standards, 
including  those  which  had  been  taken  within  their  ranks,  one 
hundred  and  seventy.  He  then  returned  to  the  ei\emy’s 
camp,  the  entire  spoil  of  which  he  gave  to  the  soldiers. 
XXXVIII.  The  event  of  this  engagement  obliged  the  Fa- 
liscians,  who  were  under  the  terms  of  a  truce,  to  petition  the 
senate  for  a  treaty  of  alliance  ;  and  induced  the  Latines,  who 
had  their  armies  already  prepared,  to  turn  their  operations, 
from  the  Romans,  against  the  Pelignians.  Nor  was  the  fame 
of  these  successes  confined  within  the  limits  of  Italy :  the 
Carthaginians  also  sent  ambassadors  to  Rome  with  congratu¬ 
lations,  and  with  a  present  of  a  golden  crown,  weighing 
twenty -five  pounds,  to  be  placed  in  Jupiter’s  shrine  in  the 
Capitol.  Both  the  consuls  triumphed  over  the  Samnites, 

B.C.  340.] 

BOOK  VIL 

139 

while  Decius  followed  them,  highly  distinguished  by  praises 
and  presents ;  and,  in  the  rough  jests  of  the  soldiers,  the 
name  of  the  tribune  was  heard  as  frequently  as  those  of  the 
commanders.  The  embassies  of  the  Campanians  and  Sues- 
sans  were  then  heard ;  and,  in  compliance  with  their  peti¬ 
tions,  a  body  of  troops  was  sent  thither  into  winter  quarters, 
to  protect  them  against  the  incursions  of  the  Samnites,  Ca¬ 
pua,  even  at  that  time,  destructive  of  military  discipline 
through  the  allurements  of  every  kind  of  pleasures,  so  de¬ 
bauched  the  minds  of  the  soldiers,  as  to  alienate  their  affec¬ 
tions  from  their  country  ;  and  schemes  were  formed,  in  their 
winter  quarters,  to  take  Capua  from  the  Campanians  by  the 
same  wicked  means  by  which  they  themselves  had  taken  it 
from  its  ancient  possessors.  “  Nor  was  there  any  injustice,” 
they  said,  “  in  turning  their  own  example  on  themselves ;  for 
why  should  the  Campanians,  who  were  unable  to  defend 
either  their  persons  or  their  property,  enjoy  the  most  fertile 
lands  in  Italy,  and  a  city  proportioned  to  the  goodness  of 
those  lands,  rather  than  the  victorious  army,  who,  at  the  ex¬ 
pence  of  their  sweat  and  blood,  had  driven  the  Samnites  out 
of  it  ?  was  it  reasonable  that  these  should  have  the  full  en¬ 
joyment  of  such  a  fruitful  and  delicious  country,  while  they, 
after  being  spent  with  the  fatigues  of  war,  must  toil  in  the 
unwholesome  and  parched  soil  round  their  own  city,  or, 
within  the  city,  endure  the  oppressive  grievance  of  interest 
money  daily  increasing  These  schemes  were  agitated  in 
secret  cabals,  and  as  yet  communicated  only  to  a  few,  when 
the  new  consul,  Caius  Marcius  Rutilus,  came  among  them, 
the  province  of  Campania  having  fallen  to  him  by  lot,  his 
colleague  Quintus  Servilius  being  left  in  the  city.  He  was 
a  man  of  good  judgment,  matured  both  by  age 
^nd  experience,  for  he  was  then  in  his  fourth  con-  g  £  339 
sulship,  and  had  served  the  offices  of  dictator  and 
censor.  When,  therefore,  he  was  informed  by  the  tribunes 

140 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  413, 

of  all  the  circumstances  of  the  affair,  he  concluded,  that  the 
best  method  of  proceeding  would  be,  to  frustrate  the  violent 
designs  of  the  soldiery,  by  prolonging  the  period  during 
which  they  might  hope  to  be  able  to  execute  their  design 
whenever  they  pleased;  and  accordingly,  he  caused  a  report 
to  be  spread,  that  the  troops  were  to  have  their  winter  quar¬ 
ters,  for  the  next  year,  in  the  towns  they  then  occupied :  for 
they  had  been  cantoned  in  different  places  of  Campania,  and 
the  plot  had  spread  from  Capua  through  the  whole  army. 
Their  eagerness  in  pursuit  of  their  design  being,  by  these 
means,  relaxed,  the  mutiny  was  composed  for  the  present. 
XXXIX.  The  consul,  on  leading  out  his  troops  to  the  sum¬ 
mer  campaign,  resolved,  while  he  found  the  Samnites  quiet, 
to  purge  the  army  by  dismissing  the  turbulent  men ;  some 
he  discharged,  under  the  pretence  of  their  having  served  out 
their  regular  time ;  others,  as  being  enfeebled  by  age,  or 
otherwise  debilitated:  several  were  sent  away  on  furloughs, 
at  first,  singly;  after^rds,  even  several  cohorts,  because 
they  had  spent  the  winter  at  a  great  distance  from  home, 
and  from  their  private  concerns :  others,  too,  were  dispatch¬ 
ed  to  different  places,  under  pretence  of  the  business  of  the 
army,  by  which  means  a  great  part  of  them  were  removed 
out  of  the  way.  All  these  the  other  consul,  and  the  praetor, 
detained  under  various  pretences  at  Rome.  At  first,  the 
men,  not  suspecting  the  artifice  practised  on  them,  were  not 
displeased  at  the  thought  of  re-visiting  their  homes.  But 
when  they  perceived,  that  none  returned  to  their  standards, 
and  that  moreover,  hardly  any  were  dismissed  except  those 
who  had  wintered  in  Campania;  and,  of  these,  the  fomentors 
of  the  mutiny  in  particular ;  they  at  first  began  to  wonder, 
and  afterwards  to  fear,  what  seemed  beyond  a  doubt,  that 
their  designs  had  been  divulged ;  and  that  they  would  have 
to  undergo  trials,  discoveries,  secret  punishments  of  indivi¬ 
duals,  and  the  cruel  and  unrestrained  tyranny  of  the  consuls 

BOOK  VII. 

141 

B.C,  339.] 
and  senate.  These  were  the  subjects  of  secret  conferences 
among  the  troops  in  the  camp,  when  they  observed,  that  those 
who  were  the  sinews  of  the  conspiracy  had  been  sent  away 
through  the  art  of  the  consul.  One  cohort,  coming  near 
Anxur,  seated  themselves  at  Lautulae,  in  a  narrow  woody  pass, 
between  the  sea  and  the  mountains,  in  order  to  intercept 
those  who  were  daily  dismissed  under  various  pretexts,  as 
has  been  mentioned.  Their  body  soon  grew  strong  in  num¬ 
bers,  nor  was  any  thing  now  wanting  of  the  form  of  a  regu¬ 
lar  army,  except  a  leader.  Without  order,  however,  and 
plundering  the  country  in  their  way,  they  came  into  the  Al¬ 
ban  territory,  and,  under  the  hill  of  Alba  Longa,  enclosed 
their  camp  with  a  rampart;  where,  when  the  work  was 
finished,  they  spent  the  remainder  of  the  day  in  discussing 
different  opinions  respecting  the  choice  of  a  commander, 
having  no  great  confidence  in  the  abilities  of  any  who  were 
present.  And  on  whom,’’  they  said,  **  could  they  prevail 
to  come  out  from  Rome,  on  their  invitation  ?  what  man  was 
there,  among  the  patricians  or  plebeians,  who  would,  with 
his  eyes  open,  expose  himself  to  such  imminent  danger ;  or, 
to  whom  could  the  cause  of  the  army,  driven  to  madness  by 
ill-treatment,  be  properly  confided  ?”  Next  day,  while  they 
were  employed  in  deliberating  on  the  same  subject,  some  of 
the  rambling  marauders  brought  intelligence,  that  Titus 
Quintius  was  cultivating  his  farm  in  the  territory  of  Tuscu- 
lum,  regardless  of  the  city  and  of  its  honours.  He  was  of 
patrician  race,  who,  being  obliged  to  relinquish  the  military 
profession,  in  which  he  had  acquired  great  glory,  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  one  of  his  feet  being  lamed  by  a  wound,  determined 
to  spend  his  life-  in  the  country,  far  from  ambition  and  the 
contentions  of  the  Forum.  As  soon  as  his  name  was  heard, 
they  immediately  recognised  the  man  ;  and,  with  wishes  of 
success  to  the  measure,  ordered  him  to  be  sent  for.  But  as 
there  was  little  room  to  hope  that  he  would  voluntarily  ap- 

142 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  413- 

pear  in  the  cause,  it  was  resolved  that  both  menaces  and 
force  should  be  employed.  Accordingly  those  who  were 
sent  for  the  purpose,  entering  his  house  in  the  dead  of  night, 
while  he  lay  composed  in  sleep,  and  denouncing,  as  the  only 
alternative,  either  honour  and  command,  or,  when  he  made 
opposition,  death,  they  brought  him  by  force  to  their  camp. 
Immediately  on  his  arrival,  he  was  saluted  general,  and 
while  he  was  terrified  at  this  unaccountable  and  sudden  tran* 
saction,  they  brought  to  him  the  ensigns  of  the  office,  and  in¬ 
sisted  on  his  leading  them  to  the  city.  Then,  with  haste 
dictated  by  their  own  unruliness,  taking  up  the  standards, 
they. came  in  hostile  array  to  the  eighth  stone  on  the  road, 
which  is  now  the  Appian,  and  would*have  proceeded  direct¬ 
ly  to  the  city,  had  they  not  been  told  that  an  army  was  coming 
to  meet  them ;  Marcus  Valerius  Corvus  being  nominated 
dictator,  and  Lucius  .^miiius  Mamercinus  master  of  the 
horse. 
XL.  As  soon  as  the  army  sent  to  oppose  them  came  in 
sight,  and  they  distinguished  the  well-known  arms  and  stand¬ 
ards,  their  regard  for  their  country  instantly  reviving,  soft¬ 
ened  the  resentment  of  every  breast.  They  were  not  yet 
hardy  enough  to  shed  the  blood  of  their  countrymen  ^  they 
had  never  yet  known  any  but  foreign  wars ;  and  secession 
from  their  fellow-citizens  was  deemed  the  utmost  effort  of 
rage.  Now,  therefore,  the  leaders,  and  even  the  soldiers  on 
both  sides,  expressed  a  desire  that  there  should  be  a  meeting 
held  for  a  negotiation.  Accordingly,  on  one  side  Quintius, 
who  would  not  have  borne  arms,  even  in  favour  of  his  coun¬ 
try,  but  with  extreme  reluctance,  and  of  course  with  much 
greater  against  it ;  and  on  the  other,  Corvus,  who  entertain¬ 
ed  the  warmest  affection  for  every  one  of  his  countrymen, 
particularly  the  soldiery,  and  above  all  others,  those  who 
had  served  under  his  own  banner,  advanced  to  a  conference. 
The  instant  the  latter  appeared,  the  same  respectful  defer- 

BOOK  VIL 

143 

B:C.  339.] 
ence  was  paid  to  him  by  his  adversaries,  which  his  own  men 
manifested  by  their  silence :  he  then  addressed  them  in  this 
manner ;  “  Soldiers,  at  my  departure  frcrni  the  city,  1  made 
k  my  earnest  prayer  to  the  immortal  gods,  whom  ye,  the 
public  and  myself  adore,  and  humbly  implored  them  of  their 
goodness,  to  grant  me,  not  a  victory  over  you,  but  the  happi¬ 
ness  of  restoring  concord.  The  time  past  has  afforded,  and 
doubtless  the  future  will  afford  occasions  enough  for  the  ac¬ 
quisition  of  military  glory.  At  the  present,  peace  should  be 
the  object  of  our  wishes.  The  request  which  I  urged  to  the 
immortal  gods,  whilst  I  offered  up  my  vows,  it  is  in  your 
power  to  fulfil  for  me,  if  you  will  allow  yourselves  to  recol¬ 
lect  that  your  camp  stands  not  in  Samnium,  nor  in  the  terri¬ 
tory  of  the  Volscians,  but  on  Roman  ground ;  that  those 
hills,  which  ye  see,  are  your  native  soil ;  that  this  army  is 
composed  of  your  countrymen ;  that  I  am  your  own  consul, 
under  whose  conduct  and  auspices  ye  last  year  twice  defeated 
the  legions  of  the  Samnites,  and  twice  took  their  camp  by 
storm.  Soldiers,  I  am  Marcus  Valerius  Corvus,  whose  no¬ 
bility  of  birth  ye  have  ever  felt  to  be  productive  of  benefits 
to  you,  not  of  ill-treatment.  I  have  been  the  adviser  of  no 
severe  law  against  your  interest,  of  no  cruel  decree  of  the 
senate  ;  in  every  post  of  command  which  I  have  held,  more 
strict  towards  myself  than  you.  Yet,  if  any  man  might  pre¬ 
sume  upon  personal  merit,  upon  high  dignity,  and  upon  pub¬ 
lic  honours,  I  might:  for  I  am  descended  from  ancestors  so 
distinguished,  and  I  have  besides  'given  such  proof  of  my 
own  qualifications,  that  I  attained  the  honour  of  the  consul¬ 
ship  when  only  twenty- three  years  old:  I  might  then  assume 
a  degree  of  pride  not  only  towards  the  commons,  but  toWards 
the  patricians.  But  in  what  instance  did  ye  ever  hear  that  I 
either  acted  or  spoke  with  greater  harshness,  when  consul, 
than  when  only  a  tribune  ?  The  same  has  been  the  constant 
tenor  of  my  administration,  in  two  successive  consuflhips  ; 

144 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  413. 

the  same  shall  it  be,  in  this  uncontroullable  office  of  dictator. 
So  that  I  shall  be  found  not  more  gentle  to  these  my  own 
soldiers,  and  the  soldiers  of  my  country,  than  to  you  (it 
shocks  me  so  to  call  you)  its  enemies.  Ye  shall  therefore 
draw  the  sword  against  me,  before  I  unsheath  it  against  you; 
on  your  side,  if  a  battle  must  take  place,  the  signal  shall  be 
sounded ;  from  your  side  the  shouts  and  onset  shall  begin. 
You  must  determine,  tten,  to  do  what  neither  your  grand¬ 
fathers  nor  fathers  could ;  neither  those  who  seceded  to  the 
sacred  mount,  nor  yet  those  who  afterwards  took  post  on  the 
Aventine.  Wait  until  your  wives  and  mothers  come  out 
from  the  city  with  dishevelled  hair,  as  formerly  to  Coriolanus. 
At  that  time  the  legions  of  the  Volscians,  because  they  had 
a  Roman  for  their  leader,  ceased  from  hostilities.  And  will 
not  y^,  an  army  of  Romans,  desist  from  this  unnatural  war  ? 
Titus  Quintius,  under  whatever  circumstances  you  stand  on 
that  side,  whether  voluntarily,  or  through  compulsion,  if  the 
business  must  be  decided  by  arms,  do  you  then  retire  to  the 
rear.  It  will  be  more  honourable  for  you  to  turn  your  back 
and  fly,  than  to  fight  against  your  country.  You  will  at  pre¬ 
sent  stand  with  propriety  and  honour  among  the  foremost 
for  the  promoting  of  peaceful  measures,  and  may  you  be  a 
salutary  agent  in  this  conference.  Let  your  demands  and 
your  offers  be  reasonable  ;  although,  indeed,  it  were  better 
to  admit  even  unreasonable  terms,  than  engage  in  an  unnatu¬ 
ral  combat  with  each  other.” 
XLI.  Titus  Quintius  then  turning  to  his  party,  his  eyes 
full  of  tears,  said,  In  me  too,  soldiers,  if  I  am  of  any  use, 
ye  have  a  better  leader  to  peace  than  to  war.  For  he  who 
has  spoken  what  ye  have  just  now  heard,  is  not  a  Voiscian 
nor  a  Samnite,  but  a  Roman  ;  he,  soldiers,  is  your  own  con¬ 
sul,  your  own  general ;  the  influence  of  whose  auspices  ye 
have  already  experienced  operating  in  your  favour.  Wish 
not,  then,  to  try  its  effects  against  you.  The  senate  could 

BOOK  Vlh 

145 

*B,C.  339.] 
have  employed  other  commanders,  who  would  fight  against 
you  with  animosity ;  but  they  chose  the  one  who  woidd  .be 
most  tender  of  you,  who  were  his  own  soldiers,  Mid  in  whom, 
as  your  own  general,  ye  could  most  thoroughly  confide. 
Even  those  who  have  conquest  in  their  power  wish  for  peace ; 
l^hat,  ^hen,  ought  to  be  our  wish  ?  Why  do  we  not,  renounc¬ 
ing  bath  anger  and  hope,  those  fallacious  guides,  resign  our¬ 
selves  and  all  our  interests  to  his  well-known  honour.”  AH 
declaring  their  approbation  by  a  shdut,  Titus  Quintius  ad¬ 
vanced  before  the  standards,  and  said,  that  the  soldiers 
would  be  governed  by  the  dictator he  besought  them  to 
undertake  the  cause  of  those  his  unfortunate  countrymen, 
support  it  under  his  patronage,  with  the  same  honour 
which  had  ever  marked  his  administration  of  the  public  af¬ 
fairs.  That  with  regard  to  his  own  particular  case,  he  sti¬ 
pulated  no  terras,  he  wished  not  to  found  a  hope  on  aught 
but  innocence.  But  provision  should  be  made  for  the  safety 
of  the  soldiers,  as  had  been  formerly  practised  by  the  senate, 
once,  in  the  case  of  the  commons,  and  a  second  time  in  that 
of  the  legions,  so  that  no  one  should  suffer  for  the  secession.” 
The  dictator,  highly  commending  Quintius,  and  desiring  the 
others  to  hope  for  the  best,  rode  back  with  speed  to  the  city, 
and,  with  the  approbation  of  the  senate,  proposed  to  the  peo¬ 
ple  assembled  in  the  Peteline  grove,  that  none  of  the  soldiers 
should  be  puni^ed  on  account  of  the  secession ;  and  even 
made  it  his  request  to  them,  which  he  hoped  they  would  ap¬ 
prove,  that  no  persQn,  either  in  jest  or  earnest^  should  upbraid 
any  of  them  with  that  proceeding.  A  military  law  was  also 
passed,  sanctioned  with  a  devoting  clause,  that  the  name  of 
any  soldier,  once  enrolled,  should  not  be  erased  without  his 
own  consent ;  and  it  was  included  in  the  law,  th^t  no  person 
who  had  been  a  tribune  of  the  soldiers  should  afterwards  be 
a  centurion.  This  demand  of  the  conspirators  was  pointed 
against  Publius  Salonius,  who  had  long  been  alternately  tri- 
\  ot.  II.— 11 

146 

HISTORY  OP  ROME. 

[Y  Jl.  413.- 

bane  of  die  soldiers,  and  first  centnrion,  which  they  now  caU 
prvmpth.  The  soldiers  were  incensed  against  him^  b^airse 
be  had  always  opposed  their  licentious  proceedings*,  and,  to 
avoid  being  ccmcemed  thereip,  had  fled  from  Lautulae.  This 
«  was  the  only  proposal  with  which  the  senate  refused  to  com¬ 
ity  ;  on  which  Salonius,  earnestly  intreating  the  cc|iscrip{ 
fathers  not  to  pay  greater  regard  to  his  promotion,  than  ,to 
the  public  concord,  prevailed  on  them  to  let  that  also  pass. 
There  was  another  requisition,  equally  unreasonable,  that  a 
deduction  of  one^third  should  be  n)ade  from  the  pay  of  the 
cavalry,  because  they  had  opposed  the  conspiracy.  They  at 
that  time  received  triple  the  pay  of  the  foot. 
XLll.  Besides  these  regulations,  I  find  in  some  writer^, 
that  Lucius  Genucius,  plebeian  tribune,  proposed  a  law  to  the 
people,  that  no  one  should  lend  money  at  interest.  Likewise, 
that,  by  other  orders  of  the  commons,  it  was  enacted,  thatno 
person  should  hold  the  same  public  office  a  second  time  with¬ 
in  ten  years,  or  enjoy  two  offices  in  the  same  year  ;  and,  that 
it  should  be  lawful  to  elect  both  the  consuls  from  among  the 
plebeians.  If  all  these  concessions  were  really  made,  it  is 
evident  that  the  revolters  possessed  no  small  degree  erf 
strength.  According  to  the  accounts  of  other  historians, 
Valerius  was  not  nominated  dictator,  but  the  whole  business 
was  managed  by  the  consuls  ;  nor  was  it  before  they  came 
to  Rome,  but  in  the  city  itself,  that  the  conspirators  became 
so  desperate  as  to  have  recourse  to  arms.  That  the  attack 
by  night  was  not  the  country-seat  of  Titus  Qui^tius,  but 
at  the  house  *of  Caius  Manlius;  on  whom  they  laid  violent 
hands,  and  made  him  their  leader  ;  then,  marching  out  as  far 
as  the  fourth  stone,  they  took  possession  of  a  strong  post ; 
also,  that  no  mention  of  a  reconciliation  was  firsyt  made  by 
the  commanders,  but  that  after  the  troops  had  marched  out 
to  battle,  mutual  salutations  suddenly  took  place ;  and  that 
the  soldiers,  mixing  together,  began  to  shake  hands,  and  em- 

BOOK  VII. 

147 

B.C.  339.] 
brace  each  other  with  tears  ^  and  that  the  consuls,  finding  the 
minds  of  the  soldiers  averse  from  fighting,  were  obliged  to 
make  the  proposition  to  the  senate,  of  admitting  the  rev<dters 
to  terms.  So  that  in  no  circumstance  do  the  ancient  writers 
of  the  history  agree,  except  in  relating  that  there  was  a  mu¬ 
tiny,  and  that  it  was  composed.  The  report  of  this  sedition, 
and  the  heavy  war,  undertaken  at  the  same  time  against  the 
Samnites,  induced  several  nations  to  forsake  the  alliance  of 
the  Romans  ;  ^d  besides  the  Latines,  who  were  known,  for 
a  long  time  p^t,  to  be  in  a  disposition  to  break  the  treaty, 
the  Privenfians  abo,  by  a  sudden  incumon,  ravaged  Norba 
and  Setia,  colonies  of  the  Romans,  which  lay  in  their  neigh¬ 
bourhood. 

THE 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

BOOK  VIII. 
liatinesy  in  conjunction  vnih  the  Campanians,  revolt ;  send  ambassa¬ 
dors  to  Rome,  to  propose,  as  the  condition  (rf’  peace,  that  one  of  tiie  con¬ 
suls  shall  in  future  be  chosen  from  among  them.  Their  requisition  re¬ 
jected  with  disdain,  ’^itus  Manlius,  the  consul,  puts  his  own  son  to 
death,"  for  fighting,  although  successfully,  contrary  to  orders.  Decius, 
the  other  consul,  devotes  himself  for  the  army.  The  Latines  surrender. 
Rhmiius  returmng  to  the  city,  none  of  the  young  men  go  out  to  meet  liim. 
Minutla,  a  vestal,  condimned  for  incest.  Several  matrons  convicted  of 
poisoning.  JLaws  tlien  first  made  against  that  crime.  The  Ausonians, 
Privernians,  and  PalaepoUtans  subdued.  Q,uintus  Publilius  the  first  in¬ 
stance  nf  a  person  continuing  in  command,  sdter  the  expiration  of  his  of¬ 
fice,  and  of  a  triumph  decreed  to  any  person  not  a  consail.  Law  against 
confinement  for  debt.  Quintus  Fabius,  master  of  the  horse,  fights  the 
Samnites,  with  success,  contnuy  to  the  ordcre  of  Lucias  Papirius,  dic¬ 
tator  ;  and,  with  difficulty,  obtains  pardon,  through  the  intercesrion  of 
the  people.  Successful  expedition  against  «the  Samnites. 
I.  THE  new  consuls  were  now  in  office,  Caius  Plautius  a 
second  time,  and  Lucius  ./Emilius  Mamercinus, 
Y.R.414.  .  ^ 
B  C*338  Setia  and  Norba  brought 
information  to  Rome  of  the  revolt  of  the  Priver¬ 
nians,  with  complaints  of  the  damages  sustained  by  those  co¬ 
lonies.  News  also  arrived  that  an  army  of  Volscians,  head¬ 
ed  by  the  people  of  Antium,  had  taken  post  at  Satricum. 
Both  these  wars  fell  by  lot  to  Plautius,  who,  marching  first 
to  Privemum,  came  to  an  immediate  engagement.  The  ene- 

BOOK  VIIL 

149 

B.a  338.] 
Bay,  after  a  sHght  reaistaace,  were  entirely  defeated,  and  their 
town  taken,  bat  tins  was  restored  to  the  inhabitat^  beix^ 
first  secured  by  a  strong  garrison,  while  two^thirds  of  their 
lands  were  taken  firom  them.  From  thence  the  victorious  anny 
was  led  to  Satncum  a^nst  the  Antians :  there  a  furious  bat¬ 
tle  was  fought,  with  a  gmit  effusion  of  blood  on  both  sides* 
A  stcMrm  separated  die  combatants,  while  there  was  no  evi¬ 
dent  advantage  on  either  part ;  the  Romans,  however,  no 
wise  disheartened  by  the  fatigue  of  an  engagement  so  inde¬ 
cisive,  prepared  for  battle  against  the  next  day*  But  the 
Vobcians,  when  diey  had  reckoned  up  their  loss,  found  not 
in  ^mselves  the  same  degree  of  reso^tion  for  making  a  se- 
condUri^  and  marcl^  off  in  the  night  to  Antium,  with  all 
the  hurry  of  a  defeat;  leaving  behind  their  wounded,  and  part 
of  their  baggage*  A  vast  quantity  of  arms  was  both 
in  the  field  and  camp  t  tl^se  the  consul  declared  an  of- 
feri^  to  ^(od^r  Lua^,  and,  entering  the  enemj^s  country, 
laid  itrull  w«^e  as  far  as  the  sea-coast.  The  other  constd, 
JElmilius,1^ti  marching;  into  the  Sahelian  territory,  found  nei¬ 
ther  a  camp  of  the  Samnites,  nor  legions  to  oppose  him ;  but, 
while  he  was  wasting  dieir  countiy  with  fire  and  sword,  am- 
has^dors  came  to  him,  suing  for  peace*  He  referred  them 
to  the  senate ;  where,  when  they  were  admitted  to  an  audi- 
dence,  laying  aside  their  fierceness  of  spirit,  they  requested 
of  the  Romans  that  peace  might  be  restored  between  the  two 
nations,  and  that  they  might  be  at  liberty  to  carry  on  war 
against  the  Sidicinians  these  requests,  they  alleged,  they 
were  the  better  entitled  to  maj^e,  as  “  they  had  united  in 
friendship  with  the  Roman  people,  at  a  time  when  their  own 
affairs  were  in  a  flourishing  state,  not  in  a  season  of  distress, 
as  the  Campanians  Imd  done;  and,  because  those,  against 
whom  they  wished  to  take  arms,  were  the  Sidicinians,  who 
had  ever  been  enemies  toi:hem,  and  never  friends  to  the  Ro- 
♦  Otherwise  called  Ops,  Rh^a,  and  Terra,  the  earth. 

[Y.R.4t4, 

UO  HISTQBY  OF  ROME, 
mm^i  who  faa4  as  Sanmiu^ sought ^ek  feiend- 
dhip  iutkae  of  pes^  ;  uor^  as  the  Catnpauiai^,  ih^  assi^ 
saxce  ;  ikst  were  cowei^eifwith  m  any  way,  ei* 
thcs-  o^aifiiBice  or  sut^cttau^^’  " 
11,  Hie  praetor  Tiberius  jEmtlius,  haviag  inquired  ih^ 
^inim  of  the  seuate  respecting  the  fkmmids  the  Sam* 
sites,  and  the  senate  having  voted  a  rei^wal  ot  the  treaty 
with  gave  this  answer,  diat,  ^  aa  die  Ronmns 
hi^  given  to  cause  to  hinder  the  uninterrupted  cmitimiaitce 
of  th^k  friendship,  so  neitlm*  did  they  now  object  to  its  be¬ 
ing  revived  ;  rince  die  Samnites  showed  an  unwiUingn^  to 
p^aeveie  in,  a  war,  winch  they  had  btroght  on  themselves 
thtough  tl^k  own  fault.  That,  as  to  whiu:  reg^c#  the 
Sidkinians,  they  did  not  interfere  widi  the  liberty  of  d^ 
Samnite  nation  to  determine^for  thetnselves  with .  resj^t  to 
peace  and  war.’’  The  treaty  being  ctmcluded,  ^md  the  am- 
ba^ack^  returning  home,  the  Roman  army  vm  iasmiedia^ly 
withdrawn  from  thence,  after  receiving  a  yearns  ^y  lipr  the 
seddiers,  com  for  three  months  ;  which  w^e  ftie  cemdi- 
tions  stipulated  Jby  the  consul,  on  his  granting  them  a  truce, 
until  the  ambassadors  should  return.  The  Samnites  marched 
against  the  Sidicinians,  with  the  same  j^oops  which  they  luki 
emph^^  m  the  Roman  w^,  sanguine  ki  tbek  espectatkm 
oi  getting  immediate  poosesaion  of  the  enemy’s  capital.  On 
this  the  Si(hciniam  proposed,  fir^,  to  the  Romans,  to  put 
themsedves  tmder  thek  dominion;  but  the  senate . rejec^d 
the  prcqiosal,  as  made  late,  and  |arced  from  tt^m  merely 
fay  eaweme  necessity  ;  then  |he  same  c^er  was  nmde  tp,  and 
accepted  by  the  Latines,  who  were  ready  to  comment  Im- 
tUities  on  their  own  account.  Nor  did  even  ike  Camfmnians 
refrain  from  taking  a  part  in  this  quarrel,  much  stronger  im- 
piessions  being  left  on  their  minds  by  the  ilUtreatn^nt  re¬ 
ceived  from  the  Samnites,  than  by  the  kinchie^  of  the  Ro¬ 
mans.  Out  of  such  a  niunber  of  nations,  one  vast  army 

mofSi  viu. 

tst 

B.C.  33a.] 
cc^aposedt  vmdtr  the  dira:tk)o  ti^  Latii^  wUcIi,  eBler« 
mg  the  tenitories  of  the  S«ci&ites^  did  much  greater  dmuage 
by  de|»^datio8a  than  by  fighting.  But,  aUmugh  the  Latins 
had  the  be^r  in  the  fidUl,  yet  they  were  weU  {deased  to 
tire  out  <rf  the  euemy^s  country,  to  avoid  tl»  necessity  of  Um 
frequent  engagement.  This  respite  afforded  time  to 
Samnites  to  send  ambassadors  to  Rome,  who,  having  dbtm* 
cd  an  audience  of  the  senate,  made  heavy  complaints,  that, 
thcmgh  now  their  confederates,  they  suffered  the  same  c^a« 
mities  which  they  had  felt,  when  their  enemies ;  and,  widi 
tl^  humblest  entreaties,  requested,  that  the  Romans  would 
“  diink  il  enough  to  have  deprived  the  Sarnnims  of  cimq^st 
over  their  enemies,  the  Campanians  azui  Sidicinians ;  smd 
that  they  would  not,  besides,  suffer  them  to  be  conquered  by 
such  a  union  of  dastardly  nations.  That  Aey  would,  by  their 
sovereign  authority,  oblige  the  JLatines  and  Campanians,  if 
those  people  were  really  under  the  dominkm  of  the  Romans, 
to  forbear  from  entering  the  territcay  of  die  Samnites,  and, 
if  they  refused  obedient,  compel  them  to  it  by  arms.^  To 
this  the  Rommis  gave  an  ind^erminate  answer,  because  it 
would  have  been  mortifying  to  acknowledge  tfmt  the  Lattnes 
wme  not  umier  dieir  power,  and  th^  feared,  lest,  by  charging 
them  with  misbehaviour,  they  might  attempt  to  free  theim. 
selves  from  all  suhjecrion  s  but  considered  the  case  of  die 
Campaniana^as  very  different,  they  having  come  under  their 
protection,  nc^  by  treaty,  but  by  surrender.  They  miswered, 
therefore,  that  ‘‘  the  Campanians,  whether  willing  or  not, 
should  be  quiet ;  but,  in  the  treaty  with  the  Latines,  there 
was  no  article  which  prohibited  their  waging  war  against 
whom  they  chose.” 
ill.  This  answer,  as  it  sent  away  the  Samnites  in  doubt 
what  opinion  to  form,  with  respect  to  the  conduct  which  the 
Romans  intended  to  pursue,  entirely  subverted  the  allegiance 
©f  the  Campanians  by  the  menaces  held  out  to  them ;  it  also 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  415- 

152 
nicfeased  die  presumpdon  of  the  Lsitines,  the  senate  seem* 
ed  now  not  disposed,  in  an^  respect,  to  control  d^tn.  These 
last,  therefore,  under  the  pretext  of  preparing  f<»^  war  a^ii^ 
the  Sasmites,  held  frequent  meetings,  in  which  their  chiefs, 
concerting  matters  among  tfaems^es,  secretly  fomented  the 
design  of  a  war  with  Rome.  The  Campsmians,  too,  gave 
their  support  to  this  war,  though  against  their  jaeservcrs. 
But,  notwithstanding  that  they  took  all  possible  ^ins  to  keep 
their  proceedings  from  being  generally  known,  and  though 
they  wished  to  get  rid  of  the  Volscian  enemy  then  at  their 
back,  before  the  Romans  should  be  alarmed  ;  yet,  by  means 
of  persons  coifnected  with  the  latter  m  hospitality,  s^d  other 
private  ties,  intelligence  of  the  conspiracy  was  conveyed  to 
Rome.  There,  the  consuls  being  commanded  to  tdxiicate 
their  office,  in  order  that  the  new  ones  might  be  the  sooner 
elected,  and  have  the  more  time  to  ju’epare  for  a  war  of  so 
great  importance,  it  began  to  be  considered  as  improper  that 
the  elecrion  should  be  held  by  persons  not  vested  with  fuU 
authority ;  consequently  an  interregnum  took  place,  and  con- 
^  _  tinued  under  two  interreges,  Marcus  Valerius  and 
Y.R  415  ° 
B  C  337  Marcus  Fabius.  The  latter  elected  consuls,  Titus 
Manlius  Torquatus  a  third  time,  and  Publius  De- 
cius  Mus.  It  is  agreed  on  all.  hands,  that,  in  this  year, 
Alexander,  King  of  Epirus,  made  a  descent  with  a  fleet  on 
Italy,  in  which  expedition,  had  his  iirst  attempts  been  crown* 
ed  with  success,  he  would,  without  doubt,  have  carried  his 
arms  against  the  Romans.  This  period  was  also  distinguished 
by  the  exploits  of.  Alexander  the  Great,  son  to  the  other^s 
sister,  who,  in  another  quarter  of  the  globe,  after  showing 
himself  invincible  in  war,  was  doomed  by  fortune  to  be  cut 
off  by  sicknois  in  the  prime  of  life.  Now,  the  Romans,  al* 
though  they  entertained  not  a  doubt  of  the  revolt  of  their 
allies,  and  of  the  Latine  nation,  yet,  as  if  they  acted  in  behalf 
of  the  Samnites,  not  of  themselves,  summoned  ten  of  the 

BOOK  VIII, 

15S 

B,C.  SS7,] 
chiefs  of  the  Latines  to  appear  at  Rome,  and  receive  their 
orders.  The  Latines  had,  at  that  time,  two  praetors,  JLucius 
Annius,  a  native  of  Setia,  and  Lucius  Numi^ius,  of  Circei, 
both  Roman  colonists ;  through  whose  means,  besides  Signia 
and  Velitrae,  which  belonged  to  the  Romans,  the  Volscians 
also  had  been  engaged  to  join  in  the  war.  It  was  thought 
proper  that  these  two  should  be  particularly  summoned  ; 
every  one  clearly  perceived  on  what  account  they  were  sent 
for :  the  prsetors,  therefore,  before  they  set  out  for  Rome, 
called  a  general  assembly,  whom  they  informed,  that  they 
were  called  to  attend  the  Roman  senate,  and  desired  their 
opinion  with  respect  to  the  business  which  they  supposed 
would  be  the  subject  of  discussiem,  and  to  make  known  to 
them  die  answers -which  they  chose  should  be  given  on  the 
occasion. 
IV.  After  several  different  opiuions  had  been  advanced, 
Annius  said,  “  Although  I  myself  proposed  the  question,  of 
what  answer  should  be  made,  yet,  in  tny  judgment,  the  gene* 
ral  interest  requires  that  ye  determine  how  we  are  to  act, 
mther  than  how  we  are  to  speak.  When  your  designs  shall 
be  clearly  unfolded,  it  will  be  easy  to  adapt  words  to  the 
subject ;  for,  if  we  are  still  capable  of  submitting  to  slavery, 
under  the  shadow  of  a  confederacy  between  equals,  what 
have  we  more  to  do  than  to  abandon  the  Sidicinians,  yield 
obedience  to  the  commands,  not  only  of  the  Romans,  but  of 
the  Samnites^  saying  in  answer  to  the  former,  that,  whenever 
they  intimate  their  pleasure,  we  are -ready  to  lay  down  our 
arms?  But,  on  the  other  hand,  if  our  mind^  are  at  length 
penetrated  by  an  ardent  desire  of  liberty  ;  if  there  be  a  con¬ 
federacy  subsisting ;  if  alliance  be  equality  of  rights  ;  if  the 
Romans  have  now  reason  to  glory  in  a  circumstance,  of 
which  they  were  formerly  ashamed,  our  being  of  the  same 
blood  with  them  ;  if  they  have,  in  our  troops,  such  an  army 
of  allies,  that,  by  its  junction  with  their  own,  they  douWe 
VOL.  TI. - X 

154 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  415. 

strength ;  such  a  one^  in  shorty  as  their  consuls^  either 
m  commencing,  or  concluding  their  own  wars,  would,  very 
unwillingly^  disunite  from  their  party:  why  is  there  not  a 
perfect  and  setded  equahzation  ?  why  is  it  not  permitted, 
that  one  of  the  consuls  should,  be  chosen  from  among  the 
Latines  ?  and  that  they,  who  supply  an  equal  share  of 
strength,  should  be  admitted  to  an  equal  share  in  the  go¬ 
vernment  ?  This,  indeed,  considered  in  itself,  would  not  re¬ 
dound  to  our  honour,  in  any  extraordinary  degree :  as  we 
dbould  still  acknowledge  Rome  to  be  the  metropolis  of  La- 
tium  ;  but  that  it  maypossibly  appear  to  do  so,  is  owing  to 
our  tame  resignation  for  such  a  length  of  time.  But,  if  ye 
ever  wished  to  acquire  a  participation  in  the '  governnfeiU, 
die  opportunity  now  presents  itself,  afforded  to  you  by  the 
bounty  of  the  gods,  and  your  own  resolution.  Ye  have  tried 
their  patience,  by  refusing  the  ^supply  of  troops ;  who  can 
doubt  that  they  were  incensed,  to  the  highest  degree,  when 
we  broke  through  a  practice  of  more  than  two  hundred  years 
continuance?  yet  they  thought  proper  to  smother  their  re- 
s^tment.  We  waged  war  with  the  Pelignians  in  our  own 
name:  those  who,  formerly,  would  not  grant  us  lil^rty  to 
defend  our  own  frontiers,  interfered  not  then.  They  heard 
that  wc  had  received  the  Sidicinians  into  our  protection ;  that 
the  Campanians  had  revolted  from  them  to  us ;  that  we  were 
preparing  Bn  army  to  act  against  the  Samnites,  their  confede- 
rat& ;  yet  they  stirmi  not  a  step  from  their  city.  What 
feet  a  knowledge  of  oew  strength,  and  of  their  own,  made 
diem  thus  moderate?  I  am  informed,  from  good  authority, 
that,  when  the  Samnites  made  their  complaints  of  us,  the 
Roman  senate  answered  them  in  such  terms,  as  plainly 
evinced  that  they  themselves  did  not  insist  on  Latium  being 
under  the  dominion  of  Rome.  Urge,  then,  your  claim,  and 
assume  the  exercise  of  that  right  which  they  tacitly  concede" 
to  you.  If  fear  deters  you  from  making  this  demand^  lo ! 

BOOK  VHI. 

%ss 

BX,  m.] 
here  I  pledge  myself  that  I  will  require,  in  the  hearing,  not 
€mly  of  the  semute,  and  people  of  Rome,  but  of  JoTe  him* 
self,  who  resides  in  the  Capkol,  that,  if  they  wish  us  to  cmk* 
tinue  in  confederacy  and  aUiance  with  them,  they  receive 
from  us,  one  of  the  consuls,  and  half  of  the  senate.’’  On 
his  not  only  recommending  this  measure  with  boldne^,  but 
undertaking  the  execution  of  it,  they  unanimously,  with  jK:* 
clamations  of  applause,  gave  him  authority  to  act,  and  speak, 
in  such  manner,  as  he  should  judge  conducive  to  the  interest 
of  the  republic  of  the  Latine  nation,  and  becoming  his  own 
honour. 
V.  When  die  praetors  arrived  in  Rome,  they  had  audience 
of  the  senate  in  the  Capitol;  and  the  consul,  Titus  Manlius, 
having,  by  the  direction  of  the  senate,  required  of  them  tihat 
they  should  not  make  war  on  the  Samnites,  the  confederates 
of  the  Romans, — Annius,  as  if  he  were  a  conqueror,  who 
had  taken  the  Capitol  by  arms,  and  not  an  ambassador,  who 
owed  his  safe^,  in  speaking,  to  the  law  of  nations,  replied 
thus  :  “  Titus  Manlius,  and  ye.  Conscript  Fathers,  it  is  full 
time  for  you  to  cease  to  treat  us  as  a  people  subject  to  yom: 
commands,  since  ye  see  the  very  flourishing  state,  which, 
through  the  bounty  of  the  gods,  Tatium  enjoys  at  present, 
both  with  respect  to  numbers  and  strength :  the  Samnites  are 
‘Conquered  by  our  arms;  the  Sidicinians  and  Campanians, 
and  now  the  Volstians  also,  are  united  to  us  in  alliance  ;  and 
even  your  own  colonies  prefer  the  government  of  Latium  to 
that  of  Rome.  But,  since  ye  do  not  think  proper  to  put 
end  to  your  imperious  exertions  of  arbitrary  dominion,  we, 
although  able,  by  force  of  arms,  to  assert  the  independency 
of  Latium,  will  yet  pay  so  much  regard  to  the  connexion 
subsisting  between  us,  as  to  offer  an  association  on  terms, 
equality,  as  it  has  pleased  the  gods  that  the  strength  of  both 
should  be,  as  it  is,  completely  balanced.  One  of  the  consuk 
must  he  chosen  out  of  Latium,  the  other  out  of  Rome  ;  the 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y,R.  415. 

tM 
ftetmte  must  consist  of  an  equal  number  of  each  nation ;  we 
must  become  one  J>e6ple,  one  republic ;  and,  in  order  that 
both  may  have  the  same  seat  of  government,  and  the  same 
name,  as  43ne  side  or  the  other  must  make  the  concession,  let 
this,  to  the  happiness  of  both,  have  the  advantage  of  being 
deemed  the  mother  country,  and  let  us  all  be  caHed  Romans.” 
The  Romans  happened  to  have  a  consul,  (Titus  Manlius,)  of 
a  temper  as  vehement  as  that  of  Annius,  who,  so  far  from 
restraining  his  anger,  openly  declared,  that,  if  the  Conscript 
Fathers  should  be  so  infatuated,  as  to  receive  laws  from  a 
man  of  Setia,  he  would  come  into  the  senate,  with  his  sword 
in  hand,  and  put  to  death  every  Latine  that  he  should  find 
in  their  house;  then  turning  to  the  statue  of  Jupiter,  he 
exclaimed,  “  Jupiter,  hear  these  impious  demands ;  hear 
justice  and  equity.  O  Jupiter,  are  you,  as  if  overpowered 
and  made  c^tive,  to  behold,  in  your  consecrated  temple,  a 
foreign  consul,  and  a  foreign  senate  ?  are  these,  Latines,  the 
treaties  which  the  Roman  king,  Tullus,  made  with  the  Al¬ 
bans  your  forefathers,  or  which  Lucius  Tarquinius,  after¬ 
wards  concluded  with  yourselves  ?  does  not  the  fight  at  the 
lake  Regillus  recur  to  your  thoughts  ?  are  your  calamities  of 
old,  and  our  recent  kindnesses  towards  you,  entirely  oblite¬ 
rated  from  your-memories?” 
'  VI.  These  words  of  the  consul  were  followed  by  expres¬ 
sions  of  indignation  from  the  senators  ;  and  it  is  related,  that, 
in  reply  to  the  frequent  addresses  to  the  gods,  whom  the  con¬ 
suls  often  invoked  as  witnesses  to  the  treaties,  Annius  was 
heard  to  express  contempt  of  the  divinity  of  the  Roman  Ju¬ 
piter,  However,  being  inflamed  with  wrath,  and  quitting  the 
porch  of  the  temple  with  hasty  steps,  he  fell  down  the  stairs, 
and  was  dashed  against  a  stone  at  the  bottom  with  such  vio¬ 
lence,  that  he  received  a  contusion  on  bis  head,  which  de¬ 
prived  him  of  sense.  As  all  authors  do  not  concur  in  men¬ 
tioning  his  death  to  have  ensued,  I,  for  my  part,  must  leave 

BOOK  VIII. 

1S7 

B.C.  33r.} 
that  circumstance  in  dodbt ;  as  I  shall  another^  of  a  violent 
storm,  with  dreadful  noise  in  the  air,  happening  while  ap¬ 
peals  were  made  to  the  gods,  concerning  the  infraction  of  the 
treaties.  For,  as  these  accounts  may  possibly  be  founded  in 
fact,  so  may  they  likewise  have  been  invented,  to  express,  in 
a  lively  manner,  an  immediate  denunciation  of  the  wrath  of 
the  gods.  Torquatus,  being  sent  by  the  senate  to  dismiss  the 
ambassadors,  on  seeing  Annius  stretched  on  the  ground,  ex¬ 
claimed,  in  a  voice  so  loud  as  to  be  heard  both  by  the  sena¬ 
tors  and  the  people,  ‘‘Ye  gods,  proceed  in  so  just  a  war,  in 
which  your  own  rights  are  concerned  ;  there  is  a  Deity  in 
heaven  ;  thou  dost  exist,  great  Jupiter  ;  not  without  reason 
have  we  consecrated  you,  in  this  mansion,  as  the  father  of 
gods  and  men."  Why  do  you  hesitate,  Romans,  and  ye,  Con¬ 
script  Fathers,  to  take  up  arms,  when  the  gods  thus  lead  the 
way  ?  Thus  will  I  throw  down,  in  the  dust,  the  legions  of 
the  Latines,  as  ye  see  their  ambassador  prostrated.”  These 
words  of  the  consul  were  received  by  the  multitude  with  ap¬ 
plause,  and  excited  such  a  flame  in  their  breasts,  that  the  am¬ 
bassadors,  at  their  departure,  owed  their  safety  rather  to  the 
care  of  the  magistrates,  who  escorted  them,  by  the  consul’s 
order,  than  to  the  people’s  regard  to  the  laws  of  nations.  The 
senate  concurred  in  voting  for  the  war ;  and  the  consuls,  af¬ 
ter  raising  two  armies,  marched  through  the  territories  of  the 
Marsians  and  Pelignians  ;  and,  having  formed  a  junction 
with  the  army  of  the  Samnites,  pitched  their  camp  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Capua,  where  the  Latines  and  their  allies 
had  already  collected  their  forces.  Here,  as  it  is  related, 
there  appeared  to  both  the  consuls,  in  their  sleep,  the  same 
figure  of  a  mah,  of  a  form  larger,  and  more  majestic,  than  the 
human,  who  said  to  them,  that  “  of  the  one  party  a  general, 
of  the  other  the  army,  were  due  as  victims  to  the  infernal 
gods,  and  to  mother  earth  ;  and  that  on  whichever  side  a  ge¬ 
neral  should  devote  the  legions  of  his  enemy,  and  himself, 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[YJft.  415, 

MB 
with  tbein^  to  that  party  md  nation  die  victoty  would 
faU/^  The  eonsuia,  having  taitnniunicated  to  each  odier  die^ 
yi^ons  of  the  night,  determined,  that  vicdins  dmuid  be  slain 
to  avert  the  wrath  of  the  gods  j  and  also,diat^  if  the  portend, 
appearing  in  their  entrails,  concurred  with  what  they  had 
seen  in  their  sleep,  one^  or  odier  of  the  consuls  should  fulfd 
the  will  of  the  fates.  Finding  the  answers  of  the  auspices  to 
agree  with  the  awful  impressions  already  made  on  their  minds 
in  private,  they  then  called  together  the  lieutenant-generals 
and  tribunes ;  and,  having  made  known  to  them  all  the  de¬ 
crees  of  the  gods,  settled  between  themselves,  that,  lest  the 
yoluntary  death  of  a  consul  might  dishearten  the  troops  in  the 
fiLeld<>  on  whichever  side  the  Roman  army  should  begin  to 
give  ground,  the  consul  commanding  there  ishould  devote 
himself  for  the  Homan  people,  and  for  his  country.  In  this 
consultation,  it  was  also  mentioned,  that,  if  ever  strictness  in 
command  had  been  enforced^  in  any  war,  it  was  then,  parti¬ 
cularly,  requisite  that  military  discipline  should  be  brought 
back  to  the  ancient  model.  Their  attention  was  the  more 
strongly  directed  to  this  point,  by  the  consideration,  that  the 
enemies,  with  whom  they  had  to  deal,  were  the  Latines  j 
people  whq  used  the  same  language,  and  who  had  the  same 
manners,  the  same  kind  of  arms,  and,  what  was  more  than 
all,  the  same  military  institiU:iicms  as  themselves  ;  who  had 
been  intermixed  with  them  in  the  same  armies,  often  in  the 
same  companies,  soldiers  with  soldiers,  centurions  with  cen^ 
turions,  tribunes  with  d'ibunes,  comrades  and  colleagues. 
Lest,  in  consequence  of  this,  the  soldiers  might  be  betrayed 
into  any  mistake,  the  consuls  issued  orders,  that  no  person 
should  fighf  with  any  of  the  enemy,  except  in  his  post. 
VII.  It  happened  that,  among  the  other  commanders  of 
the  troops  qf  horsemen,  which  were  dispatched  to  every  quar¬ 
ter  to  procure  intelligence,  Titus  Manlius^  the  consul’s  son, 
came,  with  his  troop,  to  the  back  of  the  enemy’s  camp,  so 

BOOK  VIII. 

1S$ 

BiC.SSf,] 

»ear  as  to  be  scarcely  dktaat  a  dart’s  throw  from  the  next 
post,  where  some  horsemen  of  Tusculum  were  stationed,  un¬ 
do*  the  command  o£  Gemtnius  Metrius,  a  man  highly  distin- 
gukbed  amongst  his  countrymen,  both  by  his  birth  and  con¬ 
duct.  On  observing  the  Roman  horsemen,  and  the  constd’s 
son,  remarkable  above  the  rest,  marching  at  their  head,  (for 
they  were  all  known  to  each  other,  particularly  mm  of  any 
note,)  he  called  out,  ^  Romans,  do  ye  intend,  with  one  troop, 
to  wag^  war  against  the  Latines  and  their  allies  ?  What  em¬ 
ployment  will  the  two  consuls  and  their  armies  have  in  the 
mean  time  ?”  Manlius  answered,  ^  they  will  come  in  due 
season,  and  with  them  will  come  one  whose  power  and 
strength  is  superior  to  either,  Jupiter  himself,  the  witness  of 
those  treaties  which  ye  have  violated.  If,  at  the  lake  of  Re- 
gillus,  we  gave  you  fighting  until  ye  were  weary,  I  will  an¬ 
swer  for  it,  that  we  shall,  in  this  place  also,  give  you  such 
entertainment,  that,  for  the  future,  it  will  not  be  extremely 
agreejd»le  to  yem  to  face  us  in  the  field.”  To  this,  Geminius, 
advmicing  a  little  from  his  men,  Teplied,  “  Do  you  choose, 
then,  uiuil  that  day  arrives,  when,  with  such  great  fabour  ye 
move  your  armies,  to  enter  the  lists  yourself  with  me,  diat, 
from  the  event  of  a  combat  between  us  two,  it  may  immedi¬ 
ately  be  seen  how  much  a  Latine  homeman  surpasses  a  Rc^ 
man  Either  anger,  or  shame  of  declining  the  cemtest,  or 
the  iiT^istible  power  of  destiny,  urged  on  the  daring  spirit 
of  the  youth,  so  that,  disregarding  his  father’s  commands,  mid 
the  edict  the  consuls,  he  rushed  precipitately  to  a  conte^, 
in  which,  whether  he  was  victorious  or  vanquished,  was  of 
no  great  consequence  to  himself.  The  other  horsemen  re¬ 
moved  to  some  distance,  as  if  to  behold  a  show  ;  and  then,fo 
the  space  of  clear  ground  which  lay  between,  the  combatants 
spurred  on  their  horses  against  each  odier,  and,  on  their 
meeting  in  fierce  encounter,  the  point  of  Manlius’s  spear  pas¬ 
sed  over  the  helmet  of  his  antagonist,  and  that,  of  Metius, 

tm 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

[Y,R.  MS. 

across  the  neck  of  die  other’s  horse  4  they  then  wheeled  their 
horses  round,  and  Manlius  having,  with  the  greater  quick* 
ness,  raised  himself  in  his  seat,  to  repeat  his  stroke,  fixed  his 
javelin  between  the  ears  of  his  opponent’s  horse,  the  pain  of 
which  wound  made  the  animal  rear  his  fore  feet  on  high,  smd 
toss  his  head  with  such  violence,  that  he  shook  off  his  rider, 
whom  as  he  endeavoured  to  raise  himself,  after  the  severe 
fall,  by  leaning  on  his  javelin  and  buckler,  Manlius  pierced 
through  the  throat,  so  that  the  steel  came  out  between  his 
ribs,  and  pinned  him  to  the  earth.  Then  collecting  the  spoils, 
he  rode  back  to  his  men,  and,  together  with  his  troop,  who 
extdted  with  joy^  proceeded  to  the  camp,  and  so  on  to  his 
father,  without  ever  reflecting  on  the  nature,  or  the  conse¬ 
quences  of  his  conduct,  or  whether  he  had  merited  praise  or 
punishment.  Father,”  (said  he,)  that  all  men  may  justly 
attribute  to  me  the  honour  of  being  descended  of  your  blood, 
Having  been  chaUenged  to  combat,  I  bring  these  equestrian 
spoils  taken  from  my  antagonist,  whom  I  slew.”  Which, 
when  the  consul  heard,  turning  away  instantly  from  the  youth, 
in  an  angry  manner,  he  ordered  an  assembly  to  be  called,  by 
sound  of  trumpet ;  and,  when  the  troops  had  come  together 
in  full  numbers,  he  spoke  in  this  manner ;  ‘‘  Titus  Manlius, 
for  as  much  as  you,  in  contempt  of  the  consular  authority, 
and  of  the  respect  due  to  a  father,  have,  contrary  to  our  edict, 
fought  with  the  enemy,  out  of  your  post ;  and,  as  far  as  in 
you  lay,  subverted  the  military  discipline,  by  which  the  power 
of  Rome  has  to  this  day  been  supported  ;  and  have  brought 
me  under  the  hard  necessity  either  of  overlooking  the  inter¬ 
ests  of  the  public,  or  my  own,  and  those  of  my  nearest  con¬ 
nections  ;  it  is  fitter  that  we  undergo  the  penalty  of  our  own 
transgressions,  than  that  the  commonwealth  should  expiate 
our  offences  so  injurious  to  it.  We  shall  afford  a  melancholy 
example,  but  a  profitable  one,  to  the  youth  of  all  future  ages. 
For  my  part,  I  own,  both  the  natural  affection  of  a  parents 

BOOK  VIII. 

161 

B.C.  337.] 
and  the  instance  which  you  have  shewn  of  bravery,  misguid¬ 
ed  by  a  false  notion  of  honour,  affect  me  deeply.  But,  since 
the  authority  of  a  consul’s  orders  must  either  be  established 
by  your  death ;  or,  by  your  escaping  with  impunity,  be  an¬ 
nulled  for  ever ;  I  expect  that  even  .you  yourself,  if  you  have 
any  of  our  blood  in  you,  will  not  refuse  to  restore,  by  your 
punishment,  that  military  discipline  which  has  been  subverted 
by  your  fault.  Go,  lictor  :  bind  him  to  the  ^ake.”  Shocked 
to  the  last  degree  at  such  a  cruel  order,  each  looking  on  the 
axe  as  if  drawn  against  himself,  all  were  quiet,  through  fear, 
rather  than  discipline.  They  stodd,  therefore,  for  some  tim% 
motionless  and  silent  j  and  when  the  blood  spouted  from  his 
severed  neck,  then,  their  minds  emerging,  as  it  were,  from 
the  stupefaction  in  which  they  had  been  plunged,  they  all  at 
once  united  their  voices  in  free  expressions  of  compassion, 
refraining  not  either  from  lamentations  or  execrations  ;  and 
covering  the  body  of  the  youth  with  the  spoils,  they  burned 
it  on  a  pile,  erected  without  the  rampart,  with  every  honour 
which  the  warm  zeal  of  the  soldiers  could  bestow  on  a  fu¬ 
neral.  From  thence,  ‘  Manlian  orders’  were  not  only  then 
considered  with  horror,  but  have  been  transmitted,  as  a  mo¬ 
del  of  austerity,  to  future  times.  The  harshness  of  this  pun¬ 
ishment,  however,  rendered  the  soldiery  more  obedient  to 
their  commander  ;  while  the  guards  and  watches,  and  the 
regulation  of  the  several  posts,  were  thenceforth  attended  to 
with  greater  diligence  :  this  severity  was  also  found  useful, 
when  the  troops,  for  the  final  decision,  went  into  the  field  of 
battle. 
VI II^  A  battie  between  these  two  nations  much  resembled 
that  of  a  civil  war ;  for,  except  in  point  of  courage,  there  was 
a  perfect  similarity  between  the  Latines  and  Homans,  in 
every  particular.  The  Romans  formerly  made  use  of  tar¬ 
gets;  afterwards,  when  thfey  came  to  receive  pay,  they  made 
shields  for  themselves,  instead  of  the  targets  ;  and  their  ar- 
VOL.  II. — Y 

162 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  415. 

my,  which  before  was  composed  of  phalanxes,  like  those  of 
the  Macedonians,  began  to  be  formed  in  a  line  of  distinct 
companies.  At  length  a  farther  division  was  made  of  these, 
into  centuries  ;  each  century  containing  sixty«two  soldiers, 
one  centurion,  and  a  standard-bearer.  The  spearmen  formed 
the  first  line,  in  ten  companies,  with  small  intervals  between 
them.  A  company  had  twenty  light  armed  soldiers,  the  rest 
bearing  shields  ;  those  were  called  light,  who  carried  only  a 
spear  and  short  iron  javelins.  This  body,  which  formed  the 
van  in  the  field  of  battle,  contained  the  youth  in  early  bloom, 
irho  were  advancing  to  the^ige  of  service  ;  next  to  them  fol¬ 
lowed  the  men  of  more  robust  age,  in  the  same  number  of 
companies,  whom  they  called  Principes,  all  bearing  shields, 
and  distinguished  by  the  completest  armour.  This  band  of 
twenty  companies  they  called  Antepilani,  because  there  were, 
at  the  same  time,  ten  others  placed  behind  them  with  the 
standards.  Of  these  companies,  each  was  distinguished  in¬ 
to  three  divisions,  and  the  first  division  of  each  they  called  a 
Pilus.  Each  company  had  three  ensigns,  and  contained  one 
hundred  and  eighty-six  men.  The  first  ensign  was  at  the 
head  of  the  Triarii,  veteran  soldiers  of  approved  courage ; 
the  second,  at  the  head  of  the  Rorarii,  men  whose  age  and 
course  of  service  afforded  less  ability  ;  the  third,  at  that  of 
the  Accensi,  the  body  in  whom  they  placed  the  least  confi¬ 
dence  of  all,  for  which  reason  also  they  were  thrown  back 
to  the  last  line.  An  army  being  marshalled  according  to  this 
disposition,  the  spearmen  first  began  the  fight ;  if  these  were 
unable  to  repulse  the  enemy,  they  retreated  leisurely,  and  the 
principes  received  them  into  the  intervals  of  their  ranks.  The 
fight  then  rested  on  the  principes,  the  spearmen  following  in 
their  rear.  The  veterans  continued  kneeling  behind  the  en¬ 
signs,  with  their  left  leg  extended  forward,  holding  their 
shields  resting  on  their  shoulders,*  and  their  spears  fixed  in 
the  ground,  with  the  points  erect ;  so  that  their  line  presented 

BOOK  VIII. 

155 

Bx.  3$r.] 
an  appearance  of  strength,  like  that  of  a  rampart.  If  the 
principes  also  failed  in  making  an  impression  upon  the  ene¬ 
my,  they  fell  back  slowly,  from  the  front  to  the  veterans. 
Hence  came  into  use  the  proverbial  expression,  denoting  a 
case  of  difficulty,  that  the  affair  had  come  to  the  Triarii. 
These,  then,  rising  up,  received  the  principes  and  spearmen 
into  the  intervals  of  their  ranks,  and  immediately  closing  their 
files,  shut  up,  as  it  were,  every  opening,  and  in  one  compact 
body  fell  upon  the  enemy ;  after  which,  there  was  no  other 
resource  left.  This  was  the  most  formidable  circumstance  to 
the  enemy,  when,  after  having  pursued  them  as  vanquished, 
they  saw  a  new  line  of  battle  suddenly  starting  up,  with  an 
increase  of  strength.  The  number  of  legions,  generally 
raised,  was  four,  each  consisting  of  four  thousand  foot,  and 
three  hundred  horse.  To  these,  an  addition  of  an  equal  num¬ 
ber  used  to  be  made  by  levies,  among  the  Latines,  with 
whom  the  Romans  were  now  to  contend  as  enemies,  and 
who  practised  the  same  method  in  drawing  up  their  troops. 
So  that  it  was  well  known,  that,  unless  the  ranks  should  hew 
put  out  of  their  order,  they  would  have  to  engage,  not  only 
ensi^  against  ensign,  a  body  of  every  description  against 
one  exactly  similar,  but  even  centurion  against  centurion. 
There  were  among  the  veterans  two  first  centurions,  one  in 
each  army ;  the  Roman,  deficient  in  bodily  strength,  but  a 
man  of  courage  and  experience  in  service :  the  Latine,  ex¬ 
ceedingly  strong,  and  a  first-rate  warrior.  These  were  per¬ 
fectly  well  known  to  each  other,  because  they  had  always 
commanded  centuries  in  equal  rank.  The  Roman,  diffident 
of  his  strength,  had,  before  he  left  Rome,  obtained  permis¬ 
sion  from  the  consuls,  to  appoint  any  one,  whom  he  thought 
proper,  his  sub-centurion,  to  defend  him  against  the  one 
who  was  destined  to  be  his  antagonist ;  and  the  youth  whom 
he  chose,  being  opposed  to  the  Latine  centurion  in  battle, 
obtained  a  victory  over  him.  The  armies  came  to  an  engage- 

164 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  415. 

ment  at  a  little  distance  from  the  foot  of  Mount  Vesuvius, 
where  the  road  led  to  the  Veseris, 
IX.  The  Roman  consuls,  before  they  led  out  their  forces 
to  the  field,  performed  sacrifices.  We  are  told,  that  the 
aruspex  showed  to  Decius,  that  the  head  of  the  liver  was 
wounded  on  the  side  which  respected  himself,  in  Other  res¬ 
pects  the  victim  was  acceptable  to  the  gods:  but  Manlius 
found,  in  bis  immolation,  omens  highly  favourable.  On 
which  Decius  said,  All  is  well  yet,  since  my  colleague’s 
offering  has  been  accepted.”  With  their  troops,  arrayed  in 
the  order  already  described,  they  marched  forth  to  battle. 
Manlius  commanded  the  right  w;ing;  Decius,  the  left.  At 
the  beginning,  the  conflict  was  maintained  with  equal 
strength  on  both  sides,  and  with  equal  courage.  After¬ 
wards,  the  Roman  spearmen,  on.  the  left  wing,  unable  to 
withstand  the  violent  push  made  by  the  Latines,  retreated 
to  the  principes.  On  this  disorder  happening,  the  consul 
Decius  called  to  Marcus  Valerius,  with  a  loud  voice,  Va¬ 
lerius,  we  want  the  aid  of  the  gods:  as  public  pontiff  of  the 
Roman  people,  dictate  to  me  the  words  in  which  I  may  de¬ 
vote  myself  for  the  legions.”  The  pontiff  then  directed  him 
to  take  the  gown  called  Praetexta,  and,  with  his  head  covered, 
and  his  hand  thrust  up  under  the  gown  to  his  chin,  stand¬ 
ing  upon  a  spear  laid  under  his  feet,  to  repeat  these  words  : 
O  Janus,  Jupiter,  father  Mars,  Quirinus,  Bellona,  ye 
Lares,  ye  gods  Novensiks*,  ye  gods  Indigetes,  ye  divini¬ 
ties,  under  whose  dominion  we  and  our  enemies  are,  and  ye 
gods  of  the  infernal  regions,  I  beseech  you,  I  adore  you,  I 
implore  of  you,  that  ye  may  propitiously  grant  strength  and 
victory  to  the  Roman  people,  the  Quirites ;  and  affect  the 
enemies  of  the  Roman  people,  the  Quirites,  with  terror,  dis¬ 
may,  and^  death.  In  such  manner  as  I  have  expressed  in 
*  The  Novensiles  were  nine  deities  brought  to  Rome  by  the  Sabines  * 
Lara,  Vesta,  Minerva,  Feronia,  Concord,  Faith,  Fortune,  Chance,  Health. 

mOK  VIIL 

165 

B,C.  337.] 
words,  so  do  I  devote  the  legions,  and  the  aiudliaries  of  our 
foes,  together  with  myself,  to  the  infernal  gods,  and  to  eardi, 
for  the  republic  of  the  Romans,  for  the  army,  legions,  and 
auxiliaries  of  the  Roman  people,  the  Quirites.”  After  he 
had  uttered  these  solemn  words,  he  ordered  his  lictors  to  go 
to  Titus  Manlius,  and  to  inform  his  colleague,  without  delay, 
that  he  had  devoted  himself  for  the  army.  Then  girding 
himself  in  the  Gabine  cincture,  and  taking  his  arms,  he  leaped 
on  his  horse,  and  plunged  into  the  midst  of  the  enemy.  He 
appeared,  in  the  view  of  both  armies,  much  more  majestic 
than  one  of  the  human  race,  as  if  sent  from  heaven  to  ex¬ 
piate  all  the  wrath  of  the  gods,  to  avert  destruction  from  his 
friends,  and  transfer  it  to  the  side  of  their  enemies ;  accord¬ 
ingly,  all  the  terror  and  dismay  went  along  with  him ;  ^ 
first,  disturbed  the  battalions  of  the  Latines,  and  then  spread 
universally  oVer  their  whole  line.  This  appeared  most  evi¬ 
dently,  in  that  wherever  he  was  carried  by  his  horse,  there 
they  were  seized  with  a  panic,  as  if  struck  by  some  pestilent 
constellation:  but  where  he  fell,  overwhelmed  with  darts, 
manifest  consternation  took  possession  of  the  cohorts  of  the 
Latines,  so  that  they  fled  from  the  spot,  leaving  it  void  to 
a  considerable  extent.  At  the  same  time,  the  Romans,  their 
minds  being  delivered  from  the  dread  of  the  gods,  exerted 
themselves  with  fresh  ardour,  as  if  they  were  then  rushing 
to  the  first  onset,  on  receiving  the  signal.  Then  even  the 
Rorarii  pushed  forward  among  the  Antepilani,  and  added 
strength  to  the  spearmen  and  principes,  and  the  veterans, 
resting  on  their  right  knee,  wailed  for  the  consul’s  nod  to 
rise  up  to  the  fight.  * 
X.  Afterwards,  in  the  course  of  the  battle,  the  Latines 
had  the  advantage  in  some  places,  on  account  of  their  supe¬ 
rior  numbers.  The  consul  Manlius,  who  had  heard  the  cir¬ 
cumstances  of  his  colleague’s  death,  and,  as  was  justly  due 
to  him,  expressed  his  sentiments  of  the  glorious  manner  in 

166 

HISTOHY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  415. 

which  he  died,  both  by  tears,  and  by  the  praises  to  which  it 
was  cntitlfd,  hesitated  a  whik  whether  it  were  yet  time  for 
&e  veterans  to  rise :  then,  judging  it  better  to  reserve  them 
fresh  for  the  decisive  blow,  he  ordered  the  Accensi  to  ad^ 
vmice  from  the  rem*,  before  the  st^diwds.  On  their  moving 
forward,  the  Latines  imme^ately  call^  up  their  veterans, 
diinking  their  adversaries  had  done  the  same  j  and,  when 
these,  by  fighting  furiously  for  a  considerable  time,  had  fa¬ 
tigued  themselves,  and  either  broken  oflF  the  points  of  their 
spears,  or  blunted  them,  yet  continuing  to  drive  back  their 
opponents,  thinking  that  the  fate  of  the  battle  was  nearly  de¬ 
cided,  and  that  they  had  come  to  the  last  line,  then  the  con¬ 
sol  called  to  the  veterans,  Now  arise,  fresh  as  ye  are, 
against  men  who  are  fatigued,  and’  think  on  your  country, 
your  parents,  your  wives,  and  children ;  think  on  your  con¬ 
sul,  submitting  to  death  to  ensure  your  success/’  The  vete¬ 
rans  rising,  with  their  arms  glittering,  and  receiving  the 
Antepilani  into  the  intervals  of  their  ranks,  presentoi  a  new 
face  which  was  not  foreseen  j  raising  their  shout,  they  broke 
the  first  line  of  the  Latines ;  then,  after  slaying  those  who 
constituted  the  principal  strength,  forced  their  way,  almost 
without  a  wound,  through  the  other  companies,  as  if  through 
an  unarmed  crowd ;  and,  such  havoc  did  they  make  in  their 
thickest  bands,  that  they  left  alive  scarce  a  fourth  part  of  the 
enemy.  The  Samnites,  who  stood  in  order  of  battle,  at  a 
distance,  close  to  the  foot  of  riie  mountain,  increased  the 
fears  of  the  Latines.  But  of  all,  whether  citizens,  or  allies, 
the  principal  share  of  honour  was  due  to  the  consuls ;  one 
of  whom  drew  down,  upon  his  own  single  person,  all  the 
dangers  and  threats  denounced  by  the  deities  either  of  heaven 
or  hell;  while  the  other  displayed  such  a  degree  both  of 
courage  and  conduct,  that  it  is  universally  agreed,  among  all 
who  have  transmitted  to  posterity  an  account  of  that  batde, 
both  Latines  and  Romans,  that,  on  whichever  side  Manlius 

BOOK  vin. 

167 

B.C.  337.] 
had  held  the  command^  victory  must  have  attended^  The 
Latines  fled  towards  Mintumae.  The  body  of  Decius  was 
not  found  that  day,  night  putting  a  stop  to  the  search:  on  the 
following,  it  was  discovered,  pierced  with  a  multitude  of 
darts,  amidst  vast  heaps  of  slaughtered  enemies,  and  his  fu¬ 
neral  was  solemnized,  under  the  direction  of  his  colleague, 
in  a  manner  suited  to  his  honourable  death.  It  seems  proper 
to  mention  here,  that  it  is  allowable  for  a  consul,  dictator, 
and  praetor,  when  they  devote  the  legions  of  their  enemies, 
to  devote  along  with  them  not  themselves  in  particular,  but 
any  citizen  whom  they  choose,  out  of  a  Roman  legion  regu¬ 
larly  enrolled.  ‘‘  If  the  person  devoted  perishes,  the  perfor¬ 
mance  is  deemed  complete.  If  he  die  not,  then  an  image 
seven  feet  high,  or  more,  must  be  buried  in  the  earth,  and  a 
victim  sacrificed,  as  an  expiation.  Where  that  image  shall 
be  buried,  there  it  shall  be  unlawful  for  a  Roman  magistrate 
to  pass.’’  But  if  he  shall  choose  to  devote  himself,  as  De¬ 
cius  did,  then  if  he  who  devotes  himself,  die  not,  he  shall 
not  be  capable  of  performing,  with  propriety,  any  act  of 
worship,  in  behalf  either  of  himself,  or  of  the  public.  Let 
him  have  a  right  to  devote  his  arms  to  Vulcan,  or  to  any  other 
god  he  shall  do  it,  either  by  a  victim,  or  in  any  other  mode. 
The  enemy  should,  if  possible,  be  hindered  from  getting  pos¬ 
session  of  the  weapon,  on  which  the  consul  stood  when  he 
uttered  his  imprecatioiv  hut  if  they  chance  to  attain  it,  an 
atonement  must  be  made  to  Mars  by  the  sacrifices  called 
Suovetaurilia.”  Although  the  memory  of  every  divine  and 
human  rite  has  been  obliterated  through  the  preference  given 
to  what  is  new  and  foreign,  above  that  which  is  ancient  and 
the  growth  of  our  own  country,  yet  I  thought  it  not  amiss 
to  recite  these  particulars,  as  they  have  been  transmitted  to 
us,  and  even  in  the  very  words  in  which  they  were  expressed. 
XI.  Several  authors  relate,  that  the  Samnites  having  wait¬ 
ed  to  see  the  issue  of  the  fight,  came  up,  at  length,  with  sup- 

168 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

[Y.R.  415. 

port  to  the  Romans,  after  the  battle  was  ended.  In  like 
manner,  a  reinforcement  from  Lavinium,  after  wasting  time 
in  deliberation,  set  out  to  the  aid  of  the  Latines,  after  they 
had  been  vanquished  ;  and,  when  the  first  standards  and  part 
of  the  army  had  passed  the  gates,  receiving  information  of 
the  overthrow  of  the  Latines,  they  faced  about,  and  returned 
to  the  city ;  on  which  their  praetor,  named  Millionhis,  is  re¬ 
ported  to  have  said,  that  ‘‘  a  high  price  must  be  paid  to  the 
Romans  for  so  short  a  journey.”  Such  of  the  Latines  as 
survived  the  fight,  after  being  scattered  through  different 
roads,  collected  themselves  in  a  body,  and  took  refuge  in  the 
city  of  Vescia.  There  their  general  Numisius  insisted,  in 
their  meetings,  that  ‘‘  the  variable  chances  of  war  had  ruined 
both  armies,  by  equal  losses,  and  that  the  name  only  of  vic¬ 
tory  was  on  the  side  of  the  Romans  ;  and  that  they  were,  in 
fact,  no  better  than  defeated.  The  two  pavilions  of  their 
consuls  were  polluted  ;  one,  by  the  parricide  committed  on 
a  son ;  the  other,  by  the  death  of  a  devoted  consul :  every 
part  of  their  army  had  suffered  great  slaughter :  their  spear¬ 
men  and  their  first  ranks  were  cut  to  pieces ;  and,  both  before 
and  behind  their  standards,  multitudes  were  slain,  until  the 
veterans  at  last  restored  their  cause.  Now,  although  the 
forces  of  the  Latines  were  reduced  in  an  equal  proportion, 
yet  still,  for  the  purpose  of  procuring  reinforcements,  either 
Latium,  or  the  territory  of  the  Vokcians,  was  nearer  than 
Rome.  Wherefore,  if  they  approved  of  it,  he  would  with 
all  speed  call  out  the  youth  from  the  states  of  the  Latines 
and  Volscians ;  would  march  back  to  Capua,  with  an  army 
prepared  for  action,  and,  while  the  Romans  thought  of  no¬ 
thing  less  than  a  battle,  strike  them  with  dismay  by  his  unex¬ 
pected  arrival.”  The  misrepresentations  contained  in  his 
letters,  which  he  dispatched  round  Latium  and  the  Volscian 
nation,  were  the  more  easily  credited  by  the  people,  as  they 
had  not  been  present  at  the  battle,  and,  in  consequence,  a 

BOOK  VIII- 

169 

B.C.  33r.] 
tumultuary  army,  kvied  in  haste,  assembled  together  from 
ail  quarters.  This  body  the  consul  Torquatus  met  at  Trisa- 
num,  a  place  between  Sinuessa  and  Mintumae.  Without  wait¬ 
ing  to  choose  ground  for  camps,  both  parties  threw  down 
their  baggage  in  heaps,  and  immediately  began  an  engage¬ 
ment,  Which  decided  the  fate  of  the  war :  for  the  strength  of 
the  Latines  was  so  entirely  broken,  that,  on  the  consul  lead¬ 
ing  his  victorious  army  to  ravage  their  country,  they  all  sub¬ 
mitted  themselves  to  his  mercy,  and  their  submission  was 
followed  by  that  of  the  Campanians-  A  forfeiture  of  a  por¬ 
tion  of  their  territory  was  exacted  from  Latium  and  Capua. 
The  Latine  lands,  to  which  the  Privemian  was  added,  and 
also  the  Falernian,  which  had  belonged  to  the  people  of 
Campania,  as  far  as  the  river  Vulturnus,  were  distributed  to 
the  Roman  commons.  Of  two  acres,  the  portion  allotted  to 
each,  three-fourths  were  assigned  them  in  the  Latine  ground, 
the  complement  to  be  made  up  out  of  the  Privcrnian-  In  the 
Falernian,  three  acres  were  given  to  each,  the  addition  of 
one  being  made  in  consideration  of  the  distance.  Of  the 
Latines,  the  Lauren tians  were  exempted  from  punishment, 
as  were  the  Campanian  horsemen,  because  they  had  not  joined 
in  the  revolt.  An  order  was  made,  that  the  treaty  should  be 
renewed  with  the  Laurentians,  and  from  that  time  this  has 
been  annually  done,  on  the  tenth  day  after  the  Latine  festi¬ 
val.  The  privileges  of  citizens  were  granted  to  the  Campa¬ 
nian  horsemen  ;  and,  as  a  monument  thereof,  they  hung  up 
a  tablet  in  the  temple  of  Castor  at  Rome.  The  people  of 
Campania  were  also  enjoined  to  pay  them  a  yearly  stipend, 
of  four  hundred  and  fifty  denarii*  each ;  their  number  amount¬ 
ed  to  one  thousand  six  hundred. 
XIL  The  war  being  thus  brought  to  a  conclusion,  Titus 
Manlius,  after  distributing  rewards  and  punishments,  accord- 
*  141.  10s.  7U. 
VOL.  TT. - Z  * 

iro 

HISTORY  OR  ROME.  [Y.R.416. 
itig  to  the  merits  and  demerits  of  each,  retun^  to  Rome. 
On  his  arrival  there,  it  appeared  that  none  but  the  aged  came 
out  to  meet  him,  and  that  the  young,  both  then  and  during 
the  whole  of  his  life,  detested  and  cursed  him.  The  Antians, 
having  made  inroads  on  the  territories  of  Ostia,  Ardea,  and 
Solonia,  the  consuj  Manlius,  unable  on  account  of  the  111  state 
of  his  health  to  act  against  them  in  person,  nominated  dicta¬ 
tor  Lucius  PapiriuB  Crassus,  who  happened  at  the  time  to 
be  praetor,  and  he  constituted  Lucius  Papirius  Cursor  master 
of  the  horse.  Nothing  worth  mention  was  performed  against 
the  Antians  by  the  dictator,  although  he  kept  his  army  in  a 
fixed  camp,  in  the  territory  of  A  ntium,  during  several  months. 
To  this  year,  which  was  signalized  by  conquest  over  so  ma¬ 
ny,  and  such  powerful  nations,  and,  besides,  by  the  glorious 
death  of  one  of  the  consuls,  and  the  other’s  unrelenting  seve¬ 
rity  in  command,  by  which  he  has  been  rendered  for  ever 
memorable,  succeeded  as  consuls,  Tiberius  iEmi- 
b'c  336  *  Mamercinus,  and  Quintus  Publilius  Philo, 
'  j  a”  who  found  not  equal  opportunity  for  the  display  of 
;  and  were,  besides,  more  attentive  to  their  private 
-  »erests,  and  the  parties  which  divided  the  state,  than  to  the 
ptd}!ic  good.  The  Latines  taking  arms  again,  out  of  resent¬ 
ment  for  being  deprived  of  their  lands,  were  defeated,  and 
driven  out  of  their  camp,  in  the  plains  of  Ferentinum  ;  and 
while  Publilius,  under  whose  conduct  and  auspices  the  battle 
had  been  fought,  was  employed  there,  in  receiving  the  sub¬ 
missions  of  the  Latine  states,  who  had  lost  the  greater  part 
of  their  young  men  in  the  engagement,  iEmilius  led  the  army 
towards  Pedum.  The  people  of  this  city  were  supported  b) 
the  Tiburtine,  Prsenestine,  and  Veliumian  states:  auxiliaries 
also  came  to  them  from  Lav  ini  urn  and  Antium.  Though  the 
Romans  had  here  the  superiority,  in  several  engagements, 
yet  the  most  difficult  part  of  the  business  remained  still  to  be 
attempted,  at  the  city  of  Pedum  itself,  and  at  the  camp  of 

B.C.  336.] 

BOOK  VIIL 

in 

the  combitied  states,  which  lay  close  to  the  walk  ^  when  the 
consul,  on  bearing  that  a  triumph  had  been  decreed  to  hia 
colleague,  hastily  left  the  war  unfinished,  and  repaired  to 
Rome  to  demand  a  triumph  for  himself,  before  he  had  ob¬ 
tained  a  victory.  The  senate,  offended  at  his  ambitious  pro¬ 
ceeding,  refused  to  grant  it,  until  Pedum  should  either  sur¬ 
render  or  be  taken.  This  so  alienated  iEmilius  from  their 
interests,  that  he  acted,  during  the  remainder  of  his  consul¬ 
ate,  like  a  seditious  tribune  ;  for,  as  long  as  he  continued  in 
office,  he  never  ceased  criminating  the  patricians  in  harangues 
to  the  people,  which  his  colleague,  who  was  himself  a  ple¬ 
beian,  took  no  pains  to  prevent.  The  charges  he  brought 
against  them  were  grounded  on  a  scanty  distribution  of  the 
Latine  and  Falemian  lands  :  and,  when  the  senate,  wishing 
to  put  an  end  to  the  administration  of  the  consuls,  ordered  a 
dictator  to  be  nominated,  to  conduct  the  war  against  the 
Latines,  who  were  again  in  arms,  iEmilius,  who  was  the  act¬ 
ing  consul  at  the  time,  nominated  his  colleague  dictator, 
who  appointed  Junius  Brutus  master  of  the  horse.  The  dic¬ 
tatorship  of  Publius  was  popular,  for  his  discourses  were 
replete  with  invectives  against  the  patricians.  He,  at  the 
same  time,  passed  three  laws,  highly  advantageous  to  the 
comnions,  and  injurious  to  the  nobility  :  one,  that  the  orders 
of  the  commons  should  bind  all  the  Romans ;  another,  that 
the  senate  should,  previous  to  the  taking  of  the  suffrages, 
declare  their  approbation  of  all  laws,  which  should  be  passed 
in  the  assemblies  of  the  centuries  ;  the  third,  that  one  of  the 
censors  should,  necessarily,  be  elected  out  of  the  commons, 
as  it  had  been  already  established  that  both  the  consuls 
might  be  plebeians.  In  the  judgment  of  the  patricians,  the 
detriment  sustained  that  year,  at  home,  from  the  behaviour 
of  the  consuls  and  dictator,  was  more  than  a  counterbalance 
to  the  increase  of  empire,  through  their  conduct  and  succes¬ 

ses  in  war. 

172 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  417. 

XIII.  At  the  commencement  of  the  next  ycar^  it  which 
Luciua  Furius  Camillus,  and  Cains  Msenius.  were 
Y.R.417.  . 
B*C*335*  consuls,  the  senate,  in  order  to  render  more  con¬ 
spicuous  the  conduct  of  ^milius,  in  relinquishing 
the  business  of  the  campaign,  warmly  urged  that  men,  arms, 
and  every  kind  of  force,  should  be  employed  to  take  Pedum, 
and  demolish  it.  The  new  consuls  were  of  course  obliged  to 
postpone  every  other  business,  and  to  set  out  thither.  In 
Latium,  the  state  of  affairs  was  such,  that  the  people  could 
ill  endure  either  war  or  peace  ;  their  strength  was  not  equal 
to  the  support  of  a  war,  and  peace  they  disdained,  on  the  hu¬ 
miliating  terms  of  losing  their  lands.  They  resolved,  there¬ 
fore,  to  steer  a  middle  course  ;  to  keep  within  the  walls  of 
their  towns,  so  that  no  provocation  should  be  offered  to  the 
Romans,  which  might  serve  them  as  a  pretext  for  hostilities ; 
and  in  case  they  should  hear  of  siege  being  laid  to  any  of 
their  possessions,  then,  that  every  one  of  the  estates  should 
be  obliged  to  bring  succour  to  the  besieged.  Pedum,  how¬ 
ever,  received  aid  from  few  :  the  Tiburiians  and  Praenes- 
tians,  whose  territories  lay  nearest,  arrived  there  ;  but  the 
Aricians,  Lavinians,  and  Velitemians,  while  forming  a  junc¬ 
tion  with  the  Volscians  of  Antium,  at  the  river  Astura,  were 
unexpectedly  attacked  by  Msenius,  and  routed.  The  Tibur- 
tians,  who  were  niuch  the  strongest  body,  Camillus  fought  at 
Pedum  }  and,  though  he  had  greater  difficulties  to  surmount, 
yet  the  issue  was  equally  successful.  Some  confusion  hap¬ 
pened,  occasioned,  principally,  by  a  sudden  eruption  of  the 
townsmen,  during  the  fight ;  l3ut  Camillus,  making  part  of  his 
troops  face  about,  not  only  drove  them  within  the  walls,  but, 
after  utterly  discomfiting  both  themselves  and  their  allies, 
took  the  city  the  same  day  by  scalade.  It  was  then  resolved, 
their  troops  being  flushed  with  victory,  that  they  should  pro¬ 
ceed  until  they  had  made  an  entire  conquest  of  all  Lattum. 
This  plan  they  prosecuted  without  intermission,  making 

BOOK  vni. 

173 

B.C.  335.] 
themselves  mastei^  of  some  of  the  towns  by  foircc,  and  of 
others  by  capitulation,  reducing  the  entire  country  to  sub¬ 
jection.  Then,  leaving  garrisons  in  the  conquered  places,  they 
returned  to  Rome,  to  enjoy  the  triumph,  to  which  all  men 
allowed  they  were  justly  entitled.  To  a  triumph  was  added 
the  honour  of  having  equestrian  statues  erected  to  them  in 
the  Forum,  a  compliment  very  rare  in  that  age.  Before  the 
assembly  for  electing  consuls  was  called  for  the  ensuing  year, 
Camillas  moved  the  senate  to  take  into  consideration  the  con¬ 
duct  to  be  observed  towards  the  states  of  Latium,  and  pro¬ 
ceeded  in  this  manner ;  ‘‘  Conscript  Fathers,  Whatever  was 
to  be  effected  in  Latium,  by  means  of  arms  and  military  opera¬ 
tions,  has  now,  through  the  favour  of  the  gods,  and  the  va¬ 
lour  of  your  soldiers,  been  fully  accomplished.  The  armies 
of  our  enemies  have  been  cut  to  pieces  at  Pedum,  and  the 
Astura  ;  all  the  towns  of  Latium,  and  Antium,  in  the  Vol- 
scian  territory,  either  taken  by  storm,  or  surrendered,  are 
held  by  your  garrisons.  It  remains  then  to  be  considered, 
since  the  frequent  rebellions  of  these  people  are  the  cause  of 
so  much  trouble,  by  what  means  we  may  secure  their  quiet 
submission,  and  peaceable  behaviour.  The  attainment  of  this 
end,  the  immortal  gods  have  placed  within  your  reach,  inso¬ 
much  that  they  have  given  you  the  power  of  determining 
whether  Latium  shall  longer  exist,  or  not.  Ye  can  therefore 
ensure  to  yourselves  perpetual  peace,  as  far  as  regards  the 
Latines,  by  the  means  either  of  severity,  or  of  mercy.  Do  ye 
choose  to  adopt  cruel  measures  against  people  vanquished, 
and  submitting  to  your  authority  ?  Ye  may  utterly  destroy  all 
Latium,  and  make  a  desert  of  a  country,  from  which,  in  many 
and  diff  cult  wars,  ye  have  often  been  supplied  with  a  pow¬ 
erful  army  of  allies.  Do  ye  choose,  on  the  contrary,  and  in 
conformity  to  the  practice  of  your  ancestors,  to  augment  the 
Roman  state,  by  receiving  the  vanquished  into  the  number  of 
your  citizens  ?  Here  is  a  large  addition  which  ye  may  ac- 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

174 

[Y.R.4ir, 

quire,  by  meam  which  will  redound  moat  highly  to  your  ^oiy . 
That  government,  which  the  subjects  feel  lapipy  in  obeying, 
jMands  certainly  on  the  hrmest  of  ail  foundations.  But,  what^ 
ever  your  determination  may  be,  it  is  necessary  that  it  be 
apeedy  :  as  all  those  sutes  are,  at  present,  suspended  i^tween 
hope  and  fear.  It  is  therefore  of  importance  that  ye  should 
be  discharged  as  soon  as  possible,  from  sdl  solicitude  con¬ 
ceiving  them  ;  and  also,  that,  either  by  punishment  or  cle¬ 
mency,  an  immediate  impression  be  made  on  their  minds,  be¬ 
fore  they  recover  from  the  state  of  insensibility  in  which  the 
uncertainty  of  their  fate  has  thrown  them.  It  was  our  part 
to  bring  the  business  to  such  £ui  issue,  that  your  deliberations 
concerning  it  should  be  unrestrained  in  every  particular.  It 
is  now  yours  to  determine  what  is  most  advantageous  to 
yourselves  and  the  commonwealth.” 
XIV.  The  principal  members  of  the  senate  highly  approv¬ 
ed  of  the  consul’s  statement  of  the  business,  on  the  whole  : 
but  said,  that  as  the  states  were  differendy  circumstanced, 
it  would  conduce  to  an  easy  adjustment  of  the  plan,so,as  that 
their  resolutions  should  be  conformable  to  th^  several  merits 
of  each,  if  he  put  the  question,  on  the  case  of  each  state,  se¬ 
parately.”  The  question  was  accordingly  put,  and  a  decree 
passed  with  respect  to  each  singly.  The  Lanuvians  were  ad¬ 
mitted  members  of  the  state ;  the  exercise  of  their  public  wor¬ 
ship  was  restored  to  them,  with  a  provision,  that  the  grove 
and  temple  of  Juno  Sospita  should  be  in  common,  between 
the  burghers*  of  Lanuvium,-and  the  Roman  people.  On  the 

•  Municipes,  from  tnunus^  a  right,  and  capere,  to  possess.  Of  the  con¬ 
quered  countries  the  Romans  constituted  some,  Municipia,  where  the  peo¬ 
ple  retained  their  own  laws  and  magistrates,  and  even  honofored  with  the 
title,  and,  some  of  them,  with  all  the  rights  and  privileges  of  Roman  citi¬ 
zens.  The  people  of  Cxre  were  the  first  who  were  thus  indulged  with  full 
rights ;  but,  afterwards,  having  joined  some  neighbouring  states,  in  a  w'ar 
s^inst  Rome,  all  the  privileges  of  citizens  were  taken  from  them,  and  the 
title  only  left.  In  other  countries  they  planted  coiomes  of  their  own  citi- 

BOOK  Vril; 

ITS 

B-C  335,] 
same  terms  wiAk  the^,  the  Aricians,  Nomeiitans,  and  Pe* 
dims,  were  received  into  die  number  of  citizens.  To  the  Tus- 
culai^,  the  rights  df  citizens,  of  which  they  were  already  in 
possession,  were  continued  ;  and  the  guilt  of  the  rebellicm, 
instead  of  being  imputed  to  disaffection  in  the  state,  was 
dirown  on  a  few  incendiaries.  On  the  Veliternians,  who  were 
Roman  citizens  df  an  old  standing,  in  resentment  of  their 
having  so  often  arisen  in  rebellion,  severe  vengeance  was  in¬ 
flicted  ;  their  walls  were  razed,  and  their  senate  driven  into 
banishment ;  they  were  also  enjoined  to  dwell  on  the  farther 
side  of  the  Tiber,  with  a  denunciation  that  if  any  of  them 
should  be  caught  on  the  hither  side  of  that  river,  the  fine  to 
be  paid  for  his  discharge  should  be  no  less  than  one  thousand 
asses*,  and  that  the  person  apprehending  him  should  not  re¬ 
lease  him  from  confinement,  until  the  money  should  be  paid. 
Into  the  lands,  which  had  belonged  to  their  senators,  colo¬ 
nists  were  s^t,  from  the  addition  of  whose  numbers  Velitrae 
recovered  the  appearance  of  its  former  populousness.  To 
Antium,  ako,  a  new  colony  was  sent,  permission  being  grant¬ 
ed,  at  the  same  time,  to  the  Antians,  of.  having  themselves 
enrolled  therein  if  they  chose  it.  The  ships  of  war  were 
taken  from  them,  and  the  people  wholly  interdicted  from 
meddling  with  maritime  affairs  ;  but  the  rights  of  citizens 
were  granted  to  them.  The  Tiburtians  and  Praenestines 
were  amerced  in  a  portion  of  their  lands  ;  not  merely  on  ac¬ 
count  of  their  recent  crime  of  rebellion,  common  to  them  with 
the  rest  of  the  Latines,  but  because  they  had  formerl} ,  in  dis- 
zens ;  by  wWeb  means  tliey  disburthened  the  city  of  numbers  of  useless  and 
poor  inhabitants,  and,  at  the  same  time,  fornicd  barriers  atjainsi  Uie  adjoin¬ 
ing  states.  Colonists  retained  all  the  rights  of  citizens,  chose  their  own 
magistrates,  and  formed  a  kind  of  petty  republics,  under  that  of  Home. 
Other  countries  were  made  praefectures,  deprived  of  their  own  laws  and 
jnagistrates,  and  governed  by  a  pr?cfect  sent  annually  fi-om  Rome. 
^  rd,  4s.  7d. 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  41g. 

irs 
gust  at  the  Roman  government,  associated  in  arms  with  die 
Gauls,  a  nation  of  savages.  From  the  other  states  they  took 
away  the  privileges  of  intermarriage,  commerce,  and  bold¬ 
ing  assemblies.  To  the  Campanians,  in  compliment  to  Acir 
horsemen,  who  had  refused  to  join  in  rebellion  with  the  La- 
tines,  as  likewise  to  the  Fundans  and  Formians,  because  the 
troops  had  always  found  a  safe  and  quiet  passage  through 
their  territories,  the  freedom  of  the  state  was  granted,  with¬ 
out  right  of  suffrage.  The  states  of  Cumae  and  Suessula,  it 
was  decreed,  should  be  placed  on  the  same  footing,  and  en¬ 
joy  the  same  privileges,  as  Capua.  Of  the  ships  of  the  An- 
tians,  some  were  drawn  up  into  the  docks  at  Rome  ;  the 
rest  were  burned,  and  with  the  prows  of  these  a  pulpit,  built 
in  the  Forum,  was  ordered  to  be  decorated,  hence  called 
Rostra.* 
XV.  During  the  succeeding  consulate  of  Caius  Sulpicius 
Lon^us,  and  Publius  iElius  Paetus,  whilst  all  the 
Y  R  418  O’  ^  ^ 
B  C  334*  states  were  sincerely  disposed,  not 
more  through  consideration  of  the  power  of  the 
Romans,  than  grateful  sentiments  inspired  by  their  generous 
conduct,  to  cultivate  peace  with  them,  a  quarrel  broke  out 
between  the  Sidicinians  and  the  Auruncians.  The  latter, 
having  been  formerly,  on  their  submission,  admitted  into  al¬ 
liance,  by  Titus  Manlius,  in  his  consulate,  had  ever  since  de¬ 
meaned  themselves  peaceably,  for  which  reason  they  were  more 
justly  entitled  to  expect  assistance  from  the  Romans.  But,  be¬ 
fore  the  consuls  led  out  the  army,  (for  the  senate  had  ordered 
the  Auruncians  to  be  supported,)  intelligence  was  brought  that 
these,  through  fear,  had  deserted  their  city,  and,  removing  with 
their  wives  and  children,  had  fortified  Suessa,  which  is  now 
called  Aurunca,  and  that  their  former  dwellings  and  fortifi¬ 
cations  were  demolished  by  the  Sidicinians.  The  senate. 

From  Hostrum^  the  beak  or  prow  of  a  ship. 

BOOK  VIIL 

m 

B.C.  334.] 
highly  displeased  with  the  consuls,  in  consequence  of  whose 
dilatory  proceedings  their  allies  had  been  disappointed  of 
support,  ordered  a  dictator  to  be  nominated.  Caius  Claudius 
Regillensis,  being  accordingly  appointed,  chose  Caius  Clau¬ 
dius  Hortaior  master  of  the  horse.  A  scruple  afterwards 
arose  concerning  the  dictator,  and  the  augurs  having  declared 
his  creation  informal,  both  he  and  the  master  of  the  horse 
abdicated  their  offices.  This  year,  Minucia,  a  vestal,  falling 
at  first  under  suspicion  of  incontinence,  because  of  her  dress¬ 
ing  in  a  style  of  elegance  beyond  what  became  her  situation, 
and  being  afterwards  prosecuted  before  the  pontiffs,  on  the 
testimony  of  a  slave,  was,  by  their  decree,  ordered  to  refrain 
from  meddling  in  sacred  aites,  and  to  retain  her  slaves  under 
her  own  power.*  ‘►Being  afterwards  brought  to  trial,  she  was 
buried  alive,  at  the  Colline  gate,  on  the  right  hand  of  the 
causeway  in  the  field  of  wickedness,  which  was  so  denomi¬ 
nated,  I  suppose,  from  her  crime.  The  same  year  Quintus 
Publilius  Philo  was  the  first  plebeian  elected  praetor.  He 
was  opposed  by  the  consul  Sulpicius,  who  refused  to  admit 
him  as  a  candidate ;  but  the  senate,  having  failed  of  carry¬ 
ing  their  point,  withjrespect  to  the  highest  offices,  showed  the 
less  earnestness  about  the  praetorship. 
XVI.  The  following  year,  wherein  Lucius  Papirius  Cras- 
sus,  and  Caeso  Duilius  were  consuls,  was  distin- 
Y.R419  .  . 
B  C  333  ^  Ausonians,  which  de¬ 
serves  notice,  rather  as  they  were  a  new  enemy, 
than  on  account  of  its  importance.  This  people  inhabited 
the  city  Gales  5  they  had  ami  ted  their  arms  with  their  neigh¬ 
bours,  the  Sidicinians,  yet  the  forces  of  the  two  nations  were 
defeated,  in  a  single  battle,  without  any  great  difficulty. 
Their  cities  being  near  at  hand,  induced  them  to  quit  the 
*  Eor,  if  she  had  made  them  free,  they  could  not  have  been  examined 
by  the  torture. 
YOJ..  II. — 2  A 

ire  HISTORY  ROME.  [Y.R.  420. 
^eld  the  earlier,  and  .also  afforded  them  shelter  after  their 
Sight.  However,  the  senate  did  not,  on  this,  di^^t  from  the 
prosecuticm  of  the  war,  being  provoked  at  the  Sidiciniat^ 
having  so  often  taken  arms  against  the;n,  either  as  principals 
or  auxiliaries.  They  therefore  exerted  their  utmost  endea- 
Y  R  420  T3\se  to  the  consulship,  the  founh  time, 
B  C  332  Valerius  Corvus,.  the  greatest,general  of 
that  age.  The  coUeague  joined  wfth  him  was 
Marcus  Atilius  Regulus;  and,  lest  chance  might  frustrate 
their  wishes,  a  request  was  made^Jto  the  consuls,  that,  with¬ 
out  casting  lots,  that  province  mi^hl  be  assigned  to  Corvus. 
Receiving  the  victorious  army,  from  the  former  consuls,  he 
marched  directly  to  Cales,  where  ^he  war  had  its  rise :  and 
having,  at  the  first  onset,  routed  the  enemy,  who  were  dis- 
heartened  by  the  recollection  of  the  former  engagement,  he 
directed  his  operations  against  the  town  itself.  Such  was  the 
ardour  of  the  soldiers,  that  they  wanted  to  proceed  directly 
up  to, the  walls  with  ladders,  asserting,  that  thejwould  quick¬ 
ly  sesde  them  ;  but  that  being  a  hazardous  attempt,  Corvus 
chose  to  effect  his  purpose  by  the  labour  of  his  men,  rather 
than  at  the  expense  of  so  much  danger  to  them ;  be  therefore 
formed  a  rampart,  prepared  machines,  and  advanced  towers 
up  to  the  walls.  But  an  opportunity,  which  accidentally  pre¬ 
sented  itself,  prevented  his  ha^ng  occasion  to  use  them :  for 
Marcus  Fabius,  a  Roman,  who  was  prisoner  there,  having 
broken  his  chains,  while  his  guards  were  inattentive  on  a 
festival  day,  by  fastening  a  rope  to  one  of  the  battlements, 
let  himself  down  among  the  Roman  works,  and  persuaded 
the  general  to  make  an  assault  on  the  enemy,  while,  in  con¬ 
sequence  of  feasting  and  drinking,  they  were  disqualified  for 
action.  And  thus  the  Ausoniaos,  together  with  their  city, 
were  captured  with  as  little  difficulty  as  they  had  been  de¬ 
feated  in  the  field.  The  booty  found  there  was  immense,  and 
the  legions,  leaving  a  garrison  at  Cales,  returned  to  Rome. 

BOOK  VIII. 

BX.  332.] 

179 

The  consul  triumphed  in  pursuance  of  a  decree  of  die  senate ; 
and,  in  order  that  AilUus  should  not  be  without  a  share  of  ho- 
nour,  ixjth  the  consuls  were  ordered  to  lead  the  troo^  against 
the  Sidicinians.  But  first,  in  obedience  to  the  senate,  they 
nominated  dictator,  for  the  purpose  of  holding  the  elections, 
Lucius  iEmilius  Hamercinus,  who  named  Quintus  Publilius 
Philo  master  of  the  horse.  The  dictator  presiding 
at  the  election,  Titus  Veturius  and  Spuriits  Pos-  Y.R.421. 
B  C  331 
tumius  were  created  consuls.  Notwithstanding 
the  war  with  the  Sidicinians  remained  unfinished,  yet  being 
desirous  to  prevent,  by  an  act  of  generosity,  the  wishes  of 
the  commons,  they  proposed  to  the  senate  the  sending  a  co¬ 
lony  to  Gales  ;  and  a  decree  being  passed  that  two  thousand 
five  bundled  men  should  be  enrolled  for  that  purpose,  they 
constituted  Ca&so  Duilius,  Titus  Quintius,  and  >Marcus  Fa- 
bius,  commissioners  for  conducting  the  colony,  and  distribu¬ 
ting  the  lands. 
X^IL  Tl^  new  consuls,  receiving  ffonv  thefar  predeces¬ 
sors  the  command,  of  the  army,  marched  into  the  enemy’s 
countiy,  and  carriedigdevastaiion  even  to  the  walls  of  their 
capitfil.  There,  because  it  was  expected  that  the  Sidicinians, 
who  had  collected  a  vast  body  of  forces,  would  make  a  vi¬ 
gorous  struggle  in  support  of  their  last  hope,  and  a  report 
also  prevailing  that  Samnium  was  preparing  for  hostilities, 
the  consuls,  by  direction  of  the  senate,  nominated  dictator, 
Publius  Cornelius  Kufinus,  who  appointed  Marcus  Antonius 
his  master  of  the  horse.  A  doubt  afterwards  arose,  with 
lespect  to  the  regularity  of  their  creation,  on  which  they 
abdicated  their  offices,  and  a  pestilence  ensuing,  recourse 
was  had  to  an  interregnum,  as  if  the  auspices  of  every  office 
had  been  infected  by  that  irregularity.  Under  Marcus 
Valerius  Corvus,  the  fifteenth  ihterrex  from  the  commence¬ 
ment  of  the  interregnum,  consuls  were  at  last  clect- 
•  Y  R  422 
ed,  Aulus  Cornelius  a  ^second  time,  and  Cneius  rtV 
Domitkis.  While  things  were  in  a  state  of  tran- 

180 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  422. 

qailUty,  a  report,  which  was  spread,  that  the  Gauls  were  in 
arms,  produced  the  aame  effect  which  a  war  with  that  people 
usually  did,  a  resolution  to  create  a  dictator :  Marcus  Papi- 
rius  Crassus  was  nominated  to  that  office,  and  Publius  Vale¬ 
rius  Publicola  to  that  of  master  of  the  horse ;  and,  while 
they  were  busy  in  levying  troops,  with  greater  diligence  than 
would  have  been  deemed  requisite  in  the  case  of  war  with 
any  neighbouring  state,  intelligence  was  brought,  by  scouts 
dispatched  for  the  purpose,  that  all  was  quiet  among  the 
Gauls*  Suspicions  were  also  entertained  that  Samnium  still 
conthuied,  during  this  year^  in  a  disposition  to  raise  new  dis- 
tuihances;  for  which  reason,  the  Roman  troops*  were  not 
withdrawn  from,  the  country  of  the  Sidicinians.  An  attack 
made  by  Alexander  king  of  Epirus,  on  the  Lucanians,  drew 
the  Samnites  to  that  quarter,  where  those  two  nations  fought 
a  pitched  battle  with  the.  king,  as  he  was  making  a  descent  on 
the  side  of  the  country  adjoining  Paestum.  Alexander,  hav¬ 
ing  gained  the  victory,  concluded  a  treaty  of  amity  with  the 
Romans ;  with  what  degree  of  faith  he  would  have  observed 
it,  had  the  rest  of  his  enterprises  proved  successful,  it  is  bard 
to  say.  The  census,  or  general  survey,  was  performed  this 
year,  and  the  new  citizens  rated ;  on  whose  account,  two  ad¬ 
ditional  tribes  were  constituted,  the  Msecian  and  Scaptian,  by 
the  censors  Quintus  Publilius  Philo,  and  Spurius  Postumius. 
The  Acerrans  were  enrolled  as  Romans,  in  pursuance  of  a 
law  introduced  by  the  prsetor,  Lucius  Papirius,  which  grant- 
ed  them  the  privileges  of  citizens,  excepting  the  right  of 
suffrage.  Such  were  the  transactions,  foreign  and  domestic, 
of  this  year. 
XVill.  The  following  year  exhibited  a  shocking  scene, 
whether  occasioned  by  the  intemnerature  of  the 
Y  R  423  .  .  ’ 
B  C  329  wickedness  of  the  people.  The 
consuls  were  Marcus  Claudius  Marcelius,  and 
Caius  Valerius,  cither  Flaccus  or  Potitus,  for  1  find  these 

BOOK  VIII. 

181 

B.C.  329.] 
different  surnames  of  consul  in  the  annals ;  it  is,  however, 
a  matter  of  little  consequence,  which  of  them  be  the  true  one. 
There  is  another  accouiit,  which  I  could  heartily  wish  were 
false:  that  those  persons,  whose  deaths  distinguished  this 
year  as  disastrous,  on  account  of  the  extraordinary  mortali¬ 
ty,  were  Cut  off  by  poison.  Although  this  particular  be  not 
mentioned  by  all  the  historians  of  this  period,  yet,  that  I  may 
not  detract  from  die  credit  of  any  writer,  I  shall  relate  the 
matter  as  it  has  been  handed  down  to  us.  While  the  prin¬ 
cipal  persons  of  the  state  died,  by  disorders  of  the  same  kind, 
and  which  were  attended  with  the  same  issue  in  every  case, 
a  certain  maid-servant  undertook,  before  Quintus  Fabius 
Maximus,  curule  ^ile,  to  discover  the  cause  of  the  general 
malady,  provided  seciu-ity  were  given  *her  on  the  public 
faith,  that  she  should  not  be  a  sufferer  in  consequence.  Fa¬ 
bius  immediately  reported  the  affair  to  the  consuls,  and  the 
consuls  to  the  senate,  and,  by  order  of  that  body,  the  public 
faith  was  pledged  to  the  informer.  She  then  stated  to  them, 
that  the  calamity,  which  afflicted  the  nation,  was  caused  by 
the  wicked  contrivances  of  certain  women ;  that  some  ma¬ 
trons  were,  at  the  time,  preparing  drugs  for  die  purpose ; 
and  that,  if  they  would  be  pleased  to  go  along  with  her 
without  delay,  they  might  detect  them  in  the  fact.  Accord¬ 
ingly,  they  followed  the  infonpant,  and  found  several  women 
preparing  drugs,  and  also  quantities  of  Uie  same  laid  up, 
which  being  brought  into  the  Forum,  and  the  matrons^  in 
whose  custody  they  were  found,  to  the  number  of  twenty, 
being  summoned  by  a  beadle,  two  of  them,  Cornelia  and 
Sergia,  both  of  patrician  families,  asserted  that  those  drugs 
were  wholesome ;  while  the  informant  maintained  the  con¬ 
trary  ;  and  insisted  on  their  drinking  them,  in  order  to  con¬ 
vict  her  of  having  invented  a  falsehood.  On  this,  having 
taken  time  to  confer  together,  and  in  the  open  view  of  all,  a 
space  being  cleared  for  them,  they  drank  off  the  preparation. 

tm  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  (Y,R.  43f. 
perished  of  ihdr  owo  wicked  devtoe.  Their 
smcndmts^  being  instantly  ^ized,  ^ve  information  a^nst  a 
great  number  of  matrons,  of  whom  no  thfim  one  hun- 
dred  and  seventy  were  condemned.  Until  that  day,  no  per¬ 
son  had  ever  been  tried  at  Rome  for  poisoning:  the  aSair 
was  deemtd  a  prodigy,  and  seemed  more  die  result  of  mad¬ 
ness,  than  of  vicious  depravity.  Wherefore,  mention  being 
fbund  in  the  annals,  that  formerly,  on  occasion  of  the  seces- 
stoits  of  the  commems,  (a  disastrous  time,)  the  ceremmiy  of 
driving  the  nail  had  been  performed  by  a  dictator,  and  that, 
by  that  expiation,  the  minds  of  men,  which  were  distracted 
by  discord,  had  been  restored  to  their  proper  state,  it  was 
resolved  that  a  dictator  should  be  nominated  for  the  purpose. 
Cneius  <Quintius  being  accordingly  created,  ap- 
B  C  328  Lucius  Valerius  mastci^of  the,  horse,  and, 
as  soon  as  the  nail  was  driven,  diey  abdicated 
their  offices. 
XIX.  Lucius  Papirius  Crassus,  and  Lucius  Plautius  Ven- 
no  were  the  consuls  for  the  next  year :  in  the  be- 
Y  R.4S5  .  .  .  j  »  • 
g‘c*327  ambassadors  came  to  Rome 
from  Fabrateria  and  Polusca,  two  Volscian  states, 
praying  to  be  admitted  into  alliance ;  and  promising,  that  if 
they  were  protected  against  the  arms  of  the  Samnites,  they 
would  ever  continue  faithful;  and  obedient  subjects  to  the 
government  of  the  Rom^  pcojJe.  On  this,  ambassadors 
were  sent  by  the  senate,  to  require  of  the  Samnites,  that 
they  should  offer  no  violence  to  the  territories  of  those 
states ;  and  this  embassy  produced  the  desired  effect,  rather 
because  the  Samnites  were  not  yet  prepared  for  war,  than 
that  they  were  desirous  of  peace,  t  This  year,  war  broke 
out  with  the  people  of  Privemum :  these  were  supported  by 
inhabitants  of  Fundi,  of  which  country  was  also  the  com¬ 
mander  in  chief,  Vitruvius  Vaccus,  a  man  of  consideraWe 
note,  not  only  at  home,  but  at  Rome  also.  He  had  a  house 

BOOK  VIIL 

183 

BX.  327.] 
oa  Uie  Pdatiae  hill,  on  the  spot  which,  after  the  buildings 
were  and  the  ground  thrown  open,  was  called  Vacci- 
prata*.  He  was  committing  great  depredations  in  the  dis¬ 
tricts  of  Setia,  Norba,  and  Cora  ;  to  oppose  him,  therefore, 
Lucius  Papirius  began  his  march,  and  took  post  a  small  dis¬ 
tance  from  his  camp*  Vitruvius  neither  took  the  prudent 
rescdution  of  remaining  within  his  trenches,  in  the  presence 
of  an  enemy,  his  superior  in  strength,  nor  had  he  the  courage 
to  fight  at  any  great  distance  from  them.  Without  either 
judgment  in  forming,  or  boldness  in  executing  his  plan,  he 
entered  on  an  engagement,  while  the  last  of  his  troops  had 
scarcely  got  out  of  the  gate  of  the  camp,  and  his  men  were 
in  a  disposition  rather  to  fly  hack  thither,  than  to  face  the 
enemy.  After  some  slight  efforts,  he  was  compelled  to  give 
up  the  contest  entirely ;  but,  by  reason  of  the  shortness  of 
the  distance,  and  the  ease  with  which  he  could  regain  his 
camp,  he  saved  his  army,  without  much  difficulty,  from  any 
great  loss,  few  falling  either  in  the  action  or  in  the  retreat.  As 
soon  as  it  grew  dark,  they  removed  in  haste,  and  disorder  to 
Privernum,  choosing  to  entrust  their  safety  to  walls,  rather 
than  to  a  rampart.  The  other  consul,  Plautius,  after  wasting 
the  country  on  ev€r\"  side,  and  driving  off  the  spoil,  led  his 
army  from  Privernum  into  the  territory  of  Fundi.  On  en¬ 
tering  the  borders,  he  was  met  by  the  senate  of  that  state, 
who  declared,  that  “  they  came  not  to  intercede  for  Vitru¬ 
vius,  and  those  who  had  followed  his  faction,  but  for  the  peo¬ 
ple  of  Fundi,  who,  in  the  judgment  of  Vitruvius  himself, 
were  clear  from  all  blame  of  the  war,  as  he  showed  by  re¬ 
pairing  for  safety,  after  His  defeat,  to  Privernum,  and  not  to 
Fundi,  his  native  city.  At  Privernum,  therefore,  the  ene¬ 
mies  of  the  Roman  people  were  to  be  sought,  and  punished ; 
who,  regardless  of  their  duty  to  both  countries,  had  revolted 

♦  Or  the  field  of  Vaccus,  from  pratum^  a  field. 

184 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

CY.R,426. 

at  once  from  Fundi  md  from  Rome.  The  Fundians  were 
in  a  state  of  peace,  their  minds  were  Roman,  and 
with  a  grateful  remembrance  of  the  privilege  of  citizens  im¬ 
parted  to  them :  they  besought  the  consul  that  he  would  not 
treat  as  enemies  an  unoiFending  people ;  assuring  him,  t^t 
their  lands,  their  city,  and  their  persons,  were,  and  ever 
should  be,  in  the  disposal  of  the  Roman  people.”  The  con¬ 
sul  commended  their  conduct;  and,  dispatching  letters  to 
Rome,  that  the  Fundians  had  preserved  their  allegiance, 
turned  his  march  to  Privernum.  Claudius  writes,  that  he 
first  inflicted  punishment  on  those  who  had  been  the  princi¬ 
pal  abettors  of  the  conspiracy ;  that  three  hundred  and  fifty 
were  sent  in  chains  to  Rome;  but  that  the  senate  did  not 
accept  their  submission,  because  they  thought  that  the  peo¬ 
ple  of  Fundi  meant,  by  consigning  to  punishment  these  men, 
who  were  mean  and  indigent,  to  secure  impunity  to  them¬ 
selves.  * 
XX.  While  the  two  consular  armies  were  ernffloyed  in  the 
siege  of  Privernum,  one  of  the  consuls  was  recalled  to  Rome, 
to  preside  at  the  elections.  This  year  goals  were  first  erect¬ 
ed  in  the  circus.  While  the  attention  of  the  public  was  still 
occupied  by  the  Privemian  war,  it  was  forcibly  attracted  by 
an  alarming  report  of  the  Gauls  being  in  arms,  a  matter  at 
no  time  slighted  by  the  senate.  The  new  consuls, 
b'c  326 '  Lucius  iEmUius  Mamercinus,  and  Gains 
Plautius,  on  the  calends  of  July,  the  very  day  on 
which  they  entered  into  ofiice,  received  orders  to  settle  the 
provinces  immediately  between  themselves.  Mamercinus,  to 
whom  the  Gallic  war  fell,  was  directed  to  levy  troops,  with¬ 
out  admitting  any  plea  of  immunity  ;  nay,  it  Is  said,  that 
even  the  rabble  of  handicrafts,  and  those  of  sedentary  trades, 
of  all  the  worst  qualified  for  military  service,  were  called 
out ;  by  which  means  a  vast  army  was  collected  at  Veii,  in 
readiness  to  meet  the  Gauls.  It  was  not  thought  proper  to 

BOOK  VIII, 

185 

B.C.  326,] 
proceed  to  a  greater  distance,  lest  the  Gauls  might,  by  some 
other  route,  arrive  at  the  city  without  being  observed.  In 
ibj&  course  of  a  few  days  it  was  found,  on  a  careful  inquiry, 
that  every  thing  on  that  side  was  quiet  at  the  time ;  and  the 
whole  force,  which  was  to  have  opposed  the  Gauls,  was  then 
tun^d  against  Privemum.  Of  the  issue  of  the  business, 
Acre  are  two  different  accounts :  some  say,  that  the  city  was 
taken  by  storm  ;  and  that  Vitruvius  fell  alive  into  the  hands 
of  the  conquerors  :  others,  that  the  townsmen,  to  avoid  the 
extremities  of  a  storm,  presented  the  rod  of  peace,  and  sur¬ 
rendered  to  the  consul ;  and  that  Vitruvius  was  delivered  up 
by  his  troops.  The  senate,  being  consulted  with  respect  to 
Vitruvius  and  the  Privemians,  sent  directions,  that  the  con- 
sul  Plautius  should  demolish  the  wails  of  Privemum,  and, 
leaving  a  strong  garrison  there,  come  home  to  enjoy  the  ho¬ 
nour  of  a  triumph  ;  at  the  same  time  ordering  that  Vitruvius 
should  be  kept  in  prison,  until  the  return  of  the  consul,  and 
that  he  should  then  be  beaten  with  rods,  and  put  to  death. 
His  house,  which  stood  on  the  Palatine  hill,  they  command¬ 
ed  to  be  razed  to  the  ground,  and  his  effects  to  be  devoted 
to  Semo  Sancus.  With  the  money  produced  by  the  sale  of 
them,  brazen  globes  were  formed,  and  placed  in  the  chapel 
of  Sancus,  opposite  to  the  temple  p#  Quirinus.  As  to  the 
senate  of  Privemum,  it  was  commanded,  that  every  person 
who  had  continued  to  act  as  a  senator  of  Privemum,  after 
the  revolt  from  the  Romans,  should  reside  on  the  farther 
side  of  the  Tiber,  under  the  same  restrictions  as  those  of 
Velitrae.  After  the  passing  of  these  decrees,  there  was  no 
farther  mention  of  the  Privemians,  until  Plautius  had  tri¬ 
umphed.  When  that  ceremony  was  over,  and  Vitruvius, 
with  his  accomplices,  had  been  put  to  death,  the  consul 
thought  that  the  people’s  resentment  being  now  fully  gratified 
by  the  sufferings  of  the  guilty,  he  might  safely  introduce  the 
business  of  the  Privernian  state,  which  he  did  in  the  follow- 
voi..  II. — 2  B 

186 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[YJR.  486. 

ing  manner :  Conscript  Fathers,  since  the  authors  of  the 
revolt  have  received,  both  from  the  immortal  gods  and  from 
you,  the  punishment  due  to  their  crime,  what  do  ye  judge 
proper  to  be  done  with  respect  to  the  guiltless  mukitudel 
For  my  part,  although  my  duty  consists  rather  in  ec^lecting 
the  opinions  of  others,  than  in  offering  my  own,  yet,  when  1 
reflect  that  the  Privernians  are  situated  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  the  Samnites,  with  whom  it  is  exceedingly  uncertain  how 
long  we  shall  be  at^eace,  I  cannot  help  wishing,  that  as  little 
ground  of  animosity  as  possible  may  be  left  between  them 
and  us.’^ 
XXI.  The  affair  naturally  admitted  of  a  diversity  of  opi* 
nions,  while  each,  agreeably  to  his  particular  temper,  recom¬ 
mended  either  severity  or  lenity  ;  and  the  debate  was  still 
farther  perplexed  by  the  behaviour  of  one  of  the  Privemian 
ambassadors,  more  conformable  to  the  prospects  to  which  he 
had  been  born,  than  to  the  insuperable  exigency  of  the  pre¬ 
sent  juncture :  for  being  asked,  by  one  of  the  advocates  for 
severity,  what  punishment  he  though  the  Privernians  de¬ 
served  he  answered,  ‘‘  such  as  those  deserve,  who  deem 
themselves  worthy  of  liberty.’’  The  consul  observing,  that, 
by  this  stubborn  answer,  the  adversaries  of  the  cause  of  the 
Privernians  were  the  m^re  exasperated  against  them,  and 
wishing,  by  a  question  of  favourable  import,  to  draw  from 
Him  a  more  conciliating  reply,  said  to  him,  “  what  if  we  re¬ 
mit  the  punishment,  in  what  manner  may  we  expect  that  yc 
will  observe  the  which  shall  be  established  between 
He  replied,  ^  if  the  peace  which  ye  grant  us  be  a  good 
(Hie,  inviolably  and  eternally  ;  if  bad,  for  no  long  continu¬ 
ance.”  On  this,  several -exclaimed,  that  the  Privemian  me¬ 
naced  them,  and  not  in  ambiguous  terms ;  and  that  such  ex¬ 
pressions  were  calculated  to  excite  rebellion.  But  the  more 
reasonable  part  of  the  senate  interpreted  his  answers  more 
favourably,  and  said,  that  ‘‘  the  words  which  they  had  heard 

BOOK  VIII. 

B.C.  326.] 

1B7 

were  those  of  a  man,  and  of  one  who  knew  what  it  was  to  be 
free.  Could  it  be  believed  that  any  people,  or  even  any  in¬ 
dividual,  would  remain,  longer  than  necessity  constrained, 
in  a  situation  which  he  felt  painful  ?  That  the  terms  of  a 
peace  were  faithfully  observed,  only  when  they  were  volun¬ 
tarily  accepted ;  but  that  it  was  absurd  to  expect  fidelity, 
when  attempts  were  made  to  establish  slavery.”  In  this  opi¬ 
nion  they  were  led  to  concur,  principally,  by  the  consul  him¬ 
self,  who  frequently  observed  to  the  consulars,  who  had  pro* 
posed  the  different  resolutions,  in  such  a  manner  as  to  be 
heard  by  the  rest,  that,  surely  those  men  who  thought  of 
nothing  but  liberty,  were  worthy  of  being  made  Romans.” 
They  consequently  carried  their  cause  in  the  senate :  and, 
moreover,  by  direction  of  that  body,  a  proposal  was  laid 
before  the  people,  that  the  freedom  of  the  state  should  be 
granted  to  the  Privemians.  This  year  a  colony  of  three 
hundred  was  sent  to  Anxur,  and  received  two  acres  of  land 
each. 
XXII.  The  year  following,  in  which  the  consuls  were  Pub¬ 
lius  Piautius  Proculas,  and  Publius  Cornelius 
Y  R  427 
Scapula,  was  remarkable  for  no  one  transaction,  ^*(^  325* 
civil  or  military,  except  the  sending  of  a  colony 
to  Fregellae,a  district  which  had  belonged  to  the  Sidicinians, 
and  afterwards  to  the  Volscians  ;  and  a  distribution  of  meat 
to  the  people,  made  by  Marcus  Flavius,  on  occasion  of  the 
funeral  of  his  mother.  There  were  many  who  represented, 
that,  under  the  appearance  of  doing  honour  to  his  parent, 
he  was  making  recompence  to  the  people,  for  having  acquit¬ 
ted  him,  when  prosecuted  by  the  sediles  on  a  charge  of  hav¬ 
ing  debauched  a  married  wt>man.  This  donative,  intended 
as  a  return  for  favours  shewn  on  the  trial,  proved  also  the 
means  of  procuring  him  the  honour  of  a  public  office  j  for,  at 
the  next  election  of  plebeian  tribunes,  though  absent,  he  was 
preferred  before  the  candidates  who  solicited  in  person.  The 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  428. 

city  Pakepolis  was  situated  at  no  gre^  distance  from  the  spot 
where  Neapolis  now  stands.  The  two  cities  were  inhabited 
by  one  people :  these  came  from  Cutnse^  and  the  Cumans  de* 
rive  their  origin  from  Chalcis  in  Euboea.  By  means  of  the 
fleet,  in  which  they  had  been  conveyed  hither,  they  possessed 
great  power  on  the  coast  of  the  sea,  near  which  they  dwelt. 
Their  first  landing  was  on  the  islands  of  iEnaria,  and, the 
Pithacusae  :  afterwards  they  ventured  to  transfer  their  settle¬ 
ment  to  the  continent.  This  state,  relying  on  their  own 
strength,  and  also  on  the  disposition  of  the  Samnites,  to  come 
to  a  rupture  wdth  the  Romans  ;  or,  encouraged  by  the  report 
of  a  pestilence,  having  attacked  the  city  of  Rome,  committed 
various  acts  of  hostility  against  the  Romans  settled  in  the 
Campanian  and  Falernian  territories.  Wherefore,  in  the  suc¬ 
ceeding  consulate  of  Lucius  Cornelius,  and  Quintus  Publi- 
lius  Philo  a  second  time,  heralds  being  sent  to  Pa- 
YJI.428  .  .  ^ 
B  C  324*  demand  satisfaction,  and  a  haughty  an¬ 
swer  being  returned  by  these  Greeks,  a  race  more 
magnanimous  in  words  than  in  action,  the  people,  in  pursu¬ 
ance  of  the  direction  of  the  senate,  ordered  war  to  be  declar¬ 
ed  against  them.  On  settling  the  provinces  between  the  con¬ 
suls,  the  war  against  the  Greeks  fell  to  Publilius.  Cornelius, 
with  another  army,  was  appointed  to  watch  the  motions  of 
the  Samnites  :  and  a  report  prevailing,  of  an  expected  revolt 
in  Campania,  in  which  case  they  intended  to  march  their 
troops  thither,  that  was  judged  the  properest  station  for 
him. 
XXIII.  The  senate  received  information,  fnsm  both  the 
consuls,  that  there  was  very  little  hope  of  peace  with  the  Sam¬ 
nites.  Publilius  informed  them,  that  two  thousand  soldiers 
from  Nolae,  and  four  thousand  of  the  Samnites,  had  been  re¬ 
ceived  into  Palsepolis,  a  measure  rather  forced  on  the  Greeks 
by  the  Nolans,  than  agreeable  to  their  inclination.  Cornelius 
wrote,  that  a  levy  of  troops  had  been  ordered,  that  all  Sam- 

BOOK  VIII. 

189 

B;C.  324.] 
Bium  was  in  and  tibat  the  neighbouring  states  of  Pri- 
vemum,  Fundi,  and  Formise,  were  openly  solicited  to  join 
them.  It  was  thought  proper,  that,  before  hostilities  were 
commenced,  amba^dors  should  be  sent  to  expostulate  on 
these  subjects  with  the  Samnites,  who  answered  in  a  haughty 
manner  ;  they  even  went  so  far  as  to  accuse  thJ^Romans  of 
behaving  injuriously  towards  them  ;  but,  nevertheless,  they 
took  pains  to  acquit  themselves  of  the  charges  made  against 
diem,  asserting,  that  “  their  state  had  not  given  either  coun¬ 
sel  or  aid  to  the  Greeks,  nor  used  any  solicitations,  on  their 
behalf,  to  the  Fundus,  or  Formians  :  for,  if  they  were  dis¬ 
posed  to  war,  they  had  not  the  least  reason  to  be  diffident  of 
their  own  strength.  However,  they  could  not  dissemble,  that 
it  gave  great  offence  to  the  state  of  the  Samnites,  that  Fre- 
gellae,  a  town  which  they  had  taken  from  the  Volscians,  and 
demolished,  should  have  been  rebuilt  by  the  Romans ;  and 
that  they  should  have  established  a  colony  within  the  terri¬ 
tory  of  the  Samnites,  to  which  their  colonists  gave  the  name 
of  Fregeiise.  This  injury  and.affront,  if  not  done  away  by  the 
authors,  they  were  determined  themselves  to  remove,  by  the 
most  effectual  means  in  their  power.’’  One  of  the  Roman 
ambassadors  proposed  to  discuss  the  matter,  before  their  com¬ 
mon  allies  and  friends  ;  on  which  their  magistrate  said. 
Why  do  we  disguise  our  sentiments  ?  Romans,  no  confer¬ 
ences  of  ambassadors,  nor  arbitration  of  any  person  whatever, 
can  terminate  our  differences  ;  but  the  plains  of  Campania,  in 
which  we  must  fight :  let  our  armies,  therefore,  meet  between 
Capua  and  Suessula ;  and  there  let  us  decide,  whether  the 
Samnite,  or  the  Roman,  shall  hold  the  sovereignty  of  Italy.” 
To  this  the  ambassadors  of  the  Romans  replied,  that  ‘‘  they 
would  go,  not  whither  their  enemy  called,  but  whither  their 
commanders  should  lead.”  In  the  mean  time,  Publilius,  by 
seizing  an  advantageous  post  between  Palsepolis  and  Neapo- 
lis,  had  cut  off  the  confederates  from  that  interchange  of  mu- 

190 

HISTORY  or  ROME. 

[T.R.  4ea. 
toal  aid,  which  they  had  hidierto  alferded  mch  other,  when 
either  place  was  pressed.  The  day  of  Hie  ekcdoi^  approach* 
ed ;  and,  as  it  was  highly  inexpedient  that  PubUliiiS  steutd 
be  recalled,  when  on  the  poim  of  assailing  the  enemy’s  walk, 
and  in  daily  expectation  of  gaining  possession  of  their  city, 
application  ^as  made  to  the  tribunes,  to  recommend  to  the 
people  the  passing  of  an  order,  that  Poblilius  Philo,  when  his 
year  of  office  should  expire,  might  continue  in  command,  as 
pro-consul,  until  the  war  with  the  Greeks  should  be  finished. 
A  letter  was  dispatched  to  Lucius  Cornelius,  with  orders  to 
name  a  dictator  ;  for  it  was  not  thought  proper  that  the  con¬ 
sul  should  be  recalled,  while  he  was  employed  in  vigorous^ 
prosecuting  the  business  of  the  campaign,  and  had  already 
carried  the  war  into  Samnium.  He  nominated  Marcus  Clau¬ 
dius  Marcellus,  who  appointed  Spunus  Postumius  master  of 
the  horse.  The  elections,  however,  were  not  held  by  the  dic¬ 
tator,  because  the  regularity  of  his  appointment  was  called  in 
question ;  and  the  augurs,  being  consulted,  pronounced  that 
it  appeared  defective.  The  'tribunes  inveighed  against  this 
proceeding,  as  dangerous  and  dishonourable  ;  for  it  was  not 
probable,”  they  said,  “  that  a  fault  in  the  appointment  could 
have  been  discovered,  as  the  consul,  rising  in  the  night,  had 
nominated  the  dictator  in  private,  and  while  every  thing  was 
still*  ;  nor  had  the  said  consul,  in  any  of  his  letters,  either 
public  or  private,  made  any  mention  of  such  a  thing  ;  nor  did 
any  person  whatever  appear,  who  said  that  he  saw  or  heard 
any  thing  which  could  vitiate  the  auspices.  Neither  could 
the  augurs,  sitting  at  Rome,  divine  what  inauspicious  circum¬ 
stance  had  occurred  to  the  consul  in  the  camp.  ho  did  not 
plainly  perceive,  that  the  dictator’s  being  a  plebeian,  was  the 
defect  which  the  augurs  had  discovered  These,  and  oth- 
*  Any  noise  happening,  during  the  taking  of  the  auspices,  wasrreckoned 
inauspicious ;  hence  silentium  signified,  among  the  augurs,  every  circum¬ 
stance  being  favourable. 

BOOK  VHI. 

191 

B.C.  324.] 
er  arguments,  were  urged,  in  vain,  by  the  tribunes  ;  the  af¬ 
fair  ^ded  in  an  interregnum.  At  last,  after  the  elecdons 
had  been  adjourned  repeatedly,  on  one  pretext  or  another, 
the  fourteenth  inttrrex,  Lucius  iEmilius,  elected 
Y.R  429 
consuls  .Caius  P«tclius,  and  Lucius  Papirius  323 
Mugillanus,  or  Cursor,  as  I  find  him  named,  in 
some  annals* 
XXIV.  Historians  relate,  that,  in  this  year,  Alexandria, 
in  Egypt,  was  founded ;  and  that  Alexander,  king  of  Epi¬ 
rus,  being  slain  by  a  Lucanian  exile,  verified,  in  the  circum¬ 
stances  of  his  death,  the  prediction  of  Jupiter  of  Dodona. 
At  the  time  w'hen  he  was  invited  into  Italy  by  the  Taren- 
tines,  he  received  a  caution,  from  that  oracle,  to  beware  of 
the  Acherusian  watery,  and  the  city  Pandosia,  for  there  were 
fixed  the  limits  of  his  destiny.  For  that  reason  he  made  the 
greater  haste  to  pass  over  to  Italy,  in  order  to  be  at  as  great 
a  distance  as  possilde  from  the  city  Pandosia,  in  Epirus,  and 
the  river  Acheron,  which,  after  Bowing  through  Molossis, 
runs  into  the  lakes  called  infernal,  and  is  received  into  the 
Thesprotian  gulf.  But,  as  it  frequently  happens,  that  men, 
by  endeavouring  to  shun  their  fate,  run  directly  upon  it,  af¬ 
ter  having  often  defeated  the  armies  of  Bruttium  and  Luca- 
nia,  said  taken  Heraclea,  a  colony  of  the  Tarentincs,  Potea- 
tia  and  Metapontum  from  the  Lucanians,  Terina  from  the 
Bruttians,  and  several  other  cities  of  the  Messapians  and 
Lucanians ;  and,  having  sent  into  Epirus  three  hundred  il¬ 
lustrious  families,  whom  he  intended  to  keep  as  hostages,  he 
posted  his  troops  on  three  hills,  which  stood  at  a  small  dis¬ 
tance  from  each  other,  not  far  from  the  city  Pandosia,  and 
close  to  the  frontiere  of  the  Bruttians  and  Lucanians,  in  or¬ 
der  that  he  might  thence  make  incursions  into  every  part  of 
the  enemy’s  country.  At  that  time,  he  kept  about  his  person 
two  hundred  Lucanian  exiles,  whom  he  considered  as  faith¬ 
ful  attendants,  but  whose  fidelity,  according  to  the  general 

192 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  CY.R.  429. 

disposition  of  people  of  that  description,  was  ever  ready  to 
follow  the  changes  of  fortune.  A  continual  fall  of  rain  spread 
such  an  inundation  over  aU  the  plains,  as  cut  off,  from  the 
three  separate  divisions  of  the  army,  all  communication.  In 
this  state,  the  two  parties,  in  neither  of  which  the  king  was 
present,  were  suddenly  attacked  and  overpowered  by  the 
enemy,  who,  after  putting  them  to  the  sword,  employed  their 
whole  force  in  blockading  the  'post,  where  Alexander  com* 
manded  in  person.  From  this  place  the  Lucanian  exiles 
sent  emissaries  to  their  countrymen,  and,  stipulating  a  safe 
return  for  themselves,  promised  to  deliver  the  king,  either 
alive  or  dead,  into  their  power.  But  he,  bravely  resolving 
to  make  an  extraordinary  effort,  at  the  head  of  a  chosen 
band,  broke  through  the  midst  of  their  forces  ;  engaged  sin¬ 
gly,  and  slew,  the  general  of  the  Lucanians,  and,  collecting 
together  his  men,  who  had  been  scattered  in  the  retreat,  ar¬ 
rived  at  a  river,  where  the  ruins  of  a  bridge,  which  had  been 
recently  broken  by  the  violence  of  the  flood,  pointed  out  his 
road.  Here,  while  the  soldiers  were  fording  the  river  on  a 
very  uneven  bottom,  one  .of  them,  almost  spent  with  fatigue 
and  apprehension,  cried  out,  as  a  reflection  on  the  odious 
name  of  it, — You  are  justly  named  Acheros  (dismal:)’^ 
which  expression  reached  the  King’s  ears,  and  instantly  re¬ 
calling  to  his  mind  the  fate  denounced  on  him,  he  halted, 
hesitating  whether  he  should  cross  over  or  not.  Then  Soti- 
mus,  one  of  the  royal  band  of  youths  which  attended  him, 
asked  why  he  delayed  in  such  a  critical  moment ;  and  showed 
him,  that  the  Lucanians  were  watching  an  opportunity  U> 
perpetrate  some  act  of  treachery  :  whereupon  the  king,  look¬ 
ing  back,  and  seeing  them  coming  towards  him  in  a  body, 
drew  his  sword,  and  pushed  on  his  horse,  through  the  mid¬ 
dle  of  the  river.  He  had  now  reached  the  shallow,  when  a 
Lucanian  exile,  from  a  distance,  transfixed  him  with  a  jave¬ 
lin  :  after  his  fall,  the  current  carried  down  his  lifeless  body. 

BOOK  VIIL 

193 

B.C.  323.] 
with  the  weapon  sticking  in  it,  to  the  posts  of  the  enemy ; 
there  it  was  mangled,  in  a  manner  shocking  to  relate  ;  for, 
dividing  it  in  the  middle,  they  sent  one  half  to  Consentia, 
and  kept  the  other,  as  a  subject  of  mockery,  to  them^lves. 
While  they  were  throwing  darts  and  stones  at  it,  a  woman, 
mixing  with  the  crowd,  (who  expressed  a  degree  of  barba¬ 
rous  rage  which  could  scarce  be  conceived  to  exist  in  human 
breasts,)  prevailed  on  them  to  stop  for  a  moment.  She  then 
told  them,  with  tears  in  her  eyes,  that  she  had  a  husband 
and  children,  prisoners  among  the  enemy ;  and  that  she  hoped 
to  be  able,  with  the  King’s  body,  (if  they  would  grant  it  to 
her,)  however  disfigured,  to  ransom  her  friends :  this  put  an 
end  to  their  outrages.  The  remnants  of  his  limbs  were  bu¬ 
ried  at  Consentia,  entirely  through  the  care  of  the  woman  ; 
and  his  bones  were  sent  to  Metapontum,  to  the  enemy,  from 
whence  they  were  conveyed  to  Epirus,  to  his  wife  Cleopatra, 
and  his  sister  Olympias ;  the  latter  of  whom  was  the  mother, 
the  former  the  sister,  of  Alexander  the  Great.  Such  was  the 
melancholy  end  of  Alexander  of  Epirus ;  of  which,  although 
fortune  did  not  allow  him  to  engage  in  hostilities  with  the 
Romans,  yet,  as  he  waged  war  in  Italy,  I  have  thought  it 
proper  to  give  this  brief  account.  This  year,  the  fifth  time 
since  the  building  of  the  city,  the  Lectisternium  was  perform¬ 
ed  at  Rome,  for  procuring  the  favour  of  the  same  deities,  to 
whom  it  was  addressed  before.  i 
XXV.  The  new  consuls  having,  by  order  of  the  people, 
declared  war  against  the  Samnites,  exerted  themselves  in 
more  formidable  preparations  of  every  kind,  than  had  been 
made  against  the  Greeks ;  and,  about  the  same  time,  recei¬ 
ved  a  new  accession  of  strength,  from  a  quarter  where  they 
had  no  such  expectation.  The  Lucanians  and  Apulians,  na¬ 
tions  who,  until  that  time,  had  no  kind  of  intercourse  with 
the  Roman  people,  proposed  an  alliance  with  them,  promis¬ 
ing  a  supply  of  men  and  arms  for  the  war ;  a  treaty  of  friend* 
VOL.  II, — 2  C 

194 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  429. 

ship  was  accordingly  concluded.  '  At  the  same  time  their 
affairs  went  on  successfully  in  Samnium.  Three  towns  feU 
into  their  hands,  Aliifae,  Callifae,  and  Ruffrium  ;  and  the 
adjoining  country,  to  a  great  extent,  was,  on  the  first  arrival 
of  the  consuls,  laid  entirely  waste.  As  the  commencement 
of  their  operations,  on  this  side,  was  attended* with  so  much 
success,  so  the  war,  in  the  other  quarter,  where  die  Greeks 
were  held  besieged^  now  drew  towards  a  conclusion.  For, 
besides  the  communication  between  the  two  posts  of  the  ene¬ 
my  being  cut  off,  by  the  besiegers  having  possession  of  part 
of  the  works  through  which  it  had  been  carried  on,  they  now 
suffered,  within  the  walls,  hardships  far  more  grievous  than 
those  with  which  they  were  threatened,  being  insulted  in  the 
persons  of  their  wives  and  children,  and  feeling  all  the  ex¬ 
tremities  usual  in  the  sacking  of  cities.  When,  therefore, 
intelligence  arrived,  that  reinforcements  were  to  come  from 
Tarentum,  and  from  the  Samnites,  all  agreed  that  there  were 
more  of  the  latter  already  Within  the  walls  than  they  wished ; 
but  the  young  men  of  Tarentum,  who  were  Greeks  as  well 
as  themselves,  they  earnestly  longed  for,  as  they  hoped  to  be 
enabled,  by  their  means,  to  oppose  the  Samnites  and  Nolans, 
which  they  deemed  no  less  necessary  than  resisting  their  Ro¬ 
man  enemies.  At  last  a  surrender  to  the  Romans  appeared 
to  be  the  lightest  evil.  Gharilaus  and  Nymphius,  the  two 
principal  men  in  the  state,  consulting  together  on  the  sub¬ 
ject,  settled  the  part  which  each  was  to  act ;  it. was,  that  one 
should  desert  to  the  Roman  general,  and  the  other  stay  be¬ 
hind  to  manage  affairs  in  the  city,  so  "as  to  facilitate  the 
execution  of  their  plan.  Charilaus  was  the  person  who  came 
to  Pubiilius  Philo  ;  he  told  him,  that  ^  he  had  taken  a  reso¬ 
lution,  which  he  hoped  would  prove  advantageous,  fortu¬ 
nate,  and  happy  to  the  Palaepolitans,  and  to  the  Roman  people, 
of  delivering  the  fortifications  into  his  hands.  Whether  he 
should  appear,  by  that  deed,  to  have  betrayed,  or  preserved 

BOOK  VIII. 

195 

B.C.  323.] 

his  country,  de^nded  on  the  honour  of  the  Romans.  That, 
for  himself,  in  particular,  he  neither  stipulated  nor  requested 
any  thing ;  but,  in  behalf  of  the  state,  he  requested,  rather 
than  stipulated,  that,  in  case  the  design  should  succeed,  the 
Roman  people  would  consider,  naore  especially,  the  zeal  and 
hazard  with  which  it  sought  a  renewal  of  their  friendship, 
than  its  folly  and  rashness  in  deviating  from  its  duty.’’  He 
was  commended  by  the  general,  and  received  a  body  of  three 
thousand  soldiers,  with  which  he  was  to  seize  on  that  part 
of  the  city  which  was  possessed  by  the  Samnites,  which  de¬ 
tachment  was  commanded  by  Lucius  Quintius,  military  tri¬ 
bune. 
XXVI.  In  the  mean  time,  Nymphius,  on  his  part,  artfully 
addressing  himself  to  the  commander  of  the  Samnites,  pre¬ 
vailed  upon  him,  as  all  the  troops  of  the  Romans  were  em¬ 
ployed  either  about  Palaepolis,  or  in  Samnium,  to  allow  him 
to  sail  round  with  the  fleet,  to  the  territory  of  Rome,  where 
he  undertook  to  ravage,  not  only  the  sea  coast,  but  the  coun¬ 
try  adjoining  the  very  city.  But,  in  order  to  avoid  observa¬ 
tion,  it  was  necessary,  he  told  him,  to  set  out  by  night,  and 
to  launch  the  ships  immediately.  To  effect  this  with  the 
greater  dispatch,  all  the  young  Samnites,  except  the  necessary 
guards  of  the  city,  were  sent  to  the  shore.  While  Nymphius 
wasted  the  time  there,  giving  contradictory  orders,  designed¬ 
ly  to  create  confusion,  which  was  increased  by  the  darkness, 
and  by  the  crowd,  which  was  so  numerous  as  to  obstruct 
each  other’s  operations,  Charilaus,  according  to  the  plan  con¬ 
certed,  was  admitted,  by  his  associates,  into  the  city ;  and, 
having  filled  the  higher  parts  of  it  with  Roman  soldiers,  he 
ordered  them  to  raise  a  shout ;  on  which  the  Greeks,  who 
had  received  previous  directions  from  their  leaders,  kept 
themselves  quiet.  The  Nolans  fled  through  the  opposite 
part  of  the  town,  by  the  road  leading  to  Nola.  The  flight 
of  the  Samnites,  who  w^ere  shut  out  from  the  city,  was  easier. 

196 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

ty,R.  429, 

but  had  a  more  disgraceful  appearance.j  for  they  returned 
to  their  homes  without  arms,  stripped  of  their  baggage,  and 
destitute  of  every  thing ;  all,  in  short,  belonging  to  them  be¬ 
ing  left  with  their  enemies  j  so  that  they  were  objects  of  ridi¬ 
cule,  not  only  to  foreigners,  but  even  to  their  own  country¬ 
men.  I  know  that  there  is  another  account  of  this  matter, 
which  represents  the  town  to  have  been  betrayed  by  the  Sam- 
nites ;  but  I  have  chosen  to  follow  the  writers  most  worthy 
of  credit:  besides,  the  treaty  of  Neapolis,  for  to  that  place 
the  seat  of  government  of  the  Greeks  was  then  transferred, 
renders  it  more  probable,  that  the  renewal  of  friendship  was 
voluntary  on  their  side.  Publilius  had  a  triumph  decreed 
him,  because  people  were  well  convinced,  that  it  was  his 
conduct  of  the  siege  which  reduced  the  enemy  to  submission. 
This  man  was  distinguished  by  two  extraordinary  incidents, 
of  which  he  afforded  the  first  instance:  a  prolongation  of 
command,  never  before  granted  to  any  one :  and  a  triumph 
after  the  expiration  of  his  office. 
XXVII.  Another  war,  soon  after,  arose  with  the  Greeks 
of  the  other  coast.  The  Tarentines  having,  for  a  conside¬ 
rable  time,  buoyed  up  the  state  of  Palsepolis  with  delusive 
hopes  of  assistance,  when  they  understood  that  the  Romans 
had  gotten  possession  of  that  city,  as  if  they  were  the  per¬ 
sons  who  had  suffered  the  disappointment,  and  not  the  au¬ 
thors  of  it,  they  inveighed  against  the  Palaepolitans,  and  be¬ 
came  furious  in  their  anger  and  malice  towards  the  Romans ; 
to  which  they  were  farther  incited  by  receiving  information 
that  the  Lucanians  and  Apulians  had  joined  them ;  for  a 
treaty  of  alliance  had  been  this  year  concluded  with  both 
these  nations ;  “  The  business,”  they  observed,  was  now 
brought  almost  to  their  doors  ;  and  such  would  soon  be  the 
state  of  affairs,  that  they  must  deal  with  the  Romans  as  ene¬ 
mies,  or  receive  them  as  masters:  that,  in  fact,  their  interests 
^yere  at  stake,  on  the  issue  of  the  war  of  the  Samnites,  the 

BOOK  VIII. 

B.C.  323.] 

19r 

only  nation  which  continued  to  make  opposition ;  and  that 
with  power  very  inadequate,  since  they  were  deserted  by  the 
Lucanians:  these  however  might  yet  be  brought  back,  and 
induced  to  renounce  the  Homan  alliance,  if  proper  skill  were 
used,  in  sowing  dissension  between  them.”  These  reasonings 
being  readily  adopted,  by  people  who  wished  for  a  change, 
they  procured,  for  money,  some  young  Lucanians  of  conside¬ 
rable  note  in  their  country,  but  devoid  of  honour,  to  bring 
about  their  design ;  these,  having  lacerated  each  other’s 
bodies  with  stripes,  came  naked  into  a  public  meeting  of 
their  countrymen,  exclaiming  that,  because  they  had  ventured 
to  go  into  the  Roman  camp,  they  had  been  thus  beaten  with 
rods,  by  order  of  the  consul,  and  had  hardly  escaped  the 
loss  of  their  heads.  Circumstances,  so  shocking  in  their 
nature,  carrying  strong  proofs  of  the  ill-treatment,  none  of 
artifice,  the  people  were  so  irritated,  that,  by  their  clamours, 
they  compelled  the  magistrates  to  call  together  the  senate  ; 
and  whilst  some  stood  round  that  assembly,  insisting  on  a 
declaration  of  war  against  the  Romans,  others  ran  different 
ways  to  rouse  to  arms  the  multitude  residing  in  the  country. 
Thus  the  minds,  even  of  rational  men,  being  hurried  into  im¬ 
prudence  by  the  general  uproar,  a  decree  was  passed,  that  the 
alliance  with  the  Samnites  should  be  renewed,  and  ambassa¬ 
dors  sent  for  that  purpose.  .  This  hasty  proceeding  surprised 
the  Samnites,  who,  however,  insisted,  that  they  should  not 
only  give  hostages,  but  also  receive  garrisons  into  their  for¬ 
tified  places ;  and  they,  blinded  by  resentment,  refused  no 
terms.  In  a  little  time  after,  on  the  authors  of  the  imposi¬ 
tion  removing  to  Tarentum,  the  whole  came  to  light.  But, 
as  they  had  given  all  power  out  of  their  own  hands,  nothing 
was  left  them  but  unavailing  repentance. 
XXVIII.  This  year  proved,  as  it  were,  a  new  aera  of  li¬ 
berty  to  the  Roman  commons ;  a  stop  being  put  to  the  prac¬ 
tice  of  confining  debtors.  This  alteration  of  the  law  was  cf- 

«8 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[  Y  Ji.  429. 

iei^ed  in  consequence  of  the  behaviour  of  a  usurer,  in  which 
lo^t  and  cruelty  were  equally  conspicuous*  His  name  was 
l/ucius  Papirius*  To  him,  one  Caius  Publilius  having  sur¬ 
rendered  his  person  to  be  confined  for  a  debt  due  by  his  father, 
his  youth  and  beauty^  which  ought  to  have  excited  commise¬ 
ration,  operated  on  the  other’s  mind  as  incentives  to  barbari¬ 
ty.  He  first  attempted  to  seduce  the  young  man  by  impure 
discourses  j  but  finding  that  his  ears  were  shocked  at  their 
infamous  tendency,  he  then  endeavoured  to  terrify  him  by 
threats,  and  reminded  him  frequently  of  his  situation.  At 
last  convinced  of  his  resolution  to  act  conformably  to  his  ho¬ 
nourable  birth,  rather  than  to  his  present  condition,  he  order¬ 
ed  him  to  be  stripped  and  scourged.  With  the  marks  of 
the  rods  imprinted  in  his  flesh,  the  youth  rushed  out  into  the 
public  street,  uttering  loud  complaints  of^^the  depravedness 
and  inhumanity  of  the  usurer.  On  which  a  vast  number  of 
people,  moved  by  compassion  for  his  early  age,  and  indigna¬ 
tion  at  his  barbarous  treatment,  reflecting  at  the  same  time 
what  might  be  the  lot  of  themselves,  and  of  their  children, 
flocked  together  into  the  Forum,  and  from  thence,  in  a  body, 
to  the  senate-house.  When  the  consuls  were  obliged,  by 
the  sudden  tumult,  to  call  a  meeting  of  the  senate,  the  peo¬ 
ple,  falling  at  the  feet  of  each  of  the  senators,  as  they  were 
going  into  the  senate-house,  presented  to  their  view  the  back 
of  Caius  torn  with  stripes.  On  that  day,  in  consequence  of 
the  outrageous  conduct  of  an  individual,  one  of  the  strongest 
bonds  of  credit  was  broken ;  and  the  consuls  were  com¬ 
manded  to  propose  to  the  people,  that  no  person  should  be 
held  in  fetters  or  stocks,  except  convicted  of  a  crime,  and  in 
order  to  punishment ;  but  that,  for  money  due,  the  goods  of 
the  debtor,  not  his  person,  should  be  answerable.  Thus  the 
confined  debtors  were  released  ;  and  provision  made,  for  the 
time  to  come,  that  they  should  not  be  liable  to  confinement. 

BOOK  VIIL 

199 

B.C.  323.] 
XXIX.  In  the  course  of  this  year,  while  the  war  with  the 
Samnites  was  sufficient  in  itself  to  give  full  employment  to 
the  senate,  besides  the  sudden  defection  of  the  Lucanians, 
and  the  intrigues  of  the  Tarentines,  by  which  it  had  been  ef¬ 
fected,  they  found  another  source  of  uneasiness  in  an  union 
formed  by  the  state  of  the  Vestinians  with  the  Samnites. 
Which  event,  though  it  continued,  during  the  present  year, 
to  be  the  general  subject  of  conversation,  without  coming 
under  any  public  discussion,  appeared  so  important  to  the 
consuls  of  the  year  following,  Lucius  Furius  Ca- 
milius  a  second  time,  and  Decius  Junius,  that  it  g  3^2 
was  the  first  business  which  they  proposed  to  the 
consideration  of  the  state.  Notwithstanding  it  had  yet  pro- 
duced  no  effects,  it  threw  the  senate  into  great  perplexity,  as 
they  dreaded  equally  the  consequences,  either  of  passing  it 
over,  or  of  taking  it  up  ;  lest  on  the  one  hand,  if  that  peo¬ 
ple’s  conduct  passed  with  impunity,  wantonness  and  arro¬ 
gance  might  excite  other  states  in  their  neighbourhood  to 
follow  their  example ;  and,  on  the  other,  if  an  attempt  should 
be  made  to  punish  them  by  force  of  arms,  resentment  and 
dread  of  immediate  danger  might  produce  the  same  effect. 
And  the  whole  body  of  V estinians,  too,  was  at  least  equal  in 
strength  to  the  Samnites,  being  composed  of  the  Marsians, 
the  Pelignians,  and  the  Marrusinians  ;  against  all  of  whom 
they  would  have  to  contend,  if  any  steps  were  taken  j^ainst 
that  nation.  However,  that  opinion  prevailed,  which  might, 
at  the  time, seem  to  have  more  spirit  than  prudence;  but  the 
event  afforded  a  proof  that  fortune  assists  the  brave.  The 
people,  in  pursuance  of  the  direction  of  the  senate,  ordered 
war  against  the  Vestinians,  which  province  fell  by  lot  to  Ju¬ 
nius  ;  Samnium  to  Camillus.  Armies  were  led  to  both 
places,  which,  by  carefully  guarding  the  frontiers,  prevent¬ 
ed  a  juncteon  of  the  forces  of  their  enemies.  But  Lucius 
Furius,  on  whom  the  principal  weight  of  the  business  rested, 

200 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  430. 

was  deprived  of  his  share  in  the  management  of  it,  beitig 
seized  with  a  severe  sickness.  He  was,  therefore,  ordered 
to  nominate  a  dictator  to  conduct  the  war,  and  he  nominated 
Lucius  Papirius  Cursor,  the  most  celebrated  general,  by  far, 
of  any  in  that  age,  who  appointed  Quintus  Fabius  Maximus 
Rullianus  master  of  the  horse.  These  commanders  were  re« 
markable  for  their  exploits  in  war ;  but  more  so,  for  a  quar¬ 
rel  which  arose  between  themselves,  and  which  proceeded 
almc^t  to  violence.  The  other  consul,  in  the  territory  of  the 
Vestinians,  carried  on  operations  of  various  kinds ;  and,  in 
all,  was  uniformly  successful.  He  utterly  laid  waste  their 
lands ;  and,  by  spoiling  and  burning  their  houses  and  corn, 
compelled  them  to  come  to  an  engagement ;  when,  in  one 
battle,  he  reduced  the  strength  of  the  Vestinians  to  such  a 
degree,  though  not  without  loss  on  his  own  side,  that  they 
not  only  fled  to  their  camp  ;  but,  fearing  even  to  trust  to  the 
rampart  and  trench,  dispersed  from  thence  into  the  several 
towns,  in  hopes  of  finding  security  in  the  situation  and  forti¬ 
fications  of  their  cities.  At  last  he  undertook  to  reduce 
their  towns  by  force  ;  and  so  ardent  were  the  soldiers,  and 
such  their  resentment  for  the  wounds  which  they  had  receiv¬ 
ed,  (hardly  one  of  them  having  come  out  of  the  battle  imhurt,) 
that  he  took  Cutina  by  scalade,  and  afterwards  Cingilia.  The 
spoil  of  both  cities  he  gave  to  the  soldiers,  in  consideration 
of  their  having  bravely  surmounted  the  obstruction  both  of 
gates  and  walls. 
XXX.  The  commanders  entered  Samnium  without  having 
obtained  any  particularly  favourable  indications  in  the  aus¬ 
pices  ;  an  ominous  circumstance,  which  pointed,  not  at  the 
event  of  war,  for  that  was  prosperous,  but  at  the  furious  pas¬ 
sions  and  the  quarrels  which  broke  out  between  the  leaders. 
For  Papirius  the  dictator,  returning  to  Rome  in  order  to 
take  the  auspices  anew,  in  consequence  of  a  caution  received 
from  the  aruspex,  left  strict  orders  with  the  master  of  the 

# 

B;C.  m2,]  BOOK  VIII,  ^1 
horse  to  in  his  post,  and  not  to  in  battle  during 
his  absence.  After  the  departure  of  the  dictator,  Fi^ius 
having  discovered  by  his  scouts,  that  the  enemy  were  in  as 
unguarded  a  state  as-if  there  was  not  a  stogie  Roman  in  their 
neighbourhood,  the  high-spirited  )^uth,  (ehher  conceiving 
indignation  at  the  sole  authority  in  every  point  appearing  to 
be  lodged  in  the  hands  of  the  dictator,  or  induced  by  the 
opportunity  of  striking  an  important  Uow,)  having  made  the 
necessary  preparations  and  dispositions,  marched  to  a  place 
called  Imbrinium,  and  there  fought  a  battle  with  the  Sam* 
nites.  His  success  in  the  fight  was  such,  that  there  was  no 
one  circumstance  which  could  have  been  improved  to  more 
advantage,  if  the  dictator  had  been  present.  The  leader  was 
not  wanting  to  the  soldiers,  nor  the  soldiers  to  their  leader. 
The  cavalry  too,  (finding,  after  repeated  charges,  that  they 
could  not  break  the  ranks,)  by  the  advice  of  Lucius  Comi- 
nius,  a  military  tribune,  pulled  off  the  bridles  from  their 
horses  and  spurred  them  on  so  furiously,  that  no  power  could 
withstand  them  j  forcing  their  way  through  the  thickest  of 
the  enemy,  they  bore  down  every  thing  before  them ;  and 
the  infantry,  seconding  the  charge,  the  whole  body  was 
thrown  into  confusion.  Of  these,  twenty  thousand  are  said 
to  have  fallen  on  that  day.  Some  accounts  say  that  there 
were  two  battles  fought  during  the  dictator's  absence^  and 
two  victories  obtained ;  but  the  most  ancient  writers  mentiem 
only  this  one,  and  in  some  histories  the  whole  transactimi  is 
omitted.  The  master  of  the  horse  getting  possession  of 
abundance  of  spoils,  in  consequence  of  tiie  great  numbers 
slain,  collected  the  arms  into  a  hnge  heap,  and  burned  them ; 
either  in  pursuance  of  a  vow  to  some  of  the  gods,  or,  Jf  we 
choose  to  credit  Fabius,  in  order  to  ja*event  the  dictator  from 
reaping  the  fruits  of  that  renown,  to  which  he  alone  was  eiv* 
titled.  He  feared,  too,  that  Papirius  might  inscribe  his  name 
on  the  spoils,  or  cany  them  in  triumph.  His  letters  ^so, 
VOL.  II. — 2  D 

^  HISTCmY  Of  ItOME.  [YM.  4m 
co^i^auig  m  mcco^^of  thewmcss^  beiQgseiit  ^  tte  satiate, 
showed  plaa%  that  he  wish^  not  to  Impart  to  Ac  dictator 
aoy  share  of  the  honour  j  who  eeitainly  viewed  the  proved* 
ing  in  this  light,  for,  while  odmrs  rejoiced  at  the  victory 
tained,  he  showed  only  surlin^  and  anger :  insomuch  that, 
tmmediately  dismissing  the  ornate,  he  hastened  out  of  the 
senate-house;  and  fr^ucntly  repeated  with  warmth,  that  the 
legions  of  the  Samnites  were  not  more  effectually  vanquished 
mid  overthiown  by  the  master  of  the  horse,  than  were  the 
dictatorial  dignity  and  military  discipline,  if  such  contempt 
of  orders  escaped  with  impunity.  Thus,  breathing  resent¬ 
ment  ami  menaces,  be  set  out  for  the  camp  ;  but,  though  be 
travelled  with  all  possible  expeditimi,  intcUigence  arrived  be¬ 
fore  him,  that  the  dictator  was  coming,  eager  for  vengeance, 
and  in  every  second  sentence  applauding  the  conduct  of  Titus 
Manlius. 
XXXI.  Fabius  instantly  called  an  assembly,  and  intreated 
the  soldiers  to  ‘‘  show  the  same  courage  in  protecting  him, 
under  whose  conduct  and  auspices  they  had  conquered,  from 
outrageous  cruelty  df  the  dictator,  which  they  had  so 
lately  displayed  in  defending  the  commonwealth  from  its 
most  inveterate  enemies.  He  Was  now  coming,’’  he  told 
them,  frantic  with  envy ;  enraged  at  another’s  bravery, 
raving  like  a  madman,  because,  in  his  absence,  the  business 
of  the  public  had  been  executed  with  remarkable  success ; 
and,  if  be  could  change  the  fortune  of  the  engagement,  would 
wish  the  Samnites  in  possession  of  victory  rather  than  the 
Romans.  He  talked  much  of  contemj^  of  orders ;  as  if  his 
prohibition  of  fighting  were  not  dictated  by  the  same  motive, 
which  caus^  his  vexation  at  the  fight  having  token  place. 
He  wished  to  shackle  the  valour  of  others,  and  meant  to  take 
away  the  soldiers’  arms  when  they  were  most  eager  for  ac¬ 
tion,  and  thsA  do  use  might  be  made  dT  them  in  his  ^sence  : 
he  was  far^r  enraged  too,  because  Quintus  Fabius  consi- 

BOOK  vm. 

B,C  322*] 

203 

d^red  himself  as  ma^er  of  horse,  not  as  a  be^le  to  the 
dictator*  How  wcfldd  he  have  behaved,  had  issue  of  the 
fight  been  imfortunate  ;  which,  through  the  chances  of  war 
and  the  uncertainty  of  military  operations,  might  have  been 
the  case ;  since  now,  when  the  enemy  has  been  vanqiushed, 
{as  completely,  indeed,  as  if  that  leader’s  own  singular  ta¬ 
lents  had  been  employed  in  the  matter,)  be  yet  threatens  the 
master  of  the  horse  with  punishment  ?  Nor  is  his  VBXicout 
greater  towards  the  master  of  the  horse  than  towards  the 
military  tribunes,  towards  the  centurions,  towards  the  sol¬ 
diers.  On  all  he  would  vent  his  rage  ;  and,  because  that  is 
not  in  his  power,  he  vents  it  on  one.  Envy,  like  fiame,  soars 
upwards  j  aims  at  the  summit,  and  makes  its  attack  on  the 
head  of  the  business,  on  the  leader.  If  he  could  put  him  out 
of  the  way,  together  with  the  glory  of  the  service  perform¬ 
ed,  he  would  then  triumph,  like  a  conqueror  over  vanquished 
troops  ;  and,  without  scruple,  practise  against  the  soldiers, 
what  he  bad  been  allowed  to  act  against  their  commander* 
It  behaved  them,  therefore,  in  his  cause,  to  support  the  ge¬ 
neral  liberty  oi  all.  If. the  dictator  perceived  among  the 
troops  the  same  unanimity  in  justifying  their  victory,  that 
they  had  displayed  in  gaming  it,  and  that  all  interested  them¬ 
selves  in  the  safety  of  one,  it  would  bend  his  to 
milder  counsels.  In  fine,”  he  told  them  that  ‘‘  he  committed 
his  life,  and  all  his  interests,  to  their  honour  and  to  their 
courage.” 
XXXIL  His  speech  was  received  with  the  loudest  accla¬ 
mations  from  every  part  of  the  assembly,  bidding  him  have 
courage  ;  for,  while  the  Roman  legions  were  in  being,  no  man 
should  offer  him  violence.”  Not  l<mg  after,  the  dictate  ar-  . 
rived,  and  instantly  smnmoned  an  assembly  by  sound  of 
trumpet.  Tlien,  .silence  being  made,  a  crier  cited  Quintus 
Fabius  master  of  the  horse,  and,  as  soon  as,  on  die  lower 
ground,  he  had  approached  the  tribunal,  the  dictator  said, 

204  HISTtMY  i^ME.  £yA.430. 
**  Quintus  Fabias,  I  of  ^oit^  when  Ae  authority  of 
dictator  is  acknowledged  to  be  supreme,  itoi  k  submitted  to 
by  the  consuls,  officers  endowed  with  regal  power  j  and  like¬ 
wise  by  the  prastors^  created  under  the  same  auspices  with 
consuls;  wheibcr  or  no  you  think  it  reasonable  that  it  shook! 
not  meet  obedience  from  a  master  of  the  horse  ?  I  also  ask 
you  whetfier,  when  I  knew  that  I  set  out  from  home  under 
uncertain  auspices,  it  was  for  me,  under  that  consideratimt, 
to  hazatd  the  safety  of  the  commonwealth,  or  whether  my 
duty  did  not  require  me  to  have  the  auspices  newly  taken, 
so  diat  nodiing  might  be  done  while  the  will  of  the  gods  re¬ 
mained  doubtful?  And,  further,  when  a  religious  scrujde 
was  of  such  a  nature^  as  to  hinder  the  dictator  from  acting, 
whether  the  master  of  the  horse  could  be  exempt  frcmi  it, 
and  at  liberty  ?  But  why  do  I  ask  these  questions^  when, 
supposing  that  I  had  gone  without  leaving  any  oiders,  your 
own  judgment  ought,  to  have  been  regulated  iu:cording  to 
what  you  could  discover  of  my  intention*  Why  do  you  not 
ani^r  ?  I^d  I  not  forbid  y<m  to  act,  in  any  respect,  during 
my  absence  ?  Did  I  not  foibid  you  to  aagage  the  enemy  ? 
Yet,  in  amtempt  of  these  my  orders,  while  the  auspices  were 
uncertain,  while  the  omens  were  confused,  contrary  to  the 
practice  of  war,  coatrary  to  the  discipline  of  our  ancestc^, 
and  contrary  to  the  authority  of  the  gods,  you  dared  to  enter 
on  the  fight.  Answer  to  these  questions,  proposed  to  you. 
On  any  other  matter  utter  not  a  word.  Lictor,  draw  near 
him.”  To  each  of  these  particulars,  Fd^ios,  finding  it  no 
easy  matter  to  answear,  at  one  time  remonstrated  a^inst  tte 
same  pemsn  acting  as  accuser  and  judge,  in  a  cause  wMdi 
affected  his  very  existence  ;  at  another,  he  asserted  foal  his  . 
life  should  sooner  he  forctsd  from  him,  than  tfie  g^iy  of  hk 
past  services ;  ckaring  himself,  and  accusing  the  ofoer  by 
turns,  so  diat  the  dktator^s  anger  blazed  xmt  wi&  fresh  |uty; 
and  he  ordered  foe  master  of  foe  horse  to  be  sti^^d,  imd 

205 

B.'C.'ass.]  - 
die  rods^wd  ai^  W  g£^  rte^f.  Fabias,  im^ikmng  die 
protecikm  of  dNs  aoidiel^  die  liciors  w^re  tearing  Ids 
^rmeiit&^  faired  lo  the  quarters  of  the  veterans,  who  were 
atready  tmamg  a  commotimi  in  the  assembly :  from  diem  ^ 
opro^  spread  through  die  whole  body;  in  cme  |da<%  the 
vmee  of  supplication  was  heard ;  in  another,  menaces.  Those 
wlm  happened  to  stsmd  nearest  to  die  ttibwal,  becan^,  be¬ 
ing  under  the  eyes  of  the  general,  they  coidd.  easily  be  known, 
applied  to  him  with  entreaties  to  spare  die  master  of 
horse,  and  not  in  him  to  condemn  the  whide  army.  The  re* 
motcr  parts  of  the  assembly,  and  the  crowd  ccdlected  round 
Fabfus,  railed  at  the  unrelenting  spiiit  of  the  dictamr,  smd 
were  not  far  from  mutiny :  nor  was  even  the  tribute  per- 
fec%  quiet.  The  iieutenants-gfsttral  standing  roimd  die 
^merars  seat,  besought  him  to  adjourn  the  business  to  die 
msict  day,  and  to  allow  time  to  his  anger,,  and  room  fem 
mderatimi ;  representing,  that  ^  the  indiscretiim  of  Fahim 
had  been  sufficiendy  rebuked ;  his  victory  sufficiently  dis-  ^ 
graced ;  and  they  begged  him  not  to  proi^d  to  the  extreme 
of  severity ;  imt  lo  brand  with  ignominy  a  youth  rf  extraor¬ 
dinary  merit,  or  bis  father,  a  man  of  mc^  illustriaus  ^arac- 
ter,  together  widi  the  whole  family  of  the  Fabii.”  When 
neither  their  players  nor  arguments  made  any  impressiem, 
they  desired  him  to  <A^rve  the  violent  ferment  of  the 
bly,  mid  told  him,  that,  while  the  soldiers^  tempeix  were 
heated  to  such  a  d^ree,  it  becstme  either  his  age  or  his 
wisdom  to  kindle  them  into  a  flame,  and  i^brd  matter  for  a 
mutiny ;  dm  no  one  would  lay  the  blame  of  such  an  event 
ott  Quintus  Fabios,  who  only  dqurecated  punishment ;  but 
on  die  dictator,  if,  blinded  by  resentment,  he  dmuld,  by  an 
dhjudged  contei^  draw  on  himself  die  fury  of  the  multitude ; 
smd,lest  he  should  think  that  diey  acted  from  motives  of  regard 
Quh^ua  Fs^ius,  they  were  ready  to  makeoath  that,  in  theif 

HISTORY'OF  SOME. 

[y,R.  430. 

it  was  fm*  the  interest  of  the  commcm wealth 
Quiotus  Fabkis  sfaodUl  be  puiushed  at  that  time**’ 
KJptlll*  Their  expostuktions  irritating  the  dictitor 
{gainst  themselves,  instead  of  appeasing  his  ang^r  against 
^  master  of  the  horse,  the  lieutenants-general  were  ordered 
te  go  down  from  the  tribunal ;  and,  after  seversd  vain  attempts 
were. made  to  procure  silence  by  means  of  a  crier,  the  noise 
and  tumult  t^g  so  great  that  neither  the  vmce  of  the  dic¬ 
tator  himself,  nor  that  of  his  aj^aritors,  could  be  heard  ; 
night,  as  in  the  ease  of  a  battle,  put  an  end  to  the  contest. 
The  master  of  the  horse  was  ordered  to  attend  on  the  day 
following ;  but,  being  assured  by  every  one  that  Papirius, 
being  agitated  and  exasperated  in  the  course  of  the  present 
convention,  would  proceed  against  him  with  greater  violence, 
he  fled  privately  from  the  camp  to  Rome ;  where,  by  the  ad¬ 
vice  of  his  father,  Marcus  Fabius,  who  had  been  three  times 
ctmsul,  and  likewise  dictator,  he  immediately  called  a  meet¬ 
ing  of  the  senate.  While  he  was  laying  his  complaints  be¬ 
fore  the  fathers,  of  the  rage  and  injustice  of  the  dictator, 
on  a  sudden  was  heard  the  noise  of  lictors  before  the  senate- 
house,  clearing  the  way,  and  Papirius  himself  arrived,  full  of 
resentment,  having  followed,  with  a  guard  of  light  horse,  as 
soon  as  he  heard  that  the  other  had  quitted  the  camp.  The 
contention  then  tK^gan  anew,  and  the  dictator  ordered  Fabius 
to  be  seiaed.  As  he  persisted  in  his  purpose  with  inflexible 
obstinacy,  notwithstanding  the  united  intercessions  of  the 
principal  patricians,  and  of  the  whole  senate,  Fabius,  the  fa¬ 
ther,  then  said,  “  since  neither  the  authority  of  the  senate 
has  any  weight  with  you  ;  nor  my  age,  which  you  wish  to 
render  childless  ;  nor  the  noble  birth  and  merit  of  a  master 
of  the  horse,  nominated  by  yourself ;  nor  prayers,  which  have 
often  mitigated  the  rage  of  an  enemy,  and  which  appease  the 
the  wrath  of  the  gods ;  I  call  upon  the  tribunes  of  the  com¬ 
mons  for  support,  and  appeal  to  the  people :  and,  since  you  de-^ 

BOOK  VIII. 

B.C.  322,] 

2oy 

cHoe  the  judgment  of  your  own  army,  as  w^of  the  senate,  ! 
call  you  before  a  judge  who  must  certainly  be  aflowed,  thc^igh 
no  other  should,  to  pc^sess  more  power  aiad  authority  tksLti 
yourself,  though  dictotor.  It  shall  be  seen  whether  you  wiU 
submit  to  an  appeal,  to  which  TuUus  Hostilius,  a  Iloms^ 
King,  submitted.”  They  proceeded  directly  from  the  senate* 
house  to  the  assembly  ;  where,  being  arrived,  the  dictator  at* 
tended  by  few,  the  master  of  the  horse  by  all  the  pepple  of 
the  first  rank  in  a  body,  Papirius  commanded  him  to  be  taken 
from  the  rostrum  to  the  lower  ground  ;  on  which,  his  father, 
following  him,  smd,  “  You  do  well  in  ordering  us  to  be 
brought  down  to  a  place  where  even  as  private  persons  we 
have  liberty  of  speech.”  At  first,  instead  of  regular  speeches, 
nothing  but  altercation  was  heard :  at  length,  the  indigna* 
tion  of  old  Fabius,  and  the  strength  of  his  voice,  got  the  bet* 
ter  of  noise,  while  he  reproached  Papirius  with  arr<^fance  and 
cruelty.  ‘‘  He  himself,”  he  said,  “  had  been  dictator  at  Rome : 
and  no  man,  not  even  the  lowest  plebeian,  or  centurion,  or 
soldier,  had  suffered  in  any  way  through  his  means.  But 
Papirius  sought  for  victory  and  triumph  over  a  Roman  com* 
mander  widi  as  much  zeal  as  over  the  generals  of  the  enemy. 
What  an  immense  difference  between  the  moderation  of  the 
ancients,  and  the  oppression  of  the  modems  ^  Quintius  Cin* 
cinnatus,  when  dictator,  shewed  no  farther  mark  of  resent* 
ment  to  Lucius  Minucius  the  consul,  (sdthough  from  his  ill 
conduct  he  had  fallen  into  the  power  of  the  enemy,  and  from 
which  he  rescued  him,)  "than  leaving  him  at  the  head  of  the 
army,  in  the  quality  of  lieutenant-general,  instead  of  consul. 
Marcus  Farias  Camillus,  in  the  case  of  Lucius  Furius,  who, 
in  contempt  of  his  great  age  and  authority,  had  fought  a  bat¬ 
tle,  the  issue  of  which  was  dishonourable  in  the  last  degree, 
not  only  restrained  his  anger  at  the  time,  so  as  to  write  no 
unfavourable  representation  of  his  conduct  to  the  people  or 
the  senate  ;  but,  after  returning  home,  when  the  patricians 

208 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.43  0 

gave  him  a  power  of  electing  from  among  his  ooUeagues 
whoever  he  might  approve  as  an  associate  with  Irimsclf  in  the 
commai^,  chose  that  very  man  in  preference  to  all  the  other 
ccmsular  tribunes.  Nay,  the  body  of  the  people  themselves, 
whose  power  is  supreme  in  every  case,  never  suffered  their 
passions  to  carry  then^to  greater  severity,  even  towards  thc^e, 
who,  through  rashness  and  ignorance,  had  occ^ioned  the  loss 
of  armies,  thmi  the  fining  them  in  a  sum  of  money.  Until 
that  day,  a  capital  pr<^ecution  for  ill  conduct  in  war  had  ne¬ 
ver  been  instituted  against  any  commander,  but  now,  generals 
of  the  Roman  people,  after  gaining  the  most  splendid  victo¬ 
ries,  and  meriting  the  most  honourable  triumphs,  are  threat¬ 
ened  ifrith  rods  and  axes  ;  a  treatment  which  would  not  have 
been  deemed  allowable,  even  towards  those  who  had  been  de¬ 
feated  by  an  enemy.  What  degree  of  punishment  would  his 
son  have*  been  liable  to,  if  he  had  occasioned  the  loss  of  the 
army  ?  if  he  had  been  put  to  flight,  and  driven  out  of  his 
camp  ?  Ck>uld  the  dictator  stretch  his  resentment  and  violence 
to  any  greater  length  than  to  scourge  him,  and  put  him  to 
death  ?  How  was  it  consistent  with  reason,  that,  through  the 
means  of  Quintus  Fabius,  the  state  should  be  filled  with  joy, 
exulting  in  victory,  and  occupied  in  thanksgivings  and  con¬ 
gratulations  ;  while,  at  the  same  time,  he  who  had  given  oc¬ 
casion  to  the  temples  of  the  gods  being  thrown  open,  their 
altars  yet  smoking  with  sacrifices,  and  loaded  with  honours 
and  offerings,  should  be  stripped  naked,  and  tom  with  stripes 
in  the  sight  qf  the  Roman  people ;  within  view  of  the  Capi¬ 
tol  and  citadel,  and* of  those  gods,  whose  aid  he  had  so  suc¬ 
cessfully  invoked  in  two  different  battles  ?  With  what  temper 
would  such  proceedings  be  borne  by  the  army  which  had  con¬ 
quered  under  his  conduct  and  auspices  ?  What  mourning 
would  there  be  in  the  Roman  camp  ;  what  joy  among  their 
enemies  This  sp^ch  he  accompanied  with  an  abundant 
flow  of  tears  ;  uniting  reproaches  and  complaints,  imploring 

^09 

B.C.  322.]  TOOK  VIII. 
the  aid  both  of  gods  and  men,  and  warmly  embracing  his 
son. 
XXXIV.  On  his  side  stood  the  majesty  of  the  senate,  the 
favour  of  the  people,  the  support  of  the  tribunes,  and  regard 
for  the  absent  army.  On  the  other  aide  were  urged  the  in- 
violable  audiority  of  the  Roman  government  and  military 
discipline ;  the  echet  of  the  dictator,  always  observed  as  the 
mandate  of  a  deity  ;  nor  was  the  severity  of  Manlius  forgot, 
and  his  postponing  even  parental  affection  to  public  utilit}^ 
'Hie  same  also,”  said  the  dictator,  ‘‘  was  the  conduct  of  Lu¬ 
cius  Brutus,  the  founder  of  Roman  liberty,  in  the  case  of  his 
two  sons.  But  now,  such  is  the  indulgence  of  fathers,  and 
the  easiness  of  temper  in  the  aged,  that,  in  this  case  of  con¬ 
tempt  of  the  dictatorial  authority,  they  indulge  the  young  in 
the  subversion  of  military  order,  as  if  it  were  a  matter  of 
trifling  consequence.  For  his  part,  however,  he  would  per¬ 
severe  in  his  purpose^pid  would  not  remit  the  smallest  part 
of  the  punishment  jui^  due  to  a  person  who  fought  contrary 
to  his  orders,  while  the  rites  of  religion  were  imperfectly 
executed,  and  the  auspices  uncertain.  Whether  the  majesty 
of  the  supreme  authority  was  to  be  perpetual,  or  not,  depend¬ 
ed  not  OT  him;  but  Lucius  Papirius  would  not  diminish 
aught  of  its  rights.  He  wished  that  the  tribunitian  office, 
inviolate  itself,  would  not,  by  its  interposition,  violate  the  au¬ 
thority  of  the  Roman  government ;  nor  the  Roman  people, 
in  his  case  particularly,  annihilate  the  dictator,  and  the  rights 
of  the  dictatorship,  together.  But,  if  this  should  be  the  case, 
not  Lucius  Papirius,  but  the  tribunes  and  the  people,  would 
be  blamed  by  posterity  ;  though  then  too  late,  when  military 
discipline  being  once  dissolved,  the  soldier  would  no  longer 
obey  the  orders  of  the  centurion,  the  centurion  those  of  ^he 
tribune,  the  tribune  those  of  the  lieuteimnt-general,  the  lieu¬ 
tenant-general  those  of  the  consul,  nor  the  master  of  the  horse 
those  of  the  dictator.  No  one  would  then  pay  any  deference 
VOL.  II. — 2  E 

^10 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[YJt.43a 

to  men,  no,  nor  oven  to  the  gods.  Neiihcr  edicts  of  ge^r^s, 
not  auspices,  would  be  observed.  The  soldiers,  without  leave 
of  absence,  would  straggle  at  randoih  throu^  the  lands  of 
friends  and  of  foes ;  and,  regardless  of  their  oath,  would, 
merely  to  gratify  a  wantc®  humour,  quit  dbe  service  when- 
ever  they  might  choose.  The  standards  would  be  forsaken  j 
the  men  would  neither  assemble  in  pursuance  of  orders,  nor 
attend  to  the  difference  of  fighting  by  night  or  by  day,  on  fa¬ 
vourable  or  unfavourable  ground.  In  a  word,  military  ope¬ 
rations,  kistead  of  the  regularity  established  under  the  sanc¬ 
tion  of  a  sacred  solemnity,  would  become  like  those  of  free¬ 
booters,  directed  by  chance  and  accident.  Render  yourselves, 
then,  tribunes  of  the  commons,  accountable  for  all  these  evils, 
to  aE  future  ages.  Expose  your  own  persons  to  these  heavy 
imputations  in  defence  of  ibe  Hcentious  comluct  of  Quintus 
Fabius.” 
XXXV.  The  tribunes  stood  and  were  now 
more  anxiously  concerned  at  their  situation  than  at  his 
who  sought  their  support,  when  they  were  freed  from  this 
embarrassment  by  the  Roman  people  tinasimously  having  re¬ 
course  to  prayers  and  entreaties,  that  the  dictator  would,  for 
their  sakes,  remit  the  punishment  of  die  master  of  the  horse. 
The  tribunes  likewise,  seeing  the  business  take  this  turn,  fol¬ 
lowed  the  example,  earnestly  beseeching  the  dictator  to  par- 
don  human  error,  to  consider  the  immaturity  of  the  offender’s 
age,  who  had  suffered  sufficiently :  and  now  the  youth  him¬ 
self,  now  bis  father,  Marcus  Fabius,  disclaiming  farther  con¬ 
test,  fell  at  the  dictator’s  knees,  and  deprecated  his  wrath. 
Then  the  dictator,  after  causing  silence,  said,  Romans,  it  is 
well.  Military  di^ipline  has  prevailed  ;  the  majesty  of  go- 
ymiment  has  prevailed  ;  both  which  were  in  danger  of  ceas¬ 
ing  this  day  to  exist,  Quintus  Fabius,  who  fought  contrary 
to  the  order  of  his  commander,  is  not  acquitted  of  guilt ;  but, 
after  being  condemned  as  guilty,  is  granted  as  a  boori  to  the 

BOOK  VriL 

211 

B.C.  322.] 
Romaa  people  ;  is  grafted  to  the  college  of  tribunes,  sup¬ 
porting  him  with  their  prayers,  not  with  the  regular  |K>wer  of 
their  office.  Live,  Quintus  Fabius,  more  happy  in  thb  umon 
of  all  parts  of  the  state  for  your  preservaucm  than  in  the  vic¬ 
tory  ia  which  you  lately  exulted.  Live,  after  having  ven¬ 
tured  on  such  an  act,  as  your  father  himself,  had  he  been  in 
the  place  of  Lucius  Papirius,  would  not  have  pardoned* 
With  me  you  shall  be  reconciled,  whenever  you  wish  it.  To 
the  Roman  people,  to  whom  you  owe  your  life,  you  can  per¬ 
form  no  greater  service,  than  to  let  this  day  teach  you  the 
important  lesson  of  submission  to  lawful  commands,  both  in 
war  and  peace.’’  He  then  declared,  that  the  master  of  the 
horse  was  at  liberty  to  depart :  and,  as  he  retired  from  the 
rostrum,  the  senate,  being  greatly  rejoiced,  and  the  people 
still  more  so,  gathered  round  him,  and  escorted  him,  on  one 
hand  commending  the  dictator,  on  die  other  congratulating 
the  master  of  the  horse  ;  while  all  agreed  in  opinion,  that  the 
authority  of  military  command  was  confirined  no  less  effec¬ 
tually  in  the  instance  of  Quintus  Fabius  than  in  that  of  young 
Manlius.  It  so  happened,  that,  through  the  course  of  that 
year,  as  often  as  the  dictator  left  the  army,  the  Samnites  were 
in  motion :  but  Marcus  Valerius,  the  lieutenant-general,  who 
eommnnded  in  the  camp,  had  Quintus  Fabtas  before  his  eyes 
ftwr  an  example,  not  to  fear  any  violence  of  the  enemy,  so 
much  as  the  unrelenting  anger  of  the  dict^or.  So  that  when 
a  body  of  his  foragers  fell  into  an  ambu^ade,  and  were  cut  to 
pieces  in  disadvantageous  ground,  it  wfs  generally  believed 
that  the  lieutenant-general  could  have  given  them  assistance, 
if  he  had  not  been  held  in  dread  by  his  rigOTOus  orders.  The 
resentment  which  this  excited  helped  to  alienate  the  jtfcc- 
tions  of  the  soldiery  from  the  dictator  ;  against  whom  they 
had  been  before  incensed  by  his  implacable  behaviour  towards 
Quintus  Fabius,  and  from  having  granted  him  pardon  at  the 
intercession  of  the  Roman  people,  after  he  had  refined  it  to 
their  entreaties. 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

212 

[Y.R.  430. 

XXXVI.  The  dictator  prahibited  Quintus  Fabius  from 
acting  in  any  case  as  a  n^gistrate,  conferred  the  ccnnmand  in 
the  city  on  Eucius  Papirius  Crassus,  as  master  of  the  horee, 
^d  then  returned  to  the  camp  ;  where  his  arrival  brought 
neither  any  great  joy  to  his  countrymen,  nor  any  degree  of 
terror  to  the  enemy :  for,  on  the  day  following,  cither  not 
knowing  the  dictator’s  arrival,  or  little  regarding  whether 
he  were  present  or  absent,  they  marched  out  in  order  of 
battle.  Of  such  impcntance,  however,  was  that  single  man, 
Lucius  Papirius,  that,  had  the  zeal  of  the  soldiers  seconded 
the  dispositions  of  the  commander,  no  doubt  was  entertained 
that  an  end  might  have  been  put,  that  day,  to  the  war  with 
the  Samnites.  He  chose  the  best  possible  position  for  his 
troops,  posted  his  body  of  reserve  most  judiciously,  and 
strengthened  them  with  every  advantage  which  military  skill 
could  devise  :  but  the  soldiers  exerted  no  vigour ;  and  de¬ 
signedly  kept  from  conquering,  in  order  to  injure  the  reputa¬ 
tion  of  their  leader.  Of  the  Samnites,  however,  very  many 
were  slain;  and  great  numbers  of  the  Romans  wounded. 
The  experienced  commander  quickly  perceived  the  circum¬ 
stance  which  prevented  his  success,  ^d  that  it  would  be  ne- 
cesaaiy  to  moderate  his  temper,  and  to  mingle  mildness  with 
austerity.  Accordingly,  attended  by  the  lieutenants-geperal, 
he  went  round  to  the  tents  of  the  woqnded  soldiers,  enquiring 
of  each  the  state^pf  his  health ;  then,  mentioning  them  by 
name,  he  gave  them  in  charge  to  the  oflicers,  tribunes,  and 
prasfects,  recommending  them  to  their  particular  care.  This 
behaviour,  popular  in  itself,  he  maintained  with  such  dex¬ 
terity,  that  by  his  attention  to  their  recovery,  he  gradually 
gained  their  affection ;  nor  did  any  thing  so  much  contribute 
towards  their  recovery  as  the  gratitude  excited  by  this  hu¬ 
mane  condescension.  As  soon  as  the  men  were  restored  to 
health,  he  came  to  an  engagement  with  the  enemy  ;  and  both 
Irimself  and  the  troops,  being  possessed  with  full  confidence 

mooK  vin. 

213 

B.C.  322.] 

of  success,  he  so  cnUrely  defeated  and  dispersed  the  Samnites* 
that  they  never,  after  that  day,  met  the  dictator  in  the  field. 
The  victorious  army,  afterwards,  directed  its  march  wherever 
a  prospect  of  booty  invited,  and  traversed  their  territories 
without  a  weapon  being  raisedagainst  them,  or  any  opposition 
given,  either  openly  or  by  stratagem.  It  added  to  their 
alacrity,  that  the  dictator  had,  by  proclamation,  given  the 
whole  spoil  to  the  soldiers ;  so  that  they  were  animated  not 
only  by  the  public  quarrel,  but  by  their  private  emolument. 
Thus  reduced,  the  Samnites  sued  to  the  dictator  for  peace, 
and,  after  they  had  engaged  to  supply  each  of  his  soldiers 
with  a  suit  of  clothes,  and  a  year’s  pay,  being  ordered  to  ap¬ 
ply  to  the  senate,  they  answered,  that  they  would  follow  the 
dictator,  committing  their  cause  wholly  to  his  integrity  and 
honour.  On  this  the  troops  were  withdrawn  out  of  Samnium. 
XXXVII.  The  dictator  entered  the  city  in  triumph;  and, 
though  desirous  of  resigning  his  office  immediate-  y  r  43I 
ly,  yet,  by  order  of  the  senate,  he  held  it  until  the  3  q  321* 
consuls  were  elected  ;  these  were  Caius  Sulpicius 
Longus,  a  second  time,  and  Quintus  i£miiius  Cerretanus. 
The  Samnites,  without  finishing  the  treaty  of  peace,  the  terms 
being  still  in  negociation,  departed,  after  concluding  a  truce 
for  a  year.  Nor  was  even  that  faithfully  observed ;  so  strong¬ 
ly  was  their  inclination  for  war  excited,  on  hearing  that  Pa- 
pirius  was  gone  .out  of  office.  In  this  consulate  of  Caius 
Sulpicius  and  Quintus  iEmilius,  (some  histories  have  Aulius,) 
to  the  revolt  of  the  Samnites  was  added  a  new  war  with  the 
Apulians.  Armies  were  sent  against  both.  The  Samnites 
fell  by  lot  to  Sulpicius,  the  Apulians  to  .fimilius.  Some 
writers  say,  that  this  war  was  not  waged  with  the  Apulians, 
but  in  defence  of  the  allied  states  of  that  nation,  against  the 
violence  and  injustice  of  the  Samnites.  But  the  circumstan*- 
ces  of  the  Samnites  at  jhat  period,  when  they  were  them¬ 
selves  engaged  in  a  war,  which  they  could  with  difficulty 

214 

HISTORY  OF  l^ME. 

[Y.R.  431. 

s»i^|K>rt,  render  k  more  prdsa!:^  th^  tbe^  mtt  maice  war 
on  the  Apulians,  but  that  both  nations  were  in  ams  s^gainst 
the  Romans  at  the  jjame  time.  However,  no  memoraUe 
event  occurred.  The  lands  of  the  Apulians  smd  Ssunnium 
were  utterly  laid  waste ;  but  in  neither  quaitrer  did  the  ei^- 
my  show  themselves.  At  Rome,  an  alarm,  which  happened 
in  the  ni^it,  suddtmly  roused  the  people  from  their  steep,  in 
such  a  fright,  that  tl^  Capitol  and  citadel,  the  waUs  and 
gates,  were  ail  filled  with  men  in  arms.  But,  after  diey  teid 
caUed  aU  to  their  pc^ts,  and  run  together,  in  bodies,  in  every 
quarter,  when  day  appeared,  neither  the  author  nor  cause  of 
the  alarm  could  be  discovered.  This  year,  in  pursuance  of 
the  advice  cf  Flavius,  a  triUine  of  the  commom,  die  Tus- 
culans  were  brought  to  a  trial  before  the  people.  He  propo¬ 
sed,  that  punishment  should  be  inflicted  on  those  of  the  Tus- 
cuians,  by  whose  advice  2Uid  a^istance  the  Velitemians 
and  Priverniaas  had  made  war  on  the  Roman  people.”  The 
Tusculans,  with  their  wives  and  children,  came  to  Rome, 
and,  in  mourning  habits,  like  persons  under  accusatitm,  went 
round  the  tribes,  throwing  themselves  at  the  feet  of  the  citi¬ 
zens  with  humble  supplications.  This  excited  a  degree  of 
compassion  which  operated  more  efiectually  towards  procur¬ 
ing  them  pardon,  than  all  the  arguments  they  could  urge, 
did  towards  clearing  themsdves  of  guilt.  Every  one  of  the 
tribes,  except  the  Pollian,  negatived  the  proposition.  The 
sentence  of  the  Pollian  tribe  was,  that  the  grown-up  males 
should  be  beaten,  and  put  to  death,  and  their  wives  and  chil¬ 
dren  sold  by  auction  according  to  the  rotes  of  war.  It  ap¬ 
pears,  that  the  resentment  which  arose  against  the  advisers 
of  so  rigorous  a  measure,  was  retained  in  memory  by  the 
Tusculans  down  to  the  age  of  our  fathers ;  and  that  hardly 
any  candidate  of  the  Ptdlian  tribe  could^  ever  since,  gain  the 
votes  of  the  Papirian. 

BOOK  VIII. 

ai5 

B.C.  331,] 

XXXVIll.  &  ihe  following  year,  which  w«  ihe  consu¬ 
late  of  Quintus  Fabius  and  Lucius  Fulvius,  Au-  „„ 
las  Oom^ius  Arvksa  beifig  made  dictator,  a»d 
Marcus  Fabius  Ambmms  ms^er  of  die  horse, 
troops  were  levied  with  greater  exertion  than  ordinary,  un¬ 
der  the  apprehension  of  having  a  more  powerftd  "Opposition 
than  usual  to  encounter,  in  die  war  with  the  Samnites,  who, 
it  was  reported,  had^procured,  from  their  neighbours,  a  num¬ 
ber  of  young  men  for  hire:  an  army,  therefore,  of  extraordi^- 
nary  force,  w^s  sent  against  them.  Although  in  a  hostile 
country,  their  ^mp  was  pitched  in  as  careless  a  manner,  as 
if  die  foe  Were  at  a  great  distance ;  when,  s^denly,  the  le¬ 
gions  of  the  Samnites  approached  widi  s©  much  boldnesses 
to  advance  their  rampart  close  to  an  out-jKistof  the  Romans. 
Night  coming  on,  prevented  their  assauldng  the* works;  but 
they  did  not  conceal  their  intention  of  doing  so  next  day,  as 
soon  as  the  light  should  appear.  The  dictator  faund  that 
there  would  be  a  necessity  for  fighting  sooner  than  he  had 
expected,  and,  lest  the  situatimi  should  be  an  obstruction  Ito 
the  bravery  of  the  troops,  he  ted  away  the  legions  in  silence, 
leaving  a  great  number  of  fires  the  better  to^eceive  the  ene¬ 
my*  The  camps,  however,  lay  so  closo  together,  that  he 
could  not  escape  their  observation :  their  cavalry  instandy 
pursued,  and  pressed  closely  on  his  troops,  yet  refrained 
from  attacking  them  until  the  day  appeared.  Their  infantry 
did  not  even  quit  their  camp  before  daydight.  As  soon  as  it 
was  dawn,  the  cavalry  ventured  to  begin  skirmishing ;  and, 
by  harassing  the  Roman  rear,  and  pressing  them  in  places  of 
difficult  passage,  considerably  delayed  their  march.  Mean¬ 
while  their  infantry  overtook  the  cavalry ;  and  now  the  Sam¬ 
nites  pursued  close  with  their  entire  force.  The  dictator 
then,  finding  that  he  could  no  longer  go  forward  without 
great  inconvenience,  ordered  the  spot  where  he  stood  to  be 
measured  out  for  a  camp.  But  it  was  impossible,  while  the 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y-R.  432. 
esesiy’s^  horse  were  spread  about  on  every  side,  that  pali« 
sades  could  be  brought,  and  the  work  be  begun  s  seeing  it, 
dierefore,  impracticable,  either  to  march  forward,  or  to  set- 
de  himself  there,  he  drew  up  his  troops  for  battle,  removing 
Ae  baggage  out  of  the  line.  The  enemy  likewise  formed 
their  line  t^posite  to  bis ;  no  wise  inferior,  either  in  spirit  or 
in  strength.  Their  courage  was  chiefly  improved  from  not 
knowing  that  die  motive  of  the  Romans*  retreat  was  the  in- 
commodimiHiess  of  the  ground,  so  that  they  imagined  thcm- 
srelves  objects  of-terror,  and  supposed  that  they^were  pursu¬ 
ing  men  who  fled  through  fear.  Tins  kept*  the  balance  of 
die  fight  equal  for  a  considerable  time ;  though,  of  late,  it 
had  been  unusual  with  the  Samnites  to  stand  even  the  shout 
of  a  Roman  army.  Certain  it  is,  that  the  contest,  on  this 
day,  contmued  so  very  doubtful  from  the  third  hour  to  the 
eighth,  that  neither  was  the  shout  repeated,  after  being  raised 
at  the  first  onset,  nor  the  standards  moved  cither  forward  or 
backward^  nor  any  ground  lost  on  either  side.  They  fought 
without  taking  breath,  every  man  in  his  post,  ^d  pushing 
against  dieir  opponents  with  their  shields.  The  noise  con¬ 
tinuing  equal,  and  the  terror  of  the  fight  the  same,  seemed 
to  denote,  that  the  decision  would  be  effected  either  by  fa¬ 
tigue  or  by  the  night.  The  men  had  now  exhausted  their 
strength,  the  sword  its  power,  and  the  leaders  their  skill ; 
when,  on  a  sudden,  the  Samnite  cavalry,  having  learned 
frc«n  a  single  troop  which  had  advanced  beyond  the  rest, 
that  the  baggage  of  the  Romans  lay  at  a  distance  from  their 
army,  without  any  guard  or  defence  ;  eager  for  booty,  they 
hastened  to  attack  it :  of  which,  the  dictator  being  informed 
by  a  hasty  .messenger,  said,  Let  them  alone,  let  them  en- 
cumt^  themselves  with  spoils.”  Afterwards  came  several, 
one  after  another,  crying  out,  that  they  were  plundering  and 
carrying  oS  ail  the  effects  of  the  seddiers :  he  then  called  to 
him  the  master  of  the  horse,  and  said,  Do  you  see,  Mar- 

BOOK  VIII. 

B.C.  320.] 

2tr 

cus  Fabias,  that  the  enemy’s  cavalry  have  forsaken  the  hght  r 
they  are  entangled  and  encumbered  with  our  baggage.  At¬ 
tack  them :  you  will  find  them,  as  is  the  case  of  every  midCt- 
tude  employed  in  plundering,  scattered  about  j  few  mounted 
on  horseback,  few  with  swords  in  their  hands  ;  and^  while 
they  arc  loading  their  horses  with  spoil,  and  unarmed,  put 
them  to  the  sword,  and  make  it  bloody  spoil  for  them.  I 
will  take  care  of  the  legions,  and  the^ght  of  the  infantry: 
your’s  be  the  honour  which  the  horse  shall  acquire.” 
XXXIX.  The  body  of  cavalry,  in  the  most  exact  drder 
possible,  charging  the  enemy,  who  were  straggling  and  em¬ 
barrassed,  filled  every  place  with  slaughters  for  the  packages 
which  they  hastily  threw  down,  and  which  lay  in  the  way  of 
their  feet,  and  of  the  alFrighted  horses,  as  they  endeavoured 
to  escape,  made  them  unable  either  to  fight  or  fly.  Then 
Fabius,  after  he  had  almost  entirely  cut  off  the  enemy’s 
horse,  led  round  his  squadrons  in  a  small  circuit,  and  attack¬ 
ed  the  infantry  in  the  rear.  .  The  new  shout,  raised  in  that 
quarter,  terrified  the  Samnites  pn  the  one  hand  ;  and  when, 
on  the  other,  the  dictator  saw^^ieir  troops  in  the  van  looking 
behind  them,  their  battalions  in  confusion,  and  their  line 
wavering,  he  earnestly  exhorted  and  animated  his  men,  call¬ 
ing  on  the  tribunes  and  chief  centurions J  by  name,  to  join 
him  In  renewing  the  fight.  Raising  the  shout  anew,  they 
pressed  forward,  and,  as  they  advanced,  perceived  the  enemy 
more  and  more  confused.  The  cavalry  now  could  be  seen 
by  those  in  front,  and  Cornelius,  turning  about  to  the  several 
companies,  made  them  understand,  by  raising  his  voice  and 
hands,  that  he  saw  the  standards  and  bucklers  of  his  own 
horsemen.  On  hearing  which,  and  at  the  same  time  seeing 
them,  they,  at  once,  so  far  forgot  the  fatigue  which  they  had 
endured,  through  almost  the  whole  day,  and  even  their 
wounds,  that  they  rushed  to  the  fray  with  as  much  vigour 
and  alacrity,  as  if  they  were  coming  fresh  out  of  camp 
VOL  .  ii. — 2  F 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  432. 

an^  i^ceiring  the  sigaa!  for  battle.  The  Samaites  could  no 
tonger  sustain  the  charge  of  horse  and  foc^  together :  part  of 
inclosed  on  bc^h  sides,  were  cut  off ;  the  rest  separate 
«d^  fled  different  ways.  The  infantry  slew  those  who 
w^re  surrounded  and  made  resistance  ;  and  the  cavalry  made 
great  havoc  of  the  fugitives,  among  whom  fell  their  general. 
This  bai^le  crushed,  at  length,  the  power  of  the  Satnnites  so 
effectualiy,  that,  in  all  their  meetings,  they  expressed  much 
discontent,  and  said,  ^  it  was  not  at  all  to  be  wondered  at,  if, 
in  a^  impious  war,  commenced  in  violation  of  a  treaty,  when 
the  gods  were,  with  justice,  more  incensed  against  them  than 
men,  none  of  their  undertakings  prospered.  They  were  not 
to  expect  the  crime  (for  so  such  an  infraction  of  treaties  must 
be  held)  to  be  expiated  and  atoned  for  without  a  heavy  pe- 
nsdty.  The  only  alternative  they  had,  was,  whether  the  pe¬ 
nalty  should  be  the  guilty  blood  of  a  few,  or  the  innocent 
blood  of  all.”  Some  now  ventured  to  name  the  authors  of 
the  war,  among  whom  was  particularly  mentioned,  Brutulus 
Fapius :  he  was  a  man  of  power  and  noble  birth,  and  un¬ 
doubtedly  the  cause  of  the  late  rupture.  The  praetors  being 
coitopdled  to  take  the  opinion  of  the  assembly  concerning  him, 
a  decree  was  made,  that  Brutulus  Papius  should  be  deli¬ 
vered  into  the  hands  of  the  Homans  ;  and  that,  together  with 
him,  all  the  spoil  taken  from  the  Romans,  and  the  prisoners, 
should  be  sent  to  Rome,  and  that  the  restitution  demanded 
by  the  heralds,  in  conformity  to  treaty,  should  be  made,  as 
was  agreeable  to  justice  and  equity.”  In  pursuance  of  this 
determinaticai,  heralds  were  sent  to  Rome,  and  also  the  dead 
body  of  Brutulus ;  for,  by  a  voluntary  death,  he  avoided 
the  punishment  and  ignominy  intended  for  him.  It  was 
thought  {M^per  that  his  goods  also  should  be  delivered  up 
along  with  the  body.  But  none  of  all  those  things  were  ac¬ 
cepted,  except  the  prisoners,  and  such  articles  of  the  spoil  as 

BOOK  VIIL 

219 

B.C.  320.] 
were  recognized  by  the  owners.  The  dictator  obtained  a 
triumph  by  a  decree  of  the  senate. 
XL.  Some  writers  affirm,  that  the  consuls  had  the  conduct 
of  this  war,  and  that  they  triumphed  over  the  Samnites  ;  and 
also,  that  Fabius  advanced  into  Apulia,  and  carried  off  from 
thence  abundance  of  spoil.  But  that  Aulus  Cornelius  was 
dictator  that  year  is  an  undisputed  fact.  The  question  then 
is,  whether  he  was  appointed  for  the  purpose  of  conducting 
the  war,  or  on  occasion  of  the  illness  of  Lucius  Plautius,  the 
praetor  ;  in  order  that  there  might  be  a  magistrate  to  give 
the  signal  for  the  starting  of  the  chariots  at  the  Roman  games. 
This  latter  is  asserted  of  him ;  and  that,  after  performing 
the  business,  which,  in  truth,  jreflected  no  great  lustre  on  his 
office,  he  resigned  the  dictatorship.  It  is  not  easy  to  deter¬ 
mine  between  either  the  facts  or  the  writers,  which  of  them 
deserves  the  preference :  1  am  persuaded  that  history  has 
been  much  corrupted  by  means  of  funeral  panegyrics,  and 
false  inscriptions  on  monuments  ;  each  family  striving  by  false 
representation^  to  appropriate  to  itself  the  fame  of  warlike  ex¬ 
ploits,  and  public  honours.  From  this  cause,  certainly,  much 
confusion  has  taken  place,  both  in  the  memoirs  of  individu¬ 
als,  and  in  the  puUic  records  of  events.  Nor  is  there  extant 
any  writer,  contemporary  with  those  events,  on  whose  autho¬ 
rity  we  can  with  certainty  rely. 

ruE 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

BOOK  IX.  ' 
Titus  Veturius  and  Spurius  Postumius,  with  their  army,  surrounded  by  the 
Sa«inites  at  tJie  Caudine  forks  t  enter  into  a  treaty,  ^ve  six  hundred 
hostages,  and  are  sent  under  the  yoke.  The  treaty  declared  invalid; 
the  two  generals  and  tlie  other  sureties  sent  back  to  the  Samnites,  but 
are  not  accepted.  Not  long  after,  Papirius  Cursor  obliterates  this  dis¬ 
grace,  by  vanquishing  the  Samnites,  sending  them  under  the  yoke,  and 
recovering  the  hostages.  Two  tribes  added.  Appius  Claudios,  censor, 
constructs  the  Claudian  aqueduct,  and  tiie  Appikn  road  ;  admits  the  sons 
of  freedom  into  the  senate.  Successes  against  the  ApuMans,  Etruscans, 
Umbrians,  Marsians,  Pelignians,  ^quans,  and  Samnites.  Mention  made 
of  Alexander  the  Great,  who  flourished  at  this  time  ;  a  comparative  es¬ 
timate  of  his  strength,  and  that  of  the  Roman  people,  tending  to  show, 
that,  if  he  had  carried  hfe  arms  into  Italy,  he  would  not  have  been  as 
successful  there  as  he  had  been  in  the  Eastern  countries. 
I.  THE  year  following  was  distinguished  by  the  convention 
^  _  of  Caudium,  so  memorable  on  account  of  the  mis« 
Y.R.433. 
B  C  319  Romans.  The  consuls  of  the  year 
were  Titus  Veturius  Calvinus,  and  Spunus  Pos- 
tumius.  The  Samnites  were  that  year  commanded  bv  Caius 
Pontius,  son  to  Herennius,  bom  of  a  father  most  highly  re- 

BOOK  IX. 

221 

BX.  319.] 
Downed  for  wisdom,  and  himself  a  consummate  warrior  and 
commander.  When  the  ambassadors,  who  had  been  sent  to 
offer  restitution,  returned,  without  concluding  a  peace,  he 
said,  in  an  assembly,  ‘‘  that  ye  may  not  think  diat  no  pur¬ 
pose  has  been  effected  by  this  embassy,  be  assured,  that  what¬ 
ever  degree  of  anger  the  deities  of  heaven  had  conceived 
against  us,  on  account  of  the  infraction  of  the  treaty,  ^as 
been  hereby  expiated.  I  am  very  confident,  that  whatever 
deities  they  were,  whose  will  it  was,  that  you  should  be  re¬ 
duced  to  the  necessity  of  making  restitution,  it  was  not  agree¬ 
able  to  them,  that  our  atonement  for  the  breach  of  treaty 
should  be  so  haughtily  spurned  by  the  Homans.  For  what 
more  could  po^ibly  be  done  towards  appeasing  the  gods,  and 
softening  the  anger  of  men,  than  we  have  done  ?  The  effects 
of  the  enemy,  taken  among  the  spoils,  which  appeared  to  be 
our  own  by  the  right  of  war,  we  restored  ;  the  authors  of  the 
war,  as  we  could  not  deliver  them  up  alive,  we  delivered  to 
them  dead  :  their  goods  we  carried  to  Rome,  lest,  by  retain¬ 
ing  them,  any  degree  of  guilt  should  remain  among  us. 
What  more,  Roman,  do  I  owe  to  thee  ?  what  to  the  treaty  ? 
wHat  to  the  gpds^  the  guarantees  of  the  treaty  ?  What  um¬ 
pire  shall  I  call  in  to  judge  of  your  resentment,  and  of  my 
punishment  ?  I  decline  none  ;  neither  nation  nor  private  per¬ 
son.  But,  if  the  weak  is  not  to  find  protection  against  a 
stronger  in  human  laws,  I  will  appeal  to  the  gods,  the  aven¬ 
gers  of  intolerable  arrogance,  and  will  beseech  them  to  turn 
their  wrath  against  those  who  are  not  satisfied  by  the  resto¬ 
ration  of  their  own,  nor  by  additional  heaps  of  other  men’s 
property  ;  whose  inhuman  rage  is  not  satiated  by  the  death 
of  the  guilty,  by  the  surrender  of  their  lifel^s  bodies,  and 
by  their  goods  accompanying  the  surrender  of  the  owner ; 
who  cannot  be  appeased  otherwise  than  by  giving  them  our 
blood  to  drink,  and  our  entrails  to  be  torn.  Samnites,  war  is 
just,,  when  it  becomes  necessary,  and  arms  are  dear  of 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

fY^R.  435. 

piety,  when  men  have  no  hope  left  but  in  arms*  Wherefore, 
as  the  issue  of  every  human  undertaking  dep^ds  chiefly  on 
men^s  acting  cither  with  or  without  the  favour  of  the  gods, 
be  assured  that  the  form®*  wars  yc  waged  in  oppositima  to  the 
gods  more  than  to  men  ;  in  Ais,  which  we  are  now  to  under¬ 
take,  ye  will  act  under  the  immediate  guidance  of  gods 
themselves,’^ 
II.  After  uttermg  these  predictions,  not  favourable 
than  true,  he  led  out  the  troops,  and  placed  his  eamp  about 
Caudium,  as  much  out  of  view  as  possible.  From  thence  he 
sent  to  Galatia,  where  he  heard  that  the  Roman  consuls 
were  encamped,  ten  soldiers,  in  the  habit  of  shepherds,  and 
ordered  them  to  keep  some  cattle  feeding  in  sevemi  different 
places,  at  a  small  distance  from  the  Roman  po^s  ;  and  that, 
when  they  fell  in  vvith  any  of  their  foragers,  they  should  all 
agree  in  the  same  story,  that  the  legions  of  the  Samnites 
were  then  in  Apulia,  besieging  Luceria  with  their  whtde 
force,  and  very  near  becoming  masters  of  it.  Such  a  rumour 
had  been  industriously  spread  before,  mid  had  alri^d^  reach¬ 
ed  the  Romans  ;  but  these  prisoners  caused  th^  to  give  it 
greater  credit,  especially  as  they  all  concurred  in  the  same 
report.  The  Romans  did  not  hesitate  to  resolve  on  carrying 
succour  to  the  Lucerians,  because  they  were  good  and  faith¬ 
ful  allies  ;  and,  for  this  farther  reason,  lest  aU  Apulia,  through 
apprehension  of  the  impending  danger,  might  go  over  to  the 
enemy.  The  only  point  which  came  under  deiiberatiem  was, 
by  what  road  they  should  go.  There  were  two  roads  leading 
to  Luceria,  one  along  the  coast  of  the  upp^r  sea,  wide  and 
open  ;  but,  as  it  was  the  safer,  so  it  was  proportionably  Icmg^r ; 
^he  other,  which  was  shorter,  through  the  Caudine  forks. 
The  nature  of  the  place  is  this :  there  are  two  deep  glens, 
narrow  and  covered  with  wood,  connected  together  by  moun¬ 
tains  ranging  on  both  sides,  from  one  to  the  other ;  between 
these  lies  a  plain  of  considerable  extent,  abounding  in  grass 

Bm>K  IJL 

223 

B*C.  319,] 
radiv^tar^imd^bwgh  die  middle  winch  the  pamge  nms : 
but  before  this  is  lurived  the  fim  defile  must  be  ps^sed, 
while  the  oaly  way  is^  through  die  road  by  which  it  wi» 
et^red ;  cw  tf  in  of  resolving  to  ^xiceed  forward,  it  mmt 
be  by  tlnMc^her  gkn^  which  is  stitt  more  nswrow  and  difficult. 
Ibto  this  pbda  the  marched  down  their  troopa,  by  one 
of  those  passes,  through  the  cleft  of  a  rock  ;  and,  when  they 
advimced  to  the  oAo*  defile,  found  it  blocked  up  by  trees 
thrown  across,  with  a  momd  of  huge  stones.  The  stratagem 
of^he  enemy  now  became  apparent ;  and  at  the  same  time  a 
h<^  of  troops  was  seen  on  the  eminence  over  the  glen. 
Ha^ening  back,  dten,  to  the  road  by  which  they  had  entered, 
they  fouivd  tdso  shut  up  by  such  another  fence,  and  men 
in  ani^;  Thtas,  whhout  orders,  they  halted  ;  amaa^ment 
took  pCMSsemion  of  their  minds,  and  a  strange  kind  of  numb* 
dF  thdr  limte :  they  then  remained  a  Imsg  time  motion* 
le^  and  siletd,  with  dteir  eyes  fixed  on  each  other,  as  if  each 
thott^it  the  other  nuwe  capable  of  judging  and  advising  than 
himself.  After  some  time,  the  comuFs  pavilions  were  erected, 
smd  they  got  ready  the  implements  for  dirowing  up  works,  al* 
though  they  were  i^sfole  that  it  must  appear  ridiculous  tx> 
a^mf^  rafsing  a  fortificadtm  in  their  present  desperate  cem* 
dhkm,  and  when  almost  evexy  hope  was  lost.  Yet,  not  to  add 
a  fiiult  to  thdr  idxsfortunes,  they  all,  without  being  advised 
or  mrdered  by  any  one,  set  earnestly  to  work,  and  enclosed  a 
camp  with  a  rampart,  close  to  the  water,  while  themselves, 
besides  enduring  the  hau^ty  taunts  of  their  enemies,  seemed 
with  melancholy  to  acknowledge  the  apparent  fruitlessness  of 
their  labour.  The  Ixeutenants-general  and*  tribunes,  without 
being  summoned  to  consultation,  (for  there  was  nh  room  for 
either  consultation  or  remedy,)  assembled  round  the  dejected 
consul ;  while  the  soldiers,  crowding  to  the  general’s  quar¬ 
ters,  demanded  from  thek  leaders  that  succour,  which  it  was 
hardly  in  the  power  of  the  immortal  gods  themselves  to  afford 
them. 

224  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  ^3. 
III.  Night  aame  eo  ^iie  they  we?e  em^doyed  in  lament¬ 
ing  their  situation,  idi  urging,  with  warmth,  whatever  their 
several  tempers  prompted.  Some  crying^cmt,  ^  Let. us  go 
over  those  fences  which  obstruct  die  ro^ds  tubers,  over 
the  steeps  ;  through  the  woods  ;  any  way,  Where  mrms  c^be 
cmried.  Let  us  be  but  permitted,  to  come- to  die  enemy, 
whom  we  have  been  used  to  conquer  now  near  thirty  years. 
All  places  wiU  be  level  and  plain  to  a  Roman,  fighting  h|^imt 
the  perfidious  Samnite.’’  Another  would  say,  **  Whither  <«• 
by  what  way  can  we  go  ?  do  we  expect  to  remove  the  moun¬ 
tains  from  their  foundations  ?  while  these  cliffs  h^g  over  us, 
how  can  we  proceed  ?  whether  armed  Or  unarmed,  brave  or 
dastardly,  we  are  all,  without  distm^tiem,  captured  and  van¬ 
quished.  The  enemy  will  not  even  show  us  a  weapon,  by 
which  we  might  die  with  honour.  He  wffl  finkh  die  War, 
without  moving  from  his  seat.”  In  such  dlacoume,  thmkmg 
of  neither  food  nor  re^,  they  passed  the  whede  nij^t  Nor 
could  the  Samiiites,  though  in  circumstatmes  so  aceordm^to 
their  wishes,  instantly  detennine  how  to  act:  it  thcr<^we 
tmiversally  agreed,  that  Heretmius  Pontms,  father  of  die  gen¬ 
eral,  should  be  consulted  b)’^  letter.  He  was  how  grown  fee¬ 
ble  through  agOf  and  hsUS  withdrawn  fnmself,  not  onlr  from 
all  military,  but  also  from  ail  civil  occupations ;  yet,  notwidi- 
standing  the  dedine  of  his  bodily  strength,  his  mind  retained 
its  full  vigour.  When  he  was  infomied  that  tin;  Roman  ar¬ 
mies  were  shut  up  at  the  Caudtne  forks,  between  the  two 
glens,  and  was  asked  for  advice  by  his  son^  messenger,  he 
gave  his  opinion,  that  they  should  aB  be  immedta^ly  dismis¬ 
sed  from  thence  'unhurt.  On  this  counsel  being  rejected, 
and  the  &me  messenger  returning  to' advise  with  him  a  se¬ 
cond  time,  he  recommended  that  they  should  aB,  to  a  man, 
be  put  to  death.  '  On  receiving  these  answers,  so  opposite  to 
each  other,  like  the  ambiguous  responses  of  an  oracle,  his 
son,  although,  as  well  as  otlmrs,  persuaded  that  the  powers 

BOOK  IX. 

225 

B.C.  319.] 
of  his  father’s  mind,  together  with  those  of  his  body,  had 
been  impaired  by  age,  was  yet  prevailed  on,  by  the  general 
desire  of  all,  to  send  for  him  and  consult  him  in  person.  The 
old  man,  we  are  told,  complied  without  reluctance,  and  was 
carried  in  a  wagon  to  the  camp,  where,  when  he  came  to 
speak,  he  made  no  alterations  in  the  opinions  which  he  had 
given,  only  added  the  reasons  on  which  he  founded  them. 
That  by  his  first  plan,  which  he  esteemed  the  best,  he 
meant,  by  an  act  of  extraordinary  kindness,  to  establish  per¬ 
petual  peace  and  friendship  with  a  most  powerful  nation :  by 
the  other,  to  put  off  the  return  of  war  to  the  distance  of 
many  ages,  during  which  the  Rpman  state,  after  the  loss  of 
those  two  armies,  could  not  easily  recover  its  strength.  A 
third  plan  thei^was  not.”  His^^on,  and  the  other  chiefs,  ? 
then  asking  him  if  ‘‘  a  plan  of  a  middle  kind  might  not  be 
adopted ;  of  dismissing  them  unhurt ;  and,  at  the  same  time, 
by  the  right  of  war,  imposing  terms  on  them  as  vanquished 
That,  indeed,”  said  he,  “  is  a  plan  of  such  a  nature,  as 
neither  procures  friends  nor  removed  enemies.  Only  con¬ 
sider  who  they  are,  whom  ye  would  irritate  by  ignominious 
treatment.  The  Romans  are  a  race  who  know  not  how  to 
sit’  dow  n  quiet  under  defeat ;  any  scar,  which  the  present  ne¬ 
cessity  shall  imprint  in  their  breasts,  will  rankle  there  for 
ever,  and  will  not  suffer  them  to  rest,  until  they  have  wreaked 
manifold  vengeance  on  your  heads.”  Neither  of  these  plans 
was  approved,  and  Herennius  was  carried  home. 
IV.  In  the  other  camp,  the  Romans,  having  tried  many 
fruitless  efforts  to  force  a  passage,  and  being  now  destitute  of 
every  means  of  subsistence,  were  reduced  by  necessity  to 
send  ambassadors,  who  were  first  to  ask  peace  on  equal  terms ; 
which,  if  they  did  not  obtain,  they  were  to  challenge  the 
enemy  to  battle.  To  this  Pontius  answered,  that  the  war 
was  at  an  end;  and  since,  even  in  their  present  vanquished 
and  captive  state,  they  were  not  willing  to  make  acknow^i^?' 
VOL.  II. — 2  G 

226 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

[Y.R.4S#, 

led^ent  of  Uieir  VituatkH),  be  would  send  them  under  the 
yoke  unarmed,  and  only  partly  clothed ;  that  the  other  c^ndi* 
tions  of  peace  should  he  such  as  were  just  and  pr<^r  be¬ 
tween  the  conquerors  and  the  conquered.  Their  troops 
must  depart,  and  their  colonies  be  withdrawn  out  of  the  ter¬ 
ritories  of  the  Samnites;  and,  for  the  future,  the  Rmnans  and 
Samni^s,  under  a  treaty  of  equality,  shall  live  according  to 
their  own  respective  laws.  On  these  terms  he  was  ready  to 
negociate  with  the  consuls :  and  if.  any  of  these  should,  not 
be  accepted,  he  forbade  the  ambassadors  to  come  to  him 
again.”  When  the  residt  of  this  embassy  was  made  known, 
such  general  lamentaticm  suddenly  arose,  and  such  melan- 
ckitdy  took  possession  of  every  mind,  that,  had  they  l^en 
told  that  all  were  to  die  on  the  spot,  they  could  not  have  felt 
^eper  aiBiction.  Silence  continued  a  long  time ;  the  con¬ 
suls  not  being  able  to  utter  a  word  either  in  favour  of  a 
treaty  so  disgraceful,  or  against  a  treaty  so  necessary ;  at 
length,  Lucius  Lentulus,  who  was  the  first  among  the  lieu¬ 
tenant-generals,  both  in  respect  of  bravery,  and  of  the  pub¬ 
lic  honours  which  he  had  attained,  addressed  them  thus; 
‘‘  Consuls,  I  have  often  beard  my  father  say,  that  he  was  the 
only  person  in  the  Capitol,  who  did  not  advise  the  senate  to 
ransom  the  state  from  the  Gauls  with  gold ;  and  this  he 
would  not  concur  in,  because  they  had  not  been  enclosed 
with  a  trench  and  rampart  by  the  enemy,  (who  were  remark¬ 
ably  slothful  with  respect  to  works,  and  raising  fortifications,) 
and  because  they  might  sally  forth,  if  not  without  great  dan¬ 
ger,  yet  without  certain  destruction.  Now  if,  in  like  manner 
as  they  had  it  in  their  power  to  run  down  from  die  Capitol 
in  arms  against  their  foe,  as  men  Sesieged  have  often  sallied 
out  on  the  l^siegers,  it  were  possible  for  us  to  come  to  blows, 
cither  on  equal  or  unequal  ground,  the  advice  which  I  should 
give  W)uld  not  be  devoid  of  the  same  spirit  which  animated 
niy  father.  I  acknowledge,  indeed,  that  death,  in  defence  of 

BOOK  IX. 

•  227 

BX.  319.] 
our  country,  is  highly  glorious ;  and  I  am  ready,  cither  to 
devote  myself  for  the  Roman  people  and  the  legions,  or  to 
plunge  into  the  midst  of  the  enemy.  But  in  this  spot  I  be¬ 
hold  my  country ;  in  this  spot,  the  Mrhole  of  the  Roman  le¬ 
gions  :  and,  unless  these  choose  to  rush  on  death  for  their 
own  gratification,  what  is  there  which  can  be  preserved  by 
dieir  death  I  the  houses  of  the  city,  some  may  say,  and  the 
walls  of  it,  and  the  crowd  who  dwell  in  it.  But,  in  fact,  ia 
case  of  the  destruction  of  this  army,  all  these  are  given  up 
to  ruin,  instead  of  being  saved  from  it.  For  who  will  pro¬ 
tect  them  ?  an  unwarlike  and  unarmed  multitude,  shall  I 
suppose  ?  yes,  just  as  they  defended  them  against  the  attack 
of  the  Gauls.  Will  they  call  to  their  succour  an  army  from 
Veil,  with  Camiilus  at  its  head?  here,  on  the  spot,  I  repeat, 
are  all  our  hopes  and  strength ;  by  preserving  which,  we  pre¬ 
serve  our  country}  by  delivering  them  up  to  death,  we-aban- 
don  and  betray  it.  But  a  surrender  is  shameful  and  igno¬ 
minious.  True :  but  such  ought  to  be  our  affection  for  our 
country,  that  we  should  save  it  by  our  own  disgrace,  if  neces¬ 
sity  required,  as  freely  as  by  our  death.  Let  us  therefore 
undergo  that  indignity,  how  great  soever,  and  submit  to  chat 
necessity  to  which  even  the  gods  themselves  are  seen  to  yield. 
Go,  consuls,  ransom  the  state  for  arms,  which  your  ancestors 
ransomed  with  gold.” 
V.  The  consuls  accordingly  went  to  Pontius  to  confer 
with  him  ;  and  when  he  talked,  in  the  strain  of  a  conqueror, 
of  a  treaty,  they  declared  that  such  could  nc^  be  concluded 
without  an  order  of  the  people,  nor  without  the  ministry  of 
the  heralds,  and  the  other  customary  rites.  So  that  the  Cau- 
dine  peace  was  not  ratified  by  settled  treaty,  as  is  commonly 
believed,  and  even  asserted  by  Claudius  in  bis  history,  but 
by  convention,  wherein  the  parties  became  sureties.  For 
what  occasion  would  there  be  either  for  sureties  or  hostages 
in  the  former  case,  where  the  ratification  is  performed  by  - 

228 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  433. 

the  imprecation,  “  that  whichever  nation  shall  give  occasicai 
to  the  said  terms  being  violated,  may  Jupiter  strike  that  na¬ 
tion  in  like  manner  as  the  swine  is  struck  by  the  heralds.’’ 
The  consuls,  lieuteiiant-generals,  quaestors,  and  military  tri¬ 
bunes,  became  sureties ;  and  the  names  of  all  these  are  ex¬ 
tant  in  the  convention ;  where,  bad  4he  business  been  trans¬ 
acted  by  treaty,  none  would  have  appeared  but  those  t)f  the 
two  heralds.  On  account  of  the  necessary  delay,  before  a 
peace  could  be  concluded,  it  was  also  insisted  on,  that  si3i^ 
hundred  horsemen  should  be  given  as  hostages,  who  were  to 
suffer  death  if  the  compact  were  not  fulfilled ;  n  time  was 
then  fixed  for  delivering  up  the  hostages,  and  sending  away 
the  troops  disarmed.  The  return  of  the  consuls  renewed 
the  general  grief  in  the  camp,  insomuch  that  the  men  hardly 
Refrained  from  offering  violence  to  them,  ‘‘  by  whose  rash¬ 
ness,  they  said,  they  had  been  brought  into  such  a  situation ; 
and  through  whose  cow^ardice  they  were  likely  to  depart  with 
greater  disgrace  than  they  came.  They  had  employed  no 
guide,  who  knew  the  country,  nor  scouts  to  explore  it ;  but 
went  on  blindly,  like  beasts  into  a  pitfall.”  They  cast  looks 
of  distraction  on  each  othe^,  viewed  earnestly  the  arms  which 
they  must  presently  surrender ;  while  their  persons  would  be 
subject  to  the  will  of  the  enemy :  figured  to  themselves  the 
hostile  yoke,  the  scoffs  of  the  conquerors,  their  haughty  looks, 
and,  finally,  thus  disarmed,  their  march  through  the  midst  of 
an  armed  foe.  In  a  word,  they  saw  with  hori^r  the  misera¬ 
ble  journey  of  their  dishonoured  band,  through  the  cities  of 
the  allies ;  and  their  return  into  their  own  country,  to  their 
parents,  whither  themselves,  and  their  ancestors,  had  so  often 
come  in  triumph.  Observing,  that  “  they  alone  had  been 
conquered  without  a  fight,  without  a  weapon  thrown,  with¬ 
out  a  wound  ;  that  they  had  not  been  permitted  to  draw  their 
swords  against  the  enemy.  ^In  vain  had  arms,  in  vain  had 
strength,  in  vain  had  courage,  been  given  them.”  While 

BOOK  IX. 

229 

B.C.  319.] 
they  were  giving  vent  to  such  grievous  reflections,  the  fatal 
hour  of  their,  disgrace  arrived,  which  was  to  render  every 
circumstance  still  more  shocking,  in  fact,  than  they  had  pre¬ 
conceived  it,  in  their*imaginations.  First,  they  were  order¬ 
ed  to  go  out,  beyond  the  rampart,  unarmed,  and  with  sin^e 
garments  ;  then  the  hostages  were  surrendered,  and  carried 
into  custody.  The  lictors  were  next  commanded  to  depart 
from  the  consuls,  and  the  robes  of  the  latter  were  stripped 
off.  This  excited  such  a  degree  of  commiseration,  in  the 
breasts  of  those  very  men,  who  a  little  before  were  pouring 
execrations  upon  them,  that  every  one,  forgetting  his  own 
condition,  turned  away  his  eyes  from  that  disgraceful  insult 
on  sa  high  a  dignity,  as  from  a  spectacle  too  horrid  to  be¬ 
hold. 
VI.  First,  the  consuls,  nearly  half  naked,  were  sent  under 
the  yoke  j  then  each  officer,  according  to  his  rank,  ,was  ex¬ 
posed  to  disgrace,  and  the  same  of  the  legions  successively. 
The  enemy  stood  on  each  side  under  arms,  reviling  and 
mocking  them  ;  swords  were  pointed  at  most  of  them,  several 
were  wounded  and  some  even  slain,  when  their  looks, -ren¬ 
dered  too  fierce  by  the  indignity  to  which  they  were  subject¬ 
ed,  gave  offence  to  the  conquerors.  Thus  were  they  led  un¬ 
der  the  yoke  ;  and,  what  was  stilLmore  intolerable,  under  the 
eyes  of  the  enemy.  When  they  had  got  clear  of  the  defile, 
they  seemed  "as  if  they  had  been  drawn  up  from  the  infernal 
regions,  and  then  for  the  first  time  beheld  the  light ;  yet, 
when  they  viewed  the  ignominious  appearance,  to  which  the 
army  was  reduced,  the  light  itself  was  more  painful  to  them, 
than  any  kind  of  death  could  have  been  ;  so  that,  although  they 
might  have  arrived  at  Capua  before  night,  yet,  doubting  the 
fidelity  of  the  allies,  and  embarrassed  by  shame,  they  halted 
at  a  small  distance  from  that  city.  They  stood  in  need  of 
every  kind  of  refreshment,  yet  threw  themselves  carelessly  on 
the  ground,  on  each  side  of  the  road :  which  being  told  af 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.43a. 
coiBpttsskm  the  situatumtaft^iraOiet^^k 
mf  the  tetoral  to  the  Caelpi^iaxia^.  Thtf  imm^A- 
atcly  scot  u>  Ae  Acir  eosig^  of  rfBcc,  Ae  6mm  mi 
lici^>fB ;  to  the  soldiare,  arms,  horses,  doAes,  aod  protrisiotts 
m  adboodance :  and,  Adr  approach,  the  whole  senate  and 
people  went  out  to  meet  Aem,  and  p^formcd  every  proper 
office  of  hospiti^ty,  boA  piddic  and  private.  But  the  looks 
address  of  the  allies,  joined  with  all  their  kindness,  could 
not  draw  a  woid  from  Aem  ;  nor  even  prevail  on  them  to 
raise  thek  eyes  :  so  deeply  were  they  affected  by  shame  and 
grief,  that  they  shunned  the  conyei^ation  of  these  Aeir 
friends..  Next  day,  when  some  young  nobles,  who  had  been 
sent  froln  Capua,  to  escort  them  ot  their  road  to  the  frontiers 
of  Campania,  returned,  they  were  called  into  the  senate-house, 
and,  in  j^swer  to  the  enquiries  of  the  elder  members,  said, 
that  **  to  them  they  seemed  deeply  sunk  in  melancholy  and 
dejection  |  that  the  whole  body  moved  on  in  silence,  almost 
as  if  they  were  dumb ;  the  former  genius  of  the  Romans  was 
struck  mute,  and  that  their  spirit  had  been  taken  fn>m  Aem, 
together  wiA  Aeir  arms.  Not  one  gave  answer  to  those 
who  saluted  them  ;  as  if,  through  fear,  they  were  unable  to 
utter  a  word  ;  an<!  that  their  necks  still  carried  the  yofcc  un* 
der  which  they  had  been  sent.  That  Ae  I^Hnnites  had  ob* 
tained  a  victory,  not  only  glorious,  but  ksting  ;  for  they  imi 
subdued,  not  Rome,  merely,  as  the  Gauls  had  fotmerly  done ; 
but,  what  was  a  much  more  warlike  achievement,  Ae  Roman 
couragerf^  These  discourses  were  attentively  listened  to,  and 
lamentations  made  in  this  assembly  of  faithful  allies,  as  if  the 
Roman  name  were  almost  extinct.  We  are  told  that  Ofilius 
Calavius,  son  cf  Ovius,  a  man  highly  distinguished,  both  by 
his  birth  and  conduct,  and  at  Ais  time  farther  respectable  on 
account  of  his  age,  declared  that  he  entertained  a  very  differ¬ 
ent  opinioa  in  the  came.  ^  This  ol^tmate  silence,”  said  he, 
— those  eyes  fixed  on  the  earAj—thonw:  ears  deaf  to  all  com- 

BOOK  IX. 

231 

B.C.  319.] 
the  ^  befaokibg  the  hght^--*^e  i&dicati<m8 
&f  a  wikI  calimg  f^rih^  fyom  its  mmost  recesses,  die  utmo^ 
eaertiojDS  of  rebutment.  Either  he  was  ignorant  of  the  tem¬ 
per  of  the  Romans,  or  that  silence  would  shortly  excite, 
among  the  Samnites,  iament^^e  cries  and  groans ;  for  that 
the  remembrance  of  the  Caudine  peace  would  be  much  more 
sorrowful  to  the  Samnites  than  to  the  Romans.  Each  side 
would  have  their  own,  native  spirit,  wherever  they  should 
happen  to  engage,  but  the  Samnites  would  not,  every  where, 
have  the  glens  of  Caudium.” 
VII.  People  at  Rome  were,  by  this, time,  informed  of  the 
disaster  which  had  befallen  them.  At  first,  they  heard  that 
the  troops  were  shut  up  ;  afterwards,  the  news  of  the  igno- 
minmus  peace  arrived  ;  and  this  caused  greater  affliction  than 
had  been  felt  for  their  danger.  On  the^repoit  of  their  being 
surrounded,  a  levy  of  men  was  begun  ;  but  when  it  was  un¬ 
derstood  that  the  army  had  surrendered  in  so  disgraceful  a 
manner,  the  preparations  were  laid  aside  ;  and  immediately, 
without  any  public  directions,  a  general  mourning  took  place, 
with  all  the  various  demonstrations  of  grief.  The  shops  were 
shut ;  and  all  business  ceased  in  the  Forum,  by  common  con- 
^nt,  without  any  order  for  that  purpose  being  issued.  Or¬ 
namented  dresses*  were  laid  aside :  and  the  public  were  in 
greater  tribulation,  if  possible,  than  the  vanquished  them¬ 
selves  ;  they  were  not  only  enraged  against  the  commamiers, 
the  advisers  and  sureties  of  the  peace,  but  were  filled  with 
detestation,’ even  of  the  unoffending  soldiers,  and  asserted, 
that  they  ought  not  to  be  admitted  into  the  city.  But  these 
transports  of  passion  were  allayed  by  the  arrival  of  the  troops,. 
*  In  the  original^  Inti  clavi.  The  latus  clavus  was  a  tunic,  or  vest,  orna¬ 
mented  with  a  broad  stripe  of  purple,  on  the  fore  part,  worn  by  the  sena¬ 
tors  :  the  knight  wore  a  similar  one,  only  ornamented  with  a  narrower  stripe. 
GoM  rings  were  also  used  aui  badges  of  distinction,  the  common  people 
wore  iron  ones. 

HISTORY  ©F  ROME. 

[YR.  434, 

2351^ 
ia  a  state  sa^ejdorable^  aa^was  sufficient  to  convert  even  an¬ 
ger  w^o  eompsyisio!i4  fer  they  came  into  the  city,  not  like 
men,  retumn^  jmto  their  countiy  with  unexpcc^d  safety ; 
but  la  the  h^t,  and  with  the  Ick]^  of  captives,  late  in  the 
evening ;  jemd  bid  themselvee  so  closely  in  their  houses, 
that,  for  the  and  several  folk>wing  days,  x^t  one  of 
them  could  bear  .to  come  in  sight  of  the  Forum,  or  of  die 
public*  The  consuls,  shut  up  in  private,  transacted  no  dffi- 
cial  business,  except  that  they  were  compelled,  by  a  decree  pf 
the  senate,  to  nominate  a  dictator  to  preside  at  the  elections. 
They  nominated  Quiijtus  Fabius  Ambu^us,  and  as  master 
of  thehoi^e  Publius  i£lius  Patus.  But  some  irregularity 
being  discovered  in  their  appointment,  there  were  substituted 
in  theb*  room,  Marcus  ^mllius  Papus  dictator,  and  Lucius 
Valeritm  Flaccus  master  of  the  horse".  But  neither  did  these 
hc4d  the  elections :  and  the  people  being  dissatisfied  with  all 
the  magistrates  of  that  year,  an  interrepium  ensued.  The 
office  of  interrex  was  held  by  Quintus  Fabius  Maximus  j  af¬ 
terwards  by  Marcus  Valerius  Corvus,  who  elecled 
Y  R  434  ^  .  . 
B*C  318  t:onsuls  Quintus  Pubiilius  Philo,  and  Lucius  Pa- 
pirius  Cursor  a  second  time  a  choice  universally 
approved,  for  there  were  no  commanders  at  that  time  of  higher 
reputation. 
,  VIII.  They  entered  into  office  immediately  on  being  elect¬ 
ed,  for  so  it  had  been  determined  by  the  Fathers.  When  the 
customary  decrees  of  the  senate  were  passed,  they  proposed 
the  consideration  of  the  Caudine  peace  ;  and  Pubiilius,  whose 
duty  it  was  to  open  the  business,  said,  Spurius  Postumius, 
speak he  arose  with  just  the  same  countenance  with  which 
he  had  passed  under  the  yoke,  and  delivered  himself  to  this 
effect :  Consuls,  doubtless  I  am  to  be  called  up  first  with 
marked  ignominy,  not  with  honour ;  and  am  ordered  to  speak, 
not  as  being  a  senator,  but  as  a  person  who  has  to  answer  for 
an-  unsuccessful  war,  and  disgraceful  peace.  However,  the 

BOOK  IX. 

233 

B.€.  318J 
question  propounded  by  you  is  not  concerning  our  guilt,  or 
our  punishment ;  waving,  therefore,  a  defence,  which  would 
not  be  very  difficult,  before  men  who  are  not  unacquainted 
with  the  casualties  to  which  mankind  are  subject,  I  shall 
briefly  state  my  opinion  on  the  matter  in  question  ;  which 
opinion  will  testify,  whether  I  was  actimted  by  tenderness  to 
myself,  or  to  your  legions,  when  I  engaged  as  surety  to  the 
convention,  be  it  of  what  kind  it  may,  whether  dishonourable 
or  necessary  :  by  which,  however,  the  Roman  people  are  not 
bound,  inasmuch  as  it  was  concluded  without  their  order  ;  nor 
is  any  thing  liable  to  be  forfeited  to  Ae  Samnites,  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  it,  except  our  persons.  Let  us  then  be  delivered^ 
up  to  them  by  the  heralds,  naked,  and  in  chains.  Let  us  free 
the  people  of  the  religious  obligation,  if  we  have  bound  th^m 
under  any  such  ;  so  that  there  may  be  no  restriction,  divine  or 
human,  to  prevent  your  entering  on  the  war  anew,  without 
violating  the  maxims  of  religion  and  justice. am  also  of 
opinion,  that  the  consuls,  in  the  mean  time,  enlist,  arm,  and 
l^d  out  an  army  ;  but  that  they  should  not  enter  the  enemy’s 
territories,  before  every  particular,  respecting  the  surrender 
of  us,  be  regularly  executed.  And,  O  Immortal  Gods!  I 
pray  and  beseech  you,  that,  although  it  has  not  been  your 
will,  that  Spurius  Postumius,  and  Titus  Veturius,  in  the  of¬ 
fice  of  consuls,  should  wage  war  with  success  against  the 
Samnites,  ye  may  yet  deem  it  sufficient  to  have  seen  us  i^nt 
under  the  yoke  ;  to  have  seen  us  bound  under  an  infamous 
convention  ;  to  have  seen  us  shackled,  and  delivered  into  the 
hands  of  our  foes,  taking  on  our  own  heads  the  whole  weight 
of  the  enemy’s  resentment.  And  grant,  that  the  consuls  and 
legions  of  Rome  may  meet  the  same  fortune  in  war,  against 
the  Samnites,  which  has  attended  them  in  every  war  before' 
we  became  consids.”  On  his  concluding  this  speech,  men’s 
minds  were  so  impressed  with  admiration  and  compassion, 
that  they  could  scarce  believe  him  to  be  the  same  Spurius 
VOL.  II. — 2  H 

^34  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  434. 
Po$tiimius,  who  1^  bcewthe  author  of  so  shameful  a  peace  ; 
lameutittg,  at  the  same  time,  that  such  a  man  was  likeljr  to 
undergo,  anu>ng  the  enemy,  a  punishment  even  beyond  that 
of  others,  through  the  desire  of  ammliing  the  peat^.  All  the 
tnembers,  showing  tenderness  towards  him,  expressed  their 
approbation  of  Ihs  sentiments,  when  Lucius  Livius  and  Quin* 
tus  Mselfus,  being  tribunes  of  the  commems,  attempted,  for  a 
time,  to  stop  the  proceeding  by  a  protest ;  insisting,  that  ‘‘  the 
pea|de  could  not  be  acquitted  of  the  religious  oMigation,  from 
ftte  consuls  being  given  up,  unless  all  things  were  restored  to 
the  same  state  in  which  they  had  been  at  Caudium  ;  nm*  had 
€«y  themselves  deserved  any  pimishment,  for  having,  by  be¬ 
coming  sureties  to  the  peace,  preserved  the  army  of  the  Ro¬ 
man  people  ;  nor,  finally,  could  they,  being  sacred  and  in¬ 
violable,  be  surrendered  to  the  enemy,  or  treated  with  vio- 
IX.  To  Ais  Pdstumius  replied,  “  In  the  mean  time  sur- 
ft^ier  us  as  unsanctified  persons,  which  ye  may  do,  without 
to  religion ;  tho^  sacred  and  xnviolaUe  personages, 
the  tribunes,  ye  will  deliver  up  as  soon  as  they  go  out  of 
oSce ;  but,  if  ye  listen  to  me,  they  will  be  fimt  scourged  with 
rods,  here  in  the  Comitium,  by  way  of  interest  for  tbeir  pun¬ 
ishment,  on  account  of  the  delay  of  payment.  For,  as  to 
Aeir  denying  that  the  people  are  acquitted  of  the  religious 
chligation,  by  our  being  given  up,  who  is  there,  so  ignorant 
of  the  laws  of  the  heralds,  as  not  to  know,  that  those  men 
speak  in  that  manner,  to  prevent  themselves  from  being  sur- 
rendered,  rather  than  because  the  case  is  really  so  ?  still  I 
do  imt  deny,  Comcript  Fathers,  that  compacts,  on  sureties 
given,  as  sacred  as  treaties,  in  the  eyes  of  all  who  regard 
faith  between  men,  with  the  same  reverence  which  is  paid  to 
duties  respecting  the  gods ;  but  I  insist,  that  without  the  or¬ 
der  the  people,  nothing  can  be  ratified,  that  is  to  bind  the 
people.  Suppose  that,  out  of  the  same  arrogsmee,  with  which 

BOOK  IX- 

235 

B-C.  318.] 
the  Samoites  forced  from  us  the  comreution  in  question,  they 
had  compelled  us  to  repeat  the  established  form  of  words  for 
the  surrendering  of  cities ;  would  ye,  tnbun^,  say,  that  the 
Roman  people  was  surrendered  ?  and,  tiiat  this  city,  th^ 
temples,  and  consecrated  grounds,  these  lands  and  waters, 
were  become  the  property  of  the  Samnites?  I  say  no  more 
of  the  surrender ;  because,  our  having  become  sureties,  k 
the  point  insisted  on.  Now,  suppose  we  had  become  sureties 
that  the  Roman  people  should  quit  this  city ;  that  they  should 
set  it  on  fire ;  that  they  should  have  no  magistrates,  no  seiuite, 
no  laws  ;  that  they  should,  in  future,  be  ruled  by  kings  :  the 
gods  forbid,  you  say.  But  the  enormity  of  the  articles  les¬ 
sens  not  the  c^ligation  of  a  compact.  If  the  people  can  be 
bound,  in  any  one  instance,  it  can,  in  all.  Nor  is  there  uxiy 
importance  in  another  circumstance,  which  weighs,  perhaps, 
witii  some  :  whether  a  consul,  a  dictator,  or  a  praetor,  be  the 
surety.  And  this,  indeed,  was  the  judgment,  even  of  the 
Samnites  themselves,  who  were  not  satisfied  with  tl^  secu-. 
rity  of  the  t^tsuls,  but  compelled  the  lieutenmit-generris, 
qusestors,  and  military  tribunes  to  join  them.  Let  it  not  then 
be  demanded  of  me,  why  I  entered  into  such  a  comps^, 
when  no  such  power  was  lodged  in  a  consul,  and  when  I 
could  not,  either  to  them,  insure  a  peace,  of  which  I  could 
not  command  the  ratification ;  or  in  behalf  of  you,  who  had 
given  me  no  powers.  Conscript  Fathers^  none  of  the  trans¬ 
actions  at  Caudium  were  directed  by  human  wisdom.  The 
immortal  gods  deprived  of  understanding,  both  your  gene¬ 
rals,  and  those  of  the  enemy.  On  the  one  side,  we  acted 
not  with  sufikient  caution ;  on  the  other,  tiicy  threw  away 
a  victory,  which  through  our  folly  they  had  obtained, 
while  they  hardly  confided  in  the  places,  by  means  of  which 
they  had  conquered ;  but  were  in  haste,  on  any  terms,  to 
take  arms  out  of  the  hands  of  men  who  were  bom  to  arm^ 
Had  their  reason  been  sound,  would  it  have  been  difficult,' 

236 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  434. 

during  the  time  which  they  spent  in  sending  for  old  men 
from  home  to  give  diem  advice,  to  send  anodiassadors  to 
Rome,  and  to  negocia^  a  peace  and  treaty  with  the  senate, 
and  with  the  people  ?  it  would  have  ^en  a  journey  of  only 
three  days  to  expeditious  travellers.  In  the  intmm,  matters 
might  have  rested  under  a  truce,  that  is,  until  their  ambas- 
s^ors  should  have  brought  from  Rome,  cither  certain  vic¬ 
tory,  or  peace.  That  would  have  been  really  a  compact,  on 
the  faith  of  sureties,  for  we  should  have  become  sureties  by 
order  of  the  people.  But,  neither  would  ye  have  passed 
such  an  order,  nor  should  we  have  pledged  our  faith ;  nor 
was  it  the  will  of  fate,  that  the  affair  should  have  any  other 
issue,  than,  that  the\r  should  be  vainly  mocked  with  a  dream., 
as  it  were,  of  greater  prosperity  than  their  minds  were  capa¬ 
ble  of  comprehending,  and  that  the  same  fortune,  which  had 
entangled  our  army,  should  effectuate  its  deliverance ;  that 
an  ineffectual  victory  should  be  succeeded  by  a  more  ineffec¬ 
tual  peace  ;  and  that  a  convention,  on  the  faith  of  surety, 
should  be  introduced,  which  bound  no  other  person  beside 
die  surety or  what  part  had  ye,  Conscript  Fathers ;  what 
part  had  the  people,  in  this  affair  ?  w^ho  can  j::all  upon  you  ? 
who  can  say,  that  he  has  been  deceived  by  you  f  can  the  ene¬ 
my?  can  a  citizen  ?  to  the  enemy  ye  engaged  nothing.  Ye 
ordered  no  citizen  to  ^gage  on  your  behalf.  Ye  are  there¬ 
fore  no  way  concerned  either  with  us,  to  whom  ye  gave  no 
commission ;  nor  with  the  Samnites,  with  whom  ye  transact¬ 
ed  no  business.  We  are  sureties  to  the  Sumnites  j  debtors, 
whose  abilities  are  sufficiently  extensive  over  that  which  *  is 
our  own,  over  that  which  we  can  offer— our  bodies  and  our 
minds.  On  these,  let  them  exercise  their  cruelty;  against 
these,  let  them  whet  their  resentment  and  their  swords.  As 
to  what  relates  to  the  tribunes,  you  will  consider  whether  the 
delivering  them  up  can  be  immediately  effected,  or  if  it  must 
be  deferred  to  another  day.  Meanwhile  let  us,  Titus  Vetu- 

BOOK  IX. 

B.C.  318.] 

rius,  and  the  T^t  concerned,  offer  our  worthless  persons,  as 
atonements  for  tl^  non-perforoiance  of  our  engagements^ 
and,  by  our  sufferings,  liberate  tl^  Roman  armies,” 
X,  These  argument,  and,  still  more,  the  person  by  whom 
they  were  delivered,  powerfully  affected  the  senators ;  as  they 
did  likewise  every  one,  not  excepting  even  the  tribunes  of 
the  commons,  who  declared,  that  they  would  be  directed  by 
the  senate.  They  then  instantly  resigned  their  office,  and 
were  delivered,  together  with  the  rest,  to  the  heralds,  to  be 
conducted  to  Caudium.  On  passing  this  decree  of  the  senate, 
it  seemed  as  if  some  new  light  had  shone  upon  the  state: 
Postutnius  was  in  every  mouth :  they  extolled  him  to  heaven ; 
and  pronounced  him  to  have  equalled  in  glory  even  the  con¬ 
sul  Publius  Decius,  who  devoted  himself.  Through  his 
counsel,  and  exertions,”  they  said  “  the  republic  had  raisJd 
up  its  head,  after  being  sunk  in  an  ignominious  peace.  He 
now  offered  himself  to  the  enemy’s  rage,  and  to  torments  ; 
and  was  Suffering,  in  atonement  for  the  Roman  people,”  All 
turned  their  thoughts  towards  arms  and  war,  and  the  general 
cry  was,  ‘‘when  shall  we  be  permitted,.with  arms  in  our 
hands,  to  meet  the  Samnites.”  While  the  state  glowed  with 
resentment '  and  rancour,  the  levies  were  composed  almost 
entirely  of  volunteers.  Legions,  composed  of  the  former 
soldiers,  were  quickly  formed,  and  an  army  marched  to  Cau¬ 
dium.  The  heralds,  who  went  before,  on  coming  to  the  gate, 
ordered  the  sureties  of  the  peace  to  be  stripped  of  their 
clothes,  and  their  hands  to  be  tied  behind  their  backs.  As 
the  apparitor,  out  of  respect  to  his  dignity,  was  binding  Pos- 
tumius  in  a  loose  manner,  “  nay,”  said  he,  “  draw  the  cord 
tight,  that  the  surrender  may  be  regularly  performed.’"  Then, 
when  they  came  into  the  assembly  of  the  Samnites,  and  to 
the  tribunal  of  Pontius,  Aulus  Cornelius  Arvina,  a  herald, 
pronounced  these  words ;  “  Forasmuch  as  these  men,  here 
present,  without  order  from  the  Roman  people,  the  Quiritc^^ 

SS8  HISTOJRY  ROME,  [Y.R,  434, 
eatei^d  into*  a  treaty  shmiid  be  made,  whereby 
they  have  rendered  ^emselves  criminal ;  now,  in  order  that 
the  Roman  people  may  be  freed  from  die  crime  o£  iiBpkty, 
I  here  surrender  these  men  into  your  hands.’’  On  the  her^d 
saying  thus,  Postumius  gave  him  a  stroke  on  die  thigh  wi* 
his  knee,  as  forcibly  as  he  could,  and  said  with  a  loud  voice, 
that  ‘‘  he  was  now  a  citizen  of  Samnium,  the  other  a  Roman 
ambassador ;  that  the  herald  had  be^,  by  him,  vioiendy  iH* 
treated,  contrary  to  tfae^  law  of  nations;  that  the  people 
he  i^presented  would  therefore  have  the  more  justice  on 
llieir  side,  in  the  war  which  they  were  about  to  wage.” 
XI.  Pontit:^  then  said,  Neither  will  I  accept  such  a  sur« 
render,  nor  will  the  Samnites  deem  it  valid.  Spurius  Postu¬ 
mius,  if  you  believe  that  there  are  gods,  why  do  ye  not  undo 
sR  that  Has  been  done,  or  fulfil  your  agreement  ?  The  Sam* 
nite  nadon  is  entitled,  either  to  all  die  men  whom  it  had  in 
iu  power,  or,  instead  of  them,  to  a  peace.  But  why  do  I 
nmke  a  demand  on  you,  who,  with  as  much  regard  to  faith  as 
you  are  ^le  to  show,  return  yourself  a  prisoner  into  the 
hands  of  the  conqueror  ?  I  make  the  demand  on  the  Roman 
people.  If  they  are  dissatisfied  with  the  convemion  made  at 
the  Caddinc  forks,  let  them  replace  the  legions  within  the 
defile  where  they  were  pent  up.  Let  there  be  no  decepti<Mi 
cm  either  side.  Let  aU  that  has  been  done  pass  us  nothing. 
Let  them  receive  again  the  arms  which  they  surrendered  by 
the  cemvention  ;  let  them  return  into  their  camp.  Whatever 
they  were  in  possession  of,  the  day  before  the  conference^  let 
them  possess  again.  Then  let  war  and  resolute  counsels  be 
adopted.  Then  let  the  convention,  and  peace,  be  rejected. 
Let  us  cany  on  the  war  in  the  same  circumstances,  and  situa¬ 
tions,  in  which  we  were,  before  peace  was  mentioned.  Let 
neither  the  Roman  people  blame  the  con^vention  of  the  consuls, 
nor  us  the  faith  of  the  Roman  people.  Will  ye  never  want 
an  excuse  for  violating  the  compacts  which  ye  make  on  being 

BOOK  IX. 

2S9 

B.C.  318.] 
defeated  ?  Ye  ^vc  to  I^jrsetia ;  yt  clfltfidestinely 
got  them  back.  Ye  ransomed  your  state  from  the  Gauls^  for 
gold  5  n^ile  they  were  receiving  the  gold,  they  were  put  to 
theswtad.  Ye  concluded  a  peace  with  us,  on  condition  of 
imr  reaioring  your  captured  legions :  thsrt  peace  ye  now  annul ; 
in  fine,  ye  ahrkys  spread  over  your  fraudulent  conduct  some 
show  of  right.  Do  the  Roman  people  disapprove  of  their  le* 
gions  being  saved  by  an  ignominious  peace  ?  Let  them  take 
back  their  peace,  and  return  the  captured  legions  to  the  con* 
queror.  This  would  be  conduct  consistent  with  faith,  with 
treaties,  and  with  the  laws  of  the  heralds.  But  that  you  should, 
in  consequence  of  the  convention,  obtain  what  you  de^red, 
the  safety  of  so  manyof  your  countrymen,  while  I  obtain  not, 
what  I  stipulated  for,  on  sending  you  back  those  men,  a  peace ; 
is  this  the  law  which  you,  A  ulus  Conielius,  which  ye,  heralds, 
prescribe  to  nations  ?  But  for  my  part,  I  neither  accept  diose 
men  whom  ye  pretend  to  surrender,  nor  consider  them  as  sur¬ 
rendered  ;  nor  do  I  hinder  them  from  returning  into  their  own 
country,  which  stands  bound  under  an  actual  convention,  car¬ 
rying  with  them  the  wrath  of  all  the  gods,  whose  authority  is 
thus  despised.  Wage  war,  since  Spurius  Postumius  has  just 
now  struck  with  his  knee  the  herald,  in  character  of  ambas¬ 
sador.  The  gods  are  to  believe  that  Postumius  is  a  citizen 
of  Samnium,  not  of  Rome  ;  and  that  a  Roman  ambassador 
has  been  violated  by  a  Samnite  ;  and  that  therefore  ye  have 
just  grounds  for  a  war  against  us.  That  men  of  years,  and 
of  consular  dignity,  should  not  be  ashamed  to  exhibit  such 
mockery  of  religion  in  the  face  of  day !  And  should  have  re¬ 
course  to  such  shallow  artifices  to  palliate  their  breach  of 
faith,  as  not  even  children  would  aAow  themselves !  Go,  lie- 
tor,  take  off  the  bonds  from  those  Romans.  Let  no  one  hin¬ 
der  them  to  depart,  when  they  think  proper.”  Accordingly 
they  returned  unhurt  from  Caudiiim,  to  the  Roman  camp^ 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

240 

[Y.R.  434. 

having  acquitted,  ccminiy,  their  own  faith,  and,-perh^,  that 
of  the  public, 
XII.  The  Samnites  finding  that,  instead  of  a  peace  which 
flattered  their  pride,  the  war  was  revived,  and  with  the  ut¬ 
most  inveteracy,  not  only  felt,  in  their  minds,  a  foreboding 
of  all  the  consequences  which  ensued,  but  saw  them,  in  a 
manner,  before  their  eyes.  They  now,  too  late,  and  in  vain, 
applauded  the  plans  of  old  Pontius,  by  blundering  between 
which,  they  had  exchanged  a  certainty  of  victory,  for  an  un¬ 
certain  peace ;  and  were  now  to  fight  against  men,  whom 
they  might  have  either  put  out  of  the  way,  for  ever,  as  ene¬ 
mies  j  or  engaged,  for  ever,  as  friends.  And  such  was  the 
change  which  had  taken  place  in  men’s' minds,  since  the  Cau- 
dine  peace,  even  before  any  trial  of  strength  had  shown  an 
advantage  on  either  side,  that  Postumius,  by  surrendering 
himself,  had  acquired  greater  renown  among  the  Romans, 
than  Pontius  among  the  Samnites,  by  his  bloodless  victory. 
The  Romans  considered  their  being  at  liberty  to  make  war, 
as  certain  victory  ;  while  the  Samnites  supposed  the  Ramans 
victorious,  the  moment  they  resumed  their  arms.  Mean- 
wlule,  the  Satricans  revolted  to  the  Samnites,  who  attacked 
the  colony  of  Fregellae,  by  a  sudden  surprise  in  the  night,  ac¬ 
companied,  as  it  appears,  by  the  Satricans.  From  that  time 
until  day,  their  mutual  fears  kept  both  parties  quiet;  the  day¬ 
light  was  the  signal  for  battle,  which  the  Fregellans  c(Hitrived 
to  maintain,  for  a  considerable  time,  without  loss  of  ground ; 
for  they  fought  for  their  religion  and  liberty  j  and  the  multi¬ 
tude,  who  were  unfit  to  bear  arms,  assisted  them,  from’^he 
tops  of  the  houses.  At  length,  a  stratagem  gave  the  advan¬ 
tage  to  the  assailants  ;  a  crier  was  heard  proclaiming,  that 
‘‘  whoever  laid  down  his  arms  might  retire  in  safety.”  This 
relaxed  their  eagerness  in  the  fight,  and  they  began  almost 
every  where  to  avail  themselves  of  it.  A  part,  more  deter¬ 
mined,  however,  retaining  their  arms,  rushed  out  by  the  op- 

BOOK  IX.  . 

241 

B.C.  318.] 

posite  gate,  and  found  greater  safety  in  tlieir  boldness,  than 
the  others  from  the  credulity  inspired  by  their  fears :  for  the 
Samnites  surrounded  the  latter  with  fires,  and  burned  them 
all  to  death,  while  they  made  vain  appeals  to  the  faith  of 
gods  and  men.  The  consuls  having  settled  the  provinces 
between  them,  Papirius  proceeded  into  Apulia  to  Luceria, 
where  the  Roman- horsemen,  given  as  hostages  to  Caudiutn, 
were  kept  in  custody :  Publilius  remained  in  Samnium,  to 
oppose  the  Caudine  legions.  This  proceeding  perplexed  the 
minds  of  the  Samnites:  they  could  not  safely  determine  either 
to  go  to  Luceria,  lest  the  enemy  should  press  on  their  rear ; 
or  to  remain  where  they  were,  lest,  in  the  mean  time,  Luce¬ 
ria  should  be  lost.  They  concluded,  therefore,  that  it  would 
be  most  advisable  to  trust  to  the  decision  of  fortune,  and  to 
try  the  issue  of  a  battle  with  Publilius ;  accordingly,  they 
drew  out  their  forces  into  the  field. 
XIII,  When  Publilius  was  about  to  engage,  he  thought  it 
proper  to  address  his  soldiers ;  and,  accordingiy,  he  ordered 
an  assembly  to  be  summoned.  But,  though  they  ran  together 
to  the  general’s  quarters  with  the  greatest  alacrity,  yet,  so 
loud  were  their  clamours,  demanding  the  fight,  that  none  of 
the  general’s  exhortations  were  heard :  each  man’s  own  re¬ 
flections  on  foe  late  disgrace  were  sufficient  to  determine 
them.  They  advanced,  therefore,  to  battle,  urging  the,  stan¬ 
dard-bearers  to  hasten ;  and  lest,  in  beginning  the  conflict, 
there  should  be  any  delay,  by  reason  that  javelins  were  less 
easily  wielded  than  swords,  they  threw  away  the  former,  as 
if  a  signal  to  that  purpose  had  been  given,  and,  drawing  foe 
latter,  rushed  in  full  speed  upon  the  foe.  The  general  had 
little  opportunity  of  showing  his  skill  in  forming  ranks  or 
reserves ;  the  ungoverned  troops  performed  alt,  with  a  degree 
of  fury  little  inferior  to  madness.  The  enemy,  therefore, 
were  completely  routed,  not  even  daring  to  retreat  to  their 
camp,  but  dispersing,  made  the  best  of  their  way  towards 
VOL.  II. — 2  I 

242 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.434. 

Apulia :  afterwards,  however,  they  collected  their  forces  into 
caie  body,  and  came  to  Luceria.  The  same  exasperation 
which  had  carried  the  Romans  through  the  midst  of  the  ene¬ 
my’s  line,  carried  them  forward  also  into  their  camp,  where 
greater  carnage  was  made,  and  more  blood  spilt,  than  even 
in  the  field,  while  the  greater  part  of  the  spoil  was  destroyed 
in  their  rage.  The  other  army,  with  the  consul  Papirius, 
liad  now  arrived  at  Arpi,  on  tl^  sea-coast,  having  passed 
without  molestation  through  all  the  countries  in  their  way  ; 
which  was  owing  to  the  ill  treatment  pceived  by  those  peo¬ 
ple  from  the  Samnites,  and  their  hatred  towards  them,  rather 
than  to  any  favour  received  from  the  Roman  people.  For 
such  of  the  Samnites  as  dwelt  on  the  mountains,  used  to  ra¬ 
vage  the  lowlands,  ^nd  the  places  on  the  coast ;  and,  being 
savage  themselves,  despised  the  husbandmen,  who  were  of  a 
gentler  kind.  Now,  the  people  of  this  tract,  had  they  been 
favourably  aflPected  towards  the  Samnites,  could  either  have 
prevented  the  Roman  army  from  coming  to  Arpi ;  or,  as 
they  lay  between  Ron^e^and  Arpi,  could,  by  intercepting 
the  convoys  have  caused  such  scarcity  of  every 
necessary,  as  would  fiave  been  fatal.  Even  as  it  was,  when 
they  went  from  thence  to  Euccria,  both  the  besiegers  and 
the  besieged  were  distressed  equally  by  want.  Every  kind 
of  supplies  was  brought  to  the  Romans  from  Arpi ;  but  ip  a 
very  scsmty  proportion,  the  .horsemen  carrying  corn  from 
thence  the  camp,  in  little  bags,  for  the  foot,  who  were  em¬ 
ployed  in  the  out-posts,  watches,  and  works,  and  these  soine- 
times  falling  in  with  parties  of  the  enemy,  when  they  were 
obUged  to  throw  the  corn  from  off  their  horses,  in  order  to 
fight.  With  respect  to  the  Samnites,  before  the  arrivjJ  of 
the  other  consul  and  his  victorious  army,  provisions  and  re¬ 
inforcements  had  been  brought  in  to  them  from  the  paotin- 
tains  |.3j>4t  thje  coming  of  Publilius  strengthened  the  Romans 
in  eveiy  part  j  for,  committing  the  siege  to  the  care  of  hi5 

BOOK  IX* 

*  243 

B.C*  318.] 
colleague,  and  keeping  himself  disengaged,  threw  every 
difficulty  in  the  way  of  the  enemy’s  convoys.  There  being, 
therefore,  little  hope  for  the  besieged,  or  that  they  would  be 
able  much  longer  to  endure  want,  the  Samnites,  encamped  at 
Luceria,  were  obliged  to  collect  their  forces  from  every  side, 
and  come  to  an  engagement  with  Papirius. 
XIV.  At  this  juncture,  while  both  parties  were  preparing 
for  an  action,  ambassadors  from  the  Tarentines  inter¬ 
posed,  requiring  both  Samnites  and  Romans  to  desist  from 
war;  with' menaces,  that,  if  either  refused  to  agree  to  a 
cessation  of  hostilities,  they  would  join  their  arms  with  the 
other  party,  against  them.”  Papirius,  on  hearing  the  purport 
of  their  embassy,  as  if  their  words  had  made  some  impres¬ 
sion  on  him,  answered,  that  he  would  consult  his  colleague  : 
he  then  sent  for  him,  employing  the  intermediate  time  in  the 
necessary  preparations ;  and,  when  he  had  conferred  with  him 
on  a  matter,  on  which  they  were  at  no  loss  how  to  determine, 
he  made  the  signal  for  battle.  While  the  consuls  were  em¬ 
ployed  in  performing  the  religious  rites,  and  the  other  usual 
business  preparatory  to  an  engagement,  the  Tarentine  ambas¬ 
sadors  put  themselves  in  their  way,  expecting  an  answer :  to 
whom  Papirius  said,  Tarentines,  the  priest  reports  that  the 
auspices  are  favourable,  and  that  our  sacrifices  have  been  at¬ 
tended  with  excelkffit  omens :  under  the  direction  of  the  gods, 
we  are  proceeding,  as  you  see,  to  action.”  He  then  ordered 
the  standards  to  move,  and  led  out  the  m^ops^  thus  rebuk¬ 
ing  the  exorbitant  arrogance  of  that  nation,  which,  at  a  time 
when,  through  intestine  discord  and  sedition,  it  was  une^uhl 
to  the  management  of  its  own  affairs,  yet  presumed  to  pre¬ 
scribe  the  bounds  of  peace  and  war  to  others.  On  the  other 
side,  the  Samnites,  who  had  neglected  every  preparation  for 
fighting,  cither  because  they  were  really  desirous  of  peace, 
or  found  it  their  interest  to  pretend  to  be  so,  in  order  to  con¬ 
ciliate  the  favour  of  the  Tarentines,  when  thev  saw,  on  a 

244  ‘ 

jaiSTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  434. 

sudden,  the  Romans  drawn  up  for  battle,  cried  out,  that 
they  would  continue  to  be  directed  by  the~Tarentines,  and 
would  neither  march  out,  nor  carry  their  arms  beyond  the 
rampart.  That  they  would  rather  endure  any  consequence 
which  might  ensue,  than  show  contempt  to  the  recommenda¬ 
tion  of  the  Tarentines/’  The  consuls  said,  that  they  em¬ 
braced  the  omen,  and  prayed  that  the  enemy  might  continue 
in  the  resolution  of  not  even  defending  their  rampart.’^  Then, 
dividing  the  forces  b^ween  them,  they  advanced  to  the 
works  ;  and,  making  ^n  assault  on  every  side  at  once,  while 
some  filled  up  the  trenches,  others  tore  down  the  rampart, 
and  tumbled  it  into  the  trench.  All  were  stimulated,  not 
only  by  their  native  courage,  but  by  the  resentment,  which, 
since  their  disgrace,  had  been  festering  in  their  breasts.  They 
made  their  way  into  the  camp  ;  where,  every  one  repeating, 
that  here  was  QOt  Gaudium,  nor  the  forks,  nor  the  impassable 
glens,  where  cunning  haughtily  triumphed  over  error  ;  but 
Roman  valour,  which  no  rampart  nor  trench  could  ward  off ; 
— they  slew,  without  distinction,  those  who  resisted  and 
those  who  fled,  the  armed  and  unarmed,  freemen  and  slaves, 
young  and  old,  men  and  cattle.  Nor  would  any  one  have 
escaped,  had  not  the  consuls  given  the  signal  for  retreat ; 
and,  partly  by  commands,  partly  by  threats,  forced  the  sol¬ 
diers  out  of  the  camp,  where  they  were  greedily  indulging 
themselves  in  slaughter.  As  they  were  highly  incensed  at 
being  thus  interrupted,  a  speech  was  immediately  addressed 
to  them,  assuring  the  soldiers,  that  ^  the  consuls  neither  did, 
nor  would,  fall  short  of  any  one  of  the  soldiers  in  hatred  to¬ 
ward  the  enemy ;  on  the  contrary,,  as  they  led  the  way  in 
battle,  so  would  they  have  done  the  same  in  executing  un¬ 
bounded  vengeance,  had  not  their  inclinations  been  restrained 
by  the  consideration  of  the  six  hundred  horsemen,  who  were 
confined,  as  hostages,  in  Luceria ,  for  it  was  feared  that  the 
Samnites,  through  despair,  might  be  hturied  on  blindly  to 

BOOK  IX. 

245 

B.C.318.1 
take  cruel  revenge  on  them,  before  they  perished  themselves.^’ 
The  soldiers  highly  applauded  the  consul’s  conduct,  rejoiced 
that  th^ir  resentment  had  been  checked,  and  acknowledged, 
that  every  thing  ought  to  be  endured,  rather  than  that  so  many 
Roman  youths  of  the  first  distinction  should  be  brought  into 
danger. 
XV.  The  assembly  being  then  dismissed,  a  consultation 
was  held,  whether  they  should  press  forward  the  siege  of 
Luceria,  with  all  their  forces ;  or,  whether  one  of  the  com¬ 
manders,  and  his  army,  should  make  trial  of  the  dbpositions 
of  the  rest  of  the  Apulians,  which  were  still  doubtful.  The 
consul  Publilius  set  out  to  make  a  circuit  through  Apulia, 
and  in  the  one  expedition  either  reduced  by  force,  or  received 
into  alliance,  on  conditions,  a  considerable  number  of  the 
states.  Papirius  likewise,  who  had  remained  to  prosecute 
the  siege  of  Luceria,  soon  found  the  event  agreeable  to  his 
hopes  :  for  all  the  roads  being  blocked  up,  through  which  pro¬ 
visions  used  to  be  conveyed  from  Samnium,  the  Samnites,  in 
garrison,  were  reduced  so  low  by  famine,  that  they  sent  am¬ 
bassadors  to  the  Roman  consul,  proposing  that  he  should  raise 
the  siege,  on  receiving  the  horsemen  who  were  the  cause  of 
the  war.  .To  whom  Papirius  returned  this  answer,  that 
they  ought  to  have  consulted  Pontius,  son  of  Herrennius, 
by  whose  advice  they  had  sent  the  Romans  under  the  yoke, 
what  treatment  he  thought  fitting  for  the  conquered  to  under¬ 
go.  But  since,  instead:  of  offering  fair  tenns  themselves, 
they  chose  rather  thkt  they  should  be  imposed  on  them  by 
their  enemies,  he  desired  them  to*  carry  back  orders  to  the 
troops  in  Luceria,  that  they  should  leave  within  the  walls 
their  arms,  baggage,  beasts  of  burthen,  and  all  persons  unfit 
for  war.  The  soldiers  he  would  send  under  the  yoke  with 
single  garments,  retaliating  the  disgrace  formerly  inflicted, 
not  setting  the  example.”  All  this  they  submitted  to.  Seven 
thousand  soldiers  were  sent  under  the  yoke,  and  an  immense 

246 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  435. 

booty  seized  in  die  town,  where  the  Romans  retook  all 
the  standards  and  arms  which  they  had  lost  at  Caudium  ; 
and,  what  greatly  increased  their  joy,  recovered  the  horse¬ 
men  whom  the  Samnites  had  sent  to  Luceria  to  be  kept  as 
pledges  of  the  peace.  Hardly  ever  did  the  Romans  gain  a 
victory  more  remarkable  for  the  sudden  reverse  produced  in 
the  state  of  their  affairs  :  especially  if  it  be  true,  as  I  find  in 
k^me  annals,  that  Pontius,  son'  of  Herrennius,  the  Samnite 
general,  was  sent  under  the  yoke  along  with  the  rest,  to  atone 
for  the  disgrace  of  the  consuls.  I  think  it  indeed  less  strange 
to  find  uncertainty,  with  respect  to  the  treatment  of  the  Sam¬ 
nite  general,  than  that  there  should  be  a  doubt  whether  it  was 
Lucias  Cornelius,  in  quality  of  dictator,  (Lucius  Papirios 
Cursor  being  master  of  the  horse,  who  acted  at  Caudium,  and 
afterwards  at  Luceria,  as  the  single  avenger  of  the  disgrace 
of  the  Romans,  enjoying  the  best  deserved  triumph,  perhaps 
next  to  that  of  Furius  Camillus,  which  had  ever  yet  been  ob¬ 
tained  ;)  or  whether  that  honour  belongs  to  the  consuls,  mid 
particularly  to  Papirius.  This  uncertainty  is  followed  by  an¬ 
other,  whether,  at  the  next  election,  Papirius  Cur- 
B  C  317  chosen  consul,  a  third  time,  with  Quintus 
A  ulus  Cerretanus  a  second  time,  being  re-elected 
in  requital  of  his  services  at  Luceria  ;  or  whether  it  was  Lu¬ 
cius  Papirius  Mugillanus,  the  surname  being  mistaken."*" 
XVI.  From  henceforth,  the  accounts  are  clear,  that  the 
other  wars  were  conducted  to  a  conclusion  by  the  consuls. 
Aulius,  by  one  successful  battle,  entirely  conquered  the  Fer- 
entans.  The  city,  to  which  their  army  had  retreated  after 
its  defeat,  surrendered  on  terms,,  and  was  ordered  to  give 
hostages.  Similar  fortune  attended  the  other  consul,  in  his 
operations  against  the  Satr leans  j  who,  though  Roman  citi¬ 
zens,  had,  after  the  misfortune  at  Caudium,  revolted  to  the 
Samnites,  and  received  a  garrison  into  their  city.  The  Satri- 
cans,  however,  when  the  Rommi  army  approached  their  walls. 

BOjQK  IX, 

B.c,3ir.] 

24r 

sent  deputies' to  sue  for  peace,  with  humbk  entreaties,  to 
whom  the  consul  answered,  harshly,  that  “  they  must  not 
come  again  to  him,  unless  they  either  put  to  death,  or  deliv¬ 
ered  up,  the  Samnite  garrison  which  words  struck  greater 
terror  into  the  colonists,  than  the  arms  with  which  they  were 
threatened.  The  deputies,  on  this,  several  times  asking  tfe 
consul,  how  he  thought  that  they,  who  were  few  and  weak, 
could  attempt  to  use  force  against  a  garrison  so  strong  and 
well  armed,  he  desired  them  to  ‘‘  seek  counsel  from  those,  by 
whose  advice  they  had  received  that  garrison  into  the  city.” 
They  then  departed,  and  returned  to  their  countrymen,  hav¬ 
ing  obtained  from  the  •consul,, widi  much  difficulty,  permis¬ 
sion  to  consult  their  senate,  and  bring  back  their  answer  to 
him.  Two  factions  divided  the  senate  ;  the  leaders  of  one 
had  been  the  authors  of  the  defection  from  the  Roman  peo¬ 
ple,  the  other  consisted  of  the  citizens  who  retained  their  loy¬ 
alty  ;  both,  however,  showed  an  earnest  desire,  that  every 
means  should  be  used  towards  effecting  an  accommodation 
with  the  consul  for  the  restoration  of  peace.  As  the  Samnite 
garrison,  being  in  no  respect  prepared  for  holding  out  a  siege, 
intended  to  retire  the  next  night  out  of  the  town,  one  party 
thought  it  sufficient  to  discover  to  the  consul,  at  what  hour, 
through  what  gate,  and  by  what  road,  his  enemy  was  to 
march  out.  The  other,  who  had  opposed  the  going  over  to 
the  Samnites,  went  farther,  and  opened  one  of  the  gates  for 
the  consul  in  the  night,  secretly  admitting  him  into  the  town. 
In  consequence  of  this  two- fold  tr|achery,  the  Samnite  gar¬ 
rison  was  surprized  and  overpowered  by  an  ambush,  placed 
m  the  woody  places,  near  the  road  ;  and,  at  the  same  time, 
a  shout  was  raised  in  the  city,  which  was  now  filled  with  the 
besiegers.  Thus,  in  the  short  space  of  one  hour,  the  Sam¬ 
nites  were  put  to  the  sword,  the  Satricaiis  made  prisoners, 
and  all  things  reduced  under  the  power  of  the  consul ;  who, 
taking  proper  measures  to  discover  who  were  the  instigators 

248 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.4a^. 

of  the  revolt,  scourged  with  rods,  and  beheaded,  such  as*he 
found  to  be  guilty  ;  and  then,  dkarming  the  Satricans,  he 
placed  a  strong  garrison  in  the  place..  On  this,  Papirius  Cur¬ 
sor  proceeded  to  Rome  to  celebrate  his  triumph,  according 
to  the  relation  of  those  authors,  who  say,  that  he  was  the  ge¬ 
neral  who  retook  Luceria,  and  sent  the  Samnites  under  the 
yoke.  Undoubtedly,  as  a  warrior,  he  was  deserving,  of  eveiy^ 
praise,  excelling  not  only’in  vigour  of  mind,  but  likewise  in 
strength  of  body.  He  possessed  extraordinary  swiftness  of 
foot,  surpassing  every  one  of  his  age  in  running,  from  whence 
came  the  surname  into  his  family  ;  and  he  is  said,  either  from 
the  robustnesss  of  bis  frame,  or  from  much  practice,  to  have 
been  able  to  digest  a  very  large  quantity  of  food  and  wine. 
!Never  did  either  the  foot  soldier,  or  horseman,  feel  military 
service  more  laborious,  under  any  general,  because  he  was  of 
a  constitution  not  to  be  overcome  by  fatigue.  The  cavalry, 
on  some  occasion,  venturing  to  request  that,  in  consideration 
of  their  good  behaviour,  he  would  excuse  them  some  part  of 
their  business,  he  told  them,  ye  should  not  say,  that  no  in¬ 
dulgence  has  been  granted  you,  I  excuse  you  from  rubbing 
your  horses  backs  when  ye  dismount.^’  He  supported  also 
the  authority  of  command,  in  all  its  vigour,  both  among  the 
allies  and  his  countrymen.  The  praetor  of  Praeneste,  through 
fear,  had  been  tardy  in  bringing  forward  his  men  from  the 
reserve  to  the  front :  the  general  walking  before  his  tent,  or¬ 
dered  him  to  be  called,  and  then  bade  the  lictor  to  make  rea¬ 
dy  his  axe,  on  which  the  Praenestine,  standing  frighted  almost 
to  death,  he  said,  “  here,  lictor,  cut  away  this  stump,  it  is 
troublesome  to  people  as  they  walk  and,  after  thus  alarm- 
ing  him  with  the  dread  of  the  severest  punishment,  fined  and 
dismissed  him.  It  isbe3’ond  doubt,  that  during  that  age,  than 
which  none  was  ever  more  productive  of  virtuous  characters, 
there  \vas  no  man  in  whom  the  Roman  affairs  found  a  moVe 
effectual  support :  nay,  people  even  marked  him  out,  in  their 

BOOK  IX. 

249 

B.C.  317.] 
mindS)  as  a  match  for  Alexander  the  Great,  in  case  that, 
*  having  completed  the  conquest  of  Asia,  he  should  have  turn¬ 
ed  his  arms  on  Europe. 
XVII.  Nodiing  has  ever  been  farther  from  my  intention, 
since  the  commencement  of  this  history,  than  to  digress, 
more  than  ni:^cessity  required,  from  the  course  of  oarration ; 
and,  by  embellishing  my  work  with  variety,  to  seek  pleasing 
resting-places,  as  it  were,  for  my  refers,  smd  relaxation  for 
my  own  mind ;  nevertheless,  the  mention  of  so  great  a  king 
and  commander,  as  it  has  often  set  my  thoughls  at  work,  in 
silent  disquisitions,  now  calls  forth  a  few  reflections  to  pub¬ 
lic  view ;  and  disposes  me  to  enquire,  what  would  have  been 
the  consequence,  respecting  the  affairs  of  the  Romans,  if  they 
had  happened  to  have  been  engaged  in  a  war  with  Alexan¬ 
der.  The  circumstances  of  greatest  moment  seem  to  be,  the 
number  and  bravery  of  the  soldiers,  the  abilities  of  the  emn- 
manders,  and  fortune,  which  exerts  a  powerful  sway  over  all 
human  concerns,  and  especially  over  those  of  war.  Now 
these  particulars,  considered  both  separately  and  collectively, 
must  clearly  convince  an  observer,  that  not  only  odier  kings 
and  nations,  but  that  even  Alexander  himself,  would  have  found 
the  Roman  empire  invincible.  And  first,  to  begin  with*com- 
paring  the  commanders.  I  do  not,  indeed,  deny,  that  Alex¬ 
ander  was  a  captain  of  consummate  merit ;  but  still  his  fame 
owes  part  of  its  lustre  to  his  having  been  single  in  command, 
and  to  his  dying  young,  while  his  affairs  were  advancing  in 
improvement,  and  while  he  had  not  yet  experienced  a  reverse 
of  fortune.  For,  to  pas^  by  other  illustrious  kings  and  lead¬ 
ers,  who  afford  exemplary  instances  of  the  decline  of  human 
greatness,  what  was  it,  but  length  of  life,  which  subjected 
Cyrus  (whom  the  Greeks,  in  their  panegyrics,  exalt  so  fiur 
beyond  all  others)  to  the  caprice  of  fortune  ?  and  the  same 
ws»,  lately,  the  case  of  Pompey  the  Great.  I  shall  enume¬ 
rate  the  Roman  chiefs :  not  every  one  of  every  age,  but  those 
VOL.  II. — 2  K 

250 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

[Y.R.  435. 

O0ly  with  whom,  eitha?  as  cotmub  or  dictators,  Ale^tander 
might  have  beai  engaged.  Marcus  Valerkis  Corvus,  CaUis  • 
Marcias  Rutllus,  Caius  Sulpicius,  Titus  Manlius  Torquatos, 
Qi^tus  Pubiilius  Philo,  Lucius  Papirius  Cursor,  Qmntus 
Fabius  Mammas,  the  two  Dedi,  Lucius  V<dujnnius,  Ma- 
Bius  Curios.  Then  fo&w  a  number  of  very  extraca'dinary 
men,  had  it  so  happcnjed,  that  he  had  first  engaged  in  war 
with  Carthage,  and  h^  come  into  Italy  at  a  more  advanced 
period  of  life.  Every  one  of  these  possessed  powers  of  mind 
mid  a  capacHy  eqital  with  Alexander ;  add  to  this,  that  a 
reguhur  system  of  military  discipline  had ,  been  transmitted 
&om  €Hie  to  maother,  from  the  first  rise  of  the  city  of  Rome  ; 
a  s}^tem  now  reduced  into  the  form  of  an  art,  completely 
digested  in  a  train  of  fixed  and  settled  principles,  deduced 
from  the  practice  of  the  Kings ;  and  afterwards,  of  the  ex- 
peQers  of  those  Kings,  the  Junii  and  Valcrii ;  with  all  the 
improvcmente  made  in  it  by  the  Fabii,  the  Quintii,  the  Cor- 
nelii,  and  parricvdarly  Furius  Camillas,  who  was  an  old  man 
m  the  carli^*  years  of  those  with  whom  Alexander  must 
Tiavc  fou^t.  Manlius  Tofquatus  might,  perhaps,  have 
yielded  to  Alei^der,  had  he  met  him  in  the  field:  and  so 
mighi  Valerius  Corvus;  men  who  were  •  distinguished  sol¬ 
diers,  before  they  became  commanders.  The  same,  too, 
might  have‘  been  the  case  with  the  Decii,  who,  after  devot¬ 
ing  their  persons,  rushed  upon  the  enemy,  or  of  Papirius 
Cursor,  though  possessed  of  such  powers,  both  of  body  and 
mind.  The  councils  of  one  youth,  it  is  pbssible,  might  have 
baffled  the  wisdom  of  a  whole  senate,  composed  of  such 
members,  that  he  alone,  who  said  it  was  an  assembly  of  kings, 
conceived  a  just  idea  of  it.  But  then  there  was  little  proba^ 
bility  th^  he* should,  with  more  judgment  than  miy  ime  of 
those  whom  I  have  named,  choose  ground  for  an  encamp* 
ment,  provide  supplies,  guard  against  stratagems,  distinguish 
the  season  for  fighting,  form  his  line  of  battle,  ot  strengthen 

BOOK  IX. 

251 

BX,  317.] 
it  properly  widi  i^serves.  He  would  have  owa^  &at  he 
was  not  dealmg  with  Darias,  who  drew  after  him  a  traia  of 
women  and  eunuchs ;  saw  nodiing  about  him  but  gcdd  and 
purple ;  was  encumbered  wkh  the  of 
his  state,  and  should  be  cadkd  his  {»rey,  nAerthan  his  as* 
tagohist;  whom  therefore  he  '^hmqimhtd  widiout  loss  of 
blood,  and  had  no  other  merit,  on  the  ocGimtos,  dum  diat  of 
showing  a  proper  spirit  in  despbing  empty  I^ady 
would  have  appeared,  to  lum,  a  country  of  a^^quitc  differaat 
nature  from  Asia,  which  be  traversed  in  the  gube  of  a  xe- 
vcUer,  at  the  head  of  a  crew  of  drunkards,  if  he  had  seen 
the  forests  of  Apulia,  and  the  mountains  of  Lucania,  with 
the  vestiges  of  the  disasters  of  hb  house,  and  where  his  ' 
uncle  Alexander,  king  of  Epirus,  had  been  lately  cut  oflF. 
XVIIL  I  am  here  speaking  of  Alexander,  not  yet  intoxi* 
cated  by  prosperity,  the  seductions  of  which  no  man  was 
less  capable  of  withstanding.  But,  if  a  judgment  is  to  be 
formed  of  him,  from  the  tenour*  of  his  conduct,  in  the  new 
state  of  his  fortune,  and  from  the  new  disposition,  as  I  may 
say,  which  he  put  on  after  his  successes,  he  would  have  en* 
tered  Italy  more  like  Darius,  than  Alexander ;  and  would 
have  brought  riiither  an  army  who  had  forgotten  Macedo¬ 
nia,  and  were  degenerating  into  the  manners  of  the  Persians. 
It  is  painful,  in  speaking  of  so  great  a  king,  to  recite  his 
ostentatious  pride  in  the  frequent  changes  of  his  dress  ;  his 
requiring  that  people  should  address  him  with  adulation, 
prostrating  themselves  cm  the  ground  ;  a  practice  insupport¬ 
able  to  the  Macedonians,  had  they  even  been  conquered, 
much  more  so  when  they  were  victorious;  the  shocking 
cruelty  of  bis  punishments ;  his  murdering  bis  friends  in  the 
midst  of  feasting  and  wine  ;  with  the  folly  of  his  fiction  res¬ 
pecting  his  birth.  What  most  have  been  the  consequence, 
if  his  love  of  wine  had  daily  increased  f  if  his  fierce  axui 
uncontroulable  anger  ?  and,  as  I  mention  not  any  one  circum* 

HISTORY  GF  ROME. 

im 

[Y.R.  435. 

stance  of  which  ttere  h  a  niaabt  among  wt^:ers,  ifo  we  ccm* 
^$e  soifoparageiiiaits  to  qmdifica&ms  of  a 
acawmai^er  ?  hot  then,  as  is  freqaendy  ve:j^M&d  by  sil- 
Best  of  Creeks,  w1k>  are  fonli  of  exidthig  reptitolioB, 
eWi  of  the  ^oltiiaim,  at  the  ei^^ce  the  Amoan  nmne, 
it  was  to  he  tqsprdbendeii  ^  Roman  people  woiddr  not 
have  rei^^bn  to  face  the  sf^^sdour  of  Ales^uoider’s 
name,  wlK>,  ho^ii^ver,  in  my  opinion,  was  not  known  to  them 
even  lay  tmmtxrn  feme;  and  whik,  in  Athens,  a  state  re¬ 
duced  to  u^akness  by  die  Macedonian  arms,  which  at  the 
very  time  saw  the  ruhm  of  Thebes  smoking  in  ite  neigh¬ 
bourhood,  men  had  spirit  cnemgh  to  declaim  with  freedom 
against  hhn,  as  is  numiiest  from  the  copies  of  their  speeches, 
which  have  been  preserved ;  is  it  to  be  supposed  that  out  of 
such  a  number  of  Roman  chiefs,  no  one  would  have  freely 
uttered  his  sentiments.  How  large  soever  the  scale  may  be, 
on  which  our  idea  of  this  man’s  greatness  is  fmned,  still  it 
is  the  greatness  of  an  individual,  constltat^  by  the  suc¬ 
cesses  of  a  Htde  more  than  ten  years ;  and  thorn  who  give  it 
pre-eminence  on  account,  that  the  Roman  people  have  been 
defeated,  dicmgh  it<rt  in  my  entire  war,  yet  in  several  battles, 
whereas  Alexander  was  never  once  unsuccessful  in  fight,  do 
not  consider,  that  they  are  comparing  the  actions  of  one  man, 
and  that  a  young  man,  with  the  course  of  action  of  a  nation, 
which  has  l^en  wagrag  wars,  now  eight  hundred  years.  Can 
we  wemder  then,  if  fortune  has  varied  more  in  such  a  Itmg 
space,  than  in  the  short  term  of  thirteen  years  ?  but  why  not 
compare  the  success  of  one  man,  wkh  that  of  smother  ?  how 
many  Kcmian  commanders  might  I  name,  who  never  were 
beaten  ?  in  the  annals  of  the  magistrates,  and  the  records, 
we  may  run  over  whole  pages  of  consuls,  and  dictators,  with 
whose  braverj’,  and  successes  also,  the  Roman  people  never 
<Mice  had  reason  to  be  dissatisfied.  And,  what  renders  them 
more  deserving  of  admiration  than  Alexander,  or  any  king. 

wo(m  IX. 

B.c.  Sir.] 

25a 

is,  Aat  some  of  Aeae  octed  io  tte  <^ce  of  dictator^^which 
lasted  or  it  mtg^t  be  twenty  ikys ;  none  maeharge 
of  ioQger  dormkm  ikm  ^  coasulship  erf  a  year ;  ilictr  levies 
d>stract«^  by  plebeum  trflbuncs ;  often  late  in  tidtii^  the 
field ;  recalled,  before  die  time,  to  attend  cleclions ; 
the  very  busiest  effotts  trf  the  campaign,  overtaken  by  the 
close  of  their  official  year:  somedmee  by  the  rashness,  some¬ 
times  the  pervemen^s  of  a  colleague,  invedved  in  difficulties 
or  Ios»^ ;  and  finally  succeeding  to  the  unftntmiate  adminis- 
tradmi  of  a  predecessor,  with  an  army  of  raw  or  ill-disci- 
pimed  men.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  kh^,  being  not  only 
free  firom  every  kmd  of  impediment,  but  makers  of  dreum- 
smnees  and  seasons,  controul  2B  thii^  in  sul»ervieiicy  to 
diehr  designs,  themselves  uncontrouled  by  any.  So  that 
Alexander,  tmc<mquered,  would  have  encountered  uncon- 
quered  commmiddhs ;  and  would  have  had  stsdees  of  equal 
consequence  pledged  on  the  issue.  Nay,  the  hazard  had 
been  greater  on  his  side ;  because  the  Macedonimis  would 
have  hadbuttme  Alexander,  who  was  not  only  iialrfe,  but  fond 
of  exposing  himself,  to  casualties  ;  the  Rommis  would  luive 
had  many  equal  to  Alexander,  both  in  renown,  and  m  Ae 
greatness  of  their  exploits  ;  the  life,  or  death,  6f  any  of  whom 
would  have  ^Sected  only  his  own  concmis,  without  any  ma¬ 
terial  consequence  to  the  public. 
XIX.  It  remains  to  compare  die  forces  together,  with  re¬ 
spect  to  their  numbers,  the  different  kinds  of  troops,  and  their 
reiKiurces  for  procuring  auxilimies.  Now,  in  the  general  sur¬ 
veys  of  that  age,  there  were  rated  two  hundred  smd  fifty  thou¬ 
sand  men  :  so  that,  on  every  revolt  of  the  Latine  confede¬ 
rates,  ten  legions  were  enlisted,  almost  entirely  in  the  city.  It 
often  happened  during  those  years,  that  four  or  five  armies 
were  employed  at  a  time,  in  Etruria,  in  Umbria,  the  Gauls 
also  being  at  war,  in  Samniutti,  in  Lucania.  Then  as  to  all 
Latium^  with  the  Sabines,  and  Volscians.  the  iEquans,  and 

254  HISTQBY  ROME.  [Y,R.435. 
^  }  half  etf  Unahria,  Ei^ima,  ^  Pko^a^s, 
^  «d  ta 
may  ^dd,  die  wiNode  eoast^  tte  low^Bea,{Ki8ses« 
sed  \3f  ^  Greeks  frem  Thi^^  ^  Ne^^s  ^d  Cap^ ;  and 
^  Samnites  from  thewe  as  ftri£  ^aAonamlOs^:  lA  tfae^ 
he  would  havefQttudeidip*^»H^^gdi^esfo^R<imjim89C^ 
deprived  of  {K>wer  by  thek  wmM  hmve  larmwed 
the  sea  with  hia  veteran  MPiedmauB^  ^  mme 
tbpx^^rty  tlmusm^  9U^  lam  fho^pmd  J^asM&,  diam 
mostly  Tl^sssdums.  Thki  sm  die  whole  of  his  s^re^gdt. 
Had  he  brought  ^th  him  iPer^ms  md  ladiams,  and  diose 
other  tptkms,.  it  wmdd  be  draggmg  dto  hxmmtm^umbraiice, 
rather  than  a  support.  Add  to  this,  that  die  Romans  being 
at  home,  wtmhl  have  had  recruks  at  h^i:  Alesatider  wa^^g 
war  in  a  foreign  counky,  would  have  found  his  army  worn 
out  with  service,  as  happ^^  afterwmrds  to 
As  to  arn^  dmts  were  a  buckler  and  long  spears :  those  of 
the  Romans,  a  shi^d,  which  covered  the  body  more  eff^:tu« 
ally:,  and  a  javelin,  a  much  more  forcible  weapon  than  the 
sp^,  cither  in  throwmg  or  striking.  The  scddiei^  on  both 
siA^,  were  tmed  to  steady  combat,  and  to  preserve  their 
ranks.  But  the  Msuredonian  phalanx  wm  unapt,  for  motion, 
and  composed  of  similm'  throughout:  the  Roman  line 
less  compact,  consisting  of  sevend  various  |mrts,  was  easily 
divided,  as  occasmn  required,  as  essdy  ccmjoined.  Then, 
what  soldier  is  comparid>le  to  Ae  Rontmi,  m  die  dfrowing  up 
of  works  I  who  betunr  calcc^^ed  to  endure  fatigue  ?  Alexan* 
der,  if  overcome  in  mie  bank,  make  no  other  dlbrt. 
The  Roman,  whom  Caudium,  whom  Cannae,  did  imt  crush, 
could  crush  ?  Ja  truth,  even  should  even^  have 
b^n  favmzralde  to  him  at  first,  he  would  have  often  wished 
for  t^  Belgians,  tibe  Indians,  and  the  e&minate  tribes  of 
Asia,  as  exponents ;  and  wcmld  have  acknowledge,  that  his 
^  wars  had  been  waged  with  women,  as  we  arc  told  was 

BOOH  IX. 

255 

B.C.  31  r.] 
said  fey  king  Eprmis,  afiter receiving  Immortal 
wound^'ln  rcii^km  to  &e  featdm  fcH^gfet  in  AaW  by 
and  wben  ^:^»npared  wiA  m  which  himsdf  had 
been  engaged.  Indei^  when  l^redect,  that,  in  Umj  first  Ptmifc 
war,  a  con^st  was  maMtsmed  by  die  Rom^  widi  the  C^- 
thaginlans,  at  sea^  for  tw&my-hm  y«i^  I  ^  scarcely  sup- 
j^sc  that  the  Hfe  of  Akxai^r  would  have  been  long  enough 
for  Ae  finbhing  <mc  war  with  eidierof  those  nadons.  And 
a»  die  Piudc  ^te  was  utd^d  to  the  Roman,  by  an* 
cki^  tif^ies,  and  as  similar  appre^nmons  might  arm  against 
a  emnmon  foe  dhose  two  natitms,  the  most  potent  of  the  time, 
he  might  have  been  ovawhclmed  in  a  Punk,  and  a  Roman 
war,^  once.  The  Romans  have  had  experience  of  the 
belted  jmiwess  of  the  Macedonians  in  arms,  not  indeed 
when  they  were  led  1^  Alexander,  or  when  their  power  was 
at  the  height,  but  in  tte  wars  against  Antiochus,  Philip,  and 
Pen^us  ;  and  so  far  were  they  from  sustaining  any  losses, 
that  they  incurred  not  even  danger.  Let  not  the  truth  give 
offence  to  smy,  nor  our  civil  wars  be  brought  into  mention ; 
never  were  we  wor^d  by  an  enemy’s  cavalry,  never  by  their 
in£|nwy,  never  tn  open  fight,  never  <m  equsd  groimd,  mW^ 
less  wben  the  ground  was  favourable.  Our  soldiers,  hoivy 
l^en  with  arms,  may  reasonably  fear  a  body  of  cavalry,  dr 
arrows  ;  defiles  of  difficult  passage,  and  places  impassable  to 
convoys.  But  they  have  defeated,  and  will  defeat  a  thousand 
armies,  more  farmidable  than  those  of  Alexander,  and  the 
Macedonians,  provided  that  the  same  love  of  peace,  and  zed 
to  p«5mote  domoitic  batimony,  which  at  present  subsist  among 
us,  shall  continue  to,  prevail. 
XX.  Marcus  Fc^lius  Flaccinamr  and  Lucius  Plautius 
Venno  were  the  next  raised  to  the  consulship.  In 
*  Y  R  4tS6 
this  year  ambassadors  came  from  m<^t  of  the  states  g  ^  3|g 
of  the  Samnites  to  pmeure  a  renewal  of  the  treaty  j 
aad^  having  moved  the  compassiem  of  the  senate,  by  the  ho? 

2S6 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  Mf. 

mility  with  whidi  they  prostr^d  Aemselv^s  befia^e  tftetn, 
were  refetred  to  the  people,  with  whom  they  foood  tiot  their 
ptky€T»  ^  efficacious.  Their  petidon,  Aerefbre,  with  regsa^ 
to  die  treaty,  was  injected  ;  but,  after  a  supplication  of  seve¬ 
ral  days,  they  obtained  a  truce  for  two  years.  The  Tcanesms 
likewise,  and  Cant^lans  of  Apulia,  worn  out  by  the  devasta- 
ticMJs  of  tiheir  country,  surrendered  themselves  to  the  ccmsul, 
Lucius  Ptautius,  and  gave  hc^lages.  Thtis  year  prasfccts  first 
began  to  be  created  for  Capua,  and  a  code  of  laws  was  given 
to  that  nation,  by  Lucius  Furius  the  praetor  ;  both  in  com- 
pdiance  with  their  own  request,  as  a  remedy  for  die  disorder 
of  their  affairs,  occasioned  by  intestine  dissenslcms.  At  Rome, 
two  additional  tribes  were  constituted,  the  Ufentine  and  Fa- 
lerine.  On  the  affairs  of  Apulia  falling  into  decline,  the 
Teatians  of  that  country  came  to  the  new  consuls, 
B  C  315  Junius  Bubulcus,  and  Quintus  J&mtltus  Bar- 
bula,  suing  for  an  alliance  ;  and  engaging,  that  peace 
should  be  observed  towards  the  Romans  throng  every  part  of 
Apulia.  By  pledging  themselves  boldly  for  this,  they  obtained 
the  grant  of  an  alliance,  not  however  on  terms  of  equality,  but  of 
dieir  submitting  to  the  dominion  of  the  Roman  people.  Apulia 
being  entirely  reduced,  (for  Junius  had  also  gained  possession 
of  Forentum,  a  town  of  great  strength,)  the  consuls  advanced 
into  Lucania ;  there  Nerulutn  was  surprised  and  stormed  by 
the  consul  iEmilius.  When  fame  had  spread  abroad  among 
the  allies,  how  firmly  the  affairs  of  Capua  were  settled  by  the 
introduction  of  the  Roman  institutions,  the  Antians,  imitating 
the  example,  presented  a  complaint  of  their  being  without 
laws,  and  without  magistrates  ;  on  which  the  patrons  of  the 
colony  itself  were  appointed  by  the  senate  to  form  a  body  of 
laws  for  it.  Thus  not  only  the  arms,  but  the  laws,  of  Rome, 
widely  extended  their  sway, 
XXI.  The  consuls,  Caius  Junius  Bubulcus,  and  Quintus 
iEmilius  Barbula,  at  the  conclusion  of  the  year,  defivered 

BOOK  IX 

257 

BX,  314.] 
over  kgicu^,  not  to  the  consuls  elected  by  dien^lves, 
who  were  Spurius  Neutius,  and  Marcus  PopUItus, 
Init  to  a  dk^tcu*,  Lucius  Emilias.  He,  wiA  Lu-  g'^ 
cius  Fidvius,  filter  of  the  horse,  laying  siege  to  * 
Satietda^  gave  occasion  to  the  Samnites  of  revivkig  hostiU* 
ties,  mid  this  produced  a  two-fold  sdarm  to  the  Roman  ara|y. 
Qn  one  side,  the  Samnites  having  cedketed  a  numerous  force 
with  iment  to  relieve  their  allies  from  the  siege,  pitched  their 
camp  at  a  small  distance  from  that  of  the  Romans :  on  die 
odier  side,  the  Simticulans,  opening  suddenly  their  gates,  ran 
up  with  violent  tumult  to  their  posts.  Afterwards,  each 
party,  relying  on  support  from  the  other,  more  than  on  its 
own  strength,  formed  a  regular  attack,  and  pressed  on  die 
Romans.  The  dictator,  on  his  part,  though  obliged  to  op¬ 
pose  two  enepeues  at  emee,  yet  had  his  line  secure  on  both 
sides  ;  for  he  chose  a  position  in  which  he  could  not  easily 
be  surrounded,  and  also  formed  two  different  fronts.  How* 
ever,  he  directed  his  first  efforts  against  those  wlm  had  sal¬ 
lied  &om  the  town,  and,  without  meeting  much  reaistmice^ 
drove  them  back  within  the  walls.  He  then  turned  his  whole 
force  against  the  Samnites  :  there  he  found  greater  difficulty. 
Bat  the  victory,  though  long  delayed,  was  neither  doubtful 
nor  alloyed  by  losses.  The  Samnites,  being  forced  to  fly 
into  their  camp,  extinguished  their  fires  at  night,  and  march¬ 
ed  away  in  silence ;  and  renouncing  all  hopes  of  relieving 
Saticula,  sat  themselves  down  before  Plistia,  which  was  in 
alliance  with  the  Romans,  that  they  miglM^,  if  possible,  retort 
equ^  vexation  on  their  ^emy.  ^ 
XXII.  The  year  coming  to  a  co^tdudbn,  die  war  wm 
thenceforward  conducted  by  a  dictator,  fhunti:^ 
^  Y  ]R  4.30 
F^ius.  The  new  consuls,  Lucius  fujsmm  B  C  313* 
smr  and  Quintus  PuUilius  Philo,  both  a  ftiurth  > 
time,  as  the  foimer  had  ckme,  remained  at  Rmne.  Fiddus 
came  with  a  remfiircement  to  Saticula,  to  receive  die  cma* 
VOL.  II. - 2  L 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

2id 

[Y4l.  4a0- 

of  the  army  from  Emilios*  The  Samtiites  had  oot 
ccmtinued  before  Htstia  ^  but,  having  sent  for  a  new  safety 
of  men  from  home^  and,  relying  on  their  numl^m,  had 
camped  in  the  same  sp<^  as  before ;  and,  by  pmvtddng  the 
Roatnms  to  battle,  endeavoured  to  divert  them  from  the  sie^. 
T1^  dictator,  so  much  the  more  intently,  pushed  forward  his 
c^mtions  against  the  fortifications  of  the  enemy  ;  consider* 
ing  the  mking  of  the  city  the  only  object  of  the  war,  and 
showing  an  inddference  with  respect  to  the  Samnites,  except 
th^  he  placed  guards  in  proper  places,  to  prevent  any  attempt 
cmhtseamp.  This  encouraged  the  Samnites,  w)  that  they 
rode  up  to  the  rampart,  and  allowed  him  no  quiet.  These 
TOW  coming  up  close  to  the  gates  of  the  camp,  Quintus  Au- 
lius  Cerretanus,  master  of  the  horse,  without  consuldng  the 
dictator,  sallied  out  furiously  at  the  head  of  aligthe  troops  of 
cavalry,  and  drove  them  back.  In  this  desultory  kmd  of 
fight,  fortune  exerted  her  power  in  such  a  manner,  as  to  oc¬ 
casion  an  extraordinary  loss  on  both  sides,  and  the  remarka¬ 
ble  demhs  of  the  commanders  themselves.  First,  the  general 
of  die  Samnites,  filled  with  indignadrm  at  being  repulsed, 
and  compelled  to  fly  from  a  place  to  which  he  had  advanced 
widi  such  confidence,  prevailed  on  his  hmrsemen,  entrea- 
das  and  exhortatmns,  te  renew  the  battle.  As  he  was  easily 
adioag  the  horsemen,  while  he  urged  on  die 
S|^,  Roman  ma^r  of  duriiorse  galioj^d  up  agatt^  him 
in  sucha  farioTO^^eer,  that,  with  one  stroke  of  bis  sp^,  he 
tumUed  him  lifeless  from  his  horse.  The  multitude,  how¬ 
ever,  were  not,  as  h  ^nerally  the  case,  dismayed  the  fall 
o{  their  leader,  .but  ^iher  roused  to  fury.  AB  who  were 
within  reach, their  weapons  at  Atdius,  who  incautious¬ 
ly  pushed  forward  s^memg  the  enemy’s  ;  but  the  chief 
share  of  die  borour  of  revenging  the  death  of  the  Samnitc 
general  was  reserved  for  his  brother,  who,  urged  by  rage 
ziid  grief,  dragged  <kr«m  the  victorious  master  of  the  horse 

moK  IX. 

25f 

B«€.  SIS.] 

* 
itom  Im  ^hsw  him.  As  he  fcB  in  ^  midst  of 
tcDopS)  the  Simmkes  were  also  tiear  keepmg  pmwession 
his  hoAy  t  Romans  instat^y  dismounting,  the 
Samni^s  were  to  do  the  same ;  and  tiius  were  lines 
formed  suddenly;  and  a  battle  begwoi  on  foot,  rodnd  foe  bo¬ 
dies  of  the  generals,  in  whfob  the  fi§mmRB  hwi  manffestiy  the 
advantage;  and,  recovering  the  body  of  Aulms,  carried  it 
back  in  triumph  to  foe  camp,  with  hearts  filled  with  a  ntix^ 
turc  of  joy  and  grief.  The  Samnites  having  lost  their  com¬ 
mander,  and  made  a  tri^  of  their  strength  in  this  contest 
between  the  cavsdry,  kft  Saticula,  which  they  despaired  of 
relieving,  and  returned  to  the  siege  of  PHstia  :  within  a  few 
ckys  after  which,  the  Romans  got  possession  of  Saticula  by 
ci^tulaticm,  and  foe  Samnites  of  PHstia  by  force. 
XXIII,  The  seat  of  the  war  was  then  changed.  ITie  le¬ 
gions  were  led  away  from  Samnium  and  Apulia  to  Sora. 
This  city  had  revolted  to  the  Samnites,  and  put  to  death  the 
Roman  colonism.  The  Roman  army  having  arrived  here 
first,  by  forced  marches,  with  foe  purpose  of  revenging  the 
router  of  their  countrymen,  and  recovering  possession  of 
foe  cx>lotiy,  and  the  scouts  who  were  scattered  about  the  roads 
blitzing  intelligence,  one  after  another,  that  the  Samnites 
were  followed  at  no  great  distance,  they  marched  to  meet  foe 
enemy,  and  at  Lautulse  fought  them  with  doubtful  succi&ss. 
Neither  loss  nor  flight  on  either  side,  but  the  night,  si^rat- 
ed  the  combatants,  uncertain  whether  they  were  victorious  or 
defeated.  I  find  in  some  historians,  that  the  Romans  were 
worsted  in  this  battle,  and  that  here  Quintus  Aulius,  the 
master  of  the  horse,  fell.  Caius  Fabius,  substituted  master 
of  the  horse  in  the  room  of  Quintus  Aulius,  came  hither  with 
a  new  army  from  Rome  ;  and  having,  by  messengers  whom 
he  sent  forward,  consulted  foe  dictator,  where  he  should  halt, 
at  what  lime,  and  on  what  side,  he  should  fall  upon  the 
my,  and,  being  so&ciently  apprized  of  his  designs  in  every 

060 

HISTORir  OF  «OME. 

[y,R.  4S9. 
* 
he  fesled  m  a  pkce  where  he  waa  ie^  fwm 
Hie  dic^tor,  aft^r  having  kept  bis  men  wityn 
the  ranq^ni:  for  several  days  after  the  ^gagement,  like  one 
bei^eged,  rather  than  a  besieger,  suddenly  disfdayed  die  idg- 
md  for  battle ;  and,  jud^png  it  die  moie  efficacious  method 
of  izrfiaming  the  courag#  of  brave  men,  to  let  none  have  any 
rcxim  for  hope  but  in  himself,  he  kept  secret  from  the  nroops 
the  arrival  of  the  master  of  die  horse,  and  the  new  army ; 
and,  as  if  there  were  no  safety  but  in  forcing  their  way 
thence,  he  said,  “  Soldters,  caught  as  we  are  in  a  confined 
situalitm,  we  have  no  passage  through  which  we  can  cictri- 
ca^B  ourselves,  unless  we  open  one  by  a  victory.  Our  post 
is  suffictemly  secured  by  works  ;  but,  at  the  same  time,  un¬ 
tenable  through  scarcity  of  necessaries :  for  all  the  country 
round,  from  which  provisions  could  be  supplied,  has  revolt* 
ed ;  and,  besides,  even  were  the  inhabitant  disposed  to  aid 
us,  the  nature  of  die  ground  is  unfavourable.  I  will  not, 
therefore,  mislead  you,  by  leaving  a  camp  here,  into  which 
ye  may  retreat,  as  on  a  former  day,  without  completing  the 
victory.  Works  ought  to  be  secured  by  arms,  not  arms  by 
works.  Let  those  keep  a  camp,  and  repair  to  it,  whose  inte¬ 
rest  it  is  to  protract  the  war ;  but  let  us  cut  off  from  ourselves 
every  other  prospect  but  that  of  conquering.  Advance  the 
standards  against  the  enemy ;  as  soon  as  the  troops  shall 
have  marched  beytmd  the  rampart,  let  those  who  Imve  it  in 
orders,  bum  the  camp.  Your  losses,  soldiei^  shall  be  com¬ 
pensated  with  the  spoil  of  all  the  nations  round  who  have 
revolted-*”  The  soldiers  advanced  against  enemy  with 
sjuiits  inflamed  by  the  dictator’s  dkcourse,  wMch  seemed 
to  indicate  an  extreme  nec^sity  ;  and,  at  the  same  time,  the 
very  sight  of  the  camp  burning  behind  them,  though  the 
nearest  pm  mdy  was  set  on  fire,  (for  so  the  dictator  had  or- 
dered,)  was  no  smaQ  witement :  rushing  on,  th^efore,  like 
madmen,  they  disoidered  the  enemy’s  battalicms  at  the  very 

BOOK  nL 

mt 

ome^  i  the  o£  he  mr  at  a 
^la&ce  tibe  to  ^  the  omip,  wUdb  vm  to  signal 
on,  mtoa  s«^a^»^sUe  a^uDk  tob  riir.  The 
thus  s^i^ailed  m  evei^  fled  4^lctmt  ways*  A  nanism- 
her,  who  had  gattoed  ito  a  *hodf  tom^  flsar^  yet  from 
conlhtoi^  incapiMe  of  acth^^  were  a^eroi^ded  and  ct^  to 
pietes.  'The  enemy’s  camp  w»i  takm  smd  fdundered  ;  md 
to  soMkrs,  being  laden  with  to  spod,  to  dictator  led  tom 
back  to  to  Roman  camp,  ht^dy  rejto^  at  to  success,  but 
stiHmore  at  findkig,  c<mtraiy  to toh^expectadon,  eiTeryd^i^ 
tore  safe,  eaccf^  a  simdl  part  oriy,  whidi  was  injmed  or 
destroyed  by  to  fire.  ^ 
XXIV".  They  then  mmched  bade  to  Skwa.;  md  to  imr 
omisids,  Marcus  PceteKus  and  Cams  Sulpidus, 
receiving  the  mrmy  from  to  dkta^  Fd^ins, 
discharged  a  great  {Kirt  of  to  veteran  soldiers, 
having  brought  wiA  them  new  cohorts  to  snf^y  tohr 
place*  Now  while,  on  account  of  the  dfficuldes  presemed 
by  to  situation  of  to  city,  no  nmde  of  attack  could  he  de^ 
vked^  whkh  promised  any  certainty  of  success,  and  to  tak¬ 
ing  of  it  must  either  be  deme  at  to  expense  of  a  great  deal 
of  time,  or  at  a  desperate  risk  ;  a  townsman  deserting,  came 
out  of  to  tbvm  privately  by  night,  and  when  he  had  got  as 
hr  as  to  Roman  watches,  desired  to  be  ccmducted  ii^tandy 
to  to  consub  :  which  being  complied  with,  he  made  them 
m  offer  of  delivering  the  place  into  their  hands.  From  his 
answers  to  their  que^ons,  respecting  the  means  by  which  he 
m^nflkd  to  accmnplish  his  design,  it  appeared  to  be  not  ill 
formed  |  and  he  peisuaded  them  to  remove  to  Roman  camp, 
which  was  almost  dose  to  the  walk,  to  to  distance  of  six 
miles, ^kgit^,  ^at  this  would  render  to  guards  by  day,  ami 
die  watches  by  night,  die  less  vigilant.  He  then  desired  that 
some  cohorts  should  post  themselves  the  following  night  in 
the  woody  places  under  the  town,  and  took  with  himself  ten 
chosen  soldiers,  through  steep  and  almost  impassable  ways^ 

m  ^  HisTcw  fm  muE.  ixm.  mi 
m  tbe  nm^  <€  mm* 
Th^  jme  9mm  m  tmdom^  «i  to  all 
tallie  seetm^  vi  tbaflac^  tfavi%  Smsmm 
mA  tbm.a^eapi^  narrow  {^^k»dt^  nf^imm^ 
town  Ip  clte4d^^  From  4hi8i.asc^  said  he, 
wrmed  ssf^  wi^dd  Icc^p  tsS  my  mukimde  whmm&4 
Nmr  yc^  amtmm  md^  wlm  is  mmre^  Romsmn^ 
Am^veUjammgAm  Bmmm*  Tk^  is  m  ymm 
things,  nmgo^^€¥my 
inject  ta  {M^ple,  when  t^me  alarmed.  1  will  immedia^r 
fill  every  place  w^  terrqw  *  he  yt  adert^  in  defining  ^e  ct« 
tadel.^’  He  ^heo  raoidowo  m  haste,  crying  ak^mi,  To  atins, 
citizens,  we  are  unc^oe^  the  citadel  is  taken  by  the  .enemy  ^ 
run,  defend  it«’’  This  he  repeated,  m  be.  pmsed  the  doom 
of  the  principal  me%  the  saa^  to  all  whcmi  he  met,  and  aliKt 
to  those  who  ran  mtt,  in  a  frif^t,  mto  Ae  The  ahum, 
communiciUed  first  by  ^iscr  was  soon  f^n*ead  by  numtors 
thrmigh  aU  the  city.  The  laap^amtos,  dismayed  cat  h^rii^ 
from  scou^  that  the  ciudd  was  full  of  mum  and  atmed  mim, 
wbo^  number  tlmy  multiplied,  laid  mide  ail  hc^s  of  recov* 
ering  it.  Flight  began  on  every  side,  and  the  townsmen,  Wf 
asleep,  and  b>t  the  most  part  unm-med,  tuoke  c^n  die  gatos, 
through  one  of  which  the  body  of  Ronami  tooops,  roused  by 
the  noise,  burst  in,  and  slew  the  terrified  inbd>itonts  w^  at¬ 
tempted  to  skirmish  in  tl^  street*  Soia  was  now  taken, 
when,  at  the  first  light,  the  consuls  arrived,  and  acceded  tb£ 
surrender  of  those,  whom  fortune  had  feft  lemainii^,  afi^ 
the  flight  mid  slaughter  of  die  night.  Of  these,  timy  cemveyed 
in  chains  to  Rome  two  hundred  and  twenty-five,  whom  aU 
men  agreed  in.pointijig  out  as  the  authors,  bodi  of  the  revolt, 
and  also  of  the  horrid  massacre  of  t^  colonists.  The  ret^ 
were  left  in  safety  at  Sora,  where  they  plac^  a  garrison.  All 

IX. 

MM.  §12.] 
dum  who  4a  Um&ewert  widi  rt^  in 
ikt  Faram^  wBd  bei^i^d,  to  the  great  joy  of  the  ctmmom^ 
wh(^  tntemtk  IngUy  coiK:emed^  tNit 
^nt  to  vmn&m  p}meB  m€cd<»iits,  shoidd  be  m  safety. 
XX¥.  The  Cf^Qinils  leaving  Sora,  tui^d  their  opera&nss 
agiusst  the  iai»ls  mid  cittes  of  the  An^mani  I  id}, 
had  been  set  in  oommotioii  by  the  comk^  of  the  Samnitc», 
when  the  batde  iVas  fought  at  Lautube :  ^>impirai»es  lii^ 
wise  had  been  formed  in  several  parts  of  Campania ;  nor  was 
Capua  hself  clear  of  the  charge :  nay,  the  bi^iness  spread 
CVOT  to  Rome,  and  occasioned  inquiries  to  be  instituted  re- 
iqp^tng  some  of  the  principal  men  there.  However,  the 
Ausoniati  nation  fell  mto  the  Roman  power,  in  the  san^ 
mmiaer  as  Sora,  by  their  cities  being  betrajrcd :  theae  wens 
Ausona,  mid  Vescia.  Certain  young  men  of  the 
principal  familiea,  twelve  an  number,  having  conspired  to  be- 
nray  thchr  respective  cities,  came  to  die  ctmsuls,  md  infonned 
li^m,  that  their  counwymen,  who  had,  for  a  long  time  be¬ 
fore,  earnestly  wished  £mr  the  cxuning  of  the  Samnites,  on 
^flring  of  tk€  ba^s  at  Lautuke,  had  looked  on  the  Romans 
as  defeated,  and  fami  assisted  the  Smnnites  with  supplies  of 
men  and  am^  ;  l^t  that,  riiu:e  the  Samnites  had  kxim  beaten 
out  of  the  countiy,  diey  were  wavering  betweoi  peace  and 
wm*,  not  shutting  their  gates  agaimt  die  Rotnam,  lest  they 
should  thereby  invite  im  attack  ;  yet  determined  to  sh^ 
if  may  troops  slandd  apprc^ch,  and  4bat,  while  their  minds 
were  in  that  fiucUiadng  state,  they  might  easily  be  overpow- 
^ed  by  surprise.  By  diese  men^s  advice  the  camp  was 
moved  nearer ;  ^:ul  soldiers  were  saat,  at  the  ^une  tlme^  to 
each  of  the  three  towns  ;  smne  armed,  who^were  to  lie  c<hi- 
ceabd  in  places  near  the  widls  ;  ethers,  m  the  garb  of  peace, 
with  swords  hidden  uadUr  their  ck^hes,  who,  on  the  o;^^ 
of  the  gates  at  the  appremch  of  day,  were  to  enter  ii^o  die 
cities.  These  lat^  began  with  killing  the  guards,  and^  at  tly  ^ 

HISTORY  or  mOME. 

C¥Jt4«. 
mad^  the  ^gnM  ^  die  men  in  arms,  to  up 
hmn  the  audniscades.  .  die  gsUes  were  se^^,  and 
diiee  towns  taken  in  die  same  hour  and  die  same  device. 
^  the  gei^rds  were  tiG#|»es«t  when  the  i^iu:ks  were 
made,  there  were  ms  bounds  to  ihe  cmtmge  which  ensued; 
and  the  nation  t^  Ausoniatis,  wl^n  there  w^  scmcely 
nay  clear  proof  of  die  charge  im  having  revolted,  wi» 
utterly  desUoyed,  as  if  it  had  suppcated  a  conte^  dwoi^h  a 
deadly  war. 
XXVI.  SNifing  diis  year,  Luceria  fell  into  die  hsmds  of 
the  Samnltes,  the  Riman  garrison  being  betrayed  to  them. 
The  actors  in  this  treachery  did  not  long  go  unpunished :  the 
Roman  army  was  not  far  off,  by  whom  d^  city,  which  lay  in 
a  plain,  was  taken  at  the  first  onset.  The  Lucerians  and 
Samnites  were  to  a  man  put  to  d^  sword ;  and  to  such  a 
length  was  resentment  carried,  that  Bt  Rome,  on  die  senate 
being  consulted  about  sending  a  colony  to  Luceria,  many 
voted  for  the  demcditicm  of  it.  Their  hatred  was  cff  the  bit¬ 
terest  kind,  against  a  people  whom  diey  had  been  obliged 
twice  to  subdue  by  arms ;  the  great  distonce,  also,  made  them 
averse  from  sending  their  citizens  as  colonists  atmmg  nations 
so  ill-affected  towards  them.  However  the  resolution  was 
carried,  that  such  should  be  sent ;  and  accordingly  two  thou¬ 
sand  five  hundred  were  transported  diither.  This  year,  dis¬ 
affection  to  the  Ramans  becoming  general,  conspiracies  were 
fonned  among  the  leading  men  at  Capua,  m  well  m  at  other 
places ;  which  being  reported  to  the  sedate,  dtey  deemed  it 
an  affair  by  no  mesms  to  be  neglected.  They  decro^  that 
inquiries  riiould  be  made,  and  resolved  that  a  dkla^  slumld 
be  appointed  to  enforce  the^  inquiries.  Cains  Mssnlus  was 
accordm^  nominated;  and  he  appointed  Marcus  Foslius 
master  of  die  horse.  People’s  dread  of  dias  office  was  very 
great,  insomuch  that  the  Calavii,  Ovius,  wid  Novius,  who 
lyere  the  beads  of  the  conspiracy,  either  through  fear  of  the 

BOOK  IX. 

26# 

* 
du^or’d  die  am^ciom&em  of  goiky  pl*fci4<m8  to 
diedmrg^  agidnst  them  bdng  hAi  ki  him^  ck^sej 
as  apfKNU^^d  doobt^  to  tml  hj  M  vdkm^^y 
death.  As  die  stidbject  trf  the  io^iiy  Cmfimiia  waaths^ 
recced,  the  proc^^teg^irere  then  i£b^ted  towards  Mom^i 
by  c^struiog  the  order  of  the  senate  to  Tmve  meant,  ths^ 
eaquiiy  should  be  made,  not  specially  wte  at  Capua,  hm 
generally,  who  at  miy  j^aoe  had  formed  xd^als  ccmspirS" 
cies ;  for  diat  cabals,  for  the  attainmg  of  honours,  were 
trary  ^  the  edtc^  of  the  state.  Tte  enquiry  was  extended 
to  a  greater  latitude,  with  re^ct  both  to  the  matter,  and  to 
tte  kind  of  persons  ccmcemed.  The  dictator  scrupled  not  to 
avow,  diat  his  |K3wcr  of  research  was  uidimited:  in  ccmse- 
quence,  some  of  the  nobUity'^rere  i<^led  to  account;  and 
tho^h  Aey  ap|died  to  the  tribunes  for  protecticm,  no  one 
intej^K^ed  in  dieir  behalf,  .or  to  p^vent  the  charges  from 
being  received.  On  diis  the  nobles,  n<^  those  only  against 
wlmm  the  char^  waa  levelled,  but  the  whole  body,  jointly 
insis^d  dbat  such  an  in^^jHitatlcai^layaiot  against  themselves, 
or  thdir  order,  to  whom  the  way  to  honours  lay  open  if  not 
obstructed  by  hraud,  but  against  the  ntw  men :  so  that  even 
the  dictator  and  master  of  the  hdrse,  with  respect  to  that 
question,  would,  api^mr  more  poperly  as  culprits  than  in¬ 
quisitors  ;  and  this  they  should  know  as  soon  as  they  went 
out  of  office.  This  so  deeply  affected  Msenius,  who  was 
more  solicitous  about  his  character  than  his  office,  that  he 
advanced  into  the  assembly  and  sjKike  to  this  effect:  “  Ro- 
mam,  of  my  past  life  ye  are  all  witnesses ;  Bad  this  honoura¬ 
ble  office,  which  ye  conferred  on  me,  is,  in  i^elf,  a  testimony 
of  my  innocence.  For  the  dictator,  proper  to  be  chosen  for 
holding  these  enquiries,  was  not,  as  on  many  other  occasions, 
where  the  exigencies  of  the  state  so  required,  the  man  who 
was  most  renowned  in  war ;  but  him  whose  course  of  life 
was  most  remote  from  such  cabals.  But  certain  of  the  no- 
VOL.  II. — 2  M 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

m 

[y.R.  440. 

1^1?  wlmt  rea^  it  ia  mote  proper  that  ye  ahmild 
,  ftat  f ,  ^  a  ma^strate,  should,  without  proof, 
faare  laboured  to  stifle  entirefy  the  equities  ;  and  tfien,  fad- 
i«g  dieir  strength  unequid  to  it,  mher  than  atard  a^di, 
fav€  fled  for  refuge  to  the  strcmg  htfld  of  ihetr  adveiwies, 
an  aj^al,  and  Ihc  support  of  tlfe^rifattcs  j  and,  on  heit^ 
there  also  repulsed,  (m  fufly  were  they  persuaded,  that  every 
other  measure  was  saforthan  the  attempt  to  clear  themselves,) 
have  made  an  attack  upon  us ;  and,  though  in  private  clia- 
tacters,  have  not  been  restrained  by  a»  sense  of  decency  from 
hmrituting  a  criminal  process  a^nst  a  dictator.  Now,  diat 
gods  and  men  may  perceive  that  they,  to  avoid  a  scrutiny  as 
to  their  own  conduct,  attempt  even  impossibiliues  ;  and  dsat 
I  willingly  met  the  charge,  and  face  the  accusations  of  my 
enemies,  I  divest  myself  of  the  dictatorship.  And,  consuls, 
I  beseech  you,  that,  if  this  business  is  put  into  your  h^ds 
by  the  senate,  ye  will  make  me  and  Marcus  Foslius  die  first 
objects  of  your  examinations ;  it  shaB  be  mamfestod,  Aat 
we  owe  our  safety  from  such  impv^sttions  to  our  own  inno¬ 
cence,  not'to  the  dignity  of  office.”  He  then  sdidicated  the 
dictatorship,  as  did  Marcus  Fosiius,  immediately  after,  his 
office  of  master  of  the  horse  ;  and  being  the  first  brought  to 
trial  before  the  consuls,  for  to  them  the  senate  had  committed 
the  bi^iness,  they  were  most  honourably  acquitted  of  all  the 
charges  brought  by  the  nobles.  Even  Publilius  Pbifo,  who 
had  so  often  been  invested  with  the  highest  honours,  and  had 
performed  so  many  eminent  services,  both  at  home  and 
abroad,  being  disagreeable  to  the  nobility,  wasbremght  to 
trial,  and  acquitted.  Nor  did  the  inquiry  continue  respecui- 
ble  twi  account  of  the  illustrious  names  of  the  accused,  longer 
than  while  it  was  new,  which  is  usually  the  case  ^  it  dies  be¬ 
gan  to  descend  to  persons  of  inferior  rank ;  and  at  length 
was  suppressed,  by  means  of  tho^  factions  and  cabals, 
against  which  it  had  been  instituted* 

BOOK  IX. 

26jr 

BX.  312,] 
XXVIL  The  »:oouiit$  received  of  ttese  mat^^  more 
especially  the  bo|ie  of  a  revok  io  Camp^ia,  fmr  wlucb  a 
cc^spira^^  had  bera  formedt  recaUed  the  Saomkes  from  dieir 
intended  march  towards  Apulia,  back  to  Caudium  ;  where, 
bdng  near,  they  might,  if  any  commotion  should  open  them 
an  opportunity,  ^atch  C|^pua  out  of  the  l;^ds  of  the  Ro- 
ntans.  To  the  same  place  the  consuls  repaired  with  a  power¬ 
ful  army.  They  both  held  back  for  some  time,  on  the  differ¬ 
ent  sides  of  the  defiles,  the  road  being  dangerous  to  either 
party.  Then  the  Samnites,  making  a  short  circuit  through 
an  open  tract,  marched  down  their  troops  into  level  ground 
in  die  Campanian  plains,  and  there  the  hostile  camps  first 
came  within  view  of  each  other.  Both  armies  then  made 
trial  of  their  strength  in  slight  skirmishes,  more  frequently 
between  the  horse  than  the  Toot ;  and  the  Romans  were  no 
way  displeased  either  at  the  issue  of  these,  or  at  the  protrac¬ 
tion  of  the  war.  The  Samnite  generals,  on  the  contrary, 
were  uneasy  that  their  battalions  should  be  weakened  daily 
by  small  losses,  and  the  general  vigour  abated  by  inaction. 
They  therefore  marched  into  the  held,  disposing  their  caval¬ 
ry  on  both  wings,  with  orders  to  give  more  heedful  attention 
to  the  camp  behind,  than  to  the  battle ;  for  that  the  line  of 
infantry  would  be  able  to  provide  for  their  own  safety.  The 
cmisuls  took  post,  Sulpicius  in  the  right  wing,  Poctelius  in 
the  left.  The  right  wing  was  stretched  out  wider  than  usual ; 
the  Samnites  also  on  that  side  being  formed  in  thin  ranks, 
cither  with  design  of  turning  the  flank  of  the  enemy,  or  to 
avoid  being  themselves  surrounded^  On  the  left,  besides 
that  they  were  formed  in  more  compact  order,  an  addition 
was  made  to  their  strength,  by  a  sudden  act  of  the  consul 
Postelius :  for  the  subsidiary  cohorts,  which  were  usually  re¬ 
served  for  the  exigencies  of  a  tedious  flght,  he  brought  up 
immediately  to  the  front,  and,  in  the  first  on^t,  pushed  the 
enemy  with  the  irholo  of  his  force.  The  Samnite  line  of 

HISTORY  €>F  ROME. 

[YM.  44^ 

im 
mfmiary  giving  way,  their  cavdry  advanced  to  Sttpfn)it  them ; 
aaid,  as  th^  were  charging  in  an  clique  dircctimi  between 
the  two  lines,  idle  Roman  henrse  coming  up*  at  full  speed,  dis¬ 
ordered  their  battalions  and  tanks  of  infantry,  mid  cavalry, 
so 'as  to  oblige  the  whole  line  cm  diat  side  to  give  ground. 
The  left  wing  hml  not  tmly  the  piesence  of  Pstelius  to  ani¬ 
mate  them,  but  that  of  Sulpkius  likewise ;  who,  on  the  shout 
being  first  raised  in  ik^t  quarter,  rode  thither  from  his  own 
divisimi,  which  bad  not  yet  engaged.  When  he  saw  vic¬ 
tory  BO  longer  doubtfuKtbere,  he  returned  to  his  own  post 
with  twelve  hundred  m^,  but  femnd  stairs  on  that  side 
in  a  very  different  posture;  the  Romsms  driven  from  their 
ground,  and  the  victorious  enemy  pressing  on  their  disorder¬ 
ed  battalions.  However,  the  arrival  of  the  consul  effected  a 
speedy  change  in  every  particular ;  for,  on  the  sight  of  their 
leader,  the  spirit  of  the  soldiers  was  revived,  and  die  bravery 
of  the  men,  who  came  with  him,  rendered  them  a  more  pow¬ 
erful  reinforcement  than  even  their  number ;  while  the  news 
of  success  in  the  other  wing,  of  which  they  soon  had  visible 
pi^oof,  tutored  the  vigour  of  the  fight.  From  this  time,  the 
Romans  became  victorious  through  the  whole  extent  id*  the 
line,  and  the  Samnites,  giving  up  the  contest,  were  slain  or 
taken  prisoners,  except  such  as  made  their  escape  to  Male- 
ventum,  the  town  which  is  now  called  Beneventum.  Thirty 
thousand  of  the  Samnites  were  slain  or  taken,  acconliDg  to 
the  accounts  of  historians. 
XXVIII.  The  consuls,  after  this  important  victory,  led 
forward  the  legions  to  lay  siege  to  Bovianum ;  and  there  they 
continued,  during  part  of  the  winter,  until  Caius  Pc&telius 
being  nominated  dictator,  with  Marcus  Fositus  master  of 
^  the  hoi^e,  received  the  command  of  the  army  from 
Y.R441,  ^ 
BC311  consuk,  Lucius  Papirius  Cursor  a  fifth, 
and  Caius  Junius  Bubulcus  a  seepnd  time.  On 
hearing  that  the  citadel  of  Frege  Use  was  taken  by  the  Sam¬ 
nites,  he  left  Bovianum,  and  proceeded  to  that  city,  of  which 

BOOK  IX. 

269 

B.C.  SiUJ 
he  recovered  posseaslofi  without  any  contest,  the  Samnites 
ab^doning  it  in  the  nig^t  t  he  then  |daced  a  strong  garrison 
there,  and  returned  into  Campania,  directing  his  operations 
prineij^y  to  the  recovery  of  Nola.  Within  the  walls  of 
this  place,  the  whc4e  multitude  of  the  Samnites,  and  the  in¬ 
habitants  of  the  country  about  Nola,  shut  themselves  up,  on 
the  approach  of  the  dictator.  Having  taken  a  view  of  the 
situation  of  the  city,  in  order  to  open  the  approach  to  the 
fortifications,  he  set  fire  to  ail  the  buildings  which  stood 
round  the  walls,  which  were  very  numerous;  and,  in  a  short 
time  after,  Nola  ^ken,  either  by  dictator  Poetelius,  or  the 
consul  Caius  Junius,  but  by  which  of  them  is  uncertain. 
Those  who  attribute  to  the  consul  the  honour  of  taking  Nola, 
add,  that  he  also  took  Atina  and  Calatia,  and  that  Poetelius 
was  created  dictator  in  consequence  of  a  pestilence  breaking 
out,  merely  for  the  purpose  of  driving  the  nail.  The  colo¬ 
nies  of  Suessa  and  Pemtiae  were  established  in  this  year. 
Suessa  had  been  the  property  of  the  Auruncians :  the  Vol- 
scians  had  occupied  Pontiae,  an  idand  lying  within  sight  of 
their  shore.  A  decree  of  the  senate  was  also  passed  for  con¬ 
ducting  colonies  to  Interamna  and  Casinum.  But  the  com¬ 
missioners  were  appoiotad,  and  the  colonists,  to 
the  number  of  four  thousand,  sent  by  the  sue-  g 
eeeding  consuls,  Marcus  Valerius  and  Publius 
Decius. 
XXIX.  The  Samnites  were  now  nearly  disabled  from 
•  continuing  the  war;  but,  before  the  Roman  senate  was  freed 
from  all  concern  4>n  that  side,  a  report  arose  of  the  Etrurians 
intending  to  commence  hostilities ;  and  tihere  was  not,  in 
those  times,  any  nation,  excepting  the  Gauls,  whose  arms 
were  more  dreaded,  by  reason  both  of  the  vicinity  of  their 
country,  and  of  the  multitude  of  their  men.  While,  there¬ 
fore,  one  of  the  consuls  proscjcuted  the  remains  of  the  war  m 
Samnium,  Publius  Decius,  who,  being  attacked  by  a  severe 
illness,  remained  at  Rome,  by  direction  of  the  senate,  nomi- 

270  HISTORY  HOME,  (¥^-4^ 
nated  Caius  Jimlus  Bohidcus  dictator.  He^  m  ma^» 
tude  of  the  affair  demaaded^  comfidkd  aH  the  younger  ciu« 
to  enlist,  ami,  with  the  utoaost  diligence,  prepared  all 
requisite  matters.  Yet  he  was  not  so  elated  by  the  power  he 
had  collected,  as  to  think  of  comv^emin^  dfensive  operations, 
but  prudently  dieteimxned  to  remain  quiet,  unless  the  Etru- 
ris^s  should  become  aggressors.  The  plans  of  the  Etrurians 
were  exactly  similar,  with  respect  to  preparing  ffn*,  and 
staining  from,  war:  neither  party  went  beyond  dieir  own 
frontiers.  The  censorship  of  Appius  Claudius  and  Caius 
Plautius,  for  tlus  year,  was  remark^dde ;  but  the  name  of 
Appius  has  been  handed  down  widi  more  celebrity  to  poster 
rity  on  account  of  his  living  made  the  road,  called  after  him, 
Ae  Appian,  and  for  having  conveyed  water  into  the  city. 
These  works  he  performed  alone ;  for  his  colleague,  over¬ 
whelmed  with  shame  by  reason  of  the  infamous  m\d  unwor¬ 
thy  choice  made  of  senators,  had  abdicated  his  office*  Ap- 
pus,  possessing  that  inflexibility  of  temper,  which,  from  the 
eartiest  times,  had  been  the  characteristic  of  his  family,  held 
os  Ae  censorship  by  himself.  By  direction  of  the  same  Ap- 
|Ai8,  the  Potitian  famUy,  in  which  the  office  of  priests  at¬ 
tendant  on  the  great  altar  of  Hereules,  was  hereditary,  in¬ 
structed  some  of  the  public  servants  in  the  rites  of  that 
solemnity,  with  intention  to  delegate  the  same  to  them.  The 
consequence,  as  related,  is  wonderful  to  be  told,  and  suffi¬ 
cient  to  make  people  scrupulov^  of  distuAing  Ae  establi Aed 
modes  of  religious  solemnities-:  for,  though  there  were,  at 
th^  frme,  twelve  branches  of  the  Potitian  family,  sill  grown¬ 
up  persons,  and  not  fewer  than  thirty,  yet  they  were  evei^ 
one,  togeAer  wi A  their  offspring,  cut  off  wiAin  the  year ;  so 
that  Ae  name  of  Ae  Potitii  became  extinct,  while  Ae  censor 
Appius  also  was  pursued  by  the  wrath  of  Ae  gods ;  and,, 
tome  years  after,  deprived  of  sight. 

mooK  IX, 

sri 

KXX«  Hie  omtuU  of  the  succeeding  year  were  Caios  Ju¬ 
nius  Bubidcus,  a  third  ume,  and  Quintus  iEmilius 
^  Y*  T>  y4  J 
Barbul^  a  s^ond.  'In  the  cammencefnent  iheir  g 
office,  they  complained  before  the  peojdc,  that,  by 
the  improper  choice  which  had  betaa  made  of  members  of  the 
senate,  diat  body  had  been  di^praced,  several  having  been 
p^sed  over  who  were  preferable  to  the  persons  chosen  in ; 
and  diey,  declared,  that  they  would  pay  no  regard  to  such 
eleetbn,  mide,  without  distinction  of  right  or  wrwg,  merely 
to  gratify  interest  cu*  humour ;  they  dien  immediately  called 
over  the  list  of  the  ^nate,  in  the  same  order  which  had  taken 
place  before  the  censorship  of  Appius  Claudius  and  Caius 
Phudus.  Two  public  employments,  both  relating  to  mili¬ 
tary  affairs,  came  this  year  into  the  disposal  of  the  people  ; 
erne  being  an  order,  that  sixteen  of  the  tribunes,  for  foia’  le¬ 
gions,  should  be  appointed  by  the  people  ;  whereas,  hitherto, 
they  had  been  generally  bestowed  by  the  dictators  mid  con- 
stds,  and  very  few  of  the  places  were  left  to  be  fiHed  by  verte. 
This  order  was  proposed  by  Lucius  Atilius  and  Caius  Mar¬ 
cias,  plebeian  tribunes.  Another  was,  that  the  pet^le  like¬ 
wise  should  constitute  two  naval  commissioners,  for  the 
equipping  and  refitting  of  the  fieet.  The  pemm  who  intro¬ 
duced  this  order  of  the  people  was  Marcus  Decius,  plebeian 
tribune.  Another  transaction  of  this  year  1  should  pass  over 
as  trifling,  were  it  not  for  the  relation  which  it  bears  to  reli¬ 
gion.  The  flute-players,  taking  offence  because  they  had  been 
prohibited,  by  the  last  censors,  from  holding  their  repasts  in 
the  temple  of  Jupiter,  which  had  been  customary  from  veiy 
early  times,  went  off  in  a  body  to  Ttbur ;  so  that  there  was 
notone  left  in, the  city  to  play  at  the  sacrifices.  This  affair 
gave  uneasiness  to  the  senate,  on  account  of  its  consequences 
to  religion ;  and  they  sent  envoys  to  Tibur  with  instructions, 
to  endeavour  that  these  men  might  be  sent  back  to  Rome. 
The  Tiburtlnes  readily  promised  compliance,  and,  first  call- 

272 

HISTORY  OF  j^ME. 

ing  diem  into  tibe  saiate<^hou^  wv^mly  recomm^ded  totbem 
^  return  tMther;  md,  then,  finding  dial  they  could  Jbe 
prevailed  on,  {nm^bed  an  latifice  nc^  ill  adap^d  to  die  dis- 
posidons  erf  that,  description  erf  peo^e  i  on  a  festii^  day, 
th^  invited  them  separately  to  tfeir  several  honses,  appa¬ 
rently  with  the  intention  of  heightening  the  pleasure  of  dmr 
feasts  withmt^c,and  there  plied  them  with  wine, of  whichsuch 
people  are  always  fond,  until  tl^y  laid  them  asle^.  In  this 
^te  of  insensibility  they  threw  diem  into  wagons,  and  car¬ 
ried  them  away  to  Rome :  nor  did  they  know  miy  thing  of 
the  matter,  until,  the  wagons  having  been  left  in  the 
the  light  surprised  them,  sdll  heavily  sick  from  the  debauch. 
The  people  dicn  crowded  about  them,  and,  on  their  consent¬ 
ing  at  length  to  stay,  privilege  was  granted  them  to  ramble 
about  the  city  in  full  dress,  with  music,  during  three  days  in 
every  year.  .And  that  license,  which  we  see  practised  M 
present,  and  the  right  of  being  fed  in  the  temple,  was  re¬ 
stored  to  those  who  played  at  the  sacrifices.  These  meidents 
occurred  while  the  public  attention  was  deeply  engaged  by 
two  most  important  wars. 
,XXXI.  The  consuls  adjutting  the  provinces  between  them, 
the  Samnites  fell  by  lot  to  Junius,  the  new  war  of  Etruria  to 
jEmilius.  Ja  the  country  of  the  former,  the  Samnites,  find¬ 
ing  themselves  unable  to  take  Gluvia,  a  Roman  garrison,  by 
force,  had  formed  a  blockade,  and  reduced  it,  by  famine,  to 
capitulate:  and^.af^r  torturing  with  stripes,  in  a  shocking 
the  towmmen  who  surrendered,  had  put  them  to 
death.  ^  Enraged  at  this  cruelty,  j^mius  determined  to  post¬ 
pone  overy  thing  else  to  the  attacking  of  Cluvia  j  amd,  on  the 
first  day  that  he  assaulted  the  walk,  took  it  by  storm,  and  slew 
all  who  were  grown  to  man's  estate.  The  victorious  troops 
were  led  from  thence  to  Bovianum  ;  this  was  the  capital  of 
the  Pentrimi  Samnites,  by  far  the  mc^t  ojnilent  of  their  cities, 
and  the  most  powerful  both  in  men  and  arms.  The  soldiers., 

BOOK  IX. 

273 

B.C.  309.] 
stimulated  by  the  ho{>e  of  {duoder,  somi  made  themselves 
of  tiic  fowii ;  where,  their  resentment  being  less  vio¬ 
lent,  there  was  le^  severity  exercised  on  the  enemy  ;  bat  a 
quantity  of  spoil  was  carried  greater  almost  than  had  ever 
been  collected  out  of  all  Samnium,  and  the  whole  was  libe¬ 
rally  bestowed  on  the  assailers.  The  Samnites  now  pa'ceiv- 
ing  that  the  Romans  possessed  such  a  superiority  in  arms, 
that  no  fence  in  the  field,  no  camp,  no  cities,  could  whhstand 
them,  l^nt  their  whole  attention  to  find  out  an  .opportunity  of 
acting  by  stratagem.  They  conceived  that  the  enemy,  pro¬ 
ceeding  with  incautious  eagerness  in  pursuit  of  plunder, 
might,  on  such  occasion,  be  caught  in  a  snare  and  overpow¬ 
ered.  Some  peasants  who  deserted,  and  some  prisemers  who 
were  taken,  (part  of  them  being  purposely  thrown  in  the  way, 
while  otiiers  were  met  by  accident,)  concurred  in  their  re¬ 
port  to  the  consul,  which  at  the  same  time  was  true,  that  a 
vast  quantity  of  cattle  had  been  driven  together  Into^  cer¬ 
tain  defile  of  difficult  access,  and  by  which  he  was  induced 
to  lead  thither  the  legions  lightly  accoutered,  in  order  to 
seize  the  prey.  Here,  a  very  numerous  army  of  the  enemy 
had  jmstedL  themselves,  secretly,  at  all  the  passes ;  and,  as 
soon  as  they  saw  that  the  Romans  had  got  into  the  defile, 
they  rose  up  suddenly,  with  great  clamour  and  tumult,  and 
attacked  them  unawares.  At  first,  an  event  so  unexpected, 
caused  some  confusion,  while  they  were  taking  their  arms, 
and  throwing  the  baggage  into  the  centre  ;  but,  as  fast  as 
each  had  freed  himself  from  his  burden,  and  fitted  himself 
with  arms,  they  assembled  about  the  standards,  from  every 
side  ;  and  all,  from  the  long  course  of  their  service,  know¬ 
ing  their  particular  ranks,  they  formed  the  line  without  any 
directions.  The  consul  riding  up  to  the  place  where  the  fight 
was  most  warm,  leaped  fit>m  his  horse,  and  called  ‘‘  Jupiter, 
Mars,  and  the  other  gods  to  witness,  that  he  had  come  into 
thau  place,  not  in  pursuit  of  any  glory  to  himself,  but  of  booty 
vox..  II. — 2  N 

274 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

,[Y.R,443. 

soldim ;  nor  €»>ald  my  other  ftuk  be  charged  cm  Wm, 
tiian  too  great  a  ftoUcHode  to  eqrich  them  at  the  expose  of 
the  enemy.  From  the  impending  disgrace  nothing  could  ex- 
tric^  him  but  the  valour  o£  the  troops  :  let  them  only  join 
imanimousiy  in  a  vigorous  attack  against  a  foe,  wlmm  they 
had  already  vanquished  in  the  held,  beaten  out  of  their  camps, 
and  stripped  of  their  towns,  and  who  were  now  trying  their 
last  i^source,  in  an  attempt  to  over-reach  them,  by  the  con¬ 
trivance  a£  an.  ambuscade,  placing  their  reliance  on  the  ground 
they  occupied,  not  on  their  arms.  But  what  ground^  what 
station,  was  now  unsurmountable  to  Roman  valour?”  The 
citadel  of  Fregellae,  and  that  of  Sora,  were  called  to  their  re¬ 
membrance,  with  many  other  places  where  difficulties  from 
situation  had  been  surmounted.  Animated  by  these  exhor¬ 
tations,  the  soldiers,  regardless  of  all  obstacles,  advanced 
against  the  enemy,  posted  above  them  ;  and  here  they  under¬ 
went  a  good  deal  of  fatige  in  climbing  the  steep.  But  as  soon 
as  the  first  battalions  got  footing  in  the  plain,  on  the  summit, 
and-the  troops  perceived  that  they  now  stood  on  equal  ground, 
the  dismay  was  instantly  turned  on  the  plotters  ;  who,  dis¬ 
persing  and  Casting  away  their  arms,  attempted,  by  flight,  to 
recover  the  same  lurking  places,  in  which  they  had  lately  con¬ 
cealed  themselves.  But  the  difficulties  of  the  ground,  which 
had  been  their  inducement  to  make  choice  of  it,  now  entang¬ 
led  them  in  the  snares  of  their  own  contrivance :  very  few 
found  means  to  escape  ;  twenty  thousand  men  were  slain,  and 
the  victorious  Romans  hastened  in  several  parties  to  secure 
the  booty  of  cattle,  which  the  enemy  had  so  unwisely  thrown 
in  their  way. 
XXXII.  While  such  was  the  situation  of  affairs  in  Sam- 
nium,  all  the  states  of  Etruria,  except  the  Arretians,  had  ta¬ 
ken  arms,  and  vigorously  commenced  hostilities,  by  laying 
siege  to  Sutrium  ;  which  city,  being  in  alliance  with  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  served  as  a  barrier  against  Etruria.  Thither  the  other 

BOOK  iX. 

275 

B.C. 
c<m$ul,  i&ouHus^  came  vnth  an  army  to  deliver  tkc  allies 
from  ^  siege*  The  Homans^  on  their  mrival,  were  plenti¬ 
fully  supplied,^  by  the  Sutrians^  with  provi^ns  cairied  iim> 
their  camp,  which  was  pitched  before  the  city*  Tte  Etruri¬ 
ans  s|»;itt  the  first  day  in  deliberating,  whether  they  shoidd 
expedite,  or  protract  the  war.  Oa^tbe  day  following,  their 
leaders,  having  determined  on  the  speedier  plan,  in  prefer¬ 
ence  to  the  safer,  as  soon  as  the  sun  rose,  displayed  the  sig¬ 
nal  for  battle,  and  the  troops  marched  out^to  the  field  ;  which 
being  reported  to  die  consul,  he  instantly  commanded  notice 
to  be  given,  that  they  should  take  refreshment,  and  then  ap¬ 
pear  under  arms.  The  order  was  cd>eyed  :  and  the  consul, 
seeing  than  armed  and  in  readiness,  ordered  the  standards  to 
he  carried  forth  beyond  the  rampart,  and  drew  up  his  men  at 
a  small  distance  from  the  enemy.  Both  partis  stood  a  long 
time  with  fixed  attention,  each  waiting  for  the  shout  and  fight 
to  begin  on  the  opposite  side  ;  and  the  sun  had  passed  the 
meridian  before  a  weapon  was  thrown  by  either.  At  length, 
rather  than  leave  the  place  without  something  being  done,  the 
shout  was  given  by  the,  Etrurians,  the  trumpets  sounded,  jmd 
the  battalions  advanced*  Nor  were  the  Romans  less  alert : 
both  rushed  to  the  fight  with  violent  animosity,  the  Etrurians 
superior  in  numbers,  the  Romans  in  valour.  The  battle  con¬ 
tinued  a  long  time  doubtful,  and  great  numbers  fell  on  both 
sides,  particularly  the  men  of  greatest  courage  ;  nor  did  vic¬ 
tory  declare  itself,  until  the  second  line  of  the  Romans  came 
up  fresh  to  the  front,  in  the  place  of  the  first,  who  were  much 
fatigued.  The  Etrurian  line  not  being  supported  by  any  fresh 
reserves,  all  before  and  round  the  standards  were  dain,  and 
in  no  battle  whatever  would  have  been  seen  a  nobler  stand, 
or  a  greater  effusion  of  human  blood,  had  not  the  night  shel¬ 
tered  the  Etrurians,  who  were  resolutely  determined  to  resist 
to  death ;  so  that  the  victors,  not  the  vanquished,  were  the 
first  who  desisted  from  fighting.  After  sun-set  the  signal  for 

276 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

fY-R.  444« 

retreat  was  given,  and  both  parties  retired  in  the  ni|^t  to 
their  camps*  During  ^e  remainder  of  the  year,  m^hing 
memcoaUe  was  effected  at  Sutrium  ;  for,  of  the  enemy’s  ar¬ 
my,  the  whole  first  line  h|Ki  been  cut  off,  die  reserves  only 
being  left,  who  were  scarce  sufficient  to  guard  the  camp ; 
/  and,  among  the  ^mans,  a  greater  number  died  of  their 
wounds,  than  had  fisllen  in  the  field. 
XXXIII.  Quintus  Fabius,  consul  for  the  ensuing  year, 
succeeded  to  the  command  of  the  army  at  Sutri- 
Y  R  Ml  . 
B  C  308  colleague  given  to  him  was  Caius  Mar- 
cius  Rutilus.  On  the  one  side,  Fabius  brought 
with  him  a  reinforcement  from  Rome,  and,  on  the  other,  a 
hew  mmy  had  been  sent  for,  and  came  from  home,  to  the 
Etrurians.  Many  years  had  now  passed  without  any  disputes 
between  the  patrician  magistrates  mid  plebeian  tribunes,  when 
a  contest  took  its  rise  from  that  family,  which  seemed  raised 
by  fate  as  antagonists  to  the  tribunes  and  commons  of  those 
times ;  Appius  Claudius,  being  censor,  when  the  eighteen 
months  had  expired,  which  was  the  time  limited  by  the  iEmi- 
lian  law  for  the  duration  of  the  censorship,  although  his  col¬ 
league  Cafus  Plautius  had  already  resigned  his  office,  could 
not  be  prevailed  on,  by  any  means,  to  give  up  his.  There 
was  a  tribune  of  the  commons,  Publius  Sempronius,  who  un¬ 
dertook  to  enforce  the  termination  of  the  censorship,  within 
the  lawful  time,  by  means  of  a  legal  process,  which  was  not 
more  popular  than  just,  nor  more  pleasing  to  the  people  ge¬ 
nerally,  than  to  every  man  of  character  in  the  city.  After 
fretfU^ntly  appealing  to  the  iEmilian  law,  and  bestowing 
cofiifiai^dations  on  Marne  reus  iEmilius,  who,  in  his  dicta¬ 
torship,  had  been  the  author  of  it,  for  having  contracted, 
within  the  space  of  a  year  4nd  six  months,  the  censorship, 
which  ftwmerly  had  lasted  five  years,  and  was  a  power  which, 
in  consequence  of  its  long  continuance,  often  became  tyran¬ 
nical,  he  proceeded  thus  ;  Tell  me,  Appius  Claudius,  in 

BOOK  IX. 

27r 

B.C,  ^8.] 
what  manner  3;^  would  have  acted,  had  3’ou  been  cojsor  at 
the  time  when  Caius  Purius  and  Marcus  Geganius  were  in 
that  office?”.  Appi us  insisted,  that  the  tribune’s  question 
was  irrelevant  to  his  ciae*  For,  although  the  ^milian  law 
might  bind  those  censors,  during  whose  magistracy  it  was 
passed, — because  the  people  made  that  law  after  they  had 
become  censors  ;  and  whatever  order  is  the  last  passed  by 
the  people,  that  is  held  to  be  law,  and  valid  yet  neither 
he,  nor  any  of  those,  who  had*  been  created  censors  subse¬ 
quent  to  the  passing  of  that  law,  could  be  bound  by  it.” 
XXXIV.  While  Appius  urged  such  frivolous  arguments 
as  these,  which  carried  no  conviction  whatever,  the  other 
said,  “  Behold,  Romans,  the  offspring  of  that  Appius,  who, 
being  created  decemvir  for  one  year,  created  himself  for  a 
s  ;cond  ;  and  who,  daring  a  third,  without  being  created 
even  by  himself  or  by  any  other,  held  on  the  fasces  and  the 
government ;  nor  ceased  to  continue  in  office,  until  the  go¬ 
vernment  itself,  ill  acquired,  ill  administered,  and  ill  retain* 
ed,  overwhelmed  him  in  ruin.  This  is  the  same  family,  citi¬ 
zens,  by  whose  violence  and  injustice  ye  were  compelled  to 
banish  yourselves  from  your  native  city,  and  seize  on  the 
sacred  mount ;  the  same,  against  which  ye  provided  for 
yourselves  the  protection  of  tribunes  ;  the  same,  which  oc¬ 
casioned  you  to  form  two  armies,  and  to  take  post  on  the 
Aventine ;  the  same,  which  violently  opposed  the  laws  against 
usury,  and  always  the  agrarian  laws  ;  the  same,  which  bro\e 
through  the  right  of  intermarriage  between  the  patricians 
and  the  commons ;  the  same,  which  shut  up  the  road  to  cu- 
rule  offices  against  the  latter:  this  is  a  name,  more  h<»tiie  to 
your  liberty  by  far,  than  that  of  the  Tarquinii.  I  pray  you, 
Appius  Claudius,  this  being  now  the  hundredth  year  since 
the  dictatorsliip  of  Mamercus  iEmiUus,  during  which  period 
so  many  men  of  the  highest  characters  and  abilities  have 
fiUed  that  office  ;  did  none  of  diese  ever  read  the  twelve  ta- 

278 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

CY,»,  444. 

bl^  ?  Nmie  of  them  know,  that,  whatever  was  the  last  order 
of  the  people,  that  was  law  I  Nay,  certainly,  they  ^  knew 
it ;  and  they  therefore  obeyed  the  ^milian  law,  rather  than 
the  edd  one,  under  which  the  censors  had  been  at  first  crea¬ 
ted  ;  because  it  was  the  last  order  ;  and,  because,  when  two 
laws  are  contradictory,  the  new  always  repeals  the  old.  Do 
you  mean  to  say,  Appius,  that  the  people  are  not  bound  by 
the  jEmilian  law  ?  Or,  that  the  people  are  bound,  and  you 
alone  exempted  I  The  uEmihan  law  bound  Uiose  violent  cen¬ 
sors,  Cains  Furius  mid  Marcus  Geganius,  who  showed  what 
mischief  that  office  might  do  in  the  state  ;  when,  out  of  re¬ 
sentment  for  the  limitation  of  their  power,  they  disfranchised 
Mamercus  iEmilius,  the  first  msm  of  the  age,  cither  in  war 
or  peace.  It  bound  all  the  censors  thenceforward,  during 
the  space  of  a  hundred  years.  It  binds  Caius  Plautius,  your 
colleague,  created  under  the  same  auspices,  with  the  same 
privileges.  Dui  not  the  people  create  him  with  the  fuUest 
privileges  with  which  any  censor  ever  was  created  I  Or  is 
yours  an  excepted  case,  in  which  this  singularity  peculiarly 
takes  place  ?  Shall  the  person,  whom  you  create  king  of  the 
sacrifices,  laying  hold  of  the  style  of  sovereignty,  say,  that 
he  was  created  with  the  fuUsst  privileges  with  which  any 
king  was  ever  created  at  Rcmie  ?  Who,  then,  do  you  think, 
would  be  content  with  a  dictatorship  of  six  months  ?  Who, 
with  the  office  erf"  interrex  for  five  days  ?  Whom  would  you, 
widi  confidence,  create  dictator,  for  the  purpe^e  of  driving 
the  nail,  or  of  exhibiting  games  ?  How  foolish,  how  sti^iid, 
do  ye  think  those  must  appear  in  this  man^s  eyes,  who,  after 
performing  most  important  services,  abdicated  the  dictator* 
ship  within  the  twentieth  day  ;  or  who,  being  irregularly 
created,  resigned  their  office  ?  Why  should  I  luring  instances 
from  antiquity^  Lately,  widiin  these  last  ten  years,  Caius 
Msenius,  dictator,  having  enforced  iiKiuiries  with  mm'e  strict¬ 
ness  than  cemsisted  with  the  safety  of  some  powerful  men,  a 

BOOK  IX. 

2r9 

B.C.  ^.3 
charge  was  thmwn  out  by  his  enemies,  that  he  himself  ^as 
infected  with  the  very  cnme  against  which  his  inquiries  were 
directed  s — now  Mamius,  I  say,  in  order  that  he  might,  in  a 
private  capacity,  meet  the  imputation,  sdKiicaUed  the  dictahn*- 
ship.  I  ^expect  not  such  moderation  in  you ;  you  will  not 
degenerate  from  your  family,  of  all  others  the  most  impe¬ 
rious  and  assuming  ;  nor  resign  your  office  a  day,  nor  even 
an  hour,  before  you  are  forced  to  it.  Be  it  so :  but  then  kt 
no  one  exceed  the  time  limited.  It  is  enough  to  add  a  day, 
or  a  month,  to  the  censorship.  But  Appius  says,  I  will  hold 
the  censorship,  and  hold  it  alone,  three  years  and  six  mohths 
longer  than  is  allowed  by  the  JEmilian  law.  Surely,  this  is 
like  absolute  {rawer.  Or  will  you  up  the  vacancy  trith 
another  colleague,  a  proceeding  not  allowable,  even  in  the 
case  of  the  death  of  a  censor  ?  You  are  not  satisfied  with  hav¬ 
ing,  as  if  you  were  a  religious  censor,  hindered  the  most  an¬ 
cient  solemnity,  and  the  only  one  instituted  by  the  very  dek}’, 
to  whom  it  is  performed,  from  being  attended  by  prkste  of 
the  highest  rsmk,  but  degraded  it  to  the  ministration  of  Br¬ 
yants.  You  arc  not  satisfied  that  a  family,  more  ancient  than 
the  origin  of  this  city,  and  sanctified  by  an  intercourse  of 
hospitality  with  the  immortal  gods,  has,  by  means  of  you 
and  your  censorship,  been  utterly  extirpated,  with  aH  its 
branches,  within  the  space  of  a  year,  but  would  involve  the 
whole  commonwealth  in  guilt  so  horrid,  that  I  dread  even 
to  mention  it.  This  city  was  taken  in  that  lustrum  in  which 
Caius  Julius  and  Lucius  Papirius  were  censors.  On  the 
death  of  Julius,  Papirius,  rather  than  resign  his  office,  sub¬ 
stituted  Marcus  Cornelius  Maluginensis  as  his  colleague. 
Yet,  how  much  more  moderate  was  his  ambition,  Appius, 
than  yours?  Lucius  Papirius  neither  held  the  censorship 
alone,  nor  beyond  the  time  prescribed  by  law.  But  still,  no 
one  has  since  been  found  who  would  follow  his  example :  all 
censors  having,  in  case  of  the  death  of  a  colleague,  abdicated 

^80 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  444. 

the  office.  As  for  you,  neidier  the  expiraticm  of  the  time  of 
your  censorship,  nor  the  resignation  of  your  colleague,  nor 
law,  nor  sh^e,  restrains  you.  Your  fcnthude  is  airogance ; 
your  boldness,  a  contempt  of  gods  mid  men.  ^  Aj^ius  Clau- 
dius,  in  cmisideration  of  the  dignity  of  that  office,  which  you 
ha?e  borne,  and  of  the  respect  due  to  it,  I  shoidd  be  sorry, 
not  only  to  offer  you  personal  violence,  but  even  to  address 
yoa  in  language  too  severe.  With  respect  to  what  I  have 
hitherto  said,  your  pride  and  obstinacy  forced  me  to  speak. 
And  now,  unless  you  pay  obedience  to  the  iEmilian  law,  I 
shall  order  you  to  be  led  to  prison.  Nor,  since  a  rule  has 
been  established  by  our  ancestors,  that,  in  die  election  of 
censors,  unless  two  shall  obtain  the  legal  number  of  suffiages, 
neiffier  shall  be  returned,  but  the  election  deferred,— will  I 
suffer  you,  who  could  not  singly  be  created  censor,  to  hold 
the  censorship  without  a  colleague.”  Having  spoken  to  this 
effect,  he  ordered  the  censor  to  be  seized,  and  borne  to  pri¬ 
son.  But,  although  six  of  the  tribunes  approved  of  the  pro¬ 
ceeding  of  their  colleague,  three  gave  their  support  to  Ap- 
piu$,  on  his  appealing  to  them,  and  he  held  the  censorship 
alone,  to  the  great  disgust  of  all  ranks  of  men. 
XXXV.  While  such  was  thi  state  of  affairs  at  Rome,  the 
Etmrians  had  laid  siege  to  Sutrium,  and  the  consul  Fabius, 
as  he  was  marching  along  the  foot  of  the  mountains,  with 
design  to  succour  the*  allies,  and  attempt  the  enemy’s  works, 
if  he  should  see  it  practicable,  was  met  by  their  army  pre¬ 
pared  for  battle.  The  wide  extended  plain  below, .showing 
the  greatness  of  their  force,  the  consul,  in  order  to  remedy 
his  deficiency  in  point  of  number^  by  advantage  of  the  ground, 
changed  the  direction  of  his  route,  a  little  towards  the  hills, 
where  the  way  was  tugged  and  covered  with  stones,  and  then 
formed  his  troops,  facing  the  enemy.  The  Etrurians,  think¬ 
ing  of  nothing  but  the  multitude  of  their  men,  on  which 
alone  they  depended, .  advanced  with  such  haste  and  eager- 

I!E* 

B.C.  308.] 

itt  QStbrWccme  iS^womer  eagagei. 
m^t,  they  Ibrew  way  l^arja^tas,  drew  tbeit  swords,  aad 
radhed  m.  0«  ^  n^r  side,  Ae  Rom^  poured  down  ^ 
them,  sometimes and  somettmes  stones,  which  die 
place  abandandy  ^ap]^d ;  so^rimt  the  Ubws  cm  their  shields 
and  hek^ets,  confusing  ercn  those  whom  they  did  not  wound, 
kept  th^m  ftom  closingwHh  their  foe  ;>^d  they  had  i«>  mis¬ 
sive  weapons,  with  which  to  act  at  a  distant  WhHe  tlhy 
stc^d*8tiH,  exposed  to  blows  against  which  they  had  no  stiffi- 
ciem  defence,  some  cVen  giving  way,  and  the  line  ^wing 
unsteady  and  wavering,  the  Roman  spearmen,  and  the  first 
imk,  rei«6wing  the  shotrt,  poured  down  an  diem  wth  drawn 
swordsi  This  attack  the  Etrurians  could  nbt  withstand,  but, 
fied  precipftately  towards  their  camp  ;  when  the 
Roman  ckvi^y  getting  before  them,  galloping  cMiquel^ 
acren^  the  plain,  threw  themselves  in  the  Way  of  their  flight, 
on  whkh  they  quitted  the  road,  and^bent  dteir  course  to  the 
mountains.  From  dieiicc,  in  a  body,  ^most  without  arms, 
and  debiUmted  with  wmmds,  they  made  their  way  into  the 
Ckninian  forest.  The  Romans,  having  dam  many  thousands 
of  the  Etrurians,  and  takeii  thirty-eight  mHitmy  standards, 
took  ako  possession  of  their  camp,  togetibar  wkh  a  vast  quan¬ 
tity  of  spoil*  Tlwy  then  began  tq  consider  of  piusuing  the 
enemy. 
XXXVI.  The  Ciminian  forest  was  in  th(»^  days  deemed  # 
as  impassable  and  frightful  as  the  German  fiirests  have  been 
in  latter  times ;  hot  even  any  trader  having  ever  attempted 
to  pass  -it.  Hardly  any,  besides  the  g^etd  himself,  showed 
boldness  enough  to  en^r  it ;  so  fresh  vm  die  remembrance 
of  the  i^aster  at  Caudium  in  every  ortek  mind*  Oh  this, 
Mattms  Fahius,  the  consuFs  brother,  (some  say  Caeso,  others 
Cmbs  ClauSiusi  bom  of  the  same  mother  with  the  chnsul,) 
undertook  to  explore  the  country,  and  m  bring  them  in  h 
shmt  hme  an  account  of  every  particular.  Being  eddt^ted 
VOL.  II, — 2  O 

[Y.B.444, 

2m  HfSTOBY  m 
2^  Cmrt^  where  lie  ted  friaais,  te  wjMi  perfectly  acquainted 
j  .the  Etrurian  langua^^*  I.-^have  s^n  it  affirmed  Aat, 
in  riio^e  times,  the  R^mw  youth  were  instructed 
in  the  Etrurian  learnings  they  are  iii:iw  in  the  Greek  :  but 
it  is  more  probable^  that  there  was  something  very  extraor¬ 
dinary  in  the  persim  who  acted  so  dmi^ly  a  counterfeit 
part,  and  mixed  among  the  enemy*  ^It  is  smid,  ttet  his  tmly 
attendant  was  a  slave,  who  ted  been  teed  up  with  him, 
who  was  theiefore  not  ignmant  of  the  san^  language.  They 
received  no  'further  instmctiox^  at  their  departurej,  than  a 
summary  description  of  the  country  through  which  they  were 
to  pa^ffi ;  to  this  was  added  the  tian^s  of  principal  men, 
in  the  several  stat^,  to  prevent  fheir  being  at  a  loss  in  con¬ 
versation,  and  from  being  discovered  by  making  some  mis¬ 
take*  They  act  out  in  the  dress  of  shepherte,  aimed  with 
msdc  weapons,  bills,  and  two  ihoit  javelins  each*  But 
though  their  speaking  the  language  of  die  country,  with  the 
fashion  of  their  drc!^  and  mrms,  be  supposed  to  have  cc«i- 
cesded  them,  it  was  more  ^ectually  done  by  the  mcredible 
circumstance  of  a  stranger’s  passing  the  Ciminian  forest. 
They  are  said  to  have  penetrated  as  for  as  the  Camertian 
district  of  the  Umbriaumi  there  the  Romans  ventured  to  own 
who  they  were,  ^d,  being  introduced  to  the  senate,  treated 
with  “them,  in  ihe  name  of  the  consul,  about  an  alliance  and 
friendship ;  and,  after  being  entertained  with  ctmrtcous  hos¬ 
pitality,  were  desired  to  acquaint  the  Rmnans,  ttet,  if  they 
came  into  thme  countries,  there  should  be  proviskms  in  rea¬ 
diness  for  the  troops  sufficient  for  diirty  days,  imd  that  they 
sho^  £nd  die  youth  of  ^  Camertian  Umbrians  prepmed 
in  arms,  to  otey  their  consmiands*  When  dib  infewmatiem 
Was  teougfat  to  d^  consul,  he  sent  forward  the  te^^ge  at 
the  first  wi^ch,  ordering  the  legions  to  march  in  the  rear  of 
it.  He  himself  staid  briiind  with  the  cavalry,  and  next  tey, 
as  soon  as  li|^  app^cd,  rode  up  in  a  threatening  manner 

B.C. 

posts  of  ^  which  had  beea  st£^kl^  oo  the 
oi^de  of  die  forest  |  ami,  when  he  had  dbtaic^d  thesa  there 
for  a  sufficii^  ^gih  d  tin^  he  retired  to^  his  camp,  aiui 
matcbiog  ml  by  tl^  gate^  overtop  die  main  body 
of  die  army  before  night.  At  the  first  light,  <m  the  f<dhw- 
iog  day,  he  had  gained  the  summit  of  Mount  Chnimus, 
from  whence,  having  a  view  of  opulent  plains  of  Etruria, 
he  let  loose  his  soldiers  upon  them.  When  a  vast  body  had 
been  driven  off,  some  tumultuary  cohorts  (rf  Etrurian  peasants, 
hastily  collected  by  the  principal  inhabitants  of  the  district, 
met  the  Romm^  ;  but  in  such. disorderly  array,  that  these 
rescuers  of  die  prey  were  near  becoming  whoUy  a  prey  diem- 
selves.  Thi^e  being  slain  or  put  to  flight,  and  the  counUy 
laid  waste  to  a  great  extent,  the  Romans  returned  to  their 
camp  victo^ouS)  and  enriched  with  plenty  of  every  kind.  It 
happened,  tlmt,  in  the  mean  time,  five  deputies,  with  two 
plebeian  tribunes,  bad  coii^  hither,  to  charge  Fabias  in  die 
name  of  the  senate,  not  to  attempt  to  pass  the  Ciminian  forest* 
These,  rejoicing  that  they  had  arrived  too  late  to  prevent 
the  expedition,  retmraed  to  Jlome  with  the  news  of  its  suc¬ 
cess* 
XXXVIL  The  consul,  by  this  expedition,  insteati  xif  bring¬ 
ing  the  war  nearer  to  a  conclusion,  cmiy  spread  it  to  a  wider 
extent :  for  all  the  tract,  adjacent  to  the  foot  of  Mount  Cimi- 
nii^,  had  felt  his  devastations  ;  and,  out  of  the  indignation 
conceived  thereat,  had  roused  to  arms,  not  only  the  states  of 
Etruria,  but  the  neighbouring  parts  of  Umbria.  They  came 
therefore  to  Sutrium,  with  such  a  numeraus  army  as  they  hs^ 
never  before  brought  into  the  field  ;  and  not  only  ventured  to 
encamp,  on  the  outside  of  the  wood,  but,  earpesdy  desirous 
of  coming  to  an  engagement  as  soon  as  possible,  marched 
down  to  the  plains  to  offer  battle.  The  troops  being  mar- 
shaded,  stood,  at  first,Jfar  some  time,  on  their  own  ground, 
having  left  a  space  sufficient  for  the  Ramans  to  draw  up,  op- 

HISTORY  m,  mOME. 

[Y%S.444, 

imite  to  item ;  tet  perceivu^  that  theac  fkcFmed  fightings 
advanced  to  ibe,  nmpmt ;  where^  observing  diati^  evai 
Ite  advi^ied  tad  retired  witbin  the  a?tirk», 
once  begmi  to  insist  ckmorously  ©n  dwir  geiieral’s  ordering 
provisions  for  that  day  to  be  teou|^t  down  to  them ;  for 
‘‘  they  were  resdved  to  remain  there  imder  arms  ;  ^d,  ekb- 
er  in  the  night,  or,  at  all  events,  at  the  dawn  of  day,  to  at^ck 
the  enemy^s  camp*^’  The  Roman  troops,  though  not.  tass 
eager  for  action,  were  restrained  by  die  commmids  of  the  ge- 
neraL  About  the  tendi  hour,  the  consul  m-dered  his  men  a 
^past^  and  gave  direction  that  they  shmdd  be  ready  in  arms, 
at  whatever  time  of  the  day  or  night  he  stamld  give  the  sig¬ 
nal.  He  then  addressed  a  few  words  to  them  ;  s{K>ke  in  high 
terms  of  dte  wars  of  the  Samnite8,aiKi  ccmtemptuously  of  the 
Etrurians,  who  were  not,”  he  said,  ‘‘  to  be  compaied  widt 
other  nations,  either  in  respect  of  abilities  ns  ^diers,  or  in 
point  of  numbers.  Besides,  he  had  an  engine  at  work,  as  they 
should  find  in  due  time :  at  pment  it  was  of  importmice  to 
keep  it  secret.”  This  he  intimated,  in  order  to  raise  the  cou¬ 
rage  of  his  men,  damped  by  the  superiority  of  die  enemy’s 
force.;  and,  from  their  not  having  fortified  the  post  where 
they  lay,  the  iminm^km  of  a  stratagem  formed  against  them 
seemed  the  more  credible*  After  refreshing  themselves,  they 
went  to  rest,  and  being  roused  without  noise,  ^out  the  fourth 
watch,  took  arms*  The  servants  following  the  army,  had 
axes  put  into  their  hmids,  to  tear  down  the  rampart  and  fill 
up  the  trench.  The  line  was  formed  within  the  wwks,  md 
some  chosen  cohorts  posted  close  to  the  gates.  Then,  a  little 
before  day,  which  in  summer  nights  is  the  time  of  the  pro- 
foundest  sleep,  the  signal  being  given,  the  rampmt  was  kvel- 
led,  and  the  troops^  rushing  forth,  fell  upon  the  enemy,  who 
were  every  where  smetebed  at  their  length.  Some  were  put 
to  deadi  before  diey  could  stir  j  odi^  half  asleep,  in  their 
beds ;  the  gresMteat  part  while  they  ran  in  confusion  to  arms  j 

BOOK  IX, 

B,C,  308.] 

2%$ 

in  short,  had  time  to  defend  themselves  ;  and  diese,  who 
followed  no  particular  leader,  nor  orders,  were  qidckiy  roc^« 
ed  and  pursued  by  the  Roman  horse.  They  fied  differs 
ways  I  to  the  camp  and  to  the  woods.  The  latter  aJbrded 
the  safer  refuge ;  for  the  former,  being  situated  m  a  ^Udn, 
was  taken  the  same  day.  The  gold  and  silver  was  ordered 
to  be  brought  to  the  consul ;  the  rest  of  the  spoil  was  g^ven 
to  the  soldiers.  On  that  day,  sixty  thousand  of  the  enemy 
were  slain  or  taken.  Some  a^rm,  that  this  famous  battle 
was  fought  on  the  farther  side  of  the  Ciminian  forest,  at  Pe* 
rusia  ;  md  that  the  public  had  been  under  great  dread,  l^t 
the  army  might  be  hu^losed  in  such  a  d^gerouis  pass,  and 
overpowered  by  a  genial  combination  of  the  Etrurians  smd 
Umbrians.  But  on  wbs^ver  spot  it  was  fought,  it  is  certain 
that  the  Roman  power  prevailed  j  and,  in  consequence  diere- 
of,  ambassadors  came  fzom  Ferusia,  Cortona,  and  Arr^um, 
which  were  then  among  the  principal  states  of  Etruria,  to  so- 
Hcit  a  peace  and  alliance  with  the  Romans ;  and  they  obtain¬ 
ed  a  truce  for  thirty  years. 
XXX  VIII.  Duringd^se  transactions  in  Etruria,  the  other 
consul,  Cains  Marcius  Rutikis,  took  AlHfse  by  storm  fiom 
the  Samnites  ;  and  many  of  their  forts,  ami  smaller  towns, 
were  either  destroyed  by  his  arms,  or  surrexKiered  intire. 
About  die  same  dme  sdso,  the  Roman  fleet,  having  sailed  u> 
Campania,  under  Piflflius  Cornelius,  to  whom  the  senate  had 
given  the  command  on  die  sea-coast,  put  into  Pompeii. '  Im¬ 
mediately  on  landing,  the  marine  soldieis  set  out  to  ravage 
the  country  about  Nuceria :  and  after  they  had  quickly  laid 
waste  the  parts  which  lay  nearest,  and  whence  they  could 
have  reUirned  to  the  ships  with  safety,  they  were  allured  by 
th^  temptation  of  pkmder,  as  it  often  falippei]^,  to  advance  too 
far,  and  thereby  rmised  the  enemy  against  foem.  While  ttey 
rambled  ^lout  die  country,  they  met  no  opposition,  though 
they  might  have  be^  cut  off  to  a  man  ;  b%u  as  they  were  xv- 

2^  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y,R.  444. 
tomug)  in  a  careless  manner,  the  peasants  overtook  iliem, 
£&r  from  the  ships,  stripped  them  of  the  booty,  and  cv^ 
slew  a  great  part  of  thetiu  Those  who  escaped  w<^e  driven 
m  cmifustmt  to  die  ships.  As.  the  news  of  F^ius  having 
marched  through  the  Ctminian  forest  had  occasioned  violent 
apprehensions  at  Romo^  so  it  had  excited  joy  in  pioporticm 
among  the  enemy  m  Samnium :  they  t^ed  of  the  Roman 
army  being  pent  up,  and  surrounded ;  and  of  the  Caudiae 
forks,  as  a  model  of  what  they  were  to  undergo.  **  Those 
people,”  they  said,  ever  greedy  after  further  acquisitions, 
were  now  brought  into  ii^xtricablc  difficulties,  hemmed  in, 
not  more  effectaidly  by  the  arms  of  tli^ir  ^emy,  than  by  the 
disadvantage  of  die  grom^.”  Their  joy  was  even  mingled 
with  a  Segree  of  envy,  because  fortune,  as  they  thought,  had 
transferred  the  glory  of  finishing  the  Roman  war,  from  the 
Samnites  to  the  Etrurians :  they  hastened  therefore,  with 
their  whole  collected  force,  to  crush  the  consul  Caius  Mar« 
cius  ;  resolving,  if  he  did  not  give  them  an  opportunity  of 
fighting,  to  proceed,  through  the  territories  of  the  Marsians 
and  Sabines,  into  Etruria,  The  consul  met  them,  and  a  bat¬ 
tle  was  fought  with  great  Tury  i>n  both  aides,  but  without  a 
decisive  issue.  Although  both  parties  siffiFered  severely,  yet 
the  discredit  of  losing  the  day  fell  on  die  Romans,  because 
several  of  equestrian  rank,  some  milhaty.  tribunes,  with  one 
lieutenant-general,  had  fallen  ;  and,  what  was  more  remark- 
aide^than  all,  the  consul  himself  was  wounded.  This  event, 
exaggerated  by  report,  as  is  ususd,  greatly  alarmed  the  senate, 
so  that  they  resolved  cm  having  a  dictator  nominated.  No 
one  entertained  a  doubt  diat  the  n<mmation  would  light  on 
Papirius  Cursor,  who  was  then  universally  deemed  to  pos¬ 
sess  the  greatest  abilities  as  a  commander :  but  they  could 
not  certain,  eiftier  that  a  message  might  be  conveyed  with 
safety  into  §amnium,  where  all  was  in  a  state  of  hostility,  or 
that  the  consul  Msurciias  was  alive.  The  other  consul,  Fabius, 

BOOK  IX, 

BX.  sm.] 

287 

was  at  cmni^  with  Papinas  on  his  owa  accooat ;  ami,  lest 
Ms  res^tment  might  prove  an  obstacle  to  the  poUk  good, 
die  senate  voted  that  deputies  of  consular  rank  should  be  ^nt 
to  him,  who,  uniting  Aeir  own  influence  to  that  of  govem- 
ma:rt,  might  prevail  on  him  to  drop,  for  the  sake  of  his  coim* 
try,  aU  remembrance  of  private  animosities.  When  the  de¬ 
puties  came  to  Fabius,  and  delivered  to  him  tte  decree  <rf  se* 
nate,  adding  such  arguments  as  were  suitable  to  their  im^c- 
dons,  the  consul,  casdng  his  eyes  towards  the  ground,  retired 
in  silence,  leaving  them  in  uncertainty  what  pmrt  he  intended 
to  act.  Then,  in  the  silent  time  of  die  night,  according  to  the 
established  custom,  be  nominated  Lucius  Papirius  dictator. 
When  the  deputies  returned  him  thanks,  for  so  very  merito* 
riousiy  subduing  his  passion,  he  still  persevered  in  obstinate 
silence,  and  dismissed  them  without  any  answer,  or  mention 
of  what  he  had  done :  a  proof  that  he  felt  an  extrmirdinary 
degree  of  resentment,  which  it  cost  him  a  vidlent  struggle  to 
sup|»ess.  Papirius  appointed  Caius  Junius  Bubuicus  mas¬ 
ter  of  the  horse  ;  and,  as  he  was  proceeding,  in  an  assembly 
of  the  Curiae*,  to  get  an  order  passed,  respecting  die  com¬ 
mand  of  the  army,  an  unlucky  omen  dbliged  him  to  adjomn 
it ;  for  the  Curia,  which  was  to  vote  first,  happened  to  die 
Fauci^D,  remaricably  distinguidied  by  two  disasters,  the  tak¬ 
ing  of  the  city,  and  the  Caudine  peace ;  the  same  Curia 
having  voted  first  in  those  years  in  which  the  said  eventsf  are 
foimd.  Licinius  Macer  supposes  this  Curia  crniinous,  also  on 
account  of  a  third  misfortune,  that  which  was  experienced  at 
the  Cremera. 
XXXIX.  Next  day  the  dictator,  taking  the  auspices  anew. 

*  The  comtia  curicUa,  or  assemblies  of  the  curiae,  alone  had  the  power  of 
confferring-  military  command ;  no  magistrate  therefore  could  assume  the 
command  without  the  previous  order  of  their  assembly.  In  time,  this  came 
to  be  a  mere  matter  of  form  j  yet  the  practice  always  continued  to  be  oi>- 
sm  sd. 

2BB  HISTOkY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  444. 
the  order,  aod,  inarching  out  at  the  head  of  the  le* 
giona,  lately  taked^  on  the  alarm  occasioned  by  the  army 
pissing  the  Ciminian  forest,  came  to  Longula  j  where,  having 
received  the  m^ops  of  the  consul  Marcius,  he  led  on  his 
fortes  to  battle ;  nor  did  the  enemy  seem  to  decline  the  com* 
bat.  However,  they  stood  under  arms,  until  night  came  on ; 
neither  side  choosing  to  begin  the  fray.  After  this,  they 
continued  a  con^derable  time  encamped  near  each  other, 
without  commg  to  action;  neither  diffident  of  their  own 
strength,  nor  desjnsing  the  adversary.  Meanwhile  the  army 
in  Etruria  was  fuUy  employed :  for  a  decisive  battle  was 
fought  with  the  Umbrians,  in  which  the  enemy  was  routed, 
but  lost  not  many  men^  for  they  did  not  maintain  the  fight 
with  the  vigour  with  which  they  began  it.  Besides  this,  the 
Etrurians  having  made  a  levy  of  troops,  enforced  by  the 
sanctions  of  the  devoting  law,  each  msm  choosing  another, 
came  an  en^gement  at  the  Cape  of  Vadimon,  with  more 
numerous  forces,  and,  at  the  same  time,  with  greater  spirit 
than  they  had  ever  shown  before.  The  battle  wi^  fought 
with  such  animosity^  that  no  javelins  were  thrown  by  either 
pauty :  swords  alone  were  made  use  of ;  and  the  fury  of  the, 
combatants  was  still  higher  inflamed  by  the  long  continued 
contest ;  so  that  it  appeared  to  the  .%>mans  as  if  they  were 
disputing,  not  with  Etruriaim,  whom  they  had  so  often 
conquered,  but  with  a  new  race.  Not  the  least  intention  of 
giving  ground  appeared  in  any  part:  the  fim  lines  fell :  mid, 
lest  the  standards  should  be  exposed,  widun^  defeiu^,  the 
second  lines  were  formed  in  dieir  place.  At  length,  even 
the  last  reserves  were  called  into  a^ion ;  and  such  was  the " 
extremity  of  the  difficulty  and  danger,  that  the  Roman  ca» 
valry  dismounted,  and  pressed  forward,  throu^  h^ps  of 
arms  and  bodies,  to  the  frmit  ranl;s  of  the  infan^^.  A  new 
army,  as  it  were,  thus  starting  up,  discuder^  battdions 
of  the  Etrurians;  and  the  rest,  weak  ^  their was. 

BodiC  IX;  sm 
im>ke  ^  kst  throng  cnemy^s 
m&s,  then  begm  to  gire  %ray ;  mm 
pi^^es  qn^ed  tkeir  fsmu^  and,  as  mam  ^  ibcj  onaer^imed 
Itekl^ksybeloi^  ik^sijsdiveato  o^f&a  Hasat  day  first 
hr^As»  #&  8lr»ti|^  of  die  Ed^uriaos^  mw  gro^  exobmiat 
tlii^pi^  a  long  oowse  of  jaospertty;  all  d^fio^irer  6f  d«Sr 
mm  iret«  et|t  oS^  aad  die  Romans,  wither  fadting,  seized 
and  sa^kid  diek  camp;  *  ^ 
XI^.  Eqnal  dan^r,  at^^^  issue  equally  glorious,  mm 
aft^  attemled  the  war  wirfi  die  ^muites ;  wbo,  beside^  tlieir 
immy  pt^paradms  for  the-  field,  made  no  litde  glitter  v\th 
mw  erf  Hfesk  armour.  Their  troops  were  ia  two 
dmskms,  ems  ’ef  hrf  lfceirshiclds  embossed  with  goW, 
the  ^^eri^lh  sHvit^  71^  shaped  the  shield  was  this  a 
broads  tite  plddle^fb  i^er  die  hrea^  and  shoulders,  and 
Sat  i^iopitig  off  gri^imiiy  as  to  l^c^me  pointed  be** 
low,  diat  be  wielded  with  c^se  j  a  loose  coat  of  mail 
abo  ^  defiesd  the  breast,  and  dbe  left  leg  was  covered 
widi  a  gi^ve  |  th^ir  helmets  were  adon^d  with  fdimes,  to 
aiM  to  the  s^earance  of  tl^ir  statmre«  The  gotebn-armed 
s^c^BTs  wore  twkks  of  various  colours^  the  sdver^^rmed, 
of  vdihe  limm*  To  die  the  ri^t  was  aasif^d ; 
thefitwm^  todc  pmt  <m  tho  left.  Hie  EoiMns  had  been  ap* 
prk^of  these  s{d^idid  accoutmn^ts,aaui  hsd  b^iif  taught 
by  dieir  commanders,  diat  ^  a  sc4dier  ought  m  be  roughs  wot 
dec(wmed  with  gedd  and  sUver,  but  pbuwg  his  qonMencean 
his  sword.  That  m&Mms  erf  this  kind  wtfre  in  reah^ 
rather  than  aiWiour ;  glittering  brfore  ai^<m,  but  soon  losing 
their  brilliancy  when  besmeared  with  Ucaid.  Hiat  the 
brightest  ornament  of  a  !K>ldief  valour ;  dmt  aU  tbo^ 
trmkets  would  fedlow  viemry,  and  that  those  rich  enemies 
would  be  yaliudile  prizes  to  die  poorer  conquerom.’’  Cursor, 
bavi^  animated  his  men  wkb  the^  observations,^  led  tl^m 
cm  m  batde.  He  took  post  himself  cp  the  right  wing,  givmg 
VOL.  It. - 3  P 

HISTC^Y  OF  ROME .  CY-«- 
td  &t  to  ^  master  of  die  hm^e*  Ax  tfce 
tmttf  ibetn^eeti  the  two  m*miea  b€»:asm  des- 
while  dticlalor  wd  die  tmister  the  Imme  were 
m  tiduch  wmg  irjc^ny  dboidd  fir^  dNnr 
It  hi^ieiied  Juttius  first,  wi^  dte  left  wmg, 
die  ^  th^  <m^y  l^ire  way ;  this  ccmsist^  of 
men  dev^^ed  after  the  i^rntm^  ^oS  the  Samaites,  and  oa  t^it 
accomxt  di^Bgriished  by  wMte  garmemsand  armoor  of  eqmd 
wlui«&^,  Immis,  ^  would  sacrifice  these  to  Flu* 
to,^^pi!e^ed  forward,  ^^i^rdered  their  ranks,  atid  msale  an 
e?rideat  ieofmriimt  bemg  perceived  by  die  ^Kctator, 
he  exdaimedi  ^  the  b^de  begin  cm  the  left  wing,  and 
diall  die  ri^t,  die  thcts^risown  triibps,  only  second  the 
arms  of  others,  amd  not  clmm  the  grea^t  share  df  the  vic- 
tmff”  This  spuired  on  die  soldiers  r*  nor  did  the  cavalry 
yidd  te  die  ihfantty  in  bravery,  nor  die  ardour  of  lieutenant* 
generals^  that  of  the  commanders.  Marcius  Valerius  from 
tibe  rl|^  wing,  mid  Publius  Decius  from  die  Mt,  toth  men 
of  ccmulm’  rank,  rode  cd(  to  the  cavalry,  p^isted  cm  the  ex- 
Wmities  of  die  line,  and,  exhorting  them  to  jmn  in  putting 
in  for  a  share  of  ihe  honour,  charged  the  enemy  on  the  flanks. 
ITie  Roman  legions,  on  d^^^ing  ccmfiisicm  of  the  Sam* 
nites,  by  being  thus  assailedmibc^ay^^  renewed  foe  shout, 
andriishiiig  forcibly  on  foem,  iliey%^^  to  %.  And  now 
thepidas  were  quiddyll^wfth  ^aps  of  bodies  and  spfosi* 
did  armour.  At  fir^,  foeir  camp  renewed  foe  dhmiG^^ 
Sanmites ;  but  fey  dbi  not  kmg  retife  evai  foe  pcHweswIon 
of  fet:  before  night  ft  was  taken,  mi  fmmu 
The  dictator  irkimpfaed,  in  pumnmee  of  a  decr^  of  the 
senate ;  and  the  most  splemiid  spectacle  by  fe,  o£  any  In 
his  proce^ion,  was  foe  captured  mms:  so  magnificent  were 
foey  deemed,  that  foe  shields,  afonned  with  gold,  were  dis^ 
tributed  among  foe  ownem  of  foe  silver  sho{»  to  serve  as 
embeUishments  to  fe  ]|m*ufo.  iim:e,  it  is  ssud,^an^  fe 

BOOK  IX. 

291  . 

B.C.  ^,3 
tmsmm  erf"  Ae  ¥omm  bemg  decoratedi  bjr  Ae  jEddes,  when 
this  gimd  prcK^esskms  are  made,  an  xKCimon  of  tlie  great 
g^teea.  Thii  Romm^  indeed,  converted  these  extraordinary 
ams  to  Ae  ho^ur  of  Ae  gods  t  bdt  the  Cmnpmiians,  Ont  csf 
piide,  and  m  hatred  of  Ae  foe,  gave  Aem  as  otnam^is  ^ 
Aeir  g^tators,  yfho  used  to  be  exhibited  as  a  show  at  their 
feaj^,  m&  whom  ti^y  distingnkl^d  by  the  name  of  Sam- 
nit^.  Bmtng  Ais  yon*,  Ae  consul  Fabii^  Aught  wsA  the 
remnants  of  Ae  Eortnians  at  Pertim^  which  city  dso  had 
viohi^d  Ae  truce,  and  ^ned  am^iy  and  decisive  victory. 
Afh^  Ais^he  marched  up  to  Ae  wsdk  erf  Ae  town,  and  would 
hxvt  taken  it^  had  not  depoAs  cmim  out  and  capimlated. 
Ifo^g  ^aced  a  Beimm,  and  s^t  on  before  him 
to  tim  Ae  end^m^es  of  EWuria,  who  solicit^ 
Ae^eon^i^  mto  dm  city  in  for  sue- 
ce^s  impmtant  Aau  those  of  the  dktator.  &^sides, 
a  great  Aare  df  Ae  hemour  of  reAicmg  Ae  Skmnites  was 
^lAi^ed  Id  Ae  ikutenant^enmds,  PoUius  Deems  and 
Marems  VAsrms^  whom,  at  dm  limd;  elecdon,  the  fmople, 
wWhuntverwd  eor^c^  Ae  one  coimti!,  Ae  c^ier 
piwlmr. 
XI4«  Pabius,  in-c^myiemtim:  df  his  extraorAnary 
in  Ae  COTifwm  Wi»  re-elected  into 
dm  ccmulsbtp.  Dedms  was  aj^teSnted  his  col- 
109^^4^  Vateius  was  tnvated  pmetmr  a  ferntth  *  * 
tmae.  The  cemsuk  AvMed  the  pravimres  between  them* 
Etrum  fell  to  Becias,  Sautnium  to  FAius.  The  latter, 
having  marclmd  to  Nuceria,  rejected  the  application  of  Ae 
people  of  Alfatema,  who  then  simd  for  p^l^,  because  they 
had  not  accept^  it  when  offered,  and  by  force  of  arms  com- 
pfAed  Aem  to  surrender,  A  balde  was  fought  with  Ac 
Sunnites,  who  were  overcome  wkhout  much  difficulty :  nor 
would  the  memmy  of  that  engai^ment  ha^  been  preserved, 
except  Aat  hi  it  Ae  Mi^ans  6mt  af^ieiued  ^n  turns  agahmt 

mSTOmt  0F  IIOME.  4M. 

13te  4Wfe)0tfca  ofrihe  foBoiirtsd 
i*€li^aa»,  irfe  met  Tile  g^t 
Bfeewbe  im  %m  ofefm* 
the  t&h&r  ^Itg  trMdi  he  tte  T«r- 
^  c^infefifed  Acm  ic#  Sfe  wimf 
a^to  fears.  H4  tc^jmvanri  tmM 
Ae  hf  aoAe  ef  wtm:h%e4eme^^ 
etfy  Aat  iittj  w^$hi  jmmi  i^Te^^eles  ta  caaiay^ 
^4,  byHextemilf^'his  idfns^^oim  <ii^ 
fWdsiscIi  a  4rt^d  ef  As^Ae  ofi^ 
Htted  fer^Msaoce :  Aia  they  A4  bai  tAtmh  ; 
teiitisicefor  a  f#ar 
Romsm^arctiy  fbr  tlalt  the^ea^^  a»d 
#Hro  ttoArks  for  each  were  AeA :  Ais 
wj!»  the  rf  Ae  Tlie  tns^^etffity  eert/r  eam« 
lAAed  tfi  Etmrht  w^  i^rrap^  %  #  sud4e»  n^rrec^oii 
erf^  Ae  ^  ea^mt  whkh  i^d  nisSet^  m  trmist 
Ae  wmrv  etcept  whi^  J^ewremetme  Ae  tmmtry  had  fekia 
These^  hf  tte  field  lA 
eimhrtmm  fb^mg  fc^ckig  a  gnm  Ae  Emt- 
rhrt!»  to  rcrome  their  arms^  made  op  such  a  aumerousimtre, 
tlifl^  speskieg  eC  themiehrer^h  vaai^^  hitd  of 
the  Somalia  wiA  cootmpt^  they  boasted  wMid 
leard  D^us  bebM  hi  S^riav  atNy  ^  heiii^ 
Ro^  i  wlAb  de^i  ^  theirs  be^  to  the 
he  removed  by  Im^  marchesrfrom  Simim  mwi^ 
thett  city,  andtaitdoi^dii  AeA^ni^  ef  Pu^h^ 
mm  w  act  acemdiug  tdd^  hi^ffil^ace  whlA  he  '^^the^ 
ceiiNs  of  Ae  em^yh  Rot  was  AsMrteti^ 
dm  sli^t^  tt  R^e  t  Aek  ejiAed 
fears  imoe^  Ae  peOfie,  wl^  UtA  esperkmcNNlviu  l:aiami« 
ties  sofifefed  AoA  As  Ae  msecority  of  Ae 
m  Acy  resided^  ifeputies  wtre  th€^for^dit|iaieh<sii  itr  Ae 
CGf&std  FaWwf  #Wb  dh^^om,  "Aar,  if  he  had  any  rtifdfe 

.i0|}S  IS.'  3^ 

^swi^liitB  Umii^t  eennul  iH'dert  asd, 
bf  IbrMiS  mT^BB^-iaaawMled  to  Iffevia^  wiieift  ^  &pm 
of  ’  l^e  wtfttptteted  iHatt^  of  the 
Ooii^  ^k^%tA  iidAtif^  to-fie  wlS(de>i^«Bipia7«d 
in  &aiaiwn,  far  :£at»^ 
trfBngi^ed-the  UtdEaiinaf'tiBit  anwctaS'  Aflrtied  te^iiOg  Co  th^ 

fettiied  tiMtaa  t  o^taai»>  ^  It^fag  aihie  thelr-afiis.^^<!8Qir<« 
mte  tiistrietf  ciA^%y  Acai&dvxa 
OH’^Sstst,  iKrt  oidf^OO  dmr  «i^,'li^  %o:«mae  to  sm 

ae-w^ 

IbWil^ji^  bb  oMb^  '.^fP^i(B4dlo.canw3  wt^  titen'a;i^^  im- 
fi^atCMiy  tewalrda  hblbaityitft,  fo  e)&dl'^rM#^mea.£rom 
^e'bea^^vMaMi^^B^h  the 
«isldi»«of  tise  thBe’^iffioAired ;  enotanaged  them 
by  iihd^^at  wbkb 
■^ef  B#  #i4  ia  btibattniuis,  and 
l»de  tSira  afipewil^  Etrorian 
war^  and  impiontHsi^p^kmBia  which 
&eao  people  hi^ift^Sdefcndtsmtfaict  flie  ofJIrane. 
was  ^  ahKtit^  of  the  sdMhns  mi  hearing  tfai^^&at,  raismg 
ikt  iiWem^amd-  dM’^g^sartinl’s  dis- 
ambne,  Md,  nMtftft  wnM^icir.0yersj  adVttBic^  whh  die 
itt  die  trMaj^tr^smd  -eatat^.  in  ftB-l^ecd  agahist 
the  enemy.  'I^y>inMe  ‘lhdr,nttaidc,^Jlot  iaosi  seen,  mr,  at 
leu^  mrado  mmi  hut,  WfhBliiimd  i^j^ir  wondethil  in  the 
reladtm,  begmi  by  snmcMng  ^  Mafinlarda'Ottt  of  die  hands 
which  held  tfaedi ;  and  dK»,  the  ^andard'lnaa^  demselves 
Were  dmg^d  to  the  omsnl^  and  Ae  umed  soldiers  hauled 
from  the  one  line  to  the  othdrhtiie  t^ashinOe  was  any 
where  made,  smd  the  bi^hiess  wtw  pmfonned,  not  so  much 
with  swords,  as  With  dieir  diCeli^'n^A'dn;  hhii^  of  which,  | 
«jd  thrusts  of  their  elboWS^’  Agf-hafe  AiWB  the  foe.  The 
prisoners  were  more  nlMnettniS'  dMbftdie^  tiahi,  imd  dmongh 

HlSTOIISr  ot 

EY^.  44#. 

sp.^e8sb  other,  vi^  V»e 
iurre9der  wu  made 
the  Jzst<j^:^oter8  of  ^  war; 
daya,  Ae  oth^*  states  at  tbu 
{M^^  <a]^'Saro»idered.  TheOcripuimu  were  adraitted  to  a 
^  oa  |pdog  secsurjity..  . 
v^^p41.  Fj^is,..a&er,  reapi^  hmrelf  ma  war  to 
hfnic  his  mmy  liup  ha.  owa.pnvimce.  Aod  as, 
;  ,3Ih;i^  _-)ks,  people  lad,  ia  coaide9rwti<mj(d’ 
hia|tfQf|^^  jpac«afa^y.  p«fonaed,  re-elected  Mia  to4ho 
a«}w^  sa>sto„£r<aa  ite;  ,fame  mc^^,  «Qt- 
4^-»^^,^v.hjs>c^^;imd .fia-the  f&m  fidlowiag,  ho  wluch  Ap- 
3^ls0^  5^"^;  Qmriius.  jmd  X4tci^  Volitmaius  w®ps  oc^  * 
aohs.  la  some  aomds  1  Aad,:  tibat  Apjms,  s^ 
hoidiog  die  <^ce  of  QSasor,  d(^lfli^.hHBs^  a  ca^dme  for 
the  A^.his  .decdcm; was  ^p^d  %  a  p-oU^ 
.  ^hm^-  .^H  he  rested  dhe 
to-Jhejmiw^^  new 
ii^,.^if|bt^Jhdliiait.mto,  .who  hid  tad»^.mtos,  heiag  decree# 
tq  fam  coU^agae,  he  remained  at  Rome,  with.^  design  tp  .ia- 
crease  his  hy;{H:^idar  intrigues,  since  die  nieaasx^ 
prpcuring  bmcmr.ia  war  were  placed  in  the  hands  of  others. 
VoltppmusJ^.no  reason  to  he  dissatisEed  with  Us  pitmisce : 
he  fon^  many  imcdes  with  good  success,  and  took  several 
cities  by  assault.  He  was  liberal  in  his  doimdons  of  the  spoil ; 
and  this  muniEcence,  engaging  in  itsdf,  he  enhanced  by  his 
cou^oua  demeanour,  by  which  cimduct  he  mspired  his  «d- 
diets  with  ardour  to  meet  both  ,tml  sod  dan^r.  .Quudas 
Fabius,  proconsul,  fought  a  pitched,  battle  wkhthe  armies  of 
the  Samnites,  nem.the  city  of  Alli&.  -3he  victory  was  cmn- 
plete.  The  enemy  were  driven  ,fiom  th*  fieU,  wd  {rnmned 
to  dieir  camp  nor  would  they  .have,  kept  possessiem  of  that, 
had  not  the  day  been  simost  It  was.  invested,  how- 

wooK  rx. 

2t5 

B.c.  me.} 
eirer,  before  ni^t,  and  forded  lest  acqr  slKmld 
slip  Next  mmmgy  whik  it  was  scarcely  ideae  di^, 
diey  proposed  to  c^ipitula^y  a&d  it  was  ag^ed,  that  sitcb  iis 
were  ii^ves  of  Sammam  ^teuld  be  dlsmk^d  widi  sittg^ 
garmei^.  Afl  these  were  sent  utider  the  yoke.  No  pi^esm* 
ticm  was  taken  in  favour  <3$  the  aUtes  of  die  SaasBites  Pt^y 
were  sold  by  aucticm^  to  the  number  mwn  thc^csaad. 
Hose  who  declared  ^emselves  sufa§ec^  isi  die  Hemiciasis^ 
were  kept  by  themselves  under  a  gcmrd.  Att  these  Fabias 
seat  to  Home  to  the  s^ate ;  and,  after  being  ^^mined,  wbe* 
Aer  it  was  in  ccmsequence  o£  a  pulAc  cader,  or  as  vohin* 
teers^  duit  Aey  had  carried  arms  on  Ae  sUe  of  Ae^Samnites 
Ae  Aey  were  A^ibuted  among  Ae  states 
of  the  Lmines,  to  Ut  1^1  'm  custody ;  mid  it  was  ordered, 
that  dm  new  ccmsuls,  PiAlius  Cmmelins  Arvina, 
aid  Quintus  Mardi^  IVemulus,  who  by  this 
fiase  had  b^n  elected,  Amdd  lay  dmt  afihir  entire 
before  Ae  senate ;  Ais  gave  such  ofibnce  to  the  Hemlcians, 
that,  at  a  meeting  of  aH  the  states,  as^mbled  by  the  Anag- 
mans,  hx  the  drcus  odled  Ae  Marmme,  Ae  whole  nadoii  of 
die  Hemicians,  excepting  die  Ala^ans,  Ferentines,  aid 
Veni^ns,  decided  vw  a^inst  tbe*Homan  people. 
XIrlll.  In  Sanmxum  also,  in  con^queiK^  of  Ae  departure 
of  FaUm^  ^^w  commotions  arose.  Caktia  and  Sora,  smd  the 
Rommi garrisons  stationed  Aere,  were  taken^  and  the  prisoners 
trea^d  wiA  extreme  cruelty :  Publius  Cornelius  was  there¬ 
fore  ^nt  drither  wiA  an  army.  The  command  against  dm 
tmw  imemy  (for  by  this  time  sm  order  had  passed  for  declar¬ 
ing  war  against  the  Anagpians,  and  Ae  rcstrf  the  Hemicians) 
wim  decreed  to  Marcius.  These,  in  Ae  beginning,  secured 
allAe  passes  between  the  camps  of  the  consuls,  in  such  a 
mmnmr,  that  no  messenger;  however  expert,  could  make  his 
way  from  one  to  Ae  oAer  ;  and  each  consul  spent  several 
days  in  Asoiute  uncertamty  and  in  anxious  suspense 

[YA.  uri 

m  HisTo^  m  «0M£. 
llate  Q£4Sifr9llter.  >  ApFrdbes0k»8£^^ 
wttsc 
CjWjUj^c^  to:i6«U<^  jBiaws  cttsed^  t9 
aiu«i««^4Htdd^  «»erfaM;ies,..  -Tbie  c^ptiaet^il^ 
pt0ff«9s  -of  the  war  :  ehcffired 
««HSlll«  lo  the.^?e«ent  iUiannv  to  ^lhe  -Jncient  -mmwa  9S 
tktf  aa^itu.  .  WitluHit  e«er  imkinganyieffait  worth  iiii«q^obi> 
iag,^beisg  foe^o  91^  of  tiiu«e;4^reat  ooatps  withio  siew 
stiipoliMed  for  »^«e^  ^ilriy  4ii^ dioriog  whkh 
th^  ««sd  ^  .B|}qsei4o  the.  senate,  on  the  tenoss  c£  for* 
twosB^ai^’  an4  cotn,  a^htaip  to  4^^  soli^ 
dSer.  The  ^ntftte  hack  to  Mcnawst  whom 
they  es^wered  to  4£tetwiiQe  09  the  .irfSur,  md  he  i^c^ted 
"dtpirs^bjosiseioB.  Meanwhde,inS«mMM^^^h^«oa8id, 
thoi^h  superior  in  sweagd),  wm  very  otiich  ^paterawed  by 
die  nature  of  jus  sitastkoi :  the  eoeosy  had  Nocled  ^i^tfae 
rands,  and  s^zed  on  the  dtilai,  «ot»  to-^p  tdl 
pKesof  ^ovisioes;  nor  codid  the  eoi»nj,  ih^igh  ^  daAy 
drww  eim  his  troops,  and  offered  bntdevalhBK  dwas  to  on  ai> 
It  was  evident,  dtat  aesAt^-  ocMU  ^  St^oite 
sti^j^rt  an  iwEnediatc  »mte$t,  nor  die  Botnan  adeiay  of  ae« 
tioB.  The  of  Mwcios,  who,  after  he  had  subdiKid 
the  Bteniieiaas,  haloed  m*the  succour  of  coSes^o^  |mt 
the  enemy’s  power  any  jouger  no  avoid  ffglu^tfbr 
they,  who  had  deemed  theagacives  a  match  in.fhe  JeU, 
even-  for  one  of  dm' armies,  ooutd  surely  not  suppose  d»gt,  if 
they  should  allow  the  two  consular  armies  to  unite!,  they 
coNutd  have  any  Impe  remaining  t  they  made  an  attack,  there¬ 
fore,  on  Mttrcitah  as  he  was  approaching  in  the  inegular  cn*- 
d^  ed  -maechr  -  The  ba^^age  was  hastily  thrown  togcdier  ia 
the  ccntnc,  and  the  line  form^  as  well  as  thedme  permitted. 
The  shout,  ^hieh  reapbed  the  post  of  Cornelius,  wUh-Ae 
dimt’obseiwed'^a  distance^  excited  a-bustle  and  hurry  in  his 
camp.  f^rdUsmg  bis  men,  mstautly,  to  arms,  and  leading 

BOOK  IX. 

297 

B.C.  305.] 
them  out  to  the  field  with  the  utmost  haste,  he  clutrged  the 
flank  of  the  enemy’s  line,  ^bich  had  enough  to  do  in  the 
other  dispute,  at  the  same  time  exclaiming,  that  it  would 
be  the  height  of  infamy,  if  diey  suffered  Matxius’s  army  to 
monopolize  the  honour  of  both  vicmries,  md  did  not  asseit 
their  claim  to  the  glory  of  their  own  war.”  He  bore  down 
all  before  him,  and  pushed  forward,  through  the  midst  of 
the  enemy’s  Ime,  to  their  camp,  which,  being  left  without  a 
guard,  he  took  and  set  on  fire ;  and  the  flames  of  it  bdng 
seen  by  the  soldiers  of  Marcias,  auad  likewise  by  the  enemy 
on  their  looking  about,  a  general  flight  immediately  took 
place  among  the  Samnites.  But  they  <touid  not  effect  an  es* 
cape  in  any  direction  ^  in  every  quarter  they  met  death. 
After  a  slaughter  of  thirty  thou^nd  men,  the  consub  had 
now  given  the  signal  for  retreat ;  and  were  ccdlecting,  iiito 
erne  body,  their  sevend  forces,  who  were  employed  in  mutual 
congratulations,  when  some  new  cohorts  of  the  enemy,  which 
had  been  levied  for  a  reinforcement,  being  seen  at  a  distance, 
occalicmed  a  renewal  of  the  carnage*  On  these  the  conquer- 
oia  rushed,  without  any  order  of  the  consuls,  or  signal  re¬ 
ceived,  crying  out,  that  they  would  give  these  Samnites  an 
introduction  to  service,  which  they  wouki  not  like.  The 
consub  indulged  the  ardour  of  the  legions,  well  lowing  that 
raw  troops  mixed  with  veterans  dispirited  by  defeat,  would 
be  i]icapsd>le  even  of  attempting  a  contest.  Nor  were  they 
wrtmg  in  their  judgment :  ail  the  forces  of  the  Samnites,  old 
and  new,  fled  to  the  nearest  mountains.  These  the  Roman 
army  abo  ascended,  so  that  no  situation  afforded  s^ety  to 
the  vanquished :  they  were  beaten  off,  even  from  the  sum¬ 
mits  which  they  had  seized.  And  now,  sdl,  with  one 
voice,  $i^)pHcaled  for  a  suspension  of  arms.  On  which,  be-  ^ 
ing  ordered  to  fumbh  ccan  for  three  months,  pay  for  a  year, 
and  a  tunic  to  each  of  the  soldiers,  rfiey  dejaities  to  the 
senate  to  sue  for  peace.  Cornelius  was  left  in  Smtmiom. 
VOL.  II, — 2  Q 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

tY,R.  44f . 

Mmttma  returned  ia^  Ae  city,  in  triumph  over  die  Hemi- 
cians  ;  ^d  a  decree  was  passed^  for  erectmg  to  him,  in  the 
Fimwh,  an  equ^triim  sUUue,  whtdi  placed  before  the 
temfde  of  Casi^«  To  three  states  of  tte  Hermcians  fthc 
Ahurians,  Verulans,  imd  Feremmes,)  tteir .  own  lawa  wore 
restored,  because  tl^  preferred  these,  fe>  the  being  made 
eitizens  of  Rome ;  and  Acy  were  permitted  to  intermarry 
wWi  each  <rther,  a  privilege  which  Aey  alone  Ae  Hemi- 
rirnia,  §0^  a  long  time  after,  enjoyed.  To  Anagnlans  and 
the  oAers  whodmd  nmde  war  on  the  Romans,  was  granted 
the  freedmn  of  Ae  wkhout  Ae  right  of  voting  i  public 
assemblies,  and  iatermsurria^s,  were  not  aUowed  them,  mi 
their  magistrates  woje  prohibited  from  acting,  except  in  Ae 
minisUation  of  poblk  woiphsp.  Oaring  this  year,  Caius 
Junius  Bubukus,  cei^r,  ccmnrac^  fm*  Ae  building  of  a 
tem|de  to  Heahh,  whkh  he  had  ^wed  durbg  his  constdale 
in  Ae  war  wkk  Ae  &imhtti^  By  Ae  person,  and  his 
ctdksgue,  Marcus  Vrierios  Masdmus,^  roads  were  made 
Ae  fields  at  Ae  ptddie  expense^  During  Ae  ^me 
i  year  Ac  trmity  wiA  the  Carthaginians  was  renewed  a  Aird 
rime,  and  ample  presents  made  to  their  amlmssadors  who 
aane  on  that  busb^ss. 
"  .XLIV.  Ihis  year  had  a  dictator  in  oSke,  FuUius  Cmtie- 
lius  Scipo,  wiA  Ptd^us  Decius  Mus,  master  of  Ae  horse.  - 
By  Aese  the  elecrimi  of  consuk  was  ^d,  b^ing  Ae  purpose 
for  whkh  they  had  been  created,  because  ndiAer  of  Ae  con- 
mis  could  be  al^ent  from  Ae  aimi^»  The  con* 
Y  R  448 
B  C  304"  elected  were  LtK:ms  Po^tnius  and  Tiriis 
.  Mtnueiua  ;  whom  Pko  places  next  after  ^tnktus 
Fabius  ^d  Ptidi^s  Deciua,  omiuing  Ae  two  years  in  whkh 
I  have  set  down  Ckudius  with  Volummt]^,  and  Qtmieiius 
vdA  Marcim^  m  ocmsule.  ¥^ether  Ais  happened  Arougb 
a  la]^  ctf  memmy  m  digesring  his  aimals,  or  wheAcr  he  pur- 
p^ly  ^med  over  those  two  consulates  m  deeming  the  ac- 

c&tmH  M  be  nsctttaintA.  Dmiog  tins 
ye*f  the  Sumnlte^  mmit  mcitrsioes  into  die  district  of  Stellie 
in  the  Csmpgmian  Mrhmy.  Both  the  consuls  were  there¬ 
fore  sent  into  Sarnnintn,  and  proceeded  to  dffierent  regioira, 
Postumim  to  Tlfertittss,  Minueias  to  BorianuOi.  The  first 
engagemetit  happened  at  Tiferninn,  where  Postmntus  com¬ 
manded.  Some  say,  thstt  the  Santnites  were  comjdetely  de¬ 
feated,  and  twenty  thousand  d  them  made  prisoners.  Odicrs, 
that  the  armies  separated  without  victory  cm  either  side  ; 
and  that  Ifostumtus,  counterfeititig  fear,  withdrew  his  forces 
ptrrtrtely  by  night,  and  marched  away  to^  the  mountains j 
whither  the  enemy  also  followed,  and  U>dk  possessioii  of  a 
sn^emg  bold  two  miles  distant.  The  consul,  havmg  created  a 
behef  that  he  had  come  thither  for  die  saice  of  a  safe  post, 
and  a  fruitful  spot,^nd  such  It  really  was,)  secured  his  camp 
with  strong  works*  Furnishing  it  widi  magazines  o€  erary 
thing  ota^l,  be  l^t  a  strong  guard  to  defend  it  ;  and,  at  tSbt 
third  watch,  led  away  die  legions,  lig^stfy  acxoutr^,  hf  die 
shortest  road  which  he  Could  toke,  to  join  his  cotteag^,  who 
lagr  opposite  to  his  foe.  There, ^  hf  advice  <rf  Postumius, 
Minucius  caule  to  an  engagemefit  |  and  when  the  4ght  imd 
continued  doubtful  through  a  great  jmrt  rf  die  day^  Postu¬ 
mius,  with  his  fresh  kgiona,  made  an  unexpeemd  attack  on 
the  enemy’s  line,  spent  by  this  time  with  :  dms,  wea¬ 
riness  and  wounds  having  rendered  them  incapable  even  of 
flying,  they  were  cot  off  to  a  man,  and  tw«ity-^e  standards 
taken.  The  Romaic  then  proceeded  to  Postumius’s  station, 
where  the  two  victorious  armies  flAing  upon  the  enemy,  al¬ 
ready  dismayed  by  the  news  of  what  had  passed,  muted  and 
dispersed  them :  tw^ity-six  military  s^dards  were  taken 
here,  and  the  Saimite  general,  Statius  Gellius,  with  a  great 
number  of  other  primus,  and  both  the  camps,  fell  into  die 
hat^s  of  the  conqua:*{W8.  Ne«  day  Bovianum  was  besieged, 
and  soon  after  teken.  Ae  consuls  were  honoured  with 

BISTORT  ROME. 

[YiR.  449. 

a  triamph,  md  with  h^[h  apphmse  g£  ^eir  excellent  cmuhict. 
Some  writers  my^  that  the  omsul  Minocius  wius  brought 
back  to  the  camp  grievoudy  wounds,  mid  Uisd^he  died  there ; 
that  Marcus  Fulvius  was  si^tituted  c^mmd  in  hia  fdace,  imd 
that  it  was  he,  who,  being  sent  to  comitiand  Biinucius’s  army, 
took  Bovianum*  During  the  same  year,  Sora,  Arpinum,  and 
Censeimia  were  recovered  from  die  Samnites.  Hie  smtue  of 
Hercules  die  Great  was  erected  in  the  Capitcd,  and  dedi* 
cated. 

XL  V .  In  the  succeeding  consulate  of  Publius  Snlpicaus 
Y  R  449  Publius  Semprcmius  Sophus,  the  Sam* 
B  c'303*  ^sirous  either  of  a  termination  or  a  cessa¬ 
tion  of  hostilities,  sent  andiassadors  to  Rome  to 
treat  of  peace  ;  to  whose  submissive  stdicitations  this  answer 
was  returned,  that  had  not  die  Samnites  frequently  soM* 
cited  peace,  at  times  when  they  were  actually  prefmring  for 
war,  then-  present  application  might,  perhaps,  in  die  course 
of  negociadng,  have  produced  the  desired  effect.  But  now, 
since.words  had  hithetto  proved  vain,  peo^e’s  conduct  might 
be  guided  by  facts :  that  Publius  Sempronius  the  consul 
would  shcffdy  be  in  Samnium  widi  an  army :  that  be  could 
not  be  deceived  in  judging  whether  their  dispositions  inclined 
to  peace  or  war.  Be  would  bring  the  sei^e  certain  informa¬ 
tion  respecting  every  {^ticolar,  and  their  ambassadors  might 
follow  the  consul  on  his  return  from  &mmiam.”  The  Roman 

amay  accordingly  marched  through  all  jmrts  of  Samnium, 
found  every  thing  in  a  state  of  peace,  and  was  liberally  sup¬ 
plied  with  provisions  ;  cm  which,  a  renewal  of  the  old  treaty 
was,  this  year,  granted  to  the  Samnites.  The  Roman  aims 
were  dien  turned  against  the  iEquans,  their  old  enemi^,  but 
who  Imd,  for  many  years  past,  remained  quiet,  under  a  falla* 
cious  appearance  of  friendship.  The  reason  of  making  war 
on  them  was,  that  while  the  Hemicimis  were  in  a  state  of 
prosperity,  these  had,  in  conjunction  with  them,  frequently 

BOOK  IX. 

B.C.  ms.} 

mt 

sent  aid  to  Stenites  >  and  after  the  Hemktant  wefe  9^- 
dued,  almost  die  whde  mukm^  without  dissembling  th^  they 
acted  by  pdblic  autfamrity,  had  revedted  to  die  enemy ;  and 
when;  fidier  the  conduskm  die  treaty  with  the  Saniattes  at 
Rome,  ambassadtm  were  aemt  to  demand  sausiaction,  diey 
said,  that  "  thb  was  enlyn  trial  made  of  them^  an  ^  ex- 
pectation.diat  they  wmdd  through  fmr  sufier  thmnselves  to 
be  made  Roman  citizens.  But  how  much  that  comliikm 
was  to  be  wished  for,  Aey  had  been  taught  by  die  Hcmt- 
ciaens  ;  who,  when  they  had  the  optitm,  preferred  their  own 
laws  W  the  freedom  of  the  Roman  state.  To  p^iple  who 
widhed  for  liberty  to  choc^e  what  they  judged  pte£ertd)le,  the 
nt^essity  of  beccmiing  Roman  cidz^s  have  the  smture 
of  a  punishment.’^  In  resentment  of  thei»  declartuions,  ut¬ 
tered  pddkly  in  their  ^semblies,  the  Rcnimm  pe^le  orchmed 
war  te'lte  made  on  the  iEquans  ;  and,  in  predeern:^  ci  tins 
ztew  u^derteking,  both  the  consols  marched  from  the  (^ty, 
and  down  at  die  dUi^mce  of  four  miles  frmn  the*  camp  of 
die  enemy.  The  teOGfm  of  the  iEquans,  Hke  tumsdtuary  te- 
cruite,  in  consequei^e  their  having,  pom^d  such  a  number 
of  years  without  waging  war  on  their  ot^  account,  were  all 
in  dkoxder  and  ^  cemfttsion,  without  estal^died  and 
without  coimnasid.  Stmse  advised  to  give  Imtde,  others  to 
(kfend  the  oimp;  greater  part  Were  tnflimiced  by  con¬ 
cern  for  the  devastedoit  of  their  lands,  likely  to  take  plmre, 
and  the  consequent  destruction  of  their  cities,  left  with  weak 
garrison.  Among  a  variety  of  proposidKms,  they  however 
heard  owe  which  tenckd  to  transfer  evety  man’s  attention 
from  the  public  intei%mft)  the  care  of  his  private  concerns. 
It  recommended  thtu,  at  tbe  fim  watch,  diey  shmald  depart 
from  the  camp  by  didfereUt  roads,  and  carry  all  their  effects 
into  the  cities,  where  they  might  be  secured  by  the  straigth 
of  th^  ferdheadox^  ;  dtis  they  all  approved  and  warmly  cele¬ 
brated.  When  the’  enemy  were  now  dispersed  through  the 

302 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.449. 
country,  the  Romans,  at  the  first  dawn,  marched  out  to  the 
field,  and  drew  up  in  order  of  battle,  but  no  one  coining  to 
oppose  them,  they  advanced  in  a  brisk  pace  to  the  camp. 
Perceiving  neither  guards  before  the  gates,  nor  soldiers  on 
the  ramparts,  nor  the  usual  bustle  of  a  camp,— surprised  at 
the  extraordinary  silence,  they  halted  in  apprehension  of 
some  stratagem.  At  length,  passing  over  the  rampart,  and 
finding  the  whole  deserted,  they  proceeded  to  search  out  the 
tracks  of  the  enemy.  But  these,  as  they  scattered  themselves 
to  every  quarter,  occasioned  perplexity  at  first.  Afterwards 
discovering  their  design  by  means  of  scouts,  they  attacked 
their  cities,  one  after  another,  and,  within  the  space  of  fifty 
days,  took,  entirely  by  force,  forty-one  towns,  most  of  which 
were  razed  and  burnt,  and  the  race  of  the  iEquans  almost  ex¬ 
tirpated.  A  triuniph  was  granted  over  the  iEquans.  The 
Marrucinians,  Marsiaris,  Pelignians,  and  Ferentans,  warned 
by  the  example  of  their  disasters,  sent  depiities  to  Rome  to 
solicit  peace  and  friendship  ;  and  these  states,  on  their  sub¬ 
missive  applications,  were  admitted  into  alliance. 
XL VI,  In  the  same  year,  Gaius  Flavius,  son  of  Cneius, 
grandson  of  a  freed  man,  a  notary,  in  low  circumstances 
originally,  but  artful  and  eloquent,  was  appointed  curule 
aedile.  I  find  in  some  annals,  that,  being  in  attendance  on 
the  sediles,  and  seeing  that  he  was  voted  sedile  by  the  prero¬ 
gative  tribe,  but  that  his  name  would  not  be  received,  because 
he  acted  as  a  notary,  he  threw  down  his  tablet,  and  took  an 
oath,  that  he  would  not,  Lor  the  future,  folldw  that  business. 
But  Liciinius  Macer  contends,  that  he  had  dropped  the  em¬ 
ployment  of  notary  a  considerable  time  before,  having  already 
been  a  tribune,  and  twice  a  triumvir,  once  for  regulating  the 
nightly  watch,  and  another  time  for  conducting  a  colony. 
However,  of  this  there  is  no  dispute,  that  to  the  contempt 
thrown  by  the  nobles  on  the  meanness  of  his  condition,  he 
opposed  mueh  firmness.  He  made  piiblic  the  rules  of  pro- 

BX.  303.] 

BOOK  IX. 

ceecling  in  judicial  causes,  hitherto  shut  up  in  the  closets  of 
the  pontiffs  ;  and  hung  up  to  public  view,  round  the  Forum, 
the  calendar  on  white  tablets,  that  all  might  know  when  busi¬ 
ness  could  be  transacted  in  the  courts.  To  the  great  displea¬ 
sure  of  the  nobles,  he  performed  the  dedication  of  the  tem¬ 
ple  of  Concord,  in  the  area  of  Vulcan’s  temple;  and  the 
chief  pontiff,  Cornelius  Barbatus,  was  compelled  by  the  uni¬ 
ted  instances  of  the  people,  to  dictate  to  him  the  form  of 
words,  although  he  affirmed,  that,  consistently  with  the  prac¬ 
tice  of  antiquity,  no  other  than  a  consul,  or  commander-in¬ 
chief,  could  dedicate  a  temple.  This  occasioned  a  law  to  be 
proposed  to  the  peqple,  by  direction  of  the  senate,  that  no 
person  should  dedicate  a  temple,  or  an  altar,  without  an  or¬ 
der  from  the  senate,  or  from  a  majority  of  the  plebeian  tri¬ 
bunes.  The  incident  which  1  am  about  to  mention  would 
be  trivial  in  itself,  were  it  not  an  instance  of  the  freedom  as¬ 
sumed  by  plebeians  in  opposition  to  the  pride  of  the  nobles  ; 
Flavius  coming  to  make  a  visit  to  his  colleague,  who  was 
sick,  sorne  young  nobles  who  were  sitting  there  agreed  among 
themselves  not  to  pay  him  the  compliment  of  rising  at  his 
entrance  ;  on  which  he  ordered  his  curule  chair  to  be  brought 
thither,  and  from  his  honourable  seat  of  office  enjoyed  the 
sight  of  his  enemies  tortured  with  envy.  However,  Flavius 
owed  his  appointment  to  the  sedileship  to  a  faction  composed 
of  the  lowest  class  of  people,  which  had  gathered  strength 
during  the  censorship  of  Appius  Claudius  i  for  he  was  the 
first  who  degraded  the  senate,  by  electing  into  it  the  imme¬ 
diate  descendants  of  freed  men  ;  and  whm  he  found  that  no 
one  allowed  that  election  as  valid,  and  that  his  conduct,  in 
the  senate-house,  had  not  procured  him  the  influence  in  the 
city  which  it  had  been  his  principal  object  to  attain,  he  dis¬ 
tributed  men  of  the  meanest  order  among  all  the  sevbrkl 
tribes,  and  thus  corrupted  the  assemblies  both  of  the  Forum 
and  of  the  field  of  Mars.  ^With  respect  to  the  election  of 

304 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[y.R  449. 

Flavius,  it  excited  great  indignaticm  in  ihe  breasts  dP  most 
of  tbe  nobles^  who  laid  aside  dieir  gold  rings  and  bracelets  in 
consequence  of  it.  From  that  time  the  state  was  spUi  into 
two  partly.  The  uncorrupted  part  of  die  people,  who 
voured  and  supported  the  goc»l,  held  one  side ;  the  facdon 
of  the  rabble,  the.^ther.  Quintus  Fsddqs  and  Publii^JDe« 
cius  were  then  made  censors ;  and  F^it^  bodi  for  the  sake 
of  concord,  and  at  the  same  to  prevent  die  elections 
remaining  in  the  hands  of  the  lowest  of  the  people,  pur^d 
the  rest  of  the  tribes  of  all  the  labble  of  the  Forum,  and 
threw  it  into  four,  which  he  ordered  to  be  called  city  tribes. 
And  this  procedure,  we  are  told,  gave  such  universal  satis* 
faction,  that,  by  this  regulation  in  the  orders  of  the  state,  |ie 
obtained  the  suraame  of  Maximus,  which  he  bid  not  been 
honoured  with  by  his  mmiy  victoiies.  The  annual  review 
of  the  knights,  on  the  id^  of  July,  is  also  said  to  have  bc^ 
projected  and  instituted  by  him. 

THE 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

BOOK  X. 
Submission  of  die  Marcians  accepted.  The  college  of  Augury 
from  four  to  nine.  Tlie  law  of  appeal  to  the  people  earned  by  Valmus 
the  consul.  Two  more  tribes  added.  War  declared  agriinst  the 
nites.  Several  successful  actions.  In  an  engagemetit  igaunsttlm 
bined  foo^ces  of  the  Etruscans,  Umbrians,  Sanuiites^  and  Gaul% 
Decius,  after  the  example  of  his  fatiber,  devotes  him^lf  to  the  anny. 
Dies,  and,  by  his  death,  procures  the  rictory  to  the  Bomans. ,  xiefeat  of 
the  Samnites  by  Papirius  Cursor.  The  census  held.  The  lu^rutn 
closed.  The  number  of  the  citizens  two  hundred  and 
sand,  three  hundred  and  twenty-two. 

I.  UNDER  the  succeeding  consuls,  Lucius  Genuck^, 
and  Servjus  Cornelius,  the  state  enioyed  alinost 
uifintdrupted  rest  from  foreign  wars.  Colonies  g 
were  led  out  to  Sora  and  Alba.  For  the  latter,  *  ‘  * 
situated  in  the  country  of  the  iEquans,  six  thousand  cdb« 
riiste  were  enrolled.  Sora  had  formerly  belonged  to  the  VoT- 
scimi^  territory,  but  had  fallen  into  the  possessldu  of  the  Sani'- 
nites:  thidier  were  sent  ibur^^ousaiid  settlers.  This  yesnr 
the  fireedoiii  of  the  state  grah|ed  to  the  Arpinians  atid 
Tri^ulans.  The-  frmmmmaa^  were  'fined  a  diird  pan  of 
th^r  hiiids,  ht^use  it  discovered,  ftat  th^  bad  eridla- 
VOL.  II. — 2  R 

UlSTOHY  HOME. 

[YJR.  450- 

to  stir  up  the  Heiwiaus  to  rebdlioos  and  the  heads 
eo^^racy,  after  a  trial  before  the  consuls,  held  in 
I^Sfian^e  of  a  decree  of  tiie  senate,  were  beaten  with  rods 
md  beheaded.  However,  that  tiie  Romans  might  not  pass 
^  year  entirely  exeai|^>  from  war,  a  little  expedition  was 
n^de  into  Umbria ;  imell^nce  being  received  froin  thence, 
that  numbers  of  men,  in  arms^  had,  from  a  certain  cave, 
made  excursicms  into  the  adjacent  country.  Into  this  cave 
tiie  troops  penetrated  with  their  standards,  ai^,  the  place 
being  dark,  they  jreceived  many  wounds,  chiefly  from  stones 
thrown.  At  length  the  other  mouth  of  the  cave  being 
fmmd,  for  it  pervious,  both  the  openings  were  filled 
up  with  wood,  which  being  set  on  fire,  there  perished  by 
means  of  the  smoke  and  heat,  no  less  than  two  thousand 
s^n;  many  of  whom,  at  the  last,  in  attempting  to  make 
tii^  way  out,  rushed  into  the  very  flames.  The  two  Marci, 
^  Livius  Denter,  fmd  d£milius,  succeeding  to  the 
broke  out  again  with  the  Alquans ; 
who,  being  highly  disjdesesed  at  the  colony  cs* 
t^^hed^  witiun  their  territory,  as  if  it  were  a  fortress  to 
ke^  them  in  awe,  made  an  attempt,  with  their  whole  force, 
to  seize  it,  but  were  repulsed  the  colonists  themselves. 
They  caused,  however,  such  an  riarm  at  Rome,  that,  to 
qvxll  this  insurrection,  Caius  Junius  Bubulcus  was  nomina-^ 
dictator :  for  it  was  scarcely  credible  that  the  iEquans, 
after  being  reduced  to  such  a  degree  of  weakness,  should  by 
tiiemselves^  alone  have  ventured  (o  engage  in  a  war.  The 
dieter,  taking  the  field,  with  Marcus  Titinius,  master  of 
bc^,  in  the  first  engagement,  reduced  the  jiEquans  to 
submisrion ;  and,  returning  into  the  city  in  triumph,  on  the 
ei^tit  dayy . dedicated,  in  the  character  of  dictator,  the*tem* 
jde  of  iledith,  which  he  ^had  vowed  when  consul,  and  con¬ 
tracted  wl^  cen«»r. 
II.  Curing  ^is  year  a  fleet  of  Grecians,  tbe  com¬ 
mand  of  Cleonymus,  a  Lacedsemonian,  arrived  on  the  coast 

301.3  BCK)K  X  ^ 
of  Iidy,  and  lEltoiae,  a  ialfce  tcrri^^  of  ^  Sd- 
lentines.  Ak  ettcmf ,  tihe  consol  iEmffitt1 act*, 
who,  m  one  i»Ude,  clkttplctdf  them,  airf 
futher  opfKJsifiifto  drove  them  on  bckri  ^iat  Thrfi 
was  theO  razored  to  its  old  i»W«tai^,  9si^  l^de 
biished  to  SSe  oomitiy  of  the  la 
I  hfid^  tl^  f  Bubuficus  was  Aiat  cd^a^ 
try,  and  t^t  C^koayinus,  ‘without  tiislB^ng  an  ehfa|^i^Bt 
with  the  Roia^s;  t^red  out  of  Itatjfr  tfc'ffien  aaiKlf  mumS 
promontmy  ^  Bhsndikium,  and,' steerhig  down  dwfnofid* 
die  erf  the  Adriatic  guKi  becims«"4^  ihe^ed,  cm  the  left 
hand,  the  erf  Ilaiy  and,  ck  ^ 
right,  the  ^rii«k,^t%urBhms,  M^lstrians,  nai&n8of  i»^- 
ges,  and  nbfed  &  for  he  passed  on 
&)S^  of  the  b 
to  exple^'  tfie  ^c<mirt#^^”and,  l^bg  ihfortued  that  a  mOfe^ 
b^ch  stretched  flie  rfiotc,  bt7dfli^  which  were 
overflowed  by  iSdOs ;  dkt  dtf  1a^  wa»  seen  at  no  gread 
distance,  Ic^di  in  the  neatest  p^  and  rising  behind  into 
bilk,  beyond  which  was  the  month  of  a  very  deep  river,  i^o 
which  they  had  i^en  ships  brought  round  susd  n^mtal  in 
safety,  (this  was  the  river  Medtouro^J  he  ordered  his  fl^  to 
sail  into  it  and  go  up  again^  the  stream.  As  the  channel 
would  not  admit  the  heavy  ships,  tte  troops,  removing  into 
the  li^rter  vessels,  arrived  at  a  jmrt  erf  the  country,  occupied 
by  three  maririme  cantons  of  the  Patavlans,  sefdcd,  on  diat 
coast.  Here  they  made  a  descent,  leaving  a  small  guard 
witii  the  shi]^,  made  themselves  master^  of  diesc  cantmts, 
set  lire  to  the  hou^,  drove  oS  a  cmisiderabk  bo^  of  men 
and  cattle,  and,  aHured  by  Ae^  sweets  of  plunder,  proceeded 
stiU  farther  from  the  shore.  When  m^Ws  of  this  was  brcHi|^ 
to  Patavium,  where  die  ctmtigc^  of  the  Gauls  ke|Mt  hi- 
habitants  constantly  in  arms,  di^  divided  their  3^ng  imm 
mto  two  bands,  cmc  of  which  was  led  towards  the  filter 

mSTOm  W  IftOME.  iYM^ 
ftife  p  ^ ^  by  ft 
1^  tjfe^fw^s,  towftr4b 
‘liji^v^ll^l^.pf  the  dbi|i« fifteen  0i|^4Mi^  from  the  town. 
^pp^^t%^e4  cndft,-^0i^  fctlliftg^  guards,  e<^a- 
^PfSpBfi  the  ift^oers  to  ressove  ^ir  shHis  to  the 
hapk  of  ;  ^l^iimd  sdso,  the  c^  tbe'dis- 
||ij|^  ifiilndb^  succe«5ftd  |r^d  ^  Gredam, 
I^^iilvc9c  ^ps,  were  in  their  way 
^  OBhmh  shi^,  they  were 
'OS^^/^q^X'^^iad'^oiiil^whcrwere^s^  ^rsa^ers,  ga¥e  m- 
that  ^  |Ee^^3^rilh  llie^  (^^^yinus,  was  bin; 
the  Bearest 
to  he  kept  do  board 
1pe^^4^nomed  veftsela^^i^tpGft^dri^  ^  ^  ^rpose  of 
o0ttii  iS^^^'^0^me\vts  mtp 
dowB  ;the  il^  tKfttrl^dy  ships^ 
dreads  Ite  mi^  fia^,  aial^  than  they 
showed  a  ^reat^%agerOess  to 
n^fhfSe  de<^  ihkit  to  make  reslatace.  ^  'fhe  soldiers 
l^n^td  as  lar;4a  Ih^  the  reiver;  ^d  having 
t3d:riiaind4}ariied  a  F^ft  of  t^e  &et,  which,  in  the  hurry  apd 
ccm^l^v  had  been  str^ded,  returmd  victorious.  Cleooy- 
mus,  having  met  simcess^  i^  no  part  of  the'  Adriatic  sea,  de¬ 
parted  with  scarce  a  fi£di  part  of  his  navy  remaining.  Many, 
now  alive,' have  sem  the  beaks  of  bis  ships,  and  the  spoils  of 
tte  l4aced£emoiiUins^  hating .iir  the  _old  temjde  of  Juno.  In 

coaaftiwnmatroti  of  this  event,  there  is  exhibited  at  Patavium, 
ew^y'^fear,  on  its  anniversary  day,  a  naval  combat  on  the  ri¬ 
ver  Ip  the  middle  of  the  town. 
{tf.^A  ff<»ty  was  tins  year  concluded  at  Rome  with  the 
Vesltmadts  who^sdictted  friendship.  Various  causes  of  ap- 
prehen^on  afterwm'ds  sprung  up.  News  arrived,  that  Etru¬ 
ria  was  in  rebellion ;  the  insurrection  having  arisen  ftrom  the 

)dia&efi»otis  ti  ^  i  Jat  liie  €yd»iiiG«^f  Imiag 
m  -pe^^  mxt  of  mvy  of  4liar 
sKea^^hadaf^oiiftodioceiq^1ri»Mi)7^(^^  Ac** 
jC^Boma  a£«>  l^«l  4^,  Msamm&  ibiM  forciUb 
irf  ilie  loBi^  1^  ^  colospof  £nrieo£$  coo* 
s^og:  ^  hm  dbcmsod.  mtcn^  h»d  hecxk  misL  Bf  r^^soo, 
jdicitefoiie^af.lbe^e  l^ri^^V  Mjadmm 
mm  mmimt^d  jE&t»tor,  and  qboae  for  hm  of  iht 
imme  Marcos  Mas^m  Pmdiiis.  This  I  am  minted  to  be<* 
i^di^  iiiao  lliai:  C^uintos  FdbiaB,  at  aucii  an  age  as  he 
Asq  was^ondl  afti^  eojoyrng  ma&y  honours,  was  f^ed  in  a  sta» 
^1  sub^diaate  to  Vakriusr  1  lUok  k  nca  unUkely 
tbe  mbtake  ar<»e  fncnna  the  surname  Maximus.  The  dim* 
the  £efai  ^t.  die  bead  of  sm  army^  in  one  batde 
hndy  de&mcd  die  Marstmss,  dxwe  tbemii^dieir  foflrti&d 
towns,  and  afterwaodi^in  die  course  of  a  ihsw  ^ys, 
Ikima,  Fjbsstma,  ^^dia ;  aiul  then,  iining  diis  people  in 
a  bmds,^granK^d  them  a  mxtewd  of  the  tres^. 
The  fmce  di^  war  was  then  chrectedw^tmt  the  Etrmnmm ; 
and,  the  ^bmtor.hsn^g  gone  to  Rome,  the  fmipo^  of 
renewing  die  aoapicea,  the  aaa^er  M  the  horse^  going  out  to 
&wage,  was  taken  at  ^^advimtage:^  by  means  of  an^mhuscade, 
oldiged  to  %  shmsiefolly  imo  his  camp,  ^fter  kisii^  se* 
vcrai  mndards,  and  m^my  ^  his  men«  Now,  that  such  a 
discomfiture  ha^iened  to  Fsdbius  is  exceediiij^y  tinprohl^e; 
not  only  b^^use,  if  in  smy  particular,  ceitainlyabove  a^  hi 
the  qualificauotis  c#  a  commmider,  he  fully  merited  his  sur* 
name;  but,  besides,  impressed  with  the  recollection  of  Papt- 
ruis’a  severity,  be  never  could  have  been  mnpted  to  fight, 
without  the  dictator’s  order, 
IV,  The  i^ws  of  this  disaster  excited  a|,Rome  an  alarm 
Ip^ter  than  the  imporumce  of  the  affair  should  seem  to  jus¬ 
tify  t  for,  as  if  the  army  had  been  destipyed,  the  courts  were 
ordered  to  be  shut,  guards  mounted  at  the  gates,  and  watches 

510  msioxummviE.  cY^.4afi. 
«0wfc«  aadormi^ai^  vM^otsirere  heiqi^  tai 
#c  Ail  -fte  youi^^  citiz«SB.«raf«  coiqtdled  to  mUst, 
totti  dktttw^tns  oider^  to  jofat  tfae  waty.  Tliere  he 
emj  duD§  in  •  miore  tsmqt^  iRate  dura  be  eiqiectedy 
awi  reg^rt^  estafaiisbedi,  Aroi^  ^  obv  of  Ibe  xoae^  of 
the  horse;  &e  cmp  i«B»»ed  «».  sfiwe(rf.greM»^siiAs^; 
the  cc^rts,  trUdi  bad  lost  4eir  ^SBtdi$^»  kit  odthoitt  tents 
m  the  of  die  itHBfKBte ;  -md-dte  ttoops  sodeotly  las* 
{nttiratfor  j^Btkf  dut  their  disgra^'  aa^t  .  be  the  somier 
i^tenBed.  He  dierc^sro  iman^hait^  4«kaBs|>ed,  i»d  ad* 
tpBced  ioto  the  tmitory  of  fioseSa.  Tbidwr  Ae  memy  tim 
flowed  ;  aady-ddiou^  siace  dim  bte  mccessr  they  enter* 
t#ned  dieaso^im^^piae  hoj^  frosi  an  open  trial  of  ^fengib, 
3«t  they  mdy^oured  m.giAi  d^madtaotag^^a^ata* 
g«B  athkh  ipacdsed  ,with  «tea»s. 
iB  a  mMdl  A^tmee  fiW  ^  Bi»»«a  earap,  ^e  half* 
nd»d  ^nses  rd  a  A«n  t^^di  In^  kimbat^  ^  Ae  deras* 
t«Wof -dat  5®TOl»yv  .^k:^  Aey,^^^»ded  a  body 
of^^rac^pSf  tBtd.^en  dtoee-oa  some  batd^  addins  view  of  a 
B»Q|an  post,  ccmnu^M  by  a>Meate«wd*geaend,  Cneios 
Ftdidus.  'nu84etDptaAaiaot  iBd<tritig;«i3s^QTC  to^rfrean 
hk  ari^n,  <»ie  <d.  Ac;  iKidanwo,.  .atbjBiickg  dose  to  Ae 
wtabs,  called  out,  diat  t^ers  vere  drith^iout  those  canie 
at  Aeir  kknre  ixtm  die  niks  ^  the.'townv  *"^^7  Ad  they  re- 
mar^riAe,  wben  th^.  mii^t  safely  drive  them  through  Ae 
m^dk  of  Af  -Rtwaan  camp  f  This  beiag  interpreted  to  the 
lie<rteBant*gmieral,  by  some  aadves  of  CsBre^  and  great  im- 
padcstce  prevailiiig  through  every  cmipany  of  die  soldimv, 
who,  nevei  Uaifts,  dared  not  to  move  wiAout  orders,  he 
comnumded  some  who  were  skilled  in  Ae  language  to 
observe  ^entiv^y,  wheAcr  the  Aakct  <d  Ae  herdsmen  re¬ 
sembled  Aat  of  rustks  or  of  citizens ;  Aese  reported  that 
their  accent  m  speakipg,  their  manner  and  t^pearance,  were 
all  of  a  more  polished  cast  than  Muted  such  desdipdon  of  • 

B.C.  WmM  X.  3ii 
pet^oos.  Go  tell  them 
die  ambush  whkh  tibey  vainly  ccmceal ;  that  Romans  mi* 
derst^nd  aU  their  devic^s^  and  can^imw  be  m  more  taken  by 
^^ratagem  than  diey  can  be  cimquered  by  mms?’.  When 
these,  wx^rds  were  heard,  and.anried  to  theme  who  lay  in  am** 
bush,  diey  immediately  m-ose  fimn  their  ,  lurking-place,  ami 
marched,  out  in  older  into  the  plain  which  was  open  to  view 
on  every  side.  The  lieutenant-general,  thinkii^  diMpr  foixe 
too  powerful  for  his  smdl  band  to  cope  with,  i^t,  in  haste, 
to  Vderius  for  support,  and,  in  the  m^an  time,  by  himself, 
si^tained  the  •enemy ^s  emset. 
V.  On  receiving  his  message,  the  dictator  m-dered  the 
standards  to  move,  and  the  teoqis  to  follow  in  arms.  But 
every  &ing  was  executed  more  quickly,  almot^  tham  order¬ 
ed.  The  men  in  an  instant  snatched  up  their  standards,  and 
were  with  dificulty  restrained  from  running  imj^tuonsiy  on, 
being  stimulated  both  by  indignation  at  their  late  defeat,  and 
by  the  Shouts  striking  their  ears  with  increasing  vehemence, 
as  the  cemtest  grew  hotter.  They  therefore  urged  each  other, 
and^pressed  the  standard-bearers  to  quicken  their  pace.  Hie 
dictator,  the  more  eageily  be  saw  diem  push  feu^ward,  teok 
the  more  pains  to  repress  their  haste,  and  oidered  tl^m  to 
march  at  a  slower  rate.  On  the  other  side,*  the  EtruHi^ 
puuing  themselves  in  motion,  on  t^e  fimt  beginnmg  of  the 
ftay,  had  come  up  widi  their  wfaqie  force  ;  smd  several.cx- 
prases  came  to  the  dictator,  one  after  miother,  that  aS  die 
legimis  of  the  Etrurians  had  joined  in  the  hght,  and  diift  his 
men  codd  not  any  iemger  withstand  them  i  at  the  a^me  dmf , 
he  himself  saw,  from  the  lugher  ^ound,  tte  perilmis  situation 
of  the  party.  CmiEden^  however,  that  the  lieuteoant-getie- 
ral  was  aide,  ev^  yet,  to  support  the  dispute,  and  consider** 
ing  that  he  himself  was  at  hand  to  rescue  Um  fnnn  defeat, 
he  wished  to  kt  the  enemy  ho  fatiguei^  as  much  as  might 
be,  m  Older  that  when  in  diat,  state,  he  might  fett  on  dbem 

aft  HISTORY  ROME;  [T.R.451. 
\  ■  ’  r. 
fre^h  troops.  Stewly  as  these  marched,  the  diatancfc 
jdst  sufficient  for  the  cavalry  to  begin  their  career 
l^la  Aarg^.  The  battalions  of  the  legions  marched  ra  front, 
lei^l  ^e  enemy  miglrt  suspect  any  secret  or  sudden  move- 
ftSent,  buft  intervals  had  been  left  in  the  ranks  of  the  infantry^ 
aibrding  rcK^m  for  the  hoi^es  to  gaHop  through.  At  the  same 
instant  the  line  raised  the  shout,  and  Ae  cavaliy,  chatgiug  at 
poured  on  the  enemy  ;  at^d  spread  at  once  a  gene¬ 
ral  panic.  After  thts,  as  succour  had  arrived  almost  too  late 
to  the  party  surrounded,  so  now  they  were  allowed  entire 
rest,  the  fresh  troops  taking  on  themselves  the  whole  busi¬ 
ness  of  the  fight.  Nor  was  that  either  long  or  dubious.  The 
enemy  were  routed,  and  fled  to  their  camp,  which  the  Ro¬ 
mans  advauc^g  to  attack,  they  crowded  all  together  in  the 
remotest  part  of  it.  Their  flight  l^ing  obstructed  by  the 
nte'owaess  of  the  ^tes,  the  greater  number  climbed  up  on 
ihe  mounds  and  ramparn%^^  try  if  they  could  -either  defend 
dbtemselves  with  the  aid  of  the  advantageous  ground,  or  get 
uv^,  by  any  means,  and  e^ape.  One  part  of  the  rampart 
happening  to  be  badly  tx>mpacted,  sunl  under  the  weight  of 
^ie^^^^multitude,  ^ho  stood  on  it,"and  fell  into  the  trench.  On 
crying  out  that  the  gods  had  opened  that  pass  to  give 
them  i^ety,  they  made  their  out,  them  leaving 
th^  arms  behind.  By  this  battle  the  power  of  the  Etrurians 
was,  aWcond  time,  effectually  crushed,  so  that,  engaging  to 
fuflol^  a  yeaifs  pay,  add  corn  for  Mo  mouths,  widr  the  dic- 
mof^s  permission,  they  sent  aml^ssadors  to  Ronte  tb  tteat  of 
peace*  'IMis  was  refus€d,:i^t  a  truce  for  twb‘  years  Was 
graimid^to  ditM.  The  dictator  returned  into  die  city  in  tri¬ 
umph/  f  ha^  sccB  it  asserted,  that  tranquillity  was  restored 
in  Etrutia  by  tl^  diCtaUDr,  witteaut  any  memorable  battle, 
tfxAy  by  cbmpe^ug  the  du^nsions  6f  the  Arretians,  and  ef¬ 
fecting  a  recon^atiou  l^tween  the  Cilnian  family  and  the 
commons.  Marc^  Valerius  was  elected  consul,  before  the 

BOOK  X. 

S13 

B.C.  300.] 
expiration  of  ht«  dictatorship,  many  have  beltevcd^  v^Uhtnit 
his  soliciting  the  office,  and  even  while  he  was  absent ;  and 
that  the  election  was  held  by  an  interrex.  In  one  point  aH 
agree,  that  he  held  the  consulship  with  Quintus  Appuleius 
Pansa* 
VI.  During  this  consulate  of  Marcus  Valerius  and  Quin¬ 
tus  Appuleius,  affairs  abroad  wore  a  very  peace¬ 
able  aspect.  Their  losses  sustained  in  war,  toge- 
ther  with  the  truce,  kept  the  Etrurians  quiet.  The 
Samnites,  depressed  by  the  misfortunes  of  many  yeai^,  had 
not  yet  becctee  dissatisfied  wuh  their  new  alliance.  At  Rome 
also,  the  carrying  away  of  such  multitudes  to  colonies,  ren¬ 
dered  the  commons  tranquil,  and  lightened  their  burthens. 
But,  that  all  things  might  not  stagnate  in  a  dead  calm,  a  con¬ 
tention  was  excited  between  the  principal  persons  in  the  com- 
monwestith,  patricians  on  one  hand,  and  plebeians  on  the 
other,  by  the  two  Ogulnii,  Quintus  and  Cneius,  plebeian 
tribunes,  who,  seeking  every  where  occasions  of  criminating 
the  patricians  in  the  hearing  of  the  people,  and  having  found 
other  attempts  fruitless,  engaged  in  a  scheme  calculated  to 
inflame,  not  the  lowest  class  of  the  commons,  but  their  chief 
men,  the  plebeians  of  consular  and  triumphal  rank,  to  the 
completion  of  whose  honours  nothing  was  now  wanting  but 
the  offices  of  the  priesthood,  which  were  not  yet  laid  open  to 
them.  They  therefore  published  a  proposal  for  a  law,  that, 
whereas  there  were  then  four  augurs  and  four  pontiffs,  and  it 
had  been  determined  that  the  number  of  priests  should  be 
augmented,  the  four  additional  fipntiffs  and  five  augurs  should 
all  be  chosen  out  of  the  commons.  How  the  college  of  augurs 
could  be  reduced  to  the  number  of  four,  except  by  the  death 
of  two,  1  do  not  understand :  for  it  is  a  rule  among  the  au¬ 
gurs,  that  their  number  should  be  composed  of  threes,  so  that 
the  three  ancient  tribes,  the  Ramnes,  Titienses,  and  Luceres, 
should  have  each  its  own  augur ;  or,  in  case  Aere  should  be 
VOL.  — 2  S 

3^4  HISTORY  ©P  ROME.  [y.R.  4^. 
for  that  ea^h  shoul4  mcrease  its  nuitiher  of 
^ug^prs,  i»  equals  propor6<Hi  wkh  the  rest,  in  hke  manner  as 
irhen,  by  th^  additic^  ©f  §ve  to  four,  they  made  up  the  num* 
her  nine,  so  that  there  were  three  to  each  tribe#  However, 
as' it  was  proposed  that  they  should  be  chosen  out  of  the 
QommoBs,  the  patricians  were  as  highly  offended  at  die  pro¬ 
ceeding,  as  when  th^  saw  the  consulship  made  cominoB  j 
yet  they  pretended  that  the  business  concerned  not  them  so 
much  as  it  did  the  gods,  who  would  ‘‘  take  care  that  theu* 
own  worship  shoufld  not  be  contaminated ;  that,  for  their 
parts,  they  only  wished  that  no  misfortune  might  ensue  to 
the  commonwealth.”  But  the  true  reason  of  their  not  mak¬ 
ing  a  vigorous  opposition  was,  that  they  were  now  accustom¬ 
ed  to  suffer  defeat  in  such  kind  of  diputes ;  and  they  saw 
their  adversaries^  not  as  formerly,  grasping  at  objects  which 
they  could  scarcely  hope  to  reach,  the  higher  honours  ;  but 
already  in  possession  of  all  those  advantages,  on  the  uncer¬ 
tain  prospect  of  which,  diey  hsyd  maintained  the  contest,  ma¬ 
nifold  considships,  censorships,  and  triumphs. 
VIL  Hieie  ^as,  however,  a  struggle  between  the  sup¬ 
porters  and  the  opponents  of  the  law,  maintained  principally 
by  Appius  Claudius  and  Publius  Decius  Mas.  After  these 
had  urged  nearly  the  same  topics,  respecting  the  privileges  of 
patricians  and  plebeians,  which  had  been  formerly  employed 
for  and  against  the  Licinian  law,  when  the  proposition  was 
brought  forward,  of  opening  the  consulship  to  plebeians,  De¬ 
cius  is  said  to  have  drawn  a  lively  description  of  his  own 
father,  such  as  many  then  present  in  the  assembly  had  seen 
him,  girt  in  the  Gabine  dress,  landing  on  a  spear,  in  the  at¬ 
titude  in  which  he  had  devoted  himself  for  the  people  and  the 
legions,  and  to  have  added,  that  ^  the  consul  Publius  Decius 
was  then  deemed  by  the  immortal  gods  an  offering  equally 
pure  and  pious,  as  if  his  colleague,  Titus  Manlius,  had  been 
devoted.  And  might  not  the  same  Publius  Decius  have  been. 

bOOK  X. 

315 

B.C.  3<X).] 
with  propriety,  chosen  to  perform  the  puhlic  worship  of  the 
Roman  people  I  Was  there  any  reason  to  apprehend  that  the 
gods  would  give  less  attention  to  his  prayers  than  to  those  of 
Appius  Claudius  ?  Did  the  latter  perform  his  private  acts  of 
adoration  with  a  purer  mind,  or  worship  the  gods  more  reli¬ 
giously  than  he  ?  Who  had  any  reason  to  complain  of  the 
vows  offered  in  behalf  of  the  commonwealth,  by  so  many  ple¬ 
beian  consuls  and  dickers,  cither  on  the  commencement  of 
their  campaigns,  or  in  the  heat  of  battle  ?  Were  the  number 
of  commanders  reckoned,  during  those  years,  since  business 
began  to  be  transacted  under  the  conduct  and  auspices  of  ple¬ 
beians,  the  same  number  of  triumphs  might  be  found.  The 
commons  had  now  no  reason  to  be  dissatisfied  with  the  beha¬ 
viour  of  such  of  their  body  as  had  attained  nobility.  On  the 
contrary,  they  were  folly  convinced,  that,  in  case  of  a  sudden 
war  breaking  out,  the  senate  and  people  of  Rome  would  not 
repose  greater  confidence  in  patrician  than  in  plebeian  com¬ 
manders.  Which,  being  the  case,’’  said  he,  what  god  or 
man  can  deem  it  an  impropriety,  If  those  whom  ye  have  ho¬ 
noured  with  curule  chairs,  with  the  purple  bordered  gown, 
with  the  palmvest,  and  embroidered  robe,  with  the  triumphal 
crown  and  laurel ;  whose  houses  ye  have  rendered  conspi¬ 
cuous  above  others,  by  affixing  to  them  the  spoils  of  conquer¬ 
ed  enemies,  should  add  to  these  the  badges  of  augurs  or  pon¬ 
tiffs  ? .  If  a  person,  who  has  rode  through  the  city  in  a  gilt 
chariot;  and,  decorated  with  the  ensigns  of  Jupiter,  supreme¬ 
ly  good  and  great,  has  mounted  the  Capitol,  should  be  seen 
with  a  chalice  and  wand  ;  what  impropriety,  I  say,  that  he 
should,  with  his  head  veiled,  slay  a  victim,  or  take  an  augurj^ 
in  the  citadel?  When,  in  the  inscription  on  a  person’s  statue, 
the  consulship,  censorship,  and  triumph,  shall  be  read  with 
patience,  will  the  eyes  of  the  readers  be  unable  to  endure  the 
addition  of  the  office  of  augur  or  pontiff?  In  truth  (with  de¬ 
ference  to  the  gods  I  say  it)  I  trust  that  we  are,  through  the 

516 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.E.452. 

kindness  of  the  Roman  people^  qualified  m  such  a  mmmer, 
that  we  should,  by  the  dimity  of  our  characters,  reflect  back, 
on  the  priesthood,  as  much  lustre  as  we  should  receive  ;  and 
may  demand,  nUher  on  behalf  of  the  gods,  than  for  our  own 
sakes,  that  those,  whom  we  worship  in  our  private,  we  may 
also  worship  in  a  public  capacity. 
VIII.  But  why  do  I  argue  thus,  qs  if  the  cause  of  the  pa¬ 
tricians,  respecting  the  priesthood,  stood  onimtouched  ground  ? 
and  as  if  we  were  not  already  in  possession  of  one  sacerdor 
tal  office,  of  the  highest  class  ?  We  see  plebeian  Decemvirs, 
for  perfornaing  sacrifices,  interpreters  of  the  Sibylline  prophe¬ 
cies,  and  of  the  fates  of  the  nation ;  we  also  see  them  presi¬ 
dents  of  Apollo’s  festival,  and  of  other  religious  perfi^man- 
ces.  Neither  was  any  injustice  done  to  the  patricians,  when, 
to  the  two  commissioners  for  performing  sacrifices,  an  addi¬ 
tional  number  was  joined,  in  favour  of  the  plebeians  ;  nor  is 
there  now,  when  a  tribune,  a  man  of  courage  and  activity, 
wishes  to  add  five  places  of  augurs,  and  four  of  pontiffs,  to 
which  plebeians  may  be  nominated ;  not,  Appius,  with  intent 
to  expel  you  from  your  places  ;  but,  that  men  of  plebeian 
rank  may  assist  you,  in  the  management  of  divine  afiairs, 
with  the  same  zeal  with  which  they  assist  you  in  matters  of 
human  concernment.  Blush  not,  Appius,  at  having  a  man, 
your  colleague,  in  the  priesthood,  whom  you  might  have  a 
colleague  in  the  censorship  or  consulship,  whose  master  of 
the  horse  you  yourself  may  be,  when  he  is  dictator,  as  well 
as  dictator  when  he  is  master  of  the  horse.  A  Sabine  adven¬ 
turer,  the  first  origin  of  your  nobility,  either  Attus  Clausus, 
or  Appius  Claudius,  which  you  will,  was  admitted,  by  the 
ancient  patricians  of  those  days,  into  their  number :  do  not 
then,  on  your  part,  disdain  to  admit  us  into  the  number  of 
priests.  We  bring  with  us  numerous  honours;  all  those 
honours,  indeed,  which  have  rendered  your  party  so  proud. 
Lucius  Sextius  was  the  first  consul,  chosen  out  of  the  plebe- 

BOOK  X. 

B.C.  300.] 

3ir 

ians  ;  Csuus  Licinius  Stole,  the  first  ms^ter  of  the  horse ; 
Caius  Marcius  RutiUis,  the  first  dictator,  aiwl  likewise  cen¬ 
sor  ;  Quintu^f^blilius  Philo,  the  first  praetor.  On  every  one 
of  these  oc<9^ns  was  heard  a  repetition  of  the  same  argu¬ 
ments  ;  that  the  right  of  auspices  was  vested  in  you ;  that  yc 
alone  had  the  rights  of  ^ancestry  ;  that  ye  alone  were  legally 
entitled  to  the  supreme  command,  and  the  auspices  both  in 
peace  and  war.  The  supreme  command  has  hitherto  been, 
and  will  continue  to  be,  equally  prosperous  in  plebeian  hands, 
as  iiupatrician.  Have  ye  never  heard  it  said,  that  the  first 
created  patricians,  were  not  men  sent  down  from  heaven,  but 
auch  as  could  cite  their  fathers,  that  is,  nothing  more  than 
free  bom.  I  can  now  cite  my  father,  a  consul ;  and  my  son 
will  be  able  to  cite  a  grandfather.  Citizens,  their  opposition 
means  nothing  else,  than  that  we  should  never  obtain  any 
thing,  without  a  previous  refusal.  The  patricians  wish  only 
for  a  dispute ;  nor  do  they  care  what  issue  their  disputes 
may  have.  For  my  part,  be  it  advantageous,  happy,  and 
prosperous  to  you  and  to  the  commonwealth,  I  am  of  opinion 
that  this  law  should  receive  your  sanction.” 
IX.  The  people  ordered  that  the  tribes  should  be  instantly 
called  ;  and  there  was  every  aippearance  that  the  law  would 
be  accepted.  It  was  deferred,  however,  for  that  day,  by  a  pro¬ 
test,  from  which  on  the  day  following  the  tribunes  were  de¬ 
terred  ;  and  it  passed  with  the  approbation  of  a  vast  majority. 
The  pontiffis  created  were  Publius  Decius  Mus,  the  advocate 
for  the  law ;  Publius  Sempronius  Sophus,  Caius  Marcius 
Rutilus,  and  Marcus  Livius  Denter.  The  five  augurs,  who 
were  also  plebeians,  were  Caius  Genucius,  Publius  iElius 
Paetus,  Marcus  Minucius  Fessus,  Caius  Marcius,  and  Titus 
Publilius.  Thus  the  number  of  the  pontiffs  was  made  eighty 
that  of  the  augurs  nine.  In  the  same  year  Marcus  Valerius, 
consul,  procured  a  law  to  be  passed  concerning  appeab  ; 
more  carefully  enforcing  the  observance  of  it,  by  additional 

SIS 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

[Y.R.  45£. 

sanctions.  This  was  the  third  tirne^  since  the  e^cpnbiop  of 
the  ktngSy  of  iMs  law  being  introduced,,  and  always  by  the 
same  family,  The^asm  for  renewing  it  so  I  be¬ 
lieve,  no  other,  than  that  the  influence  of  wa*  a|A  to 
prove  tc^  powerful  for  the  liberty  of  the  commons.  However, 
die  Forcian  law  seems  intended,  solely,  for  the  security  of 
the  persons  of  the  citizens ;  a  severe  penalty  being  thereby 
enacted  against  beating  with  stripes,  or  putting  to  death,  a 
Roman  citizen,  The  Valerian  law,  after  forbidding  aj>er*» 
son,  who  had  appealed,  to  be  beaten  with  rods  |md  bteheaded, 
added,  in  case  of  any  one  acting  contrary  thereto,  that  it  shall 
yet  be  only  deemed  a  wicked  act.  This,  I  suppose,  was  judg¬ 
ed  of  sufficient  strength  to  enforce  obedience  to  the  law  in 
those  days  ;  so  powerfuhwas  then  menis  sense  of  shame  :  at 
present  one  would  scarcely  make  use  of  such  a  threat  seri¬ 
ously,  even  on  any  ordinary  occasion.  The  jEquans  rebelling, 
the  same  consul  conducted  the  war  against  them  ;  in  which 
no  memorable  event  occurred  ;  for,  except  ferocity,  they  re¬ 
tained  nothing  of  their  ancient  condition.  The  other  consul 
Appuleius,  invested  the  town  of  I^equinum  in  Umbria.  The 
ground,  the  same  whereon  Narnia  now  stands,  was  so  steep, 
(on  one  side  even  ^lerpendicuHr,)  as  to  render  the  town  im¬ 
pregnable  either  by  asault,  or  works.  That  busi- 
B  C  ^9  therefore,  came  unfinished,  into  the  hands  of 
the  succeeding  consuls,  Marcus  Fulvius  Pastinus, 
and  Titus  Manlius  Torquatus.  We  are  told  by  Licinius 
Macer  and  Tubero,  that  all  the  centuries  named  Quintus  Fa- 
bius,  though  not  a  candidate,  consul  for  that  year  ;  but  that 
he  himself  recommended  to  them,,  to  postpone  the  conferring 
the  consulship  on  him  until  a  year  wherein  there  might  be 
more  employment  for  their  arms  ;  adding,  that,  daring  the 
present  year,  he  might  be  more  useful  in  the  management  of 
a  city  magistracy ;  and  thus,  neither  dissembling  what  he 
aimed  at,  nor  yet  making  direct  application  for  it,  he  was  ap- 

BOOK  X. 

319 

B.C.299.] 
Jointed  cai^e  Lucius  Papirias  Cursor. 
c^iBDl  ccrtaikf ;  because  |*iso,  a  more  aucient  wiiif r 
of  sssmh^  asserts^  that  the  curole  aediles  of  that  year  wer^ 
C^ua  Oomitiua  Calvinus^  son  of  Cneius,  and  SpurUis  Car- 
vilii^  Maximus,  son  of  Cains.  I  am  of  opinion,  that  this 
ter  surname  caused  a  mistake,  concerning  the  sediles ;  ar^ 
that  thcnce/followed  a  story,  conformable  to  this  mistake, 
patched  up,  out  of  the  two  ejections,  of  die  aediles,  and  of  die 
consuls.  The  general  survey  was  performed,  this  year,  by 
Publius  Sempronjus  Sophus,  and.Pifolius  Su^icios  Saverrio, 
i^^ons ;  and  two  trills  were  added^  the  Anieasian  and  Te- 
rendne.  Such  wet^  the  occurrences  at 
X.  Memiwhik,  after  much  time  ha^  l^n  in  the  tedir 
ous  itiegc  of  Nequmum,  two  of  the  towiBmen,  whose  houi^s 
were  cemtiguous  to  the  wajl,  having  formed  a  subtcrraneoi^ 
j^sage,  came  by  that  private  way  to  the  Roman  advmiced 
guards ;  and  being  conducted  thence  to  the  consul,  offered  to 
give  admittance  to  a  body  of  armed  men  within  the  works 
and  walls.  The  propose  was  thought  to  be  such  as  ought 
neither  to  be  rgccted,  nor  yet  assented  to  without  caution. 
With  one  of  these  men,  the  other  being  detained  as  a  hos- 
t^,  two  spies  were  sent  through  the  mine,  and  certain  infor¬ 
mation  being  received  from  them  of  the  practicability  of  the 
design  ttoec  hundred  men  in  arms  guided  by  the  deserter 
entered  ike  city,  and  seized  by  night  the  nearest  gate,  which 
being  broke  open,  the  Roman  consul  and  his  army  took  pos- 
sesskm  of  the  city  without  any  opposition.  In  this  manner 
came  Nequinum  under  the  dominion  of  the  Roman  people* 
A  colony  was  sent  thither  as  a  barrier  against  the  Umbrians, 
and  called  Narnia  from  the  river  Nar.  The  troops  returned 
to  Rome  with  abimdance  of  spoil.  This  year  the,£truriai^ 
made  preparations  for  war,  in  violation  of  the  truce.  But  a 
vast  army  of  the  Gauls,  making  an  irruption  into  their  ter¬ 
ritories,  while  their  attention  was  directed  to  another  quar- 

ko  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  t^.R.  453. 
for  a  time  the  execution  of  thelt  design.  They 
on  the  ^undanee  of  money  whieli  d»y  peases- 
laid  thetnselvcs  out  to  make  friends  of  the  Gauls^  instead 
of  enemies ;  in  order  that*  with  their  armies  eombmed^  Aey 
might  attack  the  Romans,  The  barbarians  made  ho 
idea  to  the  alliance,  smd  a  negociation  was  opened  for  settling 
the  price ;  which  being  adjusted  and  paid,  'Etrurians^ 
living  every  thmg  else  in  readiness  for  commencing  Acir 
operations^  d^ired  diem  U>  accompany  them  in  their  march. 
But  tbm  d^ey  refund,  alle^g^g,  that  **  they  Wd  stipulated  a 
]^ce  for  th^  a^s^ce  against  the  Romans  :  that  the  la¬ 
ment  already  xmide^  they  had  received  in  consideration  of  tfeir 
not  wasting  the  !^&urian  territory,  or  using  their  aims  against 
the  inhabitants,  THbat  notwithstanding,  if  it  was  the  wish  of 
the  Etrurians,  they  were  still  wiMing  to  engage  in  the  war, 
but  on  no  other  condition  than  diat  of  being  allowed  a  sh^ 
of  lands,  and  obtaining  at  length  some  permanent  set* 
dementi  Many  Us^mU^  of  the  states  of  Etruria  were 
held  on  ^his  subject,,  widmut  being  able  to  come  to  any  con* 
elusion  ;  not  m  much;^y  reason  of  dicir  aversion  from  the 
dismemberment  of  their  territory,  as  of  the  dread, ^which 
every  one  felt  of  the  consequences,  if  they  should  fix  in  so 
close  vkinity  to  themselves  people  of  such  a  savage  race. 
The  Gauls  were  therefore  dismissed,  and  carried  home  an 
immense  sum  of  mcmey,  acquired  without  toil  or  danger. 
The  report  of  a  Gallic  tumult,,in  addition  to  an  Etrurian  war, 
had  caused  serious  apprehensions  at  Rome  ;  and,  with  the 
less  hesitation  on  that  account,  an  alliance  was  concluded 
with  the  state  of  the  Picentians. 
XI.  The  province  of  Etruria  fell  by  lot  to  the  consul  Titus 
Manliiis  j^who,  when  he  had  but  just  entered  the  enemy’s 
country^  as  he  was  exercising  the  cavalry,  in  wheeling  about 
at  full  s|^ed^  was  thrown  from  his  horse,  and  almost  killed 
on  the  spot ;  three  days  after  he  died.  The  Etrurians,  era* 

BOOK  X. 

321 

B.C.  299.] 
bracing  this  pmen,  as  it  were,  of  the  future  progress  of  the 
war,  and  observing  that  the  gods  had  commenced  hostilities 
on  their  behalf,  assumed  new  courage.  At  Rome  the  news 
caused  great  affliction,  on  account  both  of  the  loss  of  such  a 
man  and  of  the  unseasonablcness  of  the  juncture  ;  insomuch 
that  the  senate  would  have  proceeded  to  order  a  dictator  to 
be  created,  but  that  an  assembly,  held  for  the  purpose  of  sub¬ 
stituting  a  new  consul,  was  conducted  agreeably  to  the  wishes 
of  people  of  the  first  consequence.  All  the  votes  and 
centuries  concurred  unanimously  in  appointing  Marcus  Vale¬ 
rius  consul,  the  same  whom  the  senate  would  have  ordered 
to  be  made  dictator.  They  then  commanded  him  to  proceed 
immediately  into  Etruria,  to  the  legions.  His  coming  gave 
such  a  check  to  the  Etrurians,  that  not  one  of  them  dared 
thenceforward  to  appear  on  the  outside  of  their  trenches  ; 
their  own  fears  operating  as  a  blockade.  Nor  could  the  new 
consul,  by  wasting  their  lands,  and  burning  their  houses,  draw 
them  out  to  an  engagement  ;  for  not  only  country-houses, 
but  numbers  of  their  tow  ns,  were  seen  smoking,  and  in  ashes, 
on  every  side.  While  this  w^ar  proceeded  more  slowly  than 
had  been  expected,  an  account  \vas  received  of  the  breaking 
out  of  another  ;  which  was,  not  without  reason,  regarded  as 
terrible,  in  consequence  of  the  heavy  losses  formerly  sustain¬ 
ed  by  both  parties.  This  account,  given  by  their  new^  allies, 
the  Picentians,  was,  that  the  Samnites  w^ere  taking  measures 
for  a  renewal  of  hostilities,  and  that  they  themselves  bad  been 
solicited  to  join  therein.  The  Picentians  received  the  thanks 
of  the  state  ;  and  a  large  share  of  the  attention  of  the  senate 
was  turned,  from  Etruria,  towards  Samnium.  The  public 
suffered  also  much  distress  from  the  dearness  of  provisions, 
and  would  have  felt  the  extremity  of  w^ant,  according  to  the 
relation  of  those  who  make  Fabius  Maximus  curule  aedile 
that  year,  had  not  the  vigilant  activity  of  that  man,  such  as 
he  had  on  many  occasions  displayed  in  the  field,  been  exerted 
VOL.  II. — 2  T 

522 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[YJl.  454. 

now  with  equal  zeal  at  home,  in  the  management  of  the 
market,  and  in  procuring  and  formings  magazines  of  com.  An 
interregnum  took  place  this  year,  the  reason  of  which  is  not 
mentioned.  Appius  Claudius,  and,  after  him,  Publius  Sul- 
picius,  were  interreges.  The  latter  held  an  elec- 
B  C*298  consuls,  chose  Lucius  Cornelius  Scipio 
and  Cneius  Fulvius.  In  the  beginning  of  this 
year,  ambassadors  came  from  the  LucMiians  to  the  new  con^ 
sids,  with  complaints  that  the  Samniles,  finding  that  they 
could  not,  by  any  offers,  tempt  them  to  take  part  in  the  war, 
had  marched  an  army  in  a  hostile  manner  into  their  coun¬ 
try,  which  they  were  now  laying  waste ;  intending  by  these 
violent  measures,  to  force  them  into  a  compliance.  I'hey  de¬ 
clared,  that  the  nation  of  the  Lucanians  thought  their  former 
errors  too  many,  and  were  so  firmly  fixed  in  their  resolution, 
that  they  would  rather  undergo  every  kind  of  suffering  and 
hardship  than  ever  again  violate  the  reverence  due  to  the 
Roman  name ;  besought  the  senate  to  take  the  people  of  Lu- 
cania  into  their  protection,  and  defend  them  from  the  injus¬ 
tice  and  outrage  of  the  Samnites  ;  and  that,  on  their  part, 
though  the  undertaking  a  war  with  the  Samnites  imposed  on 
them  a  necessity  of  being  faithful  to  the  Romans,  they  were, 
nevertheless,  willing  to  give  hostages,” 
XII.  The  deliberation  of  the  senate  was  short.  They  all, 
to  a  man,  concurred  in  opinion,  that  a  compact  should  be 
entered  into  with  the  Lucanians,  and  satisfaction  demanded 
from  the  Samnites :  accordingly,  a  favourable  answer  was 
returned  to  the  Lucanians,  and  the  alliance  concluded.  Her¬ 
alds  were  then  sent,  to  require  of  the  Samnites,  that  they 
should  depart  from  the  country  of  the  allies,  and  withdraw 
their  troops  from  the  Lucan i an  territory.  These  were  met 
by  persons  despatched  for  the  purpose  by  the  Samnites,  who 
gave  them  warning,  that  if  they  appeared  at  any  assembly 
in  Samnium,  they  must  not  ejq^ect  to  depart  in  safety.”  As 

BOOK  X, 

323 

BX.298.] 
soon  as  this  was  heard  at  Home,  the  senate  voted,  and  the 
people  ordered,  that  war  should  be  declared  against  the  Sam* 
nites.  The  consuls,  then,  dividing  the  provinces  between 
them,  Etruria  fell  to  Scipio,  the  Samnites  to  Fulvius ;  and 
they  set  out  by  different  routes,  each  against  the  enemy  al¬ 
lotted  to  him,  Scipio,  while  he  expected  a  tedious  campaign, 
like  that  of  the  preceding  year,  was  met  near  Volateira  by 
the  Etrurians,  in  order  of  battle-  The  fight  lasted  through 
the  greater  part  of  the  day,  while  very  many  fell  on  both 
sides,  and  night  came  on  before  it  could  be  discovered  to 
which  side  victory  inclined.  But  the  following  dawn  showed 
the  conqueror  and  the  vanquished ;  for  the  Etrurians  had 
decamped  in  the  dead  of  the  night.  The  Romans,  marching 
out  with  intent  to  renew  the  engagement,  and  seeing  their 
superiority  acknowledged  by  the  departure  of  the  enemy,  ad¬ 
vanced  to  their  camp ;  and,  finding  even  this  fortified  post 
deserted,  took  possession  of  it,  together  with  a  vast  quantity 
of  spoil.  The  consul  then,  leading  back  his  forces  into  the 
Faliscian  territory,  and  leaving  his  baggage  with  a  small 
guard  at  Falerii,  set  out  with  his  troops,  lightly  accoutered, 
to  ravage  the  enemy’s  country :  and  not  only  was  the  ground 
laid  waste,  but  their  forts  also  and  smaller  towns  were  des¬ 
troyed  by  fire.  He  did  not,  however,  lay  siege  to  the  cities, 
into  which  the  Etrurians  had  been  hurried  by  their  fears. 
The  other  consul,  Fulvius,  fought  the  Samnites  atBovianum, 
where  he  gained  great  honour,  and  a  complete  victory.  Then 
attacking  the  town,  and  soon  after  Aufidena,  he  took  both 
by  assault.  This  year  a  colony  was  carried  out  to  Carseoli, 
in  the  territory  of  the  iEquicolse.  The  consul  Fulvius  tri¬ 
umphed  on  his  defeat  of  the  Samnites.  ^ 
XIII.  Shortly  before  the  election  of  consuls,  a  report  pre¬ 
vailed,  that  the  Etrurians  and  Samnites  were  raising  vast  ar¬ 
mies;  that  the  leaders  of  the  Etrurians  were,  in  all  their 
assemblies,  openly  censured  for  not  having  procured  the  aid 

324 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  454. 

of  the  Gauls  on  any  terms ;  and  the  magistrates  of  the  Sam- 
nites  arraigned,  for  having  opposed  to  the  Romans  an  army 
destined  to  act  against  the  Lucanians.  That,  in  consequence, 
the  people  were  rising  up  in  arms,  with  all  their  own  strength 
and  that  of  their  allies  combined  ;  and  that  this  affair  seemed 
not  likely  to  be  terminated  without  a  contest  of  much  greater 
difficulty  than  the  former.  Although  the  candidates  for  the 
cons*ulship  were  men  of  Ulustrious  characters,  yet  this  alarm¬ 
ing  intelligence  turned  the  thoughts  of  all  on  Quintus  Fabius 
Maximus,  who  sought  not  the  employment  at  first,  and  after¬ 
wards,  when  he  discovered  their  wishes,  even  declined  it. 
‘‘  Why,”  said  he,  should  they  impose  such  a  difficult  task 
on  him,  who  was  now  in  the  decline  of  life,  and  had  passed 
through  a  full  course  of  labours,  and  of  the  rewards  of  la¬ 
bour  ?  Neither  the  vigour  of  his  body,  nor  of  his  mind,  re¬ 
mained  the  same  ;  and  he  dreaded  fortune  herself,  lest  some 
god  should  think  her  too  bountiful  to  him,  and  more  constant 
than  the  course  of  human  affairs  allowed.  He  had  himself 
succeeded,  in  gradual  succession,  to  the  dignities  of  his  pre¬ 
decessors  ;  and  he  beheld,  with  great  satisfaction,  others 
rising  up  to  succeed  to  Jiis.  There  was  no  scarcity  at  Rome, 
either  of  honours  suited  to  men  of  the  highest  merit,  or  of 
men  of  eminent  merit  suited  to  the  highest  honours.”  This 
disinterested  conduct,  instead  of  repressing,  increased,  while 
in  fact  it  justified,  their  zeal.  But  thinking  that  this  ought 
to  be  checked  by  respect  for  the  laws,  he  ordered  that  clause 
to  be  read  aloud,  by  which  it  is  forbidden  that  the  same  per¬ 
son  shall  be  re-elected  consul  within  ten  years.  Such  a  cla¬ 
mour  now  arose,  that  the  law  was  scarcely  heard ;  and  the 
"tribunes  of  the  commons  declared,  that  this  decree  should 
be  no  impediment ;  for  they  would  propose  an  order  to  the 
people,  that  he  should  be  Ofempted  from  the  obligation  of 
the  laws.”  Still  he  persisted  in  his  opposition,  asking,  “  To 
what  purpose  were  laws  enacted,  if  they  were  eluded  by  the 

4 

B.C  29a.]  BOOK  X.  325 
very  persons  who  procured  them  ?  The  laws  now,”  he  said, 
‘‘  instead  of  being  rulers,  were  over-ruled.”  The  people, 
nevertheless,  proceeded  to  vote ;  and,  as  soon  as  each  century 
was  called  in,  it  immediately  named  Fabius  consul.  Then, 
at  length,  overcome  by  the  universal  wish  of  the  state,  he 
said,  “  Romans,  may  the  gods  approve  your  present,  and  all 
your  future  proceedings.  But  since,  with  respect  to  me,  ye 
intend  to  act  according  to  your  own  wills,  let  my  interest 
find  room  with  you,  with  respect  to  my  colleague.  I  earnestly 
request,  that  ye  will  place  in  the  consulship  with  me,  Pub¬ 
lius  Decius ;  a  man  with  whom  I  have  already  experienced 
the  utmost  harmony  in  our  joint  administration  of  that  ofl&ce ; 
a  man  worthy  of  you,  worthy  of  his  father.”  The  recom¬ 
mendation  was  deemed  well  founded,  and  all  the  remaining 
centuries  voted  Quintus  Fabius  and  Publius  Decius  consuls. 
This  year,  great  numbers  were  prosecuted  by  the  sediles,  for 
having  in  possession  larger  quantities  of  land  than  the  state 
allowed  ;  and  hardly  any  were  acquitted :  by  which  means,  a 
very  great  restraint  was  laid  on  exorbitant  covetousness. 
XIV.  Whilst  the  new  consuls,  Quintus  Fabius  Maximus, 
a  fourth,  and  Publius  Decius  Mus,  a  third  time, 
’  ’  ^  Y  R  455 
were  settling  between  themselves  as  to  which  3  £  297 
should  command  against  the  Samnites,  and  which 
against  the  Etrurians  ;  and  what  number  of  forces  would  be 
sufficient  for  this,  and  for  that  province  ;  and  which  would 
be  the  fitter  commander  in  each  war ;  ambassadors  arrived 
from  Sutrium,  Nepete,  and  Falerii,  with  intelligence,  that 
the  states  of  Etruria  were  holding  assemblies  on  the  subject 
of  suing  for  peace.  In  consequence  of  this  information,  the 
whole  force  of  their  arms  was  directed  against  Samnium. 
The  consuls  took  different  routes,  in  order  to  secure  the  more 
ready  supply  of  provisions,  and  to  leave  the  enemy  in  the 
greater  uncertainty  on  what  quarter  the  war  would  fall. 
Fabius  led  his  legions  towards  Samnium  through  the  terri- 

326 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  4SS. 

tory  of  Sora,  and  Decius  his  through  that  of  Sidicinum.  As 
soon  as  they  arrived  at  the  frontiers,  both  advanced  briskly, 
spreading  devastation  wherever  they  came  ;  but  still  took 
care  to  explore  the  country,  to  a  distance  beyond  where  the 
proopa  were  employed  in  plundering.  The  enemy  had  posted 
themselves  in  readiness  for  battle,  in  a  retired  valley  near 
Tifemum ;  intending,  as  soon  as  the  Romans  should  enter 
it,  to  fall  upon  them  with  advantage  of  the  ground  ;  but  they 
escaped  the  snare.  Fabius,  sending  away  his  baggage  to  a 
place  of  safety,  and  setting  a  small  guard  over  it,  gave  noUce 
to  his  soldiers  that  a  battle  was  at  hand,  and  advanced  to  Ae 
place  where  he  had  been  told  the  enemy  lay  in  ambush.  The 
Samnites,  disappointed  in  the  hope  of  making  an  unexpected 
attack,  determined  on  a  regular  engagement.  They  dierefore 
marched  out  into  the  plain  ;  and,  with  a  greater  share  of 
spirit  than  of  hopes,  committed  themselves  to  the  disposal  of 
fortune.  Ho\^ever,  whether  in  consequence  of  their  having 
drawn  together,  from  every  state,  the  whole  of  the  force 
which  it  possessed,  or  that  the  consideration  of  their  all  being 
at  stake,  heightened  their  courage,  they  maintained,  even  in 
open  fight,  a  formidable  struggle.  Fabius,  when  he  saw  that 
the  enemy  in  no  place  gave  way,  ordered  his  son  Maximus, 
and  Marcus  Valerius,  military  tribunes,  with  whom  he  had 
hastened  to  the  front,  to  seek  the  cavalry,  and  to  exhort  them, 
that  ‘‘  if  they  remembered  any  instance  wherein  the  pdblic 
had  received  advantage  from  the  service  of  the  horsemen, 
they  would,  on  that  day,  exert  themselves  to  preserve  invio¬ 
late  die  renown  of  that  body ;  telling  them  that  the  enemy 
stood  immoveable  against  the  efforts  of  the  infantry,  and  the 
only  hope  remaining  was  in  the  charge  of  horse.”  He  ad¬ 
dressed  particularly  both  these  youths,  and  with  the  same 
cordiality,  loading  them  with  praises  and  promises.  At  the 
same  time,  considering  that,  in  case  that  effort  should  also 
fail,  it  would  be  necessary  to  accomplish,  by  stratagem,  what 

B.C.  29^0 

BOOK  X. 

3aT 
his  strength  could  not  effect ;  he  ordered  Sciplo,  one  of  his 
lieutenants-general,  to  draw  off  the  spearmen  of  the  first  le¬ 
gion  out  of  the  line  ;  to  lead  them  round  as  secretly  as  pos¬ 
sible  to  the  nearest  mountains  ;  and,  in  such  direction  as  he 
could  ascend  without  being  seen,  to  gain  the  heights,  and 
show  himself  suddenly  on  the  rear  of  the  enemy,  while  their 
attention  should  be  employed  on  the  front.  The  cavalry,  led 
on  by  the  tribunes,  rushing  forward  unexpectedly  before  the 
van,  caused  scarcely  more  confusion  among  the  enemy  than 
among  theii  friends.  The  line  of  the  Samnites  stood  firm 
against  the  furious  onset  of  the  squadrons  ;  it  neither  could 
be  driven  from  its  ground,  nor  broken  in  any  part.  The 
cavalry,  finding  their  attempts  fruitless,  withdrew  from  the 
fight,  and  retired  behind  the  line  of  infantry.  On  this  the 
enemy  assumed  new  spirits,  with  increasing  confidence  in 
their  own  prowess :  so  that  the  Roman  troops  in  the  van 
would  not  have  been  able  to  support  the  contest,  ha*d  not  the 
second  line,  by  the  consul’s  order,  come  up  into  the  place  of 
the  first*  These  fresh  troops  checked  the  progress  of  the 
Samnites,  who  had  now  began  to  gain  ground  ;  and,  at  this 
seasonable  juncture,  their  comrades  appearing  suddenly  on 
the  mountains,  and  raising  a  shout,  occasioned  in  the  Sam¬ 
nites  a  fear  of  greater  danger  than  really  threatened  them : 
Fabius  called  out  aloud  that  his  colleague  Decius  was  ap¬ 
proaching  ;  on  which  all  the  soldiers,  elated  with  joy,  repeat¬ 
ed  eagerly,  that  the  other  consul  was  come,  the  legions  were 
arrived !  This  artifice,  while  it  produced  a  happy  effect  on 
the  Romans,  filled  the  Samnites  with  such  dismay,  that  they 
thought  of  nothing  but  flight:  for  they  dreaded  above  dl 
things,  lest,  fatigued  as  they  were,  diey  should  be  overpow¬ 
ered  by  another  army,  fresh  and  unhurt.  As  they  dispersed 
themselves  on  every  side,  there  was  less  effusion  of  blood 
than  might  have  been  expected,  considering  the  completeness 
of  the  victory.  There  were  three  thousand  four  hundred 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

328 

[Y.R.  455. 

slain  ;  about  three  hundred  and  thirty  made  prisoners,  and 
twenty-three  military  standards  taken. 
XV.  The  Apulians  would  have  joined  their  forces  to  the 
Samnites  before  this  battle,  had  not  the  consul,  Publius  De- 
cius,  encamped  in  their  neighbourhood  at  Maieventum  ;  and, 
finding  means  to  bring  them  to  an  engagement,  put  them  to 
the  rout.  Here,  likewise,  there  was  more  of  flight  than  of 
bloodshed.  Two  thousand  of  the  Apulians  were  slain ;  but 
Decius,  despising  such  an  enemy,  led  his  legions  into  Sam- 
nium.  There,  the  two  consular  armies,  overrunning  every 
part  of  the  country  during  the  space  of  five  months,  laid  it 
entirely  waste.  There  were  in  Sam  nium  forty-five  places 
where  Decius,  and  eighty-six  where  the  other  consul,  en¬ 
camped.  Nor  did  they  leave  traces  only  of  having  been 
there,  as  ramparts  and  trenches,  but  other  dreadful  memen¬ 
tos  of  it — general  desolation  and  regions  depopulated.  Fabius 
also  took*  the  city  of  Cimetra,  where  he  made  prisoners  two 
thousand  four  hundred  soldiers  ;  and  there  were  slain  in  the 
assault  about  four  hundred  and  thirty.  Going  thence  to  Rome 
to  preside  at  the  elections,  he  used  all  expedition  in  despatch¬ 
ing  that  business.  All  the  first-called  centuries  voted  Quin¬ 
tus  Fabius  consul.  Appius  Claudius  was  a  candidate,  a  man 
of  consular  rank,  daring  and  ambitious  ;  and,  as  he  wished 
not  more  ardently  for  the  attainment  of  that  honour  for  him¬ 
self,  than  he  did  that  the  patricians  might  recover  the  posses¬ 
sion  of  both  places  in  the  consulship,  he  laboured,  with  all 
his  own  power,  supported  by  that  of  the  whole  body  of  the 
nobility,  to  prevail  on  them  to  appoint  him  consul  along  with 
Quintus  Fabius.  To  this  Fabius  objected,  giving,  at  first, 
the  same  reasons  which  he  had  advanced  the  year  before. ' 
The  nobles  then  all  gathered  round  his  seat,  and  besought 
him  to  raise  up  the  consulship  out  of  the  plebeian  mire,  and 
to  restore  both  to  the  office  itself,  and  to  the  patrician  rank, 
their  original  dignity.  Fabius  then,  procuring  silence,  allayed 

mX>K  X. 

329 

BX>. 
their  warm^  1^  a  qoi^ying  speech,  declaring;*  ttet,  he 
wcmki  hav^e  m  as  to  ha^^e  rcceii^ed  the  names  of 
two  patridans/if  4ie  had  seen  an  kteadon  of  appointing  any 
odier  than  himself  to  the  xonsnlship.  As  diings  now  stood, 
’he  .would  hot  set  so  l^d  a  precedent  as  to  admit  his  own 
name  amomg  the  candidates  ;  such  a  proceeding  being  con¬ 
trary  to  th^  laws*”  Wheidipon  Appius  Claudius, 
and  Lxicit^  Vdiumnius,  a  i^bcian,  who  had  like-  ’ 
wise  been  ccdleagues  in  that  ofiice  before,  Were 
elected  consuls.  The  nobility  reproached  Fabius  for  declin¬ 
ing  to  act  in  conjunction  with  Appius  Claudius,  because  he 
evidently  excelled  him  in  eloquence  and  political  abilities. 
Xyi.  When  the  election  was  finished,  the  former  consuls 
were  continued  in  command  for  six  months,  and  ordered  to 
prosecute  the  war  in  Samnium.  Accordingly,  durinil  this 
next  year,  in  the  consulate  of  Lucius  Volumnius  and  Appius 
Claudius,  Publius  Decius,  who  had  been  left  consul  m  Sam- 
niutn  by  his  colleague,  continued  in  the  character  of  pro- 
consul,  to  s|h*€ad  devastation,  in  like'hiaBt^  as  in  the  pre¬ 
ceding  year,  through  aU  parts  of  that  country  ;  until,  at  last, 
he  drove  the  army  of  the  Samnites,  which  never  dared  to 
face  him  in  the  field,  entirely  out  of  the  country.  Thus  cx*^ 
pelted  from  home,  they  bent  their  route  to  Etrurta  ;  and,  sup¬ 
posing  that  the  business,  which  they  h^d  oftm  in  vain  endea¬ 
voured  to  accomplish  by  embassies,  might  now  be  negotiated 
with  more  effect,  when  they  were  backed  by  such  a  powerful 
armed  force,  and  could  intermix  terror  with  their  entreaties, 
they  demanded  a  meeting  of  the  chiefs  of  Etrm?ia :  which 
being  assembled,  they  set  forth  the  great  number  of  years, 
during  which  they  waged  war  with  the  Romans,  in  the* 
cause  of  liberty  j  ^  they  had,”  they  said,  ‘‘  endeavom’ed,  with- 
their  own  strength,  to  sustain  the  weight  of  so  great  a  wan: 
the^  hsd  sdso  made  trial  of  the  support  of  the  adjoining  na¬ 
tions,  which  proved  of  little  avs^l-  UnaWe  kmger 
VOL.  II, — 2  U 

330 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

the  ccmffiet/  ihey  ha^  sued  to  the  Roman  people  for 
peace  ;  and  hi^^a^tn  tsdceii  op  arms,  l^cause  Aey  felt  peace, 
a^uded^ith  servitude,  more  grievous  than  warmth  liberty. 
They  had  one  only  hope  remaining,  which  was  the  support 
which  they  expect^  from  the  Etrurians.  They  knew  that 
nation  to  be  the  most  powerful  iu  Imly,  in  respect  ctf  mms, 
men,  and  money ;  to  have  the  Gaids  their*  closest  neigh¬ 
bours,  born  in  the  midst  of  war  and  ams,  of  furious  courage, 
both  from  dieir  nattu^l  temper,  and  particularly  against  the 
pe^le  of  Rome,  whdm  they  boasted,  without  infnnging  the 
truth,  of  having  made  their  prisoners  and  of  having  ransom¬ 
ed  *for  gold.  If  ttte  Etrurians  possessed  the  same  spirit, 
Wi^ch  formerly  animated  Porsena  and  their  ancestors,  tibere 
was  nothing  to  prevent  their  expelling  the  Romans  from  att 
the  l|uads  on  this  side  of  the  Tiber,  and  compelling  them  to 
fight  for  their  own  existence,  and  not  for  the  intolerable 
mmon  which  they  assumed  over  Italy.  The  Samnite  mmy 
had  come  to  them,  in  readiness  for  action,  furnished  whh 
£ums  and  subsistence:^  aikld  were  willing  to  follow  that  instetit, 
even  should  they  lead  to  the  attack  of  the  city  of  R<mie 
itself.” 
.  xyil.  While  they  were  engaged  in  these  representadc^, 
and  intriguing  at  Etruria,  the  operations  of  the  Romans^in 
their  own  territories  distressed  them  severely.  For  Puldhis 
Decius,  when  informed  by  his  scouts  of  the  departure  ^ 
Samnite  army,  called  a  council,  and  there  ^id,  ‘‘  Why  do  we 
ramble  dirough  the  country,  carrying  the  war  from  one  vil¬ 
lage  to  another  ?  Why  not  attack  the  citi^  and  forthied 
places  ?  No  army  now  guai^s  Samniuiti.  They  have  fled  : 
thi^are  gone  into  voluntary  exile.”  -  The  proposal  being  uni¬ 
versal  approved,  he  marched  to  attack  Murgantia,  a  city  of 
eouaidera^  strength  j  and  so  great  was  the  ardour  of  the 
s<fldier6^  resulting  from  their  affection  to  their  commander, 
and  from  their  hopes  of  richer  treasure  than  could  be  found  in 

BOOK  X. 

531 

pillaging  the  vOcwe^^places^  jdiiatf  m  one  they  took  it  by 
assault.  HerOy  two  thousimd  hundred  of  the  Samnites, 
making  resistance,  wene  surrcMinded  smd  taken  prisoners ;  aiul 
abundance  of  other  spoil  feU  into  the  hands  of  the  victors. 
Deciti^  not  choosing  that  the  ^pops  should  be  incumbered  in 
their  march  with  such  heavy  baggage,  ordered  them  to  be 
aiUed  together,  and  said  to  them,  “  Do  ye  intend  to  rest 
tisfied  with  this  single  victory,  and  this  booty  ?  or  do  ye 
choose  to  cherish  hopes  proportioned  to  your  bravery  f  AU 
the  cities  of  the  Samnites,  and  the  property  left  in  them,  are 
your  own  ;  since,  after  so  often  defeating  their  legions,  ye 
have  finally  driven  them  out  of  the  country.  ^11  those  ef¬ 
fect  in  your  hands  ;  and  allure  traders,  by  a  prospect  of  pro¬ 
fit,  to  follow  you  on  your  march.  I  will  from  time. to  time, 
^pply  you  with  ^oods  for  ssde.  I^et  us  go  hence  to  the  dty 
of  Romulea,  where  no  great  labour,  but  greater  gain,  awaits 
They  accordingly  sold  off  the  spoil ;  and,  warmly 
adopting  the  general’s  plan,  proceeded  to..  Romulea.  This 
town  likewise  was  taken  without  works  or  engines,  and  plun- 
for,  ^>on  as  the  battalions  approached  it,  nothing 
c&aM  hinder  the  soldiers  from  mounting  the  walls ;  but, 
hastily  applying  ladders,  they  forced  their  way  over  the  for- 
l^ations*  Two  thousand  three  hundred  men  were  s^in,  six 
tiiousand  taken  prisoners,  and  abundance  of  spoil  fell  into  the 
h^ds  of  the  soldiers.  This  they  were  obliged  to  sell  m  like 
manner  as  the  farmer ;  and,  though  no  rest  was  allowed 
them,  they  proceeded,  nevertheless,  with  the  utmost  alacrity, 
to.Ferentinum.  But  here  they  met  a  greater  share  both  o£ 
difiiculty  and  danger  :  the  gairison  made  a  vigorous  defence, 
and  the  place  was  strongly  fortified  both  by  nature  and  art. 
However,  the  soldiers,  now  inured  to  plunder,  overcame  every 
obstacle.  Three  thous^d  of  the  enemy  were  killed  round 
the  walls,  and  the  spoil  was  given  to  the  troops.  In  some 
imnak,  the  .  principal  tiim'e  of  the  honour  of  taking  these  cities 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R,4I?6. 

4s  ^ectributed  to  M^^imus.  Tfeey  say  that  was 
taken  by  ©ecios ;  Romalea  mid  Feraidnnm  by 
Some  ascribe  sbw  honour  to  the  new  consuls :  odieia  iK>t  to 
both,  bat  to  erne  of  diese,  Lucius  Vedumnius  whose  province, 
they  say,-Satniiium  was. 
XVIIL  While  thin^  went  on  thus  in  Sammum,  and  who¬ 
ever  it  was  that  had  the  command  ami  auspices,  ahodier  pow¬ 
erful  combination,  copiposed  of  many  states/  was  fomed  iif 
E^uria  against  the  Romans ;  die  -chief  jmmioter  of  which 
was,  Gellii^  £gi^as,arSammte.  Almost  all  the  Etmrimis 
had  united  ih  this  ho^le  design.  The  neighbouring  states 
of  Umbria  were  di^awn  in,  am  it  weie,  by  contagiem ;  and 
aimUaries  were  procured  from  the  Gauls  for  hire :  all  their 
Bevmid  -numbers  assembled  at  the  camp  of  the  Samnites. 
When  intelligence  of  this  sudden  eommotion  was  received  at 
Rome,  the  consul,  Lucias  Volumnius,  had  already  set  cait 
for  Samnlum,  with  the  second  and  third  legions,  and  hfteen 
thousamd  of  the  allies  ;  it  was  dierefore  resolved,  that  Appius 
Claudius  should,  without  loss  of  time,  go  into  Etruria.  He 
took  with  him  two  Roman  legions,  the  first  mid  fourth,  and 
twelve  thousand  allies,  and  encamped  at  a  small  distance  from 
the  enemy.  Hpwever,  his  early  arrival,  though  productive 
of  one  good  effect,  the  restrarning,  by  dread  of  the  Roman 
name,  several  states  of  Etruria  wim  were  indmed  to  war,  ^^t 
was  not  followed  by  any  very  judicious  or  successful  enter¬ 
prise.  Several  battles  were  foug|it,'nt  dnfes  aiid  places  fe- 
favourable,  and  increasing  confidence  rendered  the  enemy 
da^  more  formidable  j  so  that  matters  came ‘nearly  to  such 
a  smfc,  as  that  neither  could  the  sddiem  hely  much  cm  their 
leader,  nm*ch€  leader  on  his  soldiers.  It  appears  in  three  se¬ 
veral  histories,  that  a  letter  was  sent  by  the  consul  to  cdl  his 
colleagae  Jfrom  Samnium.  But  I  will  hot  .  affirm  what  re¬ 
quires  Mironger  pre^ff,  that  point  teving  been  dispifted  between 
diese  two  consuls,  a  second  tune  sussociated  in  the  same  of- 

X. 

ax.  S9S.] 

3^ 

fanriag  Vidam- 
niueJady  1^  ^tHu^«A^^diree£ntek>45«samum,  In  which 
three <tbousaDd  cf  had  bc4»'al(n^>8Bd. about  ludf 
diat  number  made  prisoners ;  md^ having  been 
raised  among  Lucanhns  by  the  ]d^da«s,  apd  the  more 
indigent  of  the  people,  he  had,  to  die  ipeat  satisfaction  of 
^mhks,.  quelled  it  bjr-sendingthither-Qinntus  Fid>ius,pio> 
coi^,  with  his  owUjtfeteran  army.  He  left  to  DeciuS  die 
nwgiging  ofthe  «H»&y  j  and  proceeded  widi  his  troops  into 
Etniriq  to  his  coHe^fue  j  where,  mt  hM^arrivtO,  the  army  in 
genend  received  him  with  joy.  Ap^us,  if  he  did  riot  write 
the  letter,  being  cmtsciojOB  of  this,  had,  in  my  opinicm,  just 
grotmd  of  di^easnre :  but  if  he  had  at^ally  sent  for  assist¬ 
ance,  his  disowning  it,  u  he  did,  arose  from  an  i]libaa|:pid 
ungrateful  mind.  For,  on  going'  out  to  receive  him,  adien 
they  had  scarcely  excfaangedsalutatkms,  he  said,  “  Is  sdl  well, 
Lucius  Volumnius  ?  How  stand  afiairs  in  Samnium  ?  What 
motive  induced  ymi  to  remove  ont  of  your  province  ?”  Vo- 
liwtnius  answered,  i^at  “  afikim  in  Samnium  were  in  a  pros¬ 
perous  state  j  and  that  he  had  -come  thither  in  cmnpliance 
widi  the  request  in  his  letter.  But,  if  dtat  were  a  forged  let- 
fa,  and  that  there  was  no  .occasion  for  him  in  Etruria, vhe 
would  instantly  face  about,  and  depart.”  “  You.  may.de|Kttt,” 
lejdied  the  other ;  “no  one  detains  you.:  for  it  is  a  perfect 
-inccmsistmuy,  that  when,  perhaps,  you  are-  scarcely  equal  to 
the  management  cd*  the  war  allotted  to  yourself,  you  should 
vaunt  <rf  coming  hither  to  succour  others.”  To  this  Voium- 
nius  rejoined,  “  May  Hercules  direct  aU  for  the  best ;  for  his 
part,  he  was  better,  pleased  that  he  had  taken  useless  trouble, 
than  that  any  conjuncture  should  have  arisen  which  had  made 
one  consular  army  insufficient  for  Etruria.” 
XIX.  As  foe  consuls  were  parting,  foe  lieutenants-general 
and  tribunes  of  Appius’s  army  gafoered  round  them;  Some 
entreated  their  own  general  that  he  would  not  reject  the 

534 

HISTORY  AOME. 

CYA.4i6, 

.^ktance,  ii^c^  ^  ou^ 
the  grqE^  mmim  ^^^vchh-s 
to  atop  Vctemlni^^  h^ee^syng  Mia  apeevkh 
dkpis^t^  wi&  to  ftoEid<n:i  of  the 
commmwedLth ;  ji^;  represented  to  him,  dmt  in  case  my 
misfortune  should  liiq>p€%  the  Uiaiske  woidd  £dl  im  the  per- 
soa  who  forsook  d^e  otoer,  not  mi  the  mie  fox^d^^n ;  that  the 
state  of  sffiiirs  was  sueht  ^t  die  credh  and  discredit  evmy 
success  and  faihurean  Etruiia,^  would  he  attrilmted  to  Lucms 
Volomnios  :  ftx  nd  one  would  enquhre^what-were  the  words 
of  Appius,  but  ^at  the  situation  erf  the  army.  Appius  in¬ 
deed  dismissed  Um,  but.the  commonwealth,  and  the  ar- 
toy^  required  his  stay.  Let  him.  mily  make  trial  of  the  in¬ 
clinations  of  the  soldiers.’’  By  such  j^monitions  and  en¬ 
treaties,  they,  in  a  manner,  dragged  die  consuls  to  an  assem¬ 
bly.  There,  longer  discourses  werje  m^e  to  the  same  pur¬ 
port,  as  had  passed  before  in  the  presence  of  a  few*  A5 
Volunxmus  had  the  advant^e  of  the  argument,  so  did  he 
show  lumself  not  deficient  in  oratory,  in  despite  of  the  ex¬ 
traordinary  eloquence  of  his  ced^gue.  On  which  A{^ius 
observed  with  a  sneer,  that  ‘‘  they  ought  to  acknowledge 
themselves  indebted  to  him,  in  having  a  consul,  who,  among 
his  other  qualifications,  possessed  eloquence  also,  inst^d  of 
bemg  dmnb  and  speechless,  as  he  was  in  dxcir  former  consu¬ 
late  ;  when,  particularly  during  di#  first  months,  he  was  not 
able  so  muckas  to^open  his  lipsi  but  now,  in  his  harangues, 
even  aspired  after  popularity.”  Volumnius  rej^ed,  how 
much  more  eamesdy  do  I  wish,  that  you.had  lemned  from 
me  to  act  with  spirit ;  than  1  from  yem  to  speak  with  elegance ! 
I  now  make  you  a  final  proposal,  which  wiB  demonstrate,  not 
which  is  the  better  orator,  for  that  is  not  what  the  public 
wants,  but  which  is  the  better  commander.  The  provinces 
are  E^ria  atrfl  Samnium  t  make  your  choice  ;  I,  with  my 
own  army,  will  undertake  to  manage  the  business  of  either.” 

335 

B.C,  2^.] 
The  soidi^  died;  wkh  Umd  clamdars^  teqiie&tod  UssA  diey 
wooid,  in  confundioii,  eany  cm  the  war  m  E^ria  ;  when 
Voiumnius,  percei^tf^mg  that  it  was  the  g^eml  wish,  said^ 
Sioce  I  have  been  mis^en  in  apprehetKling  my  ^diieagae’s 
meaning,  I  will  take  ear©  that  there  shall  beno  miss* 
take  with  respect  to  the  purport  of  your  wishes. '  Signify  by 
a  shout,  whether  you  chiKJsc  that  I  should  stay  dr  depart.” 
On  this,  a  shout  was  raised,  so  loud,  that  it  brou^t  the  ene*^ 
my  out  of  their  camp  r  they  snatched  up  their  arms,  and 
marched  forward  in  efider  of  battle.  Voliimnius  likewise 
ordered  the  signal  m  be  mounded,  axKl  his  troops  to  take  the 
held.  It  is  said  that  Appius  hesitated,  perceiving  that, 
whether  he  fought  or  remained  inadtiye,  his  colleague  would 
eiyoy  the  honour  of  the  victory ;  and  that,  afterwards,  dread¬ 
ing  lest  ids  own^  legions  should  foilow^  V olumnius  with  the 
rest,  he  gave  Ae  signal,  at  the  daitiestdeshre'of  his  men. 
On  neither  side  were  the  forced  drawn  up  tondvantagei  for, 
on  the  one,  Gellius  Egmttius,  dke  Samnite  general,  had  gone 
out  to  ft^age  with  a  few  cohorts,  and  his  men  entered  on  the 
fight,  as  the  violence  of  theif  passions  prompted,  rather  than 
under  any  directions,  or  orders*  On  the  other,  the  Roman 
armies,  neithcr^arehed  out  together,  nor  had  time  sufficient 
to  form  5  Volumnius  began  to  Engage,  before  Appius  came 
Op,  consequently  their  front  in  the  battle  was  uneven ;  and  by 
som^  accidenml  interchange  of  their  usual  opponent^  the 
Etrurians  foUghtagmnst  Volumnius ;  and  the  Samnites,  after 
delaying  some  time  tm  account  of  the  absence  of  their  gene¬ 
ral,  against  Appitts.  We  are  told  that  Appius,  during  the 
heat  of  the  fight,  raisir^  his  hands  towards  heaven,  so  as  to 
be  seen  in  the  foremost  r^ks,  prayed  thus,  ^  Bellona,  if  thoti 
grantest  us  ^he  victory  this  day,  I  vow  to  thee  a  temide;^ 
And  that  after  this  vow,  as  if  inspirited  by  the  goddess,  he 
displayed  a*degree  of  touri^e  equal  to  that  of  his  colleaguef 
and  oft  the  troops.  The  generals  perfisrmed  every  duty^  aid 

'  -# 
S36  HISTO«y.tejft03«®.  mM.4SB. 
cmk  <rf  tbefe  ^Wi  fes  %teK»t 
%%&ttr^lmd»<>*prBW0l^Wfe^^c^  TteyAete- 
fiire  m&  -defated  ifee  eaei»y,^ho  ill 
^  «  ferce  so  aii«A'  supeH^ 
Ihey  hirf  lifeeil  Acci^toed  to  i^teed  f  th» 
them  as  liie^~^ve  ^mmd,  aad%.pop*smiBg  dtem  closefy  as 
they  fled,  tfety  dsewe  Aem^  camp*^  Them 
Geiiltia  ai^:)^  fenmite  cches^  ‘t^r^iag,  li^ dght  an^ 
reoewedrior  a  ^dme  acme  di^se  d^emg 
lifasrartse  iKJtm 
t^  omap ;  ^md.  Voiewda^  la  le^sg  Ms  Aroo^ 
i^hist  one  of  the  gates,  adiiM  ft^cqi^e*^  iavoida^ 
Beliona-  the  victorious,  inflamed^  of  |iis  hfi^, 
aeitiber  rampart  nor  treiahiss  could  ptw^Eadiefe^^edtihg^m. 
The  camp  yras  tahen  Ad  |dttndered,  aad  ^b^F^it^>  whkh 
great  ^bamianoe^vras  £o^mdj  vras  given  tip,  tl^;  soldie^ 
Of  the  enemy  hundmdijrcfre  AM  J  md, 
thousaad-'C^e^iHi&^t^ttlS^twten^  ^  ^  :. 
JXX.  While  hodi  ismssUbH  vridt  i&e  jwhA  for^  ^  the 
Remans,  pointed  dieir  exertions  ptA^%a^^ 
mies  in  Etruria,  a  new  army  was  s^  A  foot  A  ^aamtadi ; 
and,  witb^deAp  *^2tg^,  d?€,fe^i#^  «d*  dw  Roma^e^* 
pire,  passed  over  tbrou^^^Uifc  ^  Vescians^  into 
the  C^panian  and  FdAA^^ritoAi^  tdiem  they  com¬ 
mitted  ^eat  depredsttions^  VAaan^aa  vm  imsteni^ 
back  toSamniam^  by  feaced  maizes,  hecmii^  the  term  for 
which  FAus  and  Deems  h|id  b^rcm^ntiA  M  commaml 
was  nearly  expired,  hemd  ^  jdus  wrmy  of  Sammte%  ami  td 
the  mischief  which  d^yAddcaieM'Camjpan  dy^ennkmig, 
therefore,  to  protec^on  to  the  Mkes,  he  atteAi  Ms 
remte  towards  that  quarter.  Wheahe  arrived  in»d3^?,di^rict 
of  Cales,  he  fotmd  marks  of  their  ravages ;  and  the 
people  of  that'  town- informed  Mm  dmt-the  cnemjroamed 
with  them  such  a  quantity  of  spoil,; that Aey  could  s<^eelj 
observe  any  order  in  their  march:  and  that  the  commanders 

BOOK  X. 

337 

B.C.  296.] 
dien  directed  piAHcly,  that  the  troops  should  go  immediately 
to  Samnium,  deposit  the  booty  there,  and  return  to  the  busi¬ 
ness  of  the  expedition,  as  an  engagement  must  not  be  hazard¬ 
ed  while  they  were  so  heavily  laden.  Notwithstanding  that 
this  account  carried  every  appearance  of  truth,  be  yet  thought 
it  necessary  to  obtain  more  certain  information ;  accordingly 
he  despatched  some  horsemen,  to  seize  on  some  of  the  strag¬ 
gling  marauders ;  from  these  he  learned,  on  enquiry,  that 
the  enemy  lay  at  the  river  Vulturnus  ;  that  they  intended  to 
remove  thence  at  the  third  watch ;  and  that  their  route  was 
towards  Samnium.  On  receiving  this  intelligence,  which 
could  be  depended  upon,  be  put  his  troops  in  motion,  and 
sat  down  at  such  a  distance  from  the  enemy,  as  %va8  sufficient 
to  prevent  their  discovering  his  approach,  and,  at  the  same 
time,  left  it  in  his  power  to  surprise  them,  as  they  should  be 
coming  out  of  their  camp.  A  long  time  before  day,  he  drew 
nigh  to  their  post,  and  sent  persons,  who  understood  the  Os- 
can  language,  to  discover  how  they  were  employed ;  these, 
mixing  with  the  enemy,  which  they  could  easily  do  during 
the  confusion  in  the  night,  found  that  the  standards  had  gone 
out  thinly  attended ;  that  the  booty,  and  those  appointed  to 
guard  it,  were  then  setting  out,  a  contemptible  train ;  each 
busied  about  his  own  affairs,  without  any  concert  with  the 
rest,  or  much  regard  to  orders.  This  the  consul  judged  the 
fittest  time  for  the  attack  ;  and,  day-light  now  approaching, 
he  gave  orders  to  sound  the  charge,  and  fell  on  the  enemy 
as  they  were  marching  out.  The  Samnites  being  embarr^- 
sed  with  the  spoil,  and  very  few  armed,  were  at  a  loss  how 
to  act.  Some  quickened  their  pace,  and  drove  the  prey  be¬ 
fore  them;  others  halted,  deliberating  whether  it  would  be 
safer  to  advance,  or  to  return  again  to  the  camp ;  and,  while 
they  hesitated,  they  were  overtaken  and  cut  off.  The  ]^o- 
mans  had  by  this  time  passed  over  the  rampart,  and  filled 
the  camp  with  slaughter  and  confusion :  the  Sanmite  army 
"'"OT  .  TI. — 2  X 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.456. 

flieir  disorder  increased  by  a  sudden  insurrecliim  of 
their  pnsdners ;  some  of  v:hom,  getting  loose,  set  the  rest 
at  liberty,  while  others  snatched  the  arins  which  were  tied 
up  among  the  baggage,  and,  being  intermixed  wMi  die 
troops,  raised  a  tumult  more  terrible  than  the  battle  itself. 
They  then  performed  a  memorable  exploit :  for,  making  an 
attack  on  Statius  Mttifu:ius,  the  general,  as  he  was  passing 
between  die  ranks  and  encouraging  his  men,  they  disperaed 
the  horsemen  who  attended  him,  gathered  round  himself, 
and  dragged  him,  sitting  on  his  horse,  a  prisoner  to  the  Ro¬ 
man  consul*  This  brought  back  the  foremost  battalions  of 
die  Samntses,  and  the  battle,  which  seemed  to  have  been  al¬ 
ready  decided,  was  renewed :  but  they  could  not  support  it 
long.  Six  thousand  of  them  were  slain,  and  two  thousMid 
five  hundred  taken,  among  whom  were  four  mifitsuy  tribunes, 
together  with  thirty  standards,  and,  what  gave  the  conquer¬ 
ors  greater  joy  than  all,  seven  thousand  fom:  hundred  prisem- 
ers  were  recovered.  The  spoil  which  had  been  taken  from 
the  allies  was  immense,  and  the  owners  were  summoned,  by 
a  proclamation,  to  chum  and  receive  their  property.  On  the 
day  appointed,  all  the  effects,  the  owners  of  which  did  not 
appear,  were  given  to  the  soldiers,  who  were  obliged  to  sell 
them,  in  order  that  they  might  have  nothing  to  thiidc  of  but 
their  duty. 
XXI.  The  depredations,  committed  on  the  lands  of  Cam* 
pania  had  occasioned  a  violent  alarm  at  Rome  ;  md  it  hap- 
{f^ned,  Aat  about  the  same  time,  intelligence  was  brou^t 
from  Etruria,  that,  after  the  departure  of  Volumnius’s  army, 
aU  that  country  had  risen  up  in  arms,  together  with  Geilius 
Egnatius,  the  leader  of  the  Samnites ;  that  the  Umbrians 
were  invited  to  join  in  the  insurrection,  and  the  Gauls  tempt- 
ec^with.  high  offers.  Terrified  at  this  news,  the  senate  or¬ 
dered  the  courts  of  justice  to  be  shut,  and  a  levy  to  be  made 
of  men  of  every  description.  Accordingly  not  only  free* 

BOOK  X. 

339 

B.C.  296.] 
bom  meiiy  and  the  younger  sort  were  obliged  to  enlist^  but 
cohorts  were  formed  of  the  elder  citizens,  and  the  wm  of 
freed  men  were  inccaporated  in  the  centuries.  Plans  were 
formed  for  the  defence  of  the  city,  and  the  chief  command 
committed  to  the  praetor,  Publius  Sempronius.  However, 
the  senate  was  exonerated  of  one  hsdf  of  their  anxiety,  by  a 
letter  from  the  consul,  Lucius  Vohtmmus,  informing  them 
diat  the  army,  which  had  ravaged  Campania,  had  been  de¬ 
feated  and  dispersed  :  whereupon,  they  decreed  a  public 
thanksgiving  for  this  success,  in  the  name  of  the  victors. 
The  courts  were  opened,  after  having  been  shut  eighteen 
days,  and  the  thmksgiving  was  performed  with  much  joy. 
They  then  turned  their  thoughts  to  devising  measures  for 
the  future  security  of  the  country,,  depopulated  by  the  Sam- 
nites ;  and,  with  this  view,  resolved  that  two  colonies  should 
be  settled  on  the  frontiers  of  the  Vcscian  and  Faleraian  ter¬ 
ritories  ;  one  at  the  mouth  of  the  river  Liris,  which  has  re¬ 
ceived  the  name  of  Mintumae;  the  other  in  the  Vescian 
forest,  which  borders  on  the  F^emian  territory ;  where,  it 
is  said,  stood  Sinope,  a  dty  of  Grecians,  called  thenceforth 
by  the  Roman  colonists  Sinuessa.  The  plebeian  tribunes 
were  charged  to  procure  an  order  of  the  commons,  enjoining 
Publius  Sempronius,  the  praetor,  to  create  triumvirs  for  con¬ 
ducting  the  colonies  to  those  places.  But  it  was  not  easy  to 
find  people  to  give  in  their  names ;  because,  a  settlement  in 
those  places  was  considered,  nearly,  as  a  perpetual  advanced 
guard  in  a  hostile  country,  not  as  a  provision  of  land.  From 
these  emplo3rmcnts,  the  attention  of  the  senate  was  drawn 
away,  by -the  Etrurian  war  growing  daily  more  formidable  j 
and  by  frequent  letters  from  Appius,  warning  them  not  to 
neglect  the  disturbances  in  that  quarter.  Four  nations,  he 
told  them,  were  uniting  their  arms  ;  the  Etrurians,  the  Sam- 
nites,  the  Umbrians,  and  the  Gauls ;  and  they  had  already 
forfiied  two  separate  camps,  one  spot  being  insufficient  to 

340 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  456. 

contdn  so  great  a  multitude.  In  consequence,  the  time  of 
the  elections  draiying  nigh,  the  consul,  Lucius  Volumnius, 
was  recalled  to  Rome,  to  hold  them.  Having  summoned  sm 
assembly  of  the  people,  before  the  centuries  were  called  to 
give  their  votes,  he  spoke  at  length  on  the  great  importance 
of  the  Etrurian  war,  and  said,  that  **  even  at  the  time  when 
he  himself  acted  there,  in  conjunction  with  his  colleague,  the 
war  was  too  weighty  to  be  managed  by  one  general,  or  one 
army ;  and  that  it  was  now  reported  that  the  enemy  had, 
since  that  time,  gained  an  accession  of  the  Umbrians,  and  a 
numerous  body  of  Gauls.”  He  desired  them  to  bear  in 
mind,  that  they  were,  on  that  day,  to  choose  consuls,  who 
were  to  command  in  a  war  against  four  nations.  For  his  own 
part,  were  he  not  confident  that  the  Roman  people  would  con¬ 
cur,  in' appointing  to  the  consulship,  the  man  who  was  allow¬ 
ed,  beyond  dispute,  to  be  the  first  commander  at  present  in 
the  world,  he  would  have  immediately  nominated  a  dicta¬ 
tor.” 
XXII.  No  doubt  was  entertained  but  that  the  universal 
choice  would  light  on  Quintus  Fabius  ;  and,  accordingly,  the 
prerogative,  and  all  the  first  called  centuries,  named  him  con¬ 
sul  with  Lucius  Volumnius.  Fabius  spoke  to  the  same  pur¬ 
pose  as  he  had  done  two  5^ars  before ;  but,  afterwards, 
yielding  to  the  general  wish,  he  applied  himself  to  procure 
Decius  to  be  appointed  his  confederate :  ‘‘  that,”  he  said, 
would  be  a  prop  to  his  declining  age.  In  the  censorship, 
and  two  consulships,  in  which  they  had  been  associated,  he 
had  experienced,  that  there  could  be  no  firmer  support,  in 
promoting  the  interest  of  the  commonwealth,  than  harmony 
with  a  colleague.  At  his  advanced  stage  of  life,  his  mind 
could  hardly  conform  itself  to  a  new  associate  in  command ; 
and  he  could  more  easily  act  in  concert  with  a  temper  to 
which  he  had  been  familiarized.”  Volumnius  subscribed  to 
these  sentiments,  bestowing  due  praises  on  Publius  Decius, 

BOOK  X. 

341 

B.C.  296;] 
and  enumerating  ‘‘the  advantages  resulting  from  ccmcord 
between  consuls,  and  the  evils  arising  from  their  disagree* 
ment  in  the  conduct  of  military  affairs at  the  same  time 
remarking,  “  how  near  the  extremity  of  danger  matters  haul 
been  brought,  by  the  late  dispute  between  Appius  and  him¬ 
self.’’  He  warmly  recommended  to  Decius  and  Fabius  to 
“  live  together  with  one  mind  and  one  spirit.”  Observed  that 
“  they  were  men  quaKfied  by  nature  for  military  command : 
great  in  action,  but  unpractised  in  the  strife  of  words,  their 
talents  were  such  as  eminently  became  consuls.  As  to  the 
artful  and  the  ingenious,  lawyers  and  orators,  such  as  Appius 
Claudius^  they  ought  to  be  kept  at  home  to  preside  in  the 
city  and  the  forum  ;  and  to  be  appointed  praetors  for  the  ad¬ 
ministration  of  justice*”  In  these  proceedings  that  day  was 
spent,  and,  on  the  following,  the  elections  both  of  consuls  and 
praetor  were  held,  and  were  guided  by  the  recommendations 
suggested  by  the  consul.  Quintus  Fabius  and  Publius  De¬ 
cius  were  chosen  consuls ;  Appius  Claudius,  praetor ;  all  of 
them  absent ;  and,  by  a  decree  of  the  senate,  followed  by  an 
order  of  the  commons,  Ducius  Volumnius  was  continued  in 
the  command  for  another  year. 
XXIll.  During  that  year  many  prodigies  happened.  To 
avert  the  evils  which  they  might  portend,  the  senate  decreed 
a  supplication  for  two  days :  the  wine  and  frankincense  for 
the  sacri^ces  were  famished  at  the  expense  of  the  public  ; 
and  numerous  crowds  of  men  and  women  attended  the  per¬ 
formance.  This  supjdication  was  rendered  remarkable  by  a 
quarrel,  which  broke  out  among  the  matrons  in  tl^  chapel  of 
patrician  chastity,  which  stands  in  the  cattle  market,  near  the 
round  temple  of  Hercules.  Virginia,  daughter  of  Aulus,  a 
patrician,  but  married  to  Volumnius  the  consul,  a  plebeian, 
was  on  that  account  excluded  by  the  matrons  from  sharing 
in  the  sacred  rites :  a  short  altercation  ensued,  which  was 
afterwards,  through  the  intemperance  of  passion  incident  to 

342 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  456. 

^  sac,  kixdled  into  a  of  contender.  Virginia  boasted, 
wHh  truth,  tl»t  she  had  a  ri^t  to  enter  die  temple  of  patri- 
eian  chastity,  a&  being  of  pattician  birth  and  chaste  in  her 
character,  and,  besides,  the  wife  of  one  to  whom  she  was  be¬ 
trothed  a  vir^,  smd  had  no  reason  to  be  ashamed  cither  of 
her  husband,  or  of  his  eiqilatts  or  honours :  to  her  high-spi¬ 
rited  words  she  added  impcntance  by  an  extraordinary  act. 
In  the  long  starect,  where  she  resided,  ^le  inclosed,  with  a 
partition,  a  part  of  the  house,  of  a  size  sufRcient  for  a  smidl 
chapel,  and  there  erected  an  altar.  Then,  calling  together  the 
plebeian  matrons,  and  complaining  of  the  injurious  behaviour 
of  the  patricians,  she  said,  tins  altar  I  dedicate  to*  plebeian 
chastity,  and  eHiort  you,  that  the  same  degiec  of  emulation, 
which  prevails  among  the  men  of  this  state,  on  the  point  of 
valour,  may  be  maintained  by  the  women  on  the  point  of 
chastity ;  and  that  you  contribute  your  best  care,  that  this 
altar  may  have  die  credit  of  being  attended  with  a  greater 
degree  of  sanctity,  and  by  chaster  women  than  the  other.” 
Sdiemn  rites  were  performed  at  this  altar  under  the  same 
regulations,  ncariy,  with  those  at  the  more  ancient  one  ;  no 
person  being  allowed  the  privilege  of  taking  part  in  the  sacri¬ 
fices,  except  a  woman  of  approved  chastity,  and  who  was  the 
wife  of  one  husband.  Tliis  institute  cm,  being  afterwards  de¬ 
based  by  the  admission  of  vicious  characters,  and  not  only 
by  matrons,  but  women  of  every  description,  sunk  at  last 
iim?  oblivion.  During  this  year  the  Ogulnii,  Cneius  and 
Quintus,  being  curulc  aediies,  carried  on  prosecutions  against 
several  usurers ;  and  these  being  condemned  to  pay  fines  out 
of  the  produce  and  for  the  use  of  the  public,  the  sediles  made 
brazen  Areslmlds  in  the  Capitol ;  utensils  of  plate  for  three 
tables,  which  were  deposited  in  the  chapel  of  Jupiter  ;  a  sta¬ 
tue  of  Jupiter  in  a  chariot,  drawn  by  four  horses,  placed  on 
roof;  and  images  of  die  founders  of  the  city,  in  their 
infant  state  under  the  teats  of  the  wedf,  at  the  Ruminal  fig- 

B.C.  295.] 

BOOK  X. 

043 

tree.  They  dso  paved  with  sqtaire  stcmes^  the  road  from  fric 
Capuan  ^te  to  die  temple  Mars.  The  plebeism  »diks 
likewise,  Lucius  iElius  Paetus,  and  Cahis  Fulvius  Corvus, 
out  of  mcmcy  levied  as  fines  on  farmers  of  the  public  pas¬ 
tures,  whom  they  had  convicted  of  mal-practices  exhibited 
games,  and  consecrated  golden  bowls  in  the  temple  of 
Ceres. 
XXIV .  Then  came  into  the  consulship  Quintus  Fabius,  a 
fifth  time,  and  Publius  Decius,  a  fourth.  They 
^  V  TJ  A 
had  been  colleagues  in  die  censorship,  and  twice  g  £  295* 
in  the  consulship,  and  were  celebr2K;ed,  not  more 
for  their  glmrious  achievements,  splendid  as  these  were,  than 
for  the  unanimi^  whidh  had  ever  sul^tsted  l^tween  them. 
The  intemlption,  wMdi  this  afterwards  suffered,  was,  in  my 
opinion,  owing  to  a  jarring  between  the  opposite  parties,  ra- 
dicr  than  between  themselves ;  the  patricians  endeavouring 
that  Fabius  should  have  Etruria  for  his  province,  without 
casting  lots,  and  the  plebeians  insisting  that  Decius  should 
bring  the  matter  to  the  decision  of  lots.  There  was  certainly 
a  contention  in  the  senate,  and  the  interest  of  Fabius,  being 
superior  there,  the  business  was  brought  before  the  people. 
Here,  betwe^  military  men  who  laid  greater  stress  on  deeds 
than  on  words,  the  debate  was  short.  Fabius  said,  ‘‘  that  it 
was  unreasonable,  that,  after  he  had  planted  a  tree,  another 
should  gather  the  fruit  of  it.  He  had  opened  the  Ciminian 
forest,  and  made  a  way  for  the  Roman  arms,  through  passes 
until  then  impracticable.  Why  had  they  disturbed  his  re¬ 
pose,  at  that  time  of  his  life,  if  they  intended  to  give  the 
management  of  the  war  to  another  ?”  Then,  in  the  ivay  of 
a  gentle  reproof,  he  observed,  that  ‘‘  instead  of  an  associate 
in  command,  he  had  chosen  an  adversary  ;  and  that  Decius 
thought  it  too  much  that  their  unanimity  should  last  through 
three  consulates.’’  Declaring,  in  fine,  that  ‘‘  he  desired  no¬ 
thing  farther,  than  that,  if  thev  thought  him  qualified  for  the 

544  . 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.45r. 

commarrd  in  province,  they  should  send  him  thither.  He 
had  sulnnitted  to  the  judgment  of  the  senate,  and  would  now 
be  governed  by  the  authority  of  the  people,”  Publius  De- 
cius  complained  of  injustice  in  the  senate  j  and  asserted,  that 
**  the  patricians  had  laboured^  as  long  as  possible,  to  exclude 
the  plebeians  from  all  access  to  the  higher  honours ;  and, 
since  merit,  by  its  own  intrinsic  power,  had  prevailed  so  far, 
as  that  it  should  not,  in  any  rank  of  men,  be  precluded  frean 
the  attsdnment  of  them,  they  sought  every  expedient  to 
der  ineffectual,  not  only  the  suffrages  of  the,  peopie,  but  even 
the  decisions  of  fortune ;  converting  all  things  to  the  aggran¬ 
dizement  of  a  few.  Former  consuls  had  disposed  of  the 
provinces  by  lots  ;  now,  the  senate  bestowed  a  province  on 
Fabius  at  their  pleasure.  If  this  was  meant  as  a  mark  of 
honour,  the  merits  of  Fabius  were  so  great  towards  the  com¬ 
monwealth,  and  towards  himself  in  particular,  that  he  would 
gladly  contribute  to  the  advancement  of  his  reputation  in 
every  instance  where  its  splendour  could  be  increased  with¬ 
out  reflecting  dishonour  on  himself.  But  who  did  not  see, 
that,  when  a  war  of  difficulty  ahd  danger,  and  out  of  the  or¬ 
dinary  course,  was  committed  to  only  that  one  consul,  the 
other  would  be  considered  as  useless  and  insignificant  ?  Fa¬ 
bius  gloried  in  his  exploits  performed  in  Etruria :  Publius 
Decius  wished  for  a  like  subject  of  glory,  and,  perhaps, 
vrould  utterly  extinguish  that  fire,  which  the  other  left 
smothered,  in  such  a  manner,  that  it  often  broke  out  anew, 
in  sudden  conflagrations.  In  fine,  honours  and  rewards  he 
would  concede  to  his  colleague,  out  of  respect  to  his  age  and 
dignified  character:  but  when  danger,  when  a  vigorous  strug¬ 
gle  with  an  enemy  was  before  them,  he  never  did,  nor  ever 
would,  willingly,  give  place.  With  respect  to  the  present 
dispute,  this  much  he  would  gain,  at  all  events,  that  a  busi¬ 
ness,  appertaining  to  the  jurisdiction  of  the  people,  should 
be  determined  by  an  order  of  that  people,  and  not  compli- 

BOOK  X. 

345 

B.C.  295.] 
merited  away  by  the  senate.  He  prayed  Jupiter,  supremely 
good  and  great,  and  all  the  immortal  gods,  not  to  grant  him 
an  equal  chance  with  his  colleague,  unless  they  intended  to 
grant  him  equal  ability  and  success,  in  the  management  of 
the  war.  It  was  certainly  in  its  nature  reasonable,  in  the 
example  salutary,  and  concerned  the  reputation  of  the  Roman 
people,  that  the  consuls  should  be  men  of  such  abilities,  that 
either  of  them  was  fully  equal  to  the  command  in  a  war  with 
Etruria,”  Fabius,  after  just  requesting  of  the  people,  that, 
before  the  tribes  were  called  in  to  give  their  votes,  they 
would  hear  the  letters  of  the  praetor  Appius  Claudius, 
written  from  Etruria,  withdrew  from  the  Comitium,  and 
the  people,  not  less  unanimously  than  the  senate,  decreed  to 
him  the  province  of  Etruria,  without  having  recourse  to 
lots. 
XXV.  Immediately  almost  all  the  younger  citizens  flocked 
together  to  the  consul,  and  cheerfully  gave  in  their  names, 
earnestly  desirous  of  serving  under  such  a  commander.  See¬ 
ing  so  great  a  multitude  collected  round  him,  he  said,  My 
intention  is  to  enlist  only  four  thousand  foot,  and  six  hundred 
horse  ;  such  of  you  as  give  in  your  names  to-day  and  to-mor¬ 
row,  I  will  carry  with  me.  I  am  more  solicitous  to  bring  home 
all  my  soldiers  rich,  than  to  employ  a  great  multitude.”  Ac¬ 
cordingly,  with  a  competent  number  of  men,  who  possessed 
greater  hopes  and  confidence,  because  a  numerous  army  had 
not  been  required,  he  marched  to  the  town  of  Ahama,  from 
which  the  enemy  were  not  far  distant,  and  proceeded  to  the 
camp  of  the  praetor  Appius.  When  he  came  within  a  few 
miles  of  it,  he  was  met  by  some  soldiers,  sent  to  cut  wood,  at¬ 
tended  by  a  guard.  Observing  the  lictors  preceding  him,  and 
learning  that  he  was  Fabius  the  consul,  they  were  filled  with 
joy  ;  and  expressed  warm  thanks  to  the  gods,  and  to  the  Ro¬ 
man  people,  for  having  sent  theni  such  a  commander.  Then, 
as  they  gathered  round,  to  pay  their  respects,  Fabius  enquir- 
VOL.  II. — 2  Y 

346 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  457. 

cd  whither  they  were  going,  and  on  their  answering  that  they 
were  going  to  provide  wood,  “  what  do  you  tell  me,”  said 
he,  have  you  not  a  rampart  raised  about  your  camp  ?” 
They  had,”  they  replied,  a  double  rampart,  and  a  trench ; 
and,  notwithstanding,  were  in  great  apprehension.”  Well 
then,”  said  lie,  ‘‘  you  have  abundance  of  wood,  go  back  and 
level  the  rampart.”  They  accordingly  returned  to  the  camp, 
and  there  levelling  the  rampart,  threw  the  soldiers  who  had 
remained  in  it,  and  Appius  himself,  into  the  greatest  fri^t, 
until  with  eager  joy  each  called  out  to  the  rest,  that,  they 
acted  by  order  of  the  consul,  Quintus  Fabius,”  Next  day, 
they  decamped,  and  the  praetor  Appius  was  dismissed  to 
Rome.  From  that  time,  the  Romans  had  no  fixed  post ;  the 
consul  affirming,  that  it  was  prejudicial  to  an  army  to  lie  in 
one  spot ;  and  that  by  frequent  marches,  and  changing  places, 
it  was  rendered  more  healthy,  and  more  capable  of  brisk  ex¬ 
ertions  :  and  this  he  practised  as  long  as  the  season  permit¬ 
ted,  the  winter  being  not  yet  ended.  Then,  in  the  beginning 
of  spring,  leaving  the  second  legion  near  Clusium,  which 
they  formerly  called  the  Camertian,  and  giving  the  command 
of  the  camp  to  Lucius  Scipio,  as  pro-prsetor,  he  returned  to 
Rome,  in  order  to  adjust  measures  for  carrying  on  the  war  ; 
either  led  thereto  by  his  own  judgment,  on  finding  it  attend¬ 
ed  with  greater  difficulty  than  he  had  believed,  from  report ; 
or,  being  summoned  by  a  decree  of  senate  ;  for  both  accounts 
are  given.  Some  choose  to  have  it  believed,  that  he  was 
forced  to  return  by  the  practices  of  the  prsetor,  Appius  Clau¬ 
dius  ;  who,  both  in  the  senate,  and  before  the  people,  exag¬ 
gerated,  as  he  was  wont  in  all  his  letters,  the  danger  of  the 
Etrurian  war  ;  contending,  that  one  general,  or  one  army, 
would  not  be  sufficient  to  oppose  four  nations.  I'hat  whether 
these  directed  the  whole  of  their  combined  force  against  him 
alone,  or  acted  separately  in  different  parts,  there  was  reason 
to  fear,  that  he  would  be  unable  to  provide,  effectually,  against 

BOOK  X. 

347 

B.C.  295.] 
every  emergency.  That  he  had  left  there  but  two  Roman 
legions  ;  and  that  the  foot  and  horse,  who  came  widj  Fabius, 
did  not  amount  to  five  thousand.  It  was  therefore  his  opin¬ 
ion,  that  the  consul  Publius  Decius,  should,  without  delay, 
join  his  colleague  in  Etruria  ;  and  that  the  province  of  Sam- 
nium  should  be  given  to  Lucius  Volumnius.  But,  if  the  con¬ 
sul  preferred  going  to  his  own  province,  that  then  Volumnius 
should  march  a  full  consular  army  into  Etruria,  to  join  the 
other  commander,”  The  advice  of  the  praetor  was  approved 
by  a  great  part  of  the  members  ;  but  Publius  Decius  recom¬ 
mended  that  every  thing  should  be  kept  undetermined,  and 
open  for  Quintus  Fabius  ;  uniil  he  should  either  come  to 
Rome,  if  he  could  do  so  without  prejudice  to  the  public,  or 
send  some  of  his  lieutenants,  from  whom  the  senate  might 
learn  the  real  state  of  the  war  in  Etruria  ;  and  what  number 
of  troops,  and  how  many  generals,  would  be  requisite  for 
carrying  it  on. 
XXVI.  Fabius,  on  his  return  to  Rome,  qualified  his  dis¬ 
courses,  both  in  the  senate  and  before  tlje  people,  in  such  a 
manner  as  to  appear  neither  to  exaggerate,  or  lessen,  any  par¬ 
ticular  relating  to  the  war ;  and  to  show,  that,  in  agreeing  to 
another  general  being  joined  with  him,  he  rather  indulged 
the  apprehensions  of  others,  than  guarded  against  any  danger 
to  himself,  or  the  public.  “  But  if  they  chose,”  he  said,  “  to 
give  him  an  assistant,  and  associate  in  command,  how  could 
he  overlook  Publius  Decius  the  consul ;  with  whom  he  was 
perfectly  acquainted,  as  a  colleague,  on  so  many  occasions  ? 
There  was  no  man  living  whom  he  would  rather  wish  to  be 
joined  in  commission  with  him  :  with  Publius  Decius  he 
should  have  forces  sufficient,  and  never  too  many  enemies. 
If,  however,  his  colleague  preferred  any  other  employment, 
let  them  then  give  him  Lucius  Volumnius  as  an  assistant.” 
The  disposal  of  every  particular  was  left  entirely  to  Fabius 
by  the  people  and  the  senate,  and  even  by  his  colleague  ; 

348 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.4S7. 

while  Decius,  having  declared  that  he  was  ready  to  go  either 
to  Etruria,  or  Samnium,  such  general  congnitulation  and  sa¬ 
tisfaction  took  place,  that  all  men  anticipated  victory,  and  felt 
as  if  a  triumph,  not  a  war,  had  been  decreed  to  the  consuls. 
I  find  in  some  writers,  that  Fabius  and  Decius,  immediately 
on  their  entering  into  office,  set  out  together  for  Etruria  ;  and 
no  mention  is  made  of  the  casting  of  lots,  or  of  the  disputes 
which  I  have  related.  Others,  not  satisfied  with  relating 
those  disputes,  have  added  charges  of  misconduct,  laid  by 
Appius  before  the  people  against  Fabius,  when  absent ;  and 
a  stubborn  opposition,  maintained  by  the  praetor , against  the 
consul,  when  present ;  and  flso  another  contention  between 
the  colleagues,  Decius  insisting  that  each  consul  should  at¬ 
tend  to  the  care  of  his  own  separate  province.  Certainty 
however  begins  to  appear,  from  the  time  when  both  consuls 
set  out  for  the  campaign.  Now,  before  these  arrived  in  Etru¬ 
ria,  the  Senonian  Gauls  came  in  a  vast  body  to  Clusium,  to 
attack  the  Roman  legion  encamped  there.  Scipio,  who  com¬ 
manded  in  that  post,  wishing  to  remedy  the  deficiency  of  his 
numbers,  by  an  advantage  in  the  ground,  led  his  men  up  a 
hill,  which  stood  between  the  camp  and  the  city  :  but  having, 
in  his  haste,  neglected  to  examine  the  place,  when  he  came 
near  the  summit,  he  found  it  already  possessed  by  the  ene¬ 
my,  who  had  ascended  on  the  other  side.  The  legion  was, 
consequently,  attacked  on  the  rear,  and  surrounded  by  seve¬ 
ral  battalions,  who  pressed  it  on  all  sides.  Some  writers  say, 
that  the  whole  were  cut  off,  so  that  not  one  survived  to  give 
an  account  of  the  disaster ;  and  that  no  information  of  the 
misfortune  reached  the  consuls,  who  were,  at  the  time,  not 
far  from  Clusium,  until  the  Gallic  horsemen  came  within 
sight,  carrying  the  heads  of  the  slain,  some  hanging  before 
their  horses’  breasts,  others  on  the  points  of  their  spears,  and 
expressing  their  triumph  in  songs,  according  to  their  custom. 
Others  affirm,  that  the  defeat  was  by  Umbrians,  not  Gauls, 

BOOK  X. 

349 

B.C.  295.] 
and  that  the  loss  sdstoined  was  not  so  great.  That  a  party 
of  foragers,  under  Lucius  Manlius  Torquatus,  lieutenant- 
general,  being  surrounded,  Scipio,  the  proprator,  brought  up 
relief  from  the  camp,  and,  renewing  the  battle,  defeated  the 
Umbrians  lately  victorious,  and  retook  the  prisoners  and 
spoil.  But  it  is  more  probable,  that  this  blow  was  suffered  from 
a  Gallic,  than  an  Umbrian  enemy  ;  because  during  that  year, 
as  was  often  the  case  at  other  times,  the  danger  principally 
apprehended  by  the  public,  was  that  of  a  Gallic  tumult ;  for 
which  reason,  notwithstanding  that  both  the  consuls  had 
marched  against  the  enemy,  with  four  legions,  and  a  large 
body  of  Roman  cavalry,  joined  by  a  thousand  chosen  horse¬ 
men  of  Campania,  supplied  on  the  occasion,  and  a  body  of 
the  allies  and  Latine  confederates,  superior  in  number  to  the 
Romans,  two  other  armies  were  posted  near  the  city,  on  the 
side  facing  Etruria  ;  one,  in  the  Faliscian,  the  other  in  the 
Vatican  territory,  Cneius  Fulvius,  and  Lucius  Postumius 
Megellus,  both  propraetors,  being  ordered  to  keep  the  troops 
stationed  in  those  places. 
XXVII.  The  consuls,  having  crossed  the  Appennines, 
came  up  with  the  combined  forces  in  the  territory  of  Senti- 
num,  and  pitched  their  camp,  distant  from  them  about  four 
miles.  Several  councils  were  then  held  by  the  enemy,  and 
their  plan  of  operations  was  thus  settled  ;  that  they  should 
not  encamp  together,  nor  go  out  together  to  battle  :  the  Gauls 
were  united  to  the  Samnites,  the  Umbrians  to  th^^  Etrurians. 
The  day  of  battle  was  fixed.  The  part  of  maintaining  the 
fight  was  committed  to  the  Samnites  and  Gauls  ;  and  the 
Etrurians  and  Umbrians  were  ordered  to  attack  the  Roman 
camp  during  the  heat  of  the  engfagement.  This  plan  was 
frustrated  by  three  Clusian  deserters,  who  came  over  by 
night  to  Fabius,  and  after  disclosing  the  above  designs,  were 
sent  back  with  presents,  in  order  that  they  might  discover, 
and  bring  intelligence  of,  any  new  scheme  which  should  be 

aso  HISTORY  OF  ROME,  (Y-R.  457, 
formed.  The  consuls  then  wrote  to  Flavius  and  Postumius 
to  move  their  armies,  the  one  from  the  Faliscian,  the  other 
from  the  Vatican  country,  towards  Clusium  ;  and  to  ruin  the 
enemy’s  territory  by  every  means  in  their  power.  The  news 
of  these  depredations  drew  the  Etrurians  from  Sentinum  to 
protect  their  own  region.  The  consuls,  in  their  absence, 
practised  every  means  to  bring  on  an  engagement.  For  two 
days,  they  endeavoured,  by  several  attacks,  to  provoke  the 
enemy  to  fight  5  in  which  time,  however,  nothing  worth  men¬ 
tion  was  performed.  A  few  fell  on  each  side,  but  still  the 
minds  of  the  Romans  were  so  irritated  as  to  wish  for  a  gene¬ 
ral  engagement,  yet  nothing  decisive  was  hazarded.  On  the 
thit-d  day,  both  parties  marched  out  their  whole  force  to  the 
field  :  here,  while  the  armies  stood  in  order  of  battle,  a  hind, 
chased  by  a  wolf  from  the  mountains,  ran  through  the  plain 
between  the  two  lines  ;  there  the  animals  turned  their  courses 
to  different  sides  ;  the  hind  towards  the  Gauls,  the  wolf  to¬ 
wards  the  Romans  :  way  was  made  between  the  ranks  for  the 
wolf,  the  Gauls  slew  the  hind  with  their  javelins  ;  on  which 
one  of  the  Roman  solaiers  in  the  van  said,  To  that  side, 
where  you  see  an  animal,  sacred  to  Diana,  lying  prostrate, 
flight  and  slaughter  are  directed  ;  on  this  side  the  victorious 
wolf  of  Mars,  safe  and  untouched,  reminds  us  of  our  foun¬ 
der,  and  of  our  descent  from  that  deity.”  The  Gauls  were 
posted  on  the  right  wing,  the  Samnites  on  the  left :  against 
the  latter,  Fabius  drew  up,  as  his  right  wing,  the  first  and 
third  legions ;  against  the  Gauls,  Decius  formed  the  left 
wing  of  the  fifth  and  sixth.  The  second  and  fourth  were 
employed  in  the  war  in  Samnium,  under  the  pro-consul  Lu¬ 
cius  Volumnius.  The  first  encounter  was  supported  with 
strength  so  equal  on  both  sides,  that  had  the  Etrurians  and 
Umbrians  been  present  at  the  action,  either  in  the  field  or  at 
the  camp,  in  whichever  place  they  might  have  employed 
their  force,  the  Romans  must  have  been  defeated. 

BOOK  X. 

351 

B.C.  295.] 
XXVIII.  However,  although  the  victory  was  still  unde¬ 
cided,  fortune  not  having  declared  in  favour  of  either  party, 
yet  the  course  of  the  fight  was  by  no  means  similar  on  both 
right  and  left  wings.  The  Romans,  under  Fabius,  rather  re¬ 
pelled  than  offered  assault ;  and  the  contest  was  protracted 
until  very  late  in  the  day :  for  their  general  knew  very  well, 
that  both  Samnites  and  Gauls  were  furious  in  the  first  onset; 
so  that,  to  prevent  their  progress,  was  as  much  as  could  well 
be  effected.  It  was  known,  too,  that  in  a  longer  dispute,  the 
spirits  of  the  Samnites  gradually  flagged,  and  even  the  bodies 
of  the  Gauls,  remarkably  ill  able  to  bear  labour  and  heat,  be¬ 
came  quite  relaxed  ;  and  although,  in  their  first  efforts,  they 
were  more  than  men,  yet  in  their  last  they  were  less  than 
women.  He,  therefore,  reserved  the  strength  of  his  men  for 
the  aforesaid  reasons,  until  the  time  when  the  enemy  were 
the  more  likely  to  be  worsted.  Decius,  more  impetuous,  as 
being  in  the  prime  of  life,  and  full  flow  of  spirits,  exerted 
his  whole  force  to  the  utmost  in  the  first  encounter ;  and 
thinking  the  infantry  not  sufficiently  powerful,  brought  up 
the  cavalry  to  their  aid.  Putting  himself  at  the  head  of  a 
troop  of  young  horsemen,  of  distinguished  bravery,  he  be¬ 
sought  those  youths,  the  flower  of  the  army,  to  follow  him, 
and  charge  the  enemy  ;  telling  them,  they  would  reap  a 
double  share  of  glory,  if  the  victory  should  commence  on 
the  left  wing,  and  through  their  means.”  Twice  they  com¬ 
pelled  the  Gallic  cavalry  to  gave  way.  At  the  second  charge 
they  advanced  nearer,  and  were  briskly  engaged  in  the  midst 
of  the  enemy’s  squadrons,  when,  by  a  method  of  fighting,  to 
which  they  were  utter  strangers,  they  were  thrown  into  dis¬ 
may.  A  number  of  the  enemy,  mounted  on  chariots  and 
cars,  made  towards  them  with  such  a  prodigious  clatter  from 
the  trampling  of  the  cattle  and  rolling  of  wheels,  as  affright¬ 
ed  the  horses  of  the  Romans,  unaccustomed  to  such  tumul¬ 
tuous  operations.  By  this  means  the  victorious  cavalrv  were 

352 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  457, 

dispersed)  through  a  panic,  and  men  and  horses,  in  their 
headlong  flight,  were  tumbled  promiscuously  on  the  ground. 
The  same  cause  produced  disorder  even  in  the  battalions  of 
the  legions :  through  the  impetuosity  of  the  horses,  and  of 
the  carriages  which  they  dragged  through  the  ranks,  many 
of  the  soldiers  in  the  van  were  trodden  or  bruised  to  death ; 
while  the  Gallic  line,  as  soon  as  they  saw  their  enemy  in  con¬ 
fusion,  pursued  the  advantage,  nor  allowed  them  time  to 
take  breath.  Decius,  calling  aloud,  ‘‘  whither  were  they 
flying,  or  what  hope  could  they  have  in  running  away?’^ 
strove  to  stop  them  as  they  turned  their  backs,  but  finding 
that  he  could  not,  by  any  efforts,  prevail  on  them  to  keep 
their  posts,  so  thoroughly  were  they  dismayed,  he  called  on 
the  name  of  his  father  Publius  Decius,  and  said,  “  Why  do 
I  any  longer  defer  the  fate  entailed  on  my  family  ?  It  is  the 
appointment  of  destiny  to  our  race,  that  we  should  serve  as 
expiatory  victims  to  avert  the  public  danger.  I  will  now 
offer  the  legions  of  the  enemy,  together  with  myself,  a  bloody 
sacrifice  to  Earth,  and  the  infernal  gods.”  Having  thus  said, 
he  commanded  Marcus  Livius,  a  pontiff,  whom,  at  his 
coming  out  to  the  field,  he  had  charged  not  to  stir  from  him, 
to  dictate  the  form  of  words  in  which  he  was  to  devote  him¬ 
self,  and  the  legions  of  the  enemy,  for  the  army  of  the  Ro¬ 
man  people,  the  Quiritcs.  He  was  accordingly  devoted  with 
the  same  imprecations,  and  in  the  same  habit,  in  which  his 
father  Publius  Decius  had  ordered  himself  to  be  devoted  at 
the  Veseris  in  the  Latine  war.  After  this,  he  added,  that 
he  carried  along  with  him  dismay  and  flight,  slaughter  and 
blood,  and  the  wrath  of  the  gods  celestial  and  infernal ;  that, 
with  the  contagious  influence  of  the  furies,  the  ministers  of 
death,  whose  victim  he  was,  he  would  infect  the  standards, 
the  weapons,  and  the  armour  of  the  enemy  ;  and  on  the  same 
spot,  should  be  accomplished  his  perdition,  and  that  of  the 
Gauls  and  Saranites.”  After  uttering  these  execrations  on 

BOOK  X. 

BITS 

BX.  t9sq 
him«^  and  the  foe,  he  ^mred  forward  his  horse^  wfaere  he 
saw  the  iine  of  the  Gauls  thickest,  and,  rushing  upon  dte  ene¬ 
my’s  weapoiis,  met  his  death. 
XXtX*  Thenceforward  the  battle  seemed  to  be  fought 
wiAn  degree -of  force  whiclr  could  scarcely  be  deemed  hu¬ 
man.  The  Romans,  on  the  loss  of  their  general,  a  circum¬ 
stance  which,  on  other  occasions,  is  wont  to  inspire  t^ror, 
stopped  their  flight,  and  re-assumed  spirit  to  begin  the  com¬ 
bat  afresh.  The  Gauls,  and  especially  those  who  encirch^ 
the  consul’sTjody,  as  if  deprived  of  reason,  cast  their  jave¬ 
lins  at  random  without  execution ;  some  became  so  stupid  as 
not  to«think  of  either  fighting  or  flying:  while,  on  the  other 
side,  Livius  the  pontiff,  to  Whom  Decius  had  tfansf^red  his 
lictors,  with  orders  to  act  as  pro-praetor,  cried  out  aloud,  that 
the  Romans  were  victorious,  befog  exempted  from  misfor- 
tune  by  the  death  of  their  consul.  That  the  Gauls  and  Sam- 
nites  were  now  the  victims  of  mother  Earth,  and  the  infernal 
gods.  That  Decius  was  summoning  and  dragging  to  him¬ 
self,  the  army  devoted  along  with  him :  and  that,  among  the 
enemy,  all  was  full  of  dismay,  and  the  vengeance  of  the  fu¬ 
ries.”  While  the  soldiers  were  busy  in  restoring  the  fight, 
they  were  joined  by  Lucius  Cornelius  Scipio  and  Caius  Mar- 
cius,  with  some  reserved  troops  from  the  rear,  who  had  been 
sent  by  Quintus  Fabius,  the  consul,  to  the  support  of  his  col¬ 
league.  These,  on  being  made  acquainted  with  the  fate  of 
Decius,  were  powerfully  excited  to  brave  every  danger  in  the 
cause  of  the  public ;  but,  as  the  Gauls  stood  in  close  order, 
with  their  shields  formed  into  a  fence  before  them,  little 
prospect  of  success  appeared  from  a  close  fight.  The  jave¬ 
lins,  which  lay  scattered  between  the  two  Ikies  were,  there¬ 
fore,  by  order  of  the  iieutenants-general,  gathered  up  from 
the  ground,  and  thrown  against  the  enemy^s  shields,  and  as 
most  of  them  pierced  the  fence,  the  long-pointed  ones  even 
into  their  bodies,  their  compact  band  was  overthrown  in 
VOL,  II. — 2  Z 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

U4 

[Y.R.  45r. 

»ucb  a  manner^  tlmt  a  great  many,  who  were  yet  fell 
a$  if  tbuadeiratrQck.  Such  were  Ae  changes  of  fortune  on 
the  left  wing  of  the  Romsms :  on  the  right^  Fabius  had  at 
first  |i|:otracted  the  time,  as  we  mentioned  above,,  in  slow 
operations ;  then,  as  soon  as  he  perceived  that  neither  the 
^out,  nor  the  efforts  of  the  enemy,  npr  the  weapons  which 
they  threw,  retained  their  former  forcc^  ordered  the  com- 
man4^t^  of  the  cavalry  to  lead  round  their  squadrons  to  the 
wing  of  the  Samnites,  and,  on  receiving  the  signal,  to  charge 
them  in  fiank,  with  all  possible  violence,  he  emnmanding,  at 
the  same  time,  his  infantry  to  advance  leisurely,  and  drive 
die  enemy  from  dieir  ground.  When  he  saw  that  they  were 
unable  to  ununtain  their  posts,  and  manifestly  spent  with  fa- 
tigue,  drawing  together  all  his  reserves,  whom  he  had  kept 
fresh  for  that  occasion,  he  made  a  brisk  push  with  the  legions, 
giving  the  cavalry  the  signal  to  charge*  The  S^nites  could 
xiot  support  the  shock,  but  ffed  precipitately  to  their  camp, 
passing  by  the  line  of  the  Gauls,  and  leaving  their  sdlies  to 
fight  by  themselves.  These  stood  in  close  order  under  cover 
of  their  shields:  Fabius,  therefore,  having  beard  of  the  death 
of  bis  colleague,  ordered  the  squadron  of  Campanian  Cavalry, 
in  number  aboiA  five  hundred,  to  fall  back  from  the  ranks, 
ride,  round,  and  attack  the  rear  of  the  Gallic  line,  sending 
the  chief  strength  of  the  third  legion  after  these,  with  direc* 
tions  that  wherever  they  should  see  the  enemy’s  troops  disor¬ 
dered  by  the  charge,  to  follow  the  blow,  and  cut  them  to 
pieces,  before  they  recovered  from  their  consternation.  After 
vowing  a  temple,  and  die  spoils  which  might  fall  into  his 
hands,  to  Jupiter  the  victorioi;^,  he  proceeded  to  the  camp 
of  the  Samnites,  whither  all  their  forces  were  hurrying  in 
confusion.  The  gates  not  affording  entrsmee  to  such  very 
great  numl^rs,  those  who  were  necessarily  excluded,  attempt¬ 
ed  resistance  just  at  the  foot  of  the  rampart,  and  here  fell 
GelUus  Egnadus  the  Samnite  general.  These,  however. 

BOOK  X. 

355 

B.c. 
were  soon  dnven  within  the  rampart;  the  camj>  was  taken 
after  a  slight  dispute ;  and  at  the  same  time  the  Gauls  were 
attacked  on  the  rear,  and  overpowered.  There  were  slain 
of  the  enemy  on  that  day  twenty-five  thousand ;  eight  thou¬ 
sand  were  taken  ' prisoners.  Nor  was  the  victory  gained 
without  loss  of  blood ;  for,  of  the  army  of  Publius  Decius, 
the  kiEed  amounted  to  seven  thousand ;  of  the  army  of  Pa- 
bius,  to  one  thousand  two  hundred.  Fabius,  after  sending 
persons  to  search  for  the  body  of  his  colleague,  had  the  spoils 
of  the  enemy  collected  into  a  heap,  and  burned  them  as  an 
offering  to  Jupiter  the  victorious.  The  consul’s  body  could 
not  be  found  that  day,  being  hid  under  a  heap  of  slaughter¬ 
ed  Gauls :  on  the  following,  it  was  discovered  and  brought  to 
the  camp,  amidst  abundance  of  tears  shed  by  the  soldiers. 
Fabius,  discarding  aE  concern  about  any  other  business,  so¬ 
lemnized  the  obsequies  of  his  coEeague  in  the  most  honoura¬ 
ble  manner,  passing  on  him  the  high  encomiums  which  he 
had  justly  merited. 
XXX.  During  the  same  period,  Cneius  Fulvius,  pro-prse- 
tor,  made  a  progress  in  Etruria  equal  to  his  wishes ;  having, 
besides  the  immense  losses  occasioned  to  the  enemy  by  the 
devastation  of  their  lands,  fought  a  battle  with  extraordinary 
success,  in  which  there  were  above  three  thousand  of  the 
Perusians  and  Clusians  slain,  and  twenty  military  standards 
taken.  The  Samnites  in  their  flight,  passing  through  the  Pe- 
lignian  territory,  were  attacked  on  afl  sides  by  the  Pelignians ; 
and,  out  of  five  thousand,  one  thousand  were  killecl.  The 
glory  of  the  day  in  the  affair  at  Sentinum  was  great,  when 
represented  with  a  stritt  adherence  to  truth ;  but  some  have 
carried  their  exaggerations  of  it  beyond  the  bounds  of  cre¬ 
dibility,  asserting  in  their  writings,  that  there  were  in  tfie 
army  of  the  enemy  forty  thousand  three  hundred  and  fhirty 
foot,  six  thousand  horsft>  and  one  thousand  chariots,  that  is, 
including  the  Etrurians  and  Umbrians,  who  they  aflirm  Were  * 

HiSTOfty  OF  ROME. 

[Y,R'.  45r. 

in  the to  magnify,  likewke,  the 
numt^f  of  &G^an  forces,  they  add  to  the  comuls  anO^er 
Lnet^  Vdlgmiuns,  pro^ccmsul  and  Ins  army  to  their 
legfoik.  In  the  greater  number  of  annals,  that  victory  is  as- 
cr^d  entirely  to  the  two  consuls  ;  and  it  is  mentioned  dmt 
VolumniuB  was  employed  at  the  time  in  Samniiim  ;  that  he 
compelled  the  army  of  the  Samnites  to  retreat  to  mount  Ti- 
femus,  and,  not  retal^ded  by  the  difficuhy  of  the  ground, 
i^ted  and  dispersed  them.  Quintus  Fabius,  leaving  De- 
cim^s  mrmy  in  Etruria,  and  leading  off  his  own  legions  to 
city,  triumphed  over  the  Gauls,  Etrurians,  and  Samnites ; 
die  soldiers  attending  his  triumph.  These,  in  their  coanse 
military  verses,  celebrated  not  more  highly  the  coxuluct  of 
Qumtus  Fabius,  than  the  Ulustricms  death  of  Publius  Dc- 
cius;  recalling  to  memory  his  self-nnmdiated  father,  of  whom 
the  son  might  be  cormidered  as  a  glorious  counterpart,  in  fo- 
spect  of  the  issue  which  resulted  both  to  himself  and  to  die 
public.  Gut  of  the  spoil,  donations  were  made  to  the  sol¬ 
diers  of  eighty-two  asses^  to  each,  with  cloaks  and  vests  j 
rewards  for  service,  which  in  that  age  were  far  from  con¬ 
temptible. 
XXXI.  Notwithstanding  these  successes,  peace  was  not 
yet  established,  either  among  the  Samnites  or  Etruriam;  for 
die  latter,  at  the  instigation  of  the  Perusians,  resumed  thrir 
arms,  as  soon  as  the  consul  had  withdrawn  his  troops ;  and 
the  Samnites  made  predatory  incursions  on  the  territories  of 
Vescia  Jwid  Formiae ;  ami  ako  on  the  other  ride,  on  those  of 
iEsemia,  and  the  parts  adjacent  to  the  river  VulturUus. 
Al^inst  these  was  sent  the  praetor  ApjHusGlaudim,  with  die 
sunmy  formerly  commanded  by  Decius.  In  Etruria,  Fabii^, 
W  the  revival  of  hostilities,  slew  four  thousand  five  hundred 
of  the  Peiwians,  and  took  prisoners  one  thousand  seven  hue- 

« 

58.3fd. 

BOOK  X. 

357 

BX.295.] 
dred  and  forty ^  who  were  ransomed  at  the  rate  of  three  hun¬ 
dred  andt  ten  mses^  each.  All  the  rest  of  the  s|>oil  was  be¬ 
stowed  on  the  soldiers.  The  legions  of  the  Samnites^  though 
pursued^  some  by  the  praetor  Appius  Claudius,  the  others  by 
Lucias  Voluamius,  pro-consul,  formed  a  junction  in  the 
country^  the  &cHatians."  Here  sat  down,  on  <me  side,  the 
whole  body  of  the  Samnites ;  and,  on  die  other,  Appius  and 
Volumnius,  with  their  forces  united  in  one  camp.  A  battle 
endued,  fought  with  the  most  rancorous  animosity,  one  party 
being  spurred  on  by  rage  against  men  who  had  so  often  re¬ 
newed  their  attacks  on  them,  and  the  other,  now  fighting  in 
^spport  of  their  last  remaining  hope.  The  txmsequence  was, 
that  there  were  slain,  of  the  Samnites,  sixteen  thousand  three 
bimdred,  and  two  duni^md  and  seven  hur^red  made  prison¬ 
ers  :  of  die  Ibimmi  army  fell  two  thousand  and  seven  hun¬ 
dred.  This  year,  so  sin^essful  in  the  operations  of  war,  was 
filled  with  distress  at  hoi«^,  arising  from  a  pestilence  j  and 
with  anxiety,  c^casioned  by  prodigks :  for  accounts  were  re¬ 
ceived  dn^,  in  many  {daces,  showers  of  earth  had  fallen ; 
and  that  very  mmiy  persons,  in  the  army  of  Appius  Clau¬ 
dius,  had  been  struck  by  lightning ;  in  consequence  of  which, 
the  IxKiks  were  consulted.  At  this  rime,  Quintus  Fabius 
Gurges,  the  consul’s  wm,  having  prosecuted  some  matrons 
before  the  people  on  a  charge  of  adultery,  built,  whh  the 
money  accruing  from  die  fines  which  they  were  condemned 
to  pay,  the  temple  of  Venus,  which  stands  near  the  Circus. 
Still  we  have  the  wars  of  the  Samnites  on  our  hands,  not¬ 
withstanding  that  the  relation  of  them  has  already  extended, 
m  cme  continued  coume,  through  four  volumes  of  our  histo¬ 
ry,  and  dirough  a  period  of  fi>rty-cix  years,  from  the  conf¬ 
late  of  Marcus  Valerius  and  Aulus  Cornelius,  who  fiimt 
carried  the  Homan  arms  into  Samnium.  And,  not  to  lecite 

358 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  457. 
flic  long  train  of  disasters  sostain^  by  both  nations,  nsmd  the 
toils  which  they  underwent,  which,  however,  were  not  suffi¬ 
cient  to  stdnlue  their  stubborn  fortitude  ;  even  in  the  Course 
of  the  last  year,  the  SamnitCs,  witii  their  own  forces  ^parate- 
iy,  and  ^so  in  conjunction  with  those  of  other  nations,  had 
been  defeated  by  few  several  armies,  and  four  generals  of 
the  Rom^is,  in  the  territory  of  Sentinutn,  in  thart  of  the  Pe- 
lignians,  at  Ttfemum,  and  in  the  plains  of  the  Stellatlans  ; 
had  lost  the  genersd  of  die  highest  character  in  their  nation  j 
and,  now,  saw  tiieir  allies  hi  the  wan*,  the  Etrurians,  the 
Umbrians,  and  the  Gaufe,  in  the  same  situation  with  them¬ 
selves  ;  but,  akhotigh  destiti^  erf  impport,  either  in  th^r 
own  or  in  foreign  resowces,  yet  cRd  die}y  not  desist  from  the 
proseeutibn  of  hostilities.  So  inde&tigahly,  though  unsuc¬ 
cessfully,  did  they  suruggfc  hi  <fcfence  of  Bberty  ;  and,  rather 
than  nc^  aspire  after  victory,  chose  to  subj^t  themselves  to 
repeated  defeats.  Who  fees  not  find  his  patience  tired, 
either  in  writing,^  or  rea^hg,  of  wars  of  such  continuance; 
and  which  yet  eahatj^ed  not  the  resolution  of  the  parties 
concerned  ? 
XXXII.  Quintus  Fabius  and  Publios  Decius  were  suc¬ 
ceeded  in  the  consulship  by  Lucius  -Fostumius 
B  C  294  Megellus  and  Marcus  Atilius  Regulus.  The  pro¬ 
vince  of  Satnnlum  was  decreed  to  both  in  con¬ 
junction  ;  because  intelligence  had  been  received  that  the 
enemy  had  embodied  three  armies ;  one  for  the  recovery  of 
Etruria  ;  another  to  repeat  their  ravages  in  Campania ;  and 
the  third,  intended  for  the  defence  of  their  frontiers.  Sick¬ 
ness  detained  Postumius  at  Rome,  but  Atilius  set  out  imme¬ 
diately,  with  design  to  surprise  the  Cherny  in  Samnium,  be¬ 
fore  they  should  have  advanced  bej^ond  their  own  borders  ; 
for  such  had  been  the  directions  of  the  senate.  The  Romans 
met  the  enemy,  as  if  by  mutual  appointment,  at  a  spot,  where, 
while  they  could  be  hindered,  iK>t  only  from  ravaging,  but 

book  X* 

559 

BX.  294.] 
eve®  from  enta^mg  tlie  Sammto  territoiy,  they  could  likewise 
hinder  the  from  contkitmig  their  progress  into  the 
countries  which  wm  quiet,  ami  the  lands  of  the  allies  of  the 
Roman  people*  While  they  lay  o{qK>site  tx>  each  other,  the 
^oftnites  attempted  an  enterprise,  which  the  Romans,  so 
often  their  cmiquerors,  would  scarcely  have  ventured  to  un¬ 
dertake  ;  such  is  the  rashness  inspired  by  extreme  despair : 
this  was  an  assault  on  the  Roman  camp*  And  although  this 
attempt,  so  daring,  succeeded  not  in  its  full  extent,  yet  it  was 
not  without  cemsiderable  ellect**  There  was  a  fog,  which 
continued  through  a  ^cat  part  of  the  day,  so  thick  as  to  ex¬ 
clude  the  light  of  the  son,  and  to  prevent  not  only  the  view  of 
any  diing  beyond  the  rampart,  but  scarcely  the  sight  of  each 
other,  when  they  should  meet.  Depending  on  this,  as  a 
covering  to  the  design,  when  the  sun  was  but  just  risen,  and 
the  light,  which  he  did  afford,  was  obscured  by  the  fog,  the 
Samnites  came  up  to  an  advanced  guard  of  the  Romans,  at 
one  of  the  gates,  who  were  standing  carelessly  on  their  post. 
In  the  sudden  surprise,  these  had  neither  courage  nor  strength 
to  make  resistance :  mx  assault  was  then  made,  through  the 
Decuman  gate,  in  the  rear  of  the  camp  :  the  qusestor’s  quar¬ 
ters,  in  ccmsequence,  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  and 
the  quaestor,  Lucius  Opimius  Pansa,  was  there  slain,  on  which 
a  general  alarm  was  given. 
XXXIII.  The  consul,  being  roused  by  the  tumult,  order¬ 
ed  two  cohorts  of  the  allies,  a  Lucanian  and  Suessanian, 
which  happened  to  be  nearest,  to  defend  the  head-quarters, 
and  led  the  companies  of  the  legions  down  the  principal 
street.  These  ran  into  the  ranks,  scarcely  taking  time  to 
furnish  themselves  with  arms  j  and,  as  they  distinguished  die 
enemy  by  their  shout,  rather  than  by  sight,  could  form  to 
judgment  how  great  their  number  might  be :  thus,  ignm'mit 
of  the  circumstmices  of  their  situation,  they  at  first  drew 
back,  and  suffered  them  to  penetrate  into  the  heart  of  the 

360 

HISTORY  OF  MOME.  tY*.  4^, 
otnip.  The  they  ifi^iid- 
ed  to  let  themelvts  be  mt^jmd  axkd 
then  to  mtorn  to  stotm  tlmr  own  they  raised 
the  slront,  unit^l;  their  efibm^  s^iod  their  ground ;  Aen 
made  advances,  fmdbed-  ^osdy  tm  the  and  living 
forced  them  to  give  way,  drove  diem  bapk,  whtout  suffering 
then-  frst  terror  to  s^te.  ^Tliey  toon  beat  them  emt  beyond  die 
gate  and  the  imnpat%  but  ntri  lhct^g  to  ^  dion,  becmise 
the  darkness  of  the  wei^^  m^tde  them  apfU^hend  an 
bush,  and  content  with  havibg  efeared  Ae  eamp,  diey  retlt^ed 
witbm  the  rsympait,  having  kiBed  ^nt  foree  hundred  of  the 
enemy.  Ctf  .the  Romans^  i^luding  the  fim  advanced  guard 
and^the  t^cbmen^  and  thtro  who  .were  surmised  at  the 
qu^tor’s  quaitars,  two  hundred  and  thirty  pcridied.  This 
not  unsucce^fol  |msoe  of^bdSness  raised  die  spirits  cd  the 
Samnites  so  hi^,  that  they  no^^  only  pieve^edthe  Romans 
from  marching  forward  into  their  country,  but  even  from 
procuring  fors^  from  tlusir  lands ;  and  the  foragers  were 
obliged  to  go  back  into  the  quiet  countiy  of  Sora«  News  of 
these  events  being  conveyed  to  Rome,  widi  circumstances  of 
alarm  magnified  beyond  the  truth,  Lucius  Postimiius,  the 
consul,  though  scarcely  recovered  from  his  ilkiess,  was  obliged 
to  set  out  for  the  army.  However,  his  departure^  hav-^ 
ing  issued  a  proclamation  that  his  troops  diould  assemMe  at 
Sora,  he  dedicated  the  temple  Victory,  for  die  building  of 
which  he  had  provided,  when  cmiilc  ^dUe,  out  of  the  mo* 
ney  arising  from  fines ;  and,  joining  the  mmy,  he  advanced 
from  Sora  towards  Samnium,  to  the  camp  of  his  cotteague. 
The  Samnites,  despairing  of  being  ^le  to  make  head  against 
the  two  armies,  retreated  from  thence,  on  which  the  omsu^ 
separ^ng,  proceeded  by  different  routes  to  lay  w^te  the 
enemy^s  lands,  and  besiege  their  towns. 
XXXIV,  Postumius  attempted  to  make  himself  master  of 
Miikmia  by  storm  ;  but  not  succeeding  widi  xt^gular  works. 

BOOK  X. 

361 

B.C.  ^94.] 
he  carried  his  approaches  to  the  walls,  and  thus  gained  an  en-» 
trance  into  the  place.  The  fight  was  continued  in  all  parts  of 
the  city  from  the  fourth  hour  until  near  the  eighth,  and  for  a 
great  part  of  the  time  without  any  decisive  advantage  ;  the 
Romans,  at  last,  gained  possession  of  it.  Three  thousand 
two  hundred  of  the  Samnites  were  killed,  four  thousand  two 
hundred  taken,  besides  the  other  booty.  From  thence,  the 
legions  were  conducted  to  Ferentinum,  out  of  which  the  in¬ 
habitants  had,  during  the  night,  retired  in  silence  through  the 
opposite  gate,  with  all  their  effects  which  could  be  either  car¬ 
ried  or  driven.  The  consul,  on  his  arrival,  approached  the 
walls  with  the  same  order  and  circumspection,  as  if  he  were 
to  meet  an  opposition  here,  equal  to  what  he  had  experienced 
at  Milionia,  The  troops,  perceiving  a  dead  silence  in  the 
city,  and  neither  arms  nor  men  on  the  towers  and  ramparts, 
were  eager  to  mount  the  deserted  fortifications,  but  he  re¬ 
strained  them,  lest  they  might  fall  into  a- snare.  He  ordered 
two  divisions  of  the  confederate  Latine  horse  to  ride  round 
the  walls,  and  explore  every  particular.  These  horsemen  ob¬ 
served  one  gate,  and  at  a  little  distance,  another  on  the  same 
»  side,  standing  wide  open,  and  on  the  roads  leading  from 
these,  every  mark  of  the  enemy  having  fled  by  night.  They 
then  rode  up  leisurely  to  the  gates,  from  whence,  with  per¬ 
fect  safety,  they  took  a  clear  view  through  straight  streets 
quite  across  the  city.  Returning  to  the  consul,  they  told  him 
that  the  city  was  abandoned  by  the  enemy,  as  was  plain  from 
the  solitude,  the  tracks  on  their  retreat,  and  the  things  which, 
in  the  confusion  of  the  night,  they  had  left  scattered  up  and 
down.  On  hearing  this,  the  consul  led  round  the  army  to 
that  side  of  the  city  which  had  been  examined,  and  making 
the  troops  halt,  at  a  little  distance  from  the  gate,  gave  or¬ 
ders  that  five  horsemen  should  ride  into  the  city  ;  and,  when 
they  should  have  advanced  a  good  way  into  it,  then,  if  they 
saw  all  things  safe,  three  should  remain  there,  and  the  otha* 
VOL.  IT.— 3  A 

HISTORY  OF  ROME- 

[Y-R.  458. 

two  return  to  him  with  intelligence-  Th^  returned  and 
said,  that  they  had  proceeded  to  a  part  of  &e  town  from  which 
they  had  a  view  on  every  side,  and  that  nothing  but  silence 
and  solitude  reigned  through  the  whok  extent  of  it.  The 
consul  immediately  led  some  light-armed  cohents  into  the  city ; 
ordering  the  test  to  fortify  a  camp  in  the  mean  time.  The 
soldiers,  who  entered  the  town,  breaking  open  the  doors, 
found  only  a  few  persons,  disabled  by  age  or  sickness  ;  and 
such  effects  remaining  as  could  not,  without  difficulty,  be  re¬ 
moved.  These  were  seized  as  plunder :  and  it  was  discov¬ 
ered  from  the  prisoners, that  several  cities  in  that  quarter  had, 
in  pumiance  of  a  concerted  plan,  resolved  on  flight ;  that 
their  towns-people  had  gone  off  at  the  first  watch,  and  they 
believed  that  the  same  solitude  would  be  found  in  the  other 
places.  The  accounts  of  the  prisoners  proved  well-founded, 
and  the  consul  took  possession  of  the  forsaken  towns. 
XXXV.  The  other  consul,  Marcus  Atilius,  met  much 
greater  difficulties  in  the  war  wherein  he  was  engaged.  As 
he  was  marching  his  legions  towards  Luceria,  to  which  he 
was  informed  that  the  Samnites  had  laid  siege,  the  enemy 
met  him  on  the  border  of  the  Lucerian  territory.  Rage  sup¬ 
plied  them,  on  this  occasion,  with  str^gth  to  equal  his  :  the 
batde  was  stubbornly  contested,  and  the  victory  doubtful : 
the  issue,  however,  proved  more  calamitous  on  the  side  of  the 
Romans,  both  because  they  were  unaccustomed  to  defeat,  and 
that,  on  leaving  the  field,  they  felt  more  sensibly,  than  dur¬ 
ing  the  heat  of  the  action,  the  number  of  their  wounds,  and 
the  loss  of  men  which  they  had  sustained.  In  consequence 
of  this,  such  dismay  spread  through  the  camp,  as,  had  it  seiz¬ 
ed  them  during  the  engagement,  must  have  occasioned  their 
overthrow.  Even  as  the  matter  stood,  they  spent  the  night 
in  great  anxiety ;  expecting,  every  instant,  that  the  camp 
would  be  assaulted  by  the  Samnites  ;  or  that,  at  the  first  i^ht, 
they  should  be  obliged  to  stmd  a  battle  with  an  apparently 

BOOK  X. 

363 

B.C.294.] 
powerful  foe*  On  the  side  of  the  enemy,  however,  although 
there  was  less  It^s,  yet  there  was  not  greater  courage-  As 
soon  as  day  appeared,  they  wished  to  retire  without  any  more 
fighting ;  but  there  was  only  one  road,  and  that  leading  close 
by  the  post  of  their  enemy  ;  so  that,  on  their  march,  it  seem- 
ed  as  if  they  were  advancing  directly  to  attack  the  camp. 
The  consul,  therefore,  ordered  his  men  to  take  arms,  and  to 
follow  him  to  the  field,  giving  directions  to  the  lieutenant- 
general,  tribunes,  and  the  praefects  of  the  allies,  in  what  man¬ 
ner  he  would  have  each  of  them  act.  They  all  assured  him, 
that  “  they  would  do  every  thing  in  their  power,  but  that  the 
soldiers  were  quite  dejected  ;  that,  from  their  own  wounds, 
and  the  groans  of  the  dying,  they  had  passed  the  whole  night 
without  sleep  ;  that  if  the  enemy  had  approached  the  camp 
before  day,  so  great  were  the  fears  of  the  troops,  that  they 
would  certainly  have  deserted  their  standards.  Even  at  pre¬ 
sent  they  were  restrained  from  flight,  merely  by  shame  ;  and, 
in  other  respects,  were  little  better  than  vanqpished  men.’’ 
This  account  made  the  consul  judge  it  necessary  to  go  him¬ 
self  among  the  soldiers,  and  speak  to  them  ;  and,  as  he  came 
up  to  each,  he  rebuked  them  for  their  backwardness  in  tak¬ 
ing  arms,  asking,  why  they  loitered,  and  declined  the  fight  ? 
If  they  did  not  choose  to  go  out  of  the  camp,  the  enemy 
would  come  into  it ;  and  they  must  fight  in  defence  of  their 
tents,  if  they  would  not  in  defence  of  the  rampart.  Men  who 
have  arms  in  their  hands,  and  contend  with  their  foe,  have 
always  a  chance  for  victory  j  but  the  man  who  waits  naked 
and  unarmed  for  his  enemy,  must  suffer  either  death  or  sla¬ 
very.”  To  these  reprimands  and  rebukes  they  answered, 
that  “  they  were  exhausted  by  the  fatigue  of  the  battle  of  yes¬ 
terday  j  and  had  no  strength,  nor  even  blood  remaining ; 
and  besides,  the  enemy  appeared  more  numerous  than  they 
were  the  day  before.”  The  hostile  army,  in  the  mean  time, 
drew  near ;  so  that,  seeing  every  thing  more  distinctly  as  the 

364 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R,  45g. 

distance  grew  less,  they  asserted  that  the  Samnites  carried 
with  them  palisades  for  a  rampart,  and  evidently  intended 
to  draw  lines  of  circumvallation  rpund  the  camp.  On  this 
the  consul  exclaimed,  with  great  earnesttiess,  against  submit¬ 
ting  to  such  an  ignominious  insult,  and  from  so  dastardly  a 
foe.  Shall  we  even  be  blockaded,’^  said  he,  in  our  camp, 
and  die,  like  cowards,  by  famine,  rather  than  likr  men,  if 
death  must  be  our  lot  by  the  sword?  May  the  gods  be  pro¬ 
pitious  !  and  let  every  one  act  in  the  manner  which  he  thinks 
becomes  him.  The  consul  Marcus  Atilius,  should  no  other 
accompany  him,  will  go  out,  even  alone,  to  face  the  enemy  ; 
and  will  fall  in  the  middle  of  the  Samnite  battalions,  rather 
than  see  the  Roman  camp  enclosed  by  their  trenches.”  The 
lieutenants-general,  tribunes,  every  troop  of  the  cavsdry,  and 
the  principal  centurions,  expressed  their  approbation  of  what 
the  consul  said :  and  the  soldiers,  at  length,  overcome"  by 
shame,  took  up  their  arms,  but  in  a  spiritless  manner  :  and, 
in  flie  same  ^iritless  manner,  marched  out  of  the  camp.  In 
a  long  train,  and  that  not  every  where  connected,  melancholy, 
and  seemingly  subdued,  they  proceeded  towards  the  enemy, 
whose  hopes  and  courage  were  not  more  steady  than  theirs. 
As  soon  therefore  as  these  beheld  the  Roman  standards,  a 
murmur  spread  from  front  to  rear  of  the  Samnites,  that,  as 
they  had  feared,  the  Romans  were  coming  out  to  oppose 
their  march  ;  that  there  was  no  road  open,  through  which 
they  could  even  fly  thence :  in  that  spot  they  must  fall,  or 
else  cut  down  the  enemy’s  ranks,  and  make  their  way  over 
their  bodies.” 
XXXVI.  They  then  threw  the  baggage  in  a  heap,  in  the 
centre,  and,  with  their  arms,  prepared  for  battle,  formed  their 
line,  each  falling  into  his  own  post.  There  was  now  but  a 
small  interval  between  the  two  armies,  and  both  stood,  wait¬ 
ing,  until  the  i^out  and  onset  should  be  begun  by  their  ad¬ 
versary.  Neither  party  had  any  inclination  to  fight,  and  they 

BOOK  X, 

BX.  294.] 

3^ 

would  have  separated,  and  taken  different  roads,  without 
coming  to  action,  but  that  each  had  a  dread  of  being  harass¬ 
ed  in  retreat  by  the  other.  Notwithstanding  this  reluctance, 
an  engagement  unavoidably  began,  but  without  any  vigour, 
and  with  a  shout,  which  discovered  neither  resolution  nor 
steadiness ;  nor  did  any  move  a  foot  from  his  post.  The 
Roman  consul,  then,  in  order  to  infuse  life  into  the  action, 
Ordered  a  few  troops  of  cavalry  to  advice  out  of  the  line, 
and  charge :  most  of  whom  being  thrown  from  their  horses, 
and  the  rest  put  into  disorder,  several  parties  ran  forward, 
both  from  the  Samnite  line,  to  cut  off  those  who  had  fallen, 
and  from  the  Roman,  to  protect  their  friends :  this  roused 
some  little  spirit  in  the  combatants ;  but  the  Samnites  had 
come  forward,  with  more  briskness,  and  also  in  greater  num¬ 
bers,  and  the  disordered  cavalry,  with  their  affrighted  horses, 
trod  down  their  own  party  who  came  to  their  relief.  These 
were,  consequently,  the  first  who  fled  ;  and  their  example  was 
followed  by  the  whole  Roman  line.  And  now  the  Samnites 
had  no  employment  for  their  arms  but  against  the  rear  of  a 
flying  enemy,  when  the  consul,  galloping  on  before  his  men, 
to  the  gate  of  the  camp,  posted  there  a  body  of  cavalry,  with 
orders  to  treat  as  an  enemy,  any  person  who  should  make 
towards  the  rampart,  whether  Roman  or  Samnite  ;  and,  pla¬ 
cing  himself  in  the  way  of  his  men,  as  they  pressed  in  disor¬ 
der  towards  the. camp,  denounced  threats  to  the  same  pur¬ 
port :  ‘‘  whither  are  you  going,  soldiers?”  said  he,  ‘‘  here 
also  you  will  find  both  n^n  and  arms  ;  nor,  while  your  con¬ 
sul  lives,  shall  you  pass  the  rampart,  unless  you  bring  victo¬ 
ry  along  with  you.  Choose,  therefore,  which  you  will  pre¬ 
fer,  fighting  against  your  own  countrymen,  or-  the  enemy.” 
While  the  consul  was  thus  speaking,  the  cavalry  gathered 
round,  with  the  points  of  their  spears  presented,  and  ordered 
the  infantry  to  return  to  the  fight.  Not  only  his  own  brave 
spirit,  but  fortune  likewise  mded  the  consul,  for  the  Samnites 

56b 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  45f , 

did  not  push  their  advantage  ;  so  that  he  had  time  to  wheel 
round  his  battalions,  and  to  change  his  front  from  the  camp, 
towards  the  enemy.  The  men  then  began  to  encourage  each 
other  to  return  to  the  battle,  while  the  centurions  snatched 
the  ensigns  from  the  standard-bearers,  and  bore  them  fear- 
ward,  pointing  out  to  the  soldiera  the  enemy,  coming  on  in 
a  hurry,  few  in  nutnber,  and  with  their  .ranks  disordered.  At 
the  same  time  the  consul,  with  his  hands  lifted  up  towards 
heaven,  and  raising  his  voice  so  as  to  be  heard  at  a  distance, 
vowed  a  temple  to  Jupiter  Stator,  if  the  Roman  army  should 
rally  from  flight,  and  renewing  the  battle,  defeat  the  Samnites. 
All  divisions  of  the  army  now  united  their  eflbrts  to  restore 
the  fight ;  officers,  soldiers,  in  short,  the  whole  force,  both  of 
cavaky  and  infantry,  even  the  gods  seemed  to  have  looked 
with  favour  on  the  Roman  cause  j  so  speedily  was  a  thorough 
change  eflfected  in  the  fortune  of  the  day,  the  enemy  being 
repulsed  from  the  camp,  and,  in  a  short  Ume,  driven  back  to 
the  spot  where  the  battle  had  commenced.  Here  they  stop¬ 
ped,  being  obstructed  by  the  heap  of  baggage,  lying  in  thrir 
way,  where  they  h^d  thrown  it  together  ;  and  then  to  pre¬ 
vent  the  plundering  of  their  effects,  formed  round  them  a 
circle  of  troops.  On  this,  the  infantry  assailed  them  vigo¬ 
rously  in  front,  while  the  cavalry,  wheeling,  fell  on  their 
rear :  and,  being  thus  inclosed  between  the  two,  they  were 
all  either  slain  or  taken  prisoners.  The  number  of  the  pri¬ 
soners  was  seven  thousand  three  hundred,  who  were  all  sent 
under  the  yoke ;  the  killed  amounted  to  four  thousand  eight 
hundred.  The  victory  was  not  obtained  without  loss  of 
blood,  on  the  side  of  the  Romans  :  when  the  consul  took  an 
account  of  the  loss  sustained  in  the  two  days,  the  number  re¬ 
turned,  of  soldiers  lost,  was  seven  thousand  three  hundred. 
During  these  transactions  in  Apulia,  the  Samnites  attempted 
to  seize  on  Interamna,  a  Roman  colony  situated  on  the  La- 
tine  road,  but,  being  disappointed  in  their  design  on  the  town, 

^  BOOK  X, 

36r 

B.C,  294.] 
employed  their  troops  in  ravaging  the  country ;  whence,  as 
they  were  driving  off  spoil,  consisting  of  men  and  cattle,  to* 
gather  with  the  colonists,  who  fell  into  their  hands,  they  met 
the  consul  returning  victorious  from  Luceria,  and  not  only 
lost  their  booty,  but  marching  in  disorder,  in  a  long  train,  and 
heavily  encumbered,  were  themselves  cut  to  pieces.  The 
consul,  by  proclamation  summoned  the  owners  to  Interamna, 
to  claim,  and  receive  again  their  property,  and  leaving  his 
army  there,  went  to  Rome  to  hold  the  elections.  On  his 
applying  for  a  triumph,  that  honour  was  refused  him,  be¬ 
cause  he  had  lost  so  many  thousands  of  his  soldiers  ;  and 
also,  because  he  had  sent  the  prisoners  under  the  yoke,  with¬ 
out  imposing  any  conditions. 
XXXVII.  The  other  consul,  Postumius,  finding  no  em¬ 
ployment  for  his  arms  in  Samnium,  led  over  his  forces  into 
Etruria,  where  he  first  laid  waste  the  lands  of  the  Volsinians: 
and,  afterwards,  on  their  marching  out  to  protect  their  coun- 
try,  gained  a  decisive  victory  over  them,  at  a  small  distance 
from  their  own  walls.  Two  thousand  two  hundred  of  the 
Etrurians  were  slain  ;  the  rest  owed  their  safety  to  the  city 
being  so  near.  The  army  was  then  led  into  the  territory  of 
Rusella,  and  there,  not  only  were  the  lands  wasted,  but  the 
town  itself  taken.  More  than  two  thousand  men  were  made 
prisoners,  and  somewhat  less  than  that  number  killed  on  the 
walls.  But  a  peace,  effected  that  year  in  Etruria,  was  still 
more  important  and  honourable  than  the  war  had  been.  Three 
very  powerful  cities  of  Etruria,  (Volsinii,  Perusia,  and  Arre- 
tium,)  made  overtures  of  peace  ;  and  having  stipulated  with 
the  consul  to  furnish  clothing  and  corn  for  his  army,  on  con¬ 
dition  of  being  permitted  to  send  deputies  to  Rome,  they 
obtained  a  truce  for  forty  years,  and  a  fine  was  imposed  on 
each  state  of  five  hundred  thousand  asses,*  to  be  immediate- 

1^6141  lU  8d. 

368 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

CY.R.  458. 
ly  paid,  Postumius  having  demanded  a  triumph  from  the 
senate,  in  ccmsideration  of  ihese  services,  rather  in  compliance 
with  the  general  practice,  than  in  hope  of  succeeding ;  and 
hnding  a  strong  oppc^ition  m?ide  to  his  request ;  by  one  par¬ 
ty,  out  of  enmity  to  himself ;  by  another,  out  of  friendship 
to  his  colleague,  whose  disappointment  they  wished  to  con¬ 
sole  by  a  similar  refusal :  some  objecting  that  he  had  Ijeen' 
too  dilatory  in  setting  out  from  the  city,  others,  that  he  had 
removed  from  Samnium  into  Etruria  without  orders  from 
the  senate  ;  he  addressed  them  thus :  Conscript  Fathers, 
I  shall  not  carry  my  deference  to  your  high  dignity  to  such 
a  length,  as  to  forget  that  I  am  consul.  The  same  au¬ 
thority  of  my  office,  by  wl^h  I  c^ried  on  those  wars, 
shall  now,  when  the  wars  have  been  brought  to  a  happy  con¬ 
clusion,  Samnium  and  Etruria  being  subdued,  and  victory 
and  peace  procured,  give  me  the  recompense  of  a  triumph.” 
With  these  words  he  left  the  senate.  On  this  arose  a  con¬ 
tention  between  the  fdebeian  tribunes  ;  some  of  them  declar¬ 
ing  that  they  would  protest  against  his  assuming  a  triumph, 
in  a  method  unprecedented ;  others,  that  they  would  support 
bis  pretensions  in  opposition  to  their  colleagues.  The  affair 
came  at  length  to  be  discussed  before  the  people,  and  the 
consul  being  summoned  to  attend,  he  first  represented,  that 
Marcus  Horatius  and  Lucius  Valerius,  when  consuls,  and 
lately  Caius  Marcius  Rutilus,  father  of  the  present  censor, 
had  triumphed,  not  by  direction  of  the  senate,  but  by  that  of 
the  people ;  and  then  added,  that  he  would,  in  like  manner, 
have  laid  his  request  before  the  public,  had  he  not  known 
that  some  plebeian  tribunes,  the  abject  slaves  of  the  nobles, 
would  have  obstructed  their  passing  an  order  on  it.  But  he 
did,  and  ever  should,  consider  the  universal  approbation,  and 
will  of  the  people,  as  equivalent  to  any  order  whatsoever.” 
Accordingly,  on  the  day  following,  being  supported  by  three 
plebeian  tribunes,  in  opposition  to  the  protest  of  the  other 

BOOK  X. 

369 

B.C.  294.] 
seven,  and  the  declared  judgment  of  the  senate,  he  triumph¬ 
ed  ;  and  the  people  paid  every  honour  to  the  day.  In  the 
historical  accounts  which  have  been  transmitted  to  us,  of  this 
year,  there  is  some  confusion  j  Claudius  asserts,  that  Postu- 
mius,  after  having  taken  several  cities  in  Samnium,  was  de¬ 
feated  and  put  to  flight  in  Apulia  ;  and  that,  being  wounded 
himself,  he  was  obliged  to  take  refuge  with  a  few  attendants 
in  Luceria.  That  the  war  in  Etruria  was  conducted  by  Al¬ 
ii  us,  and  that  it  was  he  who  triumphed.  Fabius  writes,  that 
the  two  consuls  acted  in  conjunction,  both  in  Samnium  and 
at  Luceria  ;  that  an  army  was  led  over  into  Etruria,  but  by 
which  of  the  consuls  he  has  not  mentioned  ;  that  at  Luceria, 
great  numbers  were  slain  on  both  sides :  and  that  in  that  bat¬ 
tle,  the  temple  of  Jupiter  Stator  was  vowed,  the  same  vow 
having  been  formerly  made  by  Romulus,  but  the  fane  only, 
that  is,  the  area  appropriated  for  the  temple,  had  been  yet 
consecrated.  However,  in  this  year,  the  state  having  been 
twice  bound  by  the  same  vow,  the  senate,  to  avoid  the  guilt 
of  neglect  in  the  case  of  a  religious  obligation,  ordered  the 
fane  to  be  erected. 
XXXVIII.  In  the  next  year  we  find  a  consul,  of  a  charac¬ 
ter  eminently  illustrious,  distinguished  by  the  uni¬ 
ted  splendour  of  his  own  and  his  father’s  glory,  ^*(^*293* 
Lucius  Papirius  Cursor.  We  find  likewise  a  war 
of  the  utmost  importance,  and  a  victory  of  such  consequence, 
as  no  man,  excepting  Lucius  Papirius,  the  consul’s  father, 
had  ever  before  obtained  over  the  Samnites.  It  happened 
too  that  these  had,  with  the  same  care  and  pains  as  on  the 
former  occasion,  decorated  their  soldiers  with  the  richest 
suits  of  splendid  armour ;  and  they  had,  likewise,  called  in 
to  their  aid  the  power  of  the  gods,  having,  as  it  were,  initia¬ 
ted  the  soldiers,  by  administering  the  military  oath,  with  the 
solemn  ceremonies  practised  in  ancient  times,  and  levied 
troops  in  every  part  of  Samnium,  under  an  ordinance  entirely 
VOL.  II. — 3  B 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  459. 

3ro 
new,  that  if  any  of  the  younger  inhabitants  should  not  at¬ 
tend  the  meeting,  according  to  the  general’s  proclamation, 
or  shall  depart  without  permission,  his  head  should  be  de¬ 
voted  to  Jupiter.”  Orders  being  then  issued,  for  all  to  as¬ 
semble  at  Aquilonia,  the  whole  strength  of  Samnium  came 
together,  amounting  to  forty  thousand  men.  There  a  piece 
of  ground,  in  the  middle  of  the  camp,  was  enclosed  with 
hurdles  and  boards,  and  covered  overhead  with  linen  cloth, 
the  sides  being  all  of  an  equal  length,  about  two  hundred  feet. 
In  this  place  sacrifices  were  performed,  according  to  direc¬ 
tions  read  out  of  an  old  linen  book,  the  function  of  priest 
being  discharged  by  a  very  old  man,  called  Ovius  Paccius, 
who  affirmed  that  he  took  these  ceremonials  from  the  an¬ 
cient  ritual  of  the  Samnites,  being  the  same  which  their  an¬ 
cestors  used,  when  they  had  formed  the  secret  design  of 
wresting  Capua  from  the  Etrurians.  When  the  sacrifices 
were  finished,  the  general  ordered  a  beadle  to  summon  every 
one  of  those  who  were  most  highly  distinguished  by  their 
birth,  or  conduct:  these  were  introduced  singly.  Besides 
the  other  exhibitions  of  the  solemnity,  calculated  to  impress 
the  mind  with  religious  awe,  there  were,  in  the  middle  of 
the  covered  enclosure,  altars  erected,  about  which  lay  the 
victims  slain,  and  the  centurions  stood  around  with  their 
swords  drawn.  The  soldier  was  led  up  to  the  altars,  rather 
like  a  victim,  than  a  performer  in  the  ceremony,  and  was 
bound  by  an  oath  not  to  divulge  what  he  should  see  and  hear 
in  that  place.  He  was  then  compelled  to*  swear,  in  a  dread¬ 
ful  kind  of  form,  containing  execrations  on  his  own  person, 
on  his  family  and  race,  if  he  did  not  go  to  battle,  whither¬ 
soever  the  commanders  should  lead ;  and,  if  either  he  him¬ 
self  fled  from  the  field ;  or,  in  case  he  should  see  any  other 
flying,  did  not  immediately  kill  him.  At  first  some,  refusing 
to  take  the  oath,  were  put  to  death  round  the  altars,  and  lying 
among  the  carcases  of  the  victims,  served  afterwards  as  a 

BOOK  X. 

371 

B.C.  293.] 
warning  to  others  not  to  refuse  it.  When  those  of  the  first 
rank  in  the  Samnite  nation  had  been  bound  under  these  solem¬ 
nities,  the  general  nominated  ten,  whom  he  desired  to  choose 
each  a  man,  and  so  to  proceed  until  they  should  have  filled 
up  the  number  of  sixteen  thousand.  This  body,  from  the 
covering  of  the  enclosure  wherein  the  nobility  had  been  thus 
devoted,  was  called  the  linen  legion.  They  were  furnished 
with  splendid  armour,  and  plumed  helmets,  to  distinguish 
them  above  the  rest.  They  had  another  body  of  forces, 
amounting  to  somewhat  more  than  twenty  thousand,  not  in¬ 
ferior  to  the  linen  legion,  either  in  personal  appearance,  or 
renown  in  war,  or  their  equipment  for  serxice.  This  num¬ 
ber,  composing  the  main  strength  of  the  nation,  sat  down  at 
Aquilonia. 
XXXIX.  On  the  other  side,  the  consuls  set  out  from  the 
city.  First,  Spurius  Carvilius,  to  whom  had  been  decreed 
the  veteran  legions,  which  Marcus  Atilius,  the  consul  of  the 
preceding  year,  had  left  in  the  territory  of  Interamna,  march¬ 
ed  at  their  head  into  Samnium;  and,  while  the  enemy  were 
busied  in  their  superstitious  rites,  and  holding  their  secret 
meeting,  he  took  by  storm  the  town  of  Amitqmum.  Here 
were  slain  about  two  thousand  eight  hundred  men,  and  four 
thousand  two  hundred  ayd  seventy  were  made  prisoners. 
Papirius,  with  a  new  army,  which  he  raised  in  pursuance  of 
a  decree  of  the  senate,  made  himself  master  of  the  city  of 
Duronia.  He  took  fewer  prisoners  than  his  colleague  ;  but 
slew  much  greater  numbers.  Rich  booty  was  acquired  in 
both  places.  The  consuls  then,  overrunning  Samnium,  and 
wasting  the  province  of  Atinum  with  particular  severity,  ar¬ 
rived,  Carvilius  at  Cominium,  and  Papirius  at  Aquilonia, 
where  the  main  force  of  the  Samnites  was  posted.  Here, 
for  some  time,  there  was  neither  a  cessation  of  action,  nor 
any  vigorous  effort.  The  day  w^as  generally  spent  in  provok¬ 
ing  the  enemy  when  quiet,  and  retiring  when  they  offered 

372 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  459, 

resistance  ;  in  menacing,  rather  than  making  an  attack.  By 
which  practice  of  beginning,  and  then  desisting,  even  those 
trifling  skirmishes  were  continually  left  without  a  decision. 
The  other  Roman  camp  was  twenty  miles  distant,  and  Pa- 
pirius  constantly  consulted  his  absent  colleague,  on  every 
thing  which  he  undertook,  while  Carvilius,  on  his  part,  di¬ 
rected  a  greater  share  of  his  attention  to  Aquilonia,  where 
the  state  of  affairs  was  more  critical  and  important,  than  to 
Cominium,  which  he  himself  was  besieging.  When  Papi- 
rius  had  fully  adjusted  every  measure,  preparatory  to  an  en¬ 
gagement,  he  despatched  a  message  to  his  colleague,  that 
he  intended,  if  the  auspices  permitted,  to  fight  the  enemy 
on  the  day  following  ;  and  that  it  would  be  necessary  that 
he  (Carvilius)  should  at  the  same  time  make  an  assault  on 
Cominium,  with  his  utmost  force,  that  the  Samnites  there 
might  have  no  leisure  to  send  any  succour  to  Aquilonia.” 
The  messenger  had  the  day  for  the  performance  of  his  jour¬ 
ney,  and  he  returned  in  the  night,  with  an  answer  to  the 
consul,  that  his  colleague  approved  of  the  plan,  Papirius, 
on  sending  off  the  messenger,  had  instantly  called  an  assem¬ 
bly,  where  h^  descanted,  at  large,  on  the  nature  of  the  war 
in  general,  and  on  the  mode  at  present  adopted  by  the  enemy, 
in  the  equipment  of  their  troops,  which  certainly  served  for 
empty  parade,  but  could  have  no  kind  of  efficacy  towards  en¬ 
suring  success :  for  plumes,”  he  said,  “  made  no  wounds; 
that  a  Roman  javelin  would  make  its  way  through  shields, 
however  painted  and  gilt ;  and  that  the  dazzling  whiteness 
of  their  tunics  would  soon  be  besmeared  with  blood,  when  the 
sword  began  its  work.  His  father  had  formerly  cut  off,  to  a 
man,  a  gold  and  silver  army  of  the  Samnites  ;  and  such  ac¬ 
coutrements  had  made  a  more  respectable  figure,  as  spoils, 
in  the  hands  of  the  conquering  foe,  than  as  arms  in  those  of 
the  wearers.  Perhaps  it  was  allotted,  by  destiny,  to  his  name 

BOOK  X. 

B.C,  293.] 

S7S 

and  family,  that  they  should  be  opposed  in  command  against 
the^most  powerful  efforts  of  the  Samnites  ;  and  should  bring 
home  spoils,  of  such  beauty,  as  to  serve  for  ornaments  to  the 
public  places.  The  immortal  gods  were  certainly  on  his  side, 
on  account  of  the  leagues  so  often  solicited,  and  so  often 
broken.  Besides,  if  a  judgment  might  be  formed  of  the  sen¬ 
timents  of  the  deities,  they  never  were  more  hostile  to  any 
army,  than  to  that,  which,  in  its  abominable  sacrifice,  was 
polluted  with  human  blood,  mingled  with  that  of  cattle  ; 
which  was  in  all  events  devoted  to  the  wrath  of  the  gods, 
dreading,  on  the  one  hand,  the  deities,  who  were  witnesses 
to  the  treaties  concluded  with  the  Romans ;  on  the  other, 
the  imprecations  comprised  in  the  oath  which  they  took,  in 
contradiction  to  those  treaties,  which  they  had  before  sworn 
to  observe :  an  oath,  which,  taken  through  compulsion,  they 
no  doubt  abhorred;  while  they  as  certainly  feared,  at  once 
the  gods,  their  countrymen,  and  their  enemies.” 
XL,  The  rage  of  the  soldiers  was  inflamed  to  a  high  de¬ 
gree  before ;  but,  when  the  consul  had  recounted  to  them  all 
these  circumstances,  which  he  had  learned  from  deserters, 
they  then,  filled  vfixh  confidence  in  both  divine  and  human 
aid,  with  one  universal  shout,  demanded  the  battle ;  were 
vexed  at  the  action  being  deferred ;  impatient  under  the  in¬ 
tended  delay  of  a  day  and  a  night.  Papirius,  at  the  third 
watch,  having  received  his  colleague’s  letter,  arose  in  silence, 
and  sent  the  keeper  of  the  chickens  to  take  the  auspices. 
There  was  no  one  description  of  men  in  the  camp,  who  felt 
not  earnest  wishes  for  the  fight :  the  highest,  and  the  lowest, 
were  equally  eager ;  the  general  watching  the  ardour  of  the 
soldiers,  and  the  soldiers  that  of  the  general.  This  universal 
zeal  spread  even  to  those  employed  in  taking  the  auspices  ; 
for  the  chickens  having  refused  to  feed,  the  auspex  ventured 
to  misrepresent  the  omen,  and  reported  to  the  consul,  that 

374 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[YiR.  459. 

they  had  fed  voraciously  The  consul,  highly  pleased,  and 
giving  notice  that  the  auspices  were  excellent,  and  that  they 
were  to  act  under  the  direction  of  the  gods,  displayed  the 
signal  for  battle.  Just  as  he  was  going  out  to  the  field,  he 
happened  to  receive  intelligence  from  a  desertef*,  that  twenty 
cohorts  of  Samnites,  consisting  of  about  four  hundred  each, 
had  marched  towards  Cominium.  Lest  his  colleague  should 
be  ignorant  of  this,  he  instantly  despatched  a  messenger  to 
him,  and  then  ordered  the  troops  to  advance  with  speed, 
having  already  assigned  to  each  division  of  the  army  its  pro* 
per  post,  and  appointed  general  officers  to  command  them. 
The  command  of  the  right  wing  he  gave  to  Lucius  Volum- 
nius,  that  of  the  left  to  Lucius  Scipio,  that  of  the  cavalry,  to 
the  other  lieutenant-generals,  Caius  Csedicius  and  Caius  Tre* 
bonius.  He  ordered  Spurius  Nautius  to  take  off  the  panniers 
from  the  mules,  and  to  lead  them  round  quickly,  together 
with  his  auxiliar}-  cohorts,  to  a  rising  ground  in  view ;  and 
there  to  shew  himself  during  the  heat  of  the  engagement, 
and  to  raise  as  much  dust  as  possible.  While  the  general 
was  employed  in  making  these  dispositions,  a  dispute  arose 
among  the  keepers  of  the  chickens,  about* the  auspices  of  the 
day,  which  was  overheard  by  some  Roman  horsemen,  who, 
deeming  it  a  matter  too  important  to  be  slighted,  informed 
Spurius  Papirius,  the  consul’s  nephew,  that  there  was  a  doubt 
about  the  auspices.  The  youth,  born  in  an  age  when  that 
sort  of  learning,  which  inculcates  contempt  of  the  gods,  was 
•  when  ffie  auspices  were  to  be  taken  from  the  chickens,  the  keeper 
threw  some  of  their  food  upon  the  ground,  in  their  sight,  and  opened  the 
door  of  their  coop.  If  they  did  not  come  out;  if  they  came  out  slowly; 
if  they  refused  to  feed*  or  eat  in  a  careless  manner,  the  omen  was  con¬ 
sidered  as  bad.  On  the  contrary,  if  they  rushed  out  hastily,  and  eat  gree¬ 
dily,  so  that  some  of  the  food  fell  from  their  mouths  on  the  gJouiKi,  this 
was  considered  as  an  omen  of  the  best  import;  it  was  called  tripudium  so- 
Unimumy  originally,  terripavinm^  from  terras  and pa’virei  to  strike. 

BOOK  X. 

B*C*  293.] 

375 

yet  unknowo^  examined  into  the  affair^  that  he  might  not 
carry  an  uncertain  report  to  the  consul ;  and  then  acquainted 
him  with  it.  His  answer  was,  I  very  much  applaud  your 
conduct  and  zeal.  However,  the  person  who  officiates,  in 
taking  the  auspices,  if  he  makes  a  false  report,  draws  on  his 
own  head  the  evil  portended :  but  to  the  Roman  people  and 
their  army,  the  favourable  omen  reported  to  me  is  an  excel¬ 
lent  auspice.’’  He  then  commanded  the  centurions  to  place 
the  keepers  of  the  chickens  in  the  front  of  the  line.  The 
Samnites  likewise  brought  forward  their  standards,  followed 
by  their  main  body,  armed  and  decorated  in  such  a  manner 
as  to  afford  a  magnificent  show.  Before  the  shout  was  raised, 
or  the  battle  begun,  the  auspex,  wounded  by  a  random  cast 
of  a  javelin,  fell  before  the  standards  ;  which  being  told  to 
the  consul,  he  said,  the  gods  are  present  in  the  battle  ;  the 
guilty  has  met  his  punishment.”  While  the  consul  uttered 
these  words,  a  crow,  in  front  of  him,  cawed  with  a  clear 
voice  ;  at  which  augury,  the  consul  being  rejoiced,  and  af¬ 
firming,  that  never  had  the  gods  displayed  more  evident  de¬ 
monstrations  of  their  interposition  in  human  affairs,  ordered 
the  charge  to  be  sounded  and  the  shout  to  be  raised. 
XLl.  A  furious  conflict  now  ensued,  but  with  very  une¬ 
qual  spirit  in  the  combatants.  The  Romans,  actuated  by  an¬ 
ger,  hope,  and  ardour  for  conquest,  rushed  to  battle,  like  men 
thirsting  for  their  enemy’s  blood  ;  while  the  Samnites,  for 
the  most  part  reluctantly,  as  if  compelled  by  necessity  and 
religious  dread,  rather  stood  on  their  defence,  than  made  an 
attack.  Nor  would  they,  familiarized  as  they  were  to  de¬ 
feats,  through  a  course  of  so  many  years,  have  withstood  the 
first  shout  and  shock  of  the  Romans,  had  not  another  fear, 
operating  still  more  powerfully  in  their  breasts,  restrained 
them  from  flying.  For  they  had  before  their  eyes  the  whole 
scene  exhibited  at  the  secret  sacrifice,  the  armed  priests,  the 
promiscuous  carnage  of  men  and  cattle,  the  altars  besmeared 

5^6 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

rir*R.459. 

wtdi  blood  of  victims,  and  of  their  murdered  countrymen,  the 
dreadful  curses,  and  the  direful  form  of  imprecation,  in  whidi 
they  had  called  down  perdition  on  their  family  and  race. 
Thus  shackled,  they  stood  in  their  poits,  'mote  afraid  of  their 
countrymen,  than  of  the  enemy.  The  Romans,  pushing  the 
attack  with  vigour  on  both  the  wings,  and  in  the  centre,  made 
great  havoc  among  them,  deprived,  as  they  were,  of  the  use 
of  their  faculties,  through  their  fears  of  the  gods  and  of  men, 
and' making  but  a  faint  opposition.  The  slaughter  had  now 
almost  reached  to  their  standards,  when,  on  one  side,  appear¬ 
ed  a  cloud  of  dust,  as  if  raised  by  the  marching  of  a  numer¬ 
ous  army :  this  was  caused  by  Spurius  Nautius,  (some  say 
Octavius  Metius,)  commander  of  the  auxiliary  cohorts :  for 
these  took  pains  to  raise  a  great  quantity  of  dust,  the  servants 
of  the  camp  mounted  on  the  mules,  dragging  boughs  of  trees, 
full  of  leaves,  along  the  ground.  Through  this  obscuration, 
arms  and  standards  were  seen  in  front,  with  cavalry  closing 
the  rear.  This  effectually  deceived,  not  only  the  Samnites, 
but  the  Romans  themselves  :  and  the  consul  confirmed  the 
mistake,  by  calling  out  among  the  foremost  battalions,  so  that 
his  voice  reached  also  the  enem\ ,  that  “  Cominium  was  taken ; 
and  that  his  victorious  colleague  was  approaching  bidding 
his  men  now  make  haste  to  complete  the  defeat  of  the  ene¬ 
my,  before  the  other  army  should  come  in  for  a  share  of  the 
glory,”  This  he  said  as  he  sat  on  horseback,  and  then  order¬ 
ed  the  tribunes  and  centurions  to  open  passages  for  the  horse. 
He  had  given  previous  directions  to  IVebonius,  and  Caedi- 
cius,  that,  when  they  should  see  him  waving  the  point  of  his 
spear  aloft,  they  should  cause  the  cavalry  to  charge  the  ene¬ 
my  with  all  possible  violence.  Every  particular,  as  previ¬ 
ously  concerted,  was  executed  with  the  utmost  exactness. 
The  passages  were  opened  between  the  ranks,  the  cavalry 
darted  through,  and,  with  the  points  of  their  spears  presented, 
rushed  into  the  midst  of  the  enemy’s  battalions,  breaking 

B.C.  293.] 

BOOK  X. 

3TT 
down  the  ranks  wherever  they  charged.  Vcdumnius  and 
Scipio  seconded  the  blow,  and  taking  advantage  of  the  ene¬ 
my’s  disorder,  made  a  terrible  slaughter.  Thus  attacked,  the 
linen,  regardless  of  all  restraints  from  either  gods  or  men, 
quitted  their  posts  in  confusion  ;  the  sworn,  and  the  unsworn 
all  fled  alike,  no  longer  dreading  aught  but  the  Romans.  The 
remains  of  their  infantry  were  driven  into  the  camp  at  Aqui- 
lonia.  The  nobility  and  cavalry  directed  their  flight  to  Bo- 
vianum.  The  horse  were  pursued  by  the  Roman  horse,  the 
infantry  by  their  infantry,  while  the  wings  proceeded  by  dif¬ 
ferent  roads ;  the  right,  to  the  camp  of  the  Samnites ;  the 
left,  to  the  city.  Velum nius  succeeded  first  in  gaining  pos¬ 
session  of  the  camp.  At  the  city,  Scipio  met  a  stouter  resist¬ 
ance  ;  not  because  the  conquered  troops  there  had  gained 
courage,  but  because  walls  are  a  better  defence  against  armed 
men,  than  a  rampart.  From  these,  they  repelled  the  enemy 
with  stones.  Scipio  considering,  that  unless  the  business  were 
effected,  during  their  first  panic,  and  before  they  could  re¬ 
cover  their  spirits,  the  attack  of  so  strong  a  town  would  be 
very  tedious,  asked  his  soldiers  if  they  could  endure,  with¬ 
out  shame,  that  the  other  wing  should  already  have  taken  the 
camp,  and  that  they,  after  all  their  success,  should  be  repulsed 
from  the  gates  of  the  city  Then,  all  of  them  loudly  <fc- 
claring  their  determination  to  the  contrary,  he  himself  ad¬ 
vanced,  the  foremost,  to  the  gate,  with  his  shield  raised  over 
his  head :  the  rest,  following  under  the  like  cover  of  their 
shields  conjoined,  burst  into  the  city,  and  dispersing  the  Sam¬ 
nites,  who  were  near  the  gate,  took  possession  of  the  walls, 
but  were  deterred  from  pushing  forward,  by  the  smallness  of 
their  number. 
XL II.  Of  these  transactions,  the  consul  was  for  some  time 
ignorant;  and  was  busily  employed  in  calling  home  his  troops, 
for  the  sun  was  now  hastening  to  set,  and  die  approach  of 
night  rendered  every  place  suspicious  ai3|4  dangerous,  even  to 
VOL.  II. — 3  C 

S76 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  459* 

victorious  troops.  Having  rode  forward,  a  considerable  way, 
he  saw  on  the  right,  tiie  camp  taken,  and  heard  on  the  kft,  a 
shouting  in  the  city,  with  a  confused  noise  of  fighting,  and 
crie^  of  terror.  This  happened  while  the  fight  was  going  on 
at  the  gate.  When,  on  riding  up  nearer,  he  saw  his  own 
men  on  the  walls,  and  so  much  progress  already  made  in  the 
business,  pleased  at  having  gained,  through  the  precipitate 
conduct  of  a  few,^n  opportunity  of  striking  an  important 
blow,  he  ordered  the  troops,  whom  he  had  sent  back  to  the 
camp,  to  be  called  out,  and  to  march  to  the  attack  of  the  city: 
these,  having  made  good  their  entrance,  on  the  nearest  side, 
proceeded  no  farther,  because  night  approached.  Before 
morning,  however,  the  town  was  abandoned  by  the  enemy. 
There  were  slain  of  the  Samnites  on  that  day,  at  Aquilonia, 
thirty  thousand  three  hundred  and  forty  ;  taken  three  thou¬ 
sand  eight  hundred  and  seventy,  with  ninety-seven  military 
standards.  One  circumstance,  respecting  Papirius,  is  parti¬ 
cularly  mentioned  by  historians  :  that,  hardly  ever  was  any 
general  seen  in  the  field  with  a  more  cheerful  countenance  ; 
whether  this  was  owing  to  his  natural  temper,  or  to  his  con¬ 
fidence  of  success.  From  the  same  firmness  of  mind  it  pro¬ 
ceeded,  that  he  did  not  suffer  himself  to  be  diverted  from 
the  war  by  the  dispute  about  the  auspices ;  and  that,  in  the 
heat  of  the  battle,  when  it  was  customary  to  vow  temples  to 
the  immortal  gods,  he  vowed  to  Jupiter  the  victorious,  that 
if  he  should  defeat  the  legions  of  the  enemy,  he  would,  be¬ 
fore  he  tasted  of  any  generous  liquor,  make  a  libation  to  him 
of  a  cup  of  wine  and  honey.  This  kind  of  vow  proved  ac- 
ceptacie  to  the  gods,  and  they  conducted  the  auspices  to  a 
fortunate  issue. 
XL  I II.  Like  success  attended  the  operations  of  the  other 
consul  at  Cominium  ;  leading  up  his  forces  to  the  walls,  at 
the  first  dawn,  he  invested  the  city  on  every  side,  and  posted 
strong  guards  oppc^itc  to  the  gates  to  prevent  any  sally  being 

BOOK  X. 

379 

BX.  293.] 
made.  Just  as  he  was  giving  the  signal,  the  alarming  mes¬ 
sage  from  his  colleague,  touching  the  march  of  the  twenty 
Samnite  cohorts,  not  only  caused  him  to  delay  the  assault, 
but  obliged  him  to  call  off  a  part  of  his  troops,  when  they 
were  formed  and  ready  to  begin  the  attack.  He  ordered  De* 
cius  Brutus  Scseva,  a  lieutenant-general,  with  the  first  legion, 
twenty  auxiliary  cohorts,  and  the  cavalry,  to  go  and  oppose 
the  said  detachment ;  and  in  whatever  place  he  should  meet 
the  foe,  there  to  stop  and  detain  them,^  and  even  to  engage 
in  battle,  should  opportunity  offer  for  it ;  at  all  events  not  to 
suffer  those  troops  to  approach  Cominium.  He  then  com¬ 
manded  the  scaling  ladders  to  be  brought  up  to  the  walls,  on 
every  side  of  the  city  ;  and,  under  a  fence  of  closed  shields, 
advanced  to  the  gates.  Thus,  at  the  same  moment,  the  gates 
were  broke  open,  and  the  assault  made  on  every  part  of  the 
rampart.  Though  the  Samnites,  before  they  saw  the  assail¬ 
ants  on  the  works,  had  possessed  courage  enough  to  oppose 
their  approaches  to  the  city,  yet  now,  when  the  action  was 
no  longer  carried  on  at  a  distance,  nor  with  missile  weapons, 
but  in  close  fight ;  and  when  those,  who  had  with  difficulty 
gained  the  walls,  the  most  formidable  obstruction  in  their 
way,  fought  with  ease  on  equal  ground,  against  an  enemy 
inferior  in  strength,  they  all  forsook  the  towers  and  strong 
holds,  and  were  driven  to  the  Forum.  There,  for  a  short 
time  they  tried,  as  a  last  effort,  to  retrieve  the  fortune  of  the 
fight ;  but  soon,  throwing  down  their  arms,  surrendered  to 
the  consul,  to  the  number  of  fifteen  thousand  four  hundred ; 
four  thousand  three  hundred  and  eighty  being  slain.  Such 
was  the  course  of  events  at  Cominium,  such  at  Aquilonia, 
In  the  middle  space  between  the  two  cities,  where  a  third 
battle  had  been  expected,  the  enemy  were  not  found  :  for, 
when  they  were  within  seven  miles  of  Cominium,  they  were 
recalled  by  their  countrymen,  and  had  no  part  in  either  battle. 
At  nightTall,  when  they  were  now  within  sight  of  ffieir 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  459. 

campj^  and  also  of  Aquilonia,  shouts  from  both  places  reach¬ 
ing  them  with  equal  violence  induced  them  to  halt ;  then,  on 
the  side  of  the  camp,  which  had  been  set  on  fire  by  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  the  wide-spreading  flames  discovered  with  more  cer¬ 
tainty  the  disaster  which  had  happened,  and  prevented  their 
proceeding  any  farther.  In  that  same  spot,  stretched  on  the 
ground  at  random,  under  their  arms,  they  passed  the  whole 
night  in  great  inquietude,  at  one  time  wishing  for,  at  another 
dreading  the  light.  At  the  first  dawn,  while  they  were  still 
undetermined  to  wTiat  quarter  they  should  direct  their  march, 
they  were  obliged  (unprotected  as  they  were,  either  by  a 
rampart  or  advanced  guard,)  to  betake  themselves  hastily  to 
flight,  being  descried  by  the  cavalr) ,  who  had  gone  in  pur¬ 
suit  of  the  Samnites  that  left  the  town  in  the  night.  These 
had  likewise  been  perceived  from  the  walls  of  Aquilonia, 
and  the  legionary  cohorts  now  joined  in  the  pursuit.  The 
foot  were  unable  to  overtake  them,  but  the  cavalry  cut  off 
about  two  hundred  and  eighty  of  their  rear  guard.  The  rest, 
with  less  loss  than  might  have  been  expected  in  such  a  disor¬ 
derly  rout,  effected  their  escape  to  Bovianum,  leaving  behind, 
in  their  consternation,  a  great  quantity  of  arms,  and  eighteen 
military  standards. 
XL  IV.  The  joy  of  one  Roman  army  was  enhanced  by  the 
success  of  the  other.  Each  consul,  with  the  approbation  of 
his  colleague,  gave  to  his  soldiers  the  plunder  of  the  town 
which  he  had  taken  ;  and,  when  the  houses  were  cleared,  set 
them  on  fire.  Thus,  on  the  same  day,  Aquilonia  and  Comi¬ 
nium  were  both  reduced  to  ashes.  The  consuls  then  united 
their  camps,  where  mutual  congratulations  took  place  between 
them,  and  between  their  soldiers.  Here,  in  the  view  of  the 
two  armies,  Carvilius  bestowed  on  his  men  commendations 
and  presents  according  to  the  desert  of  each ;  and  Papirius 
likewise,  whose  troops  had  been  engaged  in  a  variety  of  ac¬ 
tions,  in  the  field,  in  the  assault  of  the  camp,  and  in  that  of 

BOOK  X, 

381 

BX.  293.] 
the  city,  presented  Spurius  Nautius,  Spurius  Papirius,  his 
nephew,  four  centurions,  and  a  company  of  the  spearmen, 
with  bracelets  and  crowns  of  gold — to  Nautius,  on  account 
of  his  behaviour  at  the  head  of  his  detachment,  when  he  had 
terrified  the  enemy  with  the  appearance  as  of  a  numerous 
army  ;  to  young  Papirius,  on  account  of  his  zealous  exer¬ 
tions  with  the  cavalry,  both  in  the  battle  and  in  harassing  the 
Samnites  in  their  flight  by  night,  when  they  withdrew  pri¬ 
vately  from  Aquilonia ;  and  to  the  centurions  and  company 
of  soldiers,  because  they  were  the  first  who  gained  possession 
of  the  gate  and  wall  of  that  town.  All  the  horsemen  he  pre¬ 
sented  with  gorgets  and  bracelets  of  silver,  on  account  of 
their  distinguished  conduct  on  many  occasions.  A  council 
was  then  held  to  consider  of  the  propriety  either  of  removing 
both  armies,  or  one  at  least,  out  of  Samnium  ;  in  which  it 
was  concluded,  that  the  lower  the  strength  of  the  Samnites 
was  reduced,  the  greater  perseverance  and  vigour  ought  to 
be  used  in  prosecuting  the  war,  until  they  should  be  effec¬ 
tually  crushed,  that  Samnium  might  be  given  up  to  the  suc¬ 
ceeding  consuls  in  a  state  of  perfect  subjection.  As  there 
was  now  no  army  of  the  enemy  which  could  be  supposed 
capable  of  disputing  the  field,  they  had  only  one  mode  of 
operations  to  pursue,  the  besieging  of  the  cities  ;  by  the  des¬ 
truction  of  which,  they  might  be  enabled  to  enrich  their  sol¬ 
diers  with  the  spoil ;  and,  at  the  same  time,  utterly  to  des¬ 
troy  the  enemy,  reduced  to  the  necessity  of  fighting,  their  all 
being  at  stake.  The  consuls,  therefore,  after  despatching 
letters  to  the  senate  and  people  of  Rome,  containing  accounts 
of  the  services  which  they  had  performed,  led  away  their 
legions  to  different  quarters  ;  Papirius  going  to  attack  Sepi- 
num,  Carvilius  to  Volana. 
XLV.  The  letters  of  the  consuls  were  heard  with  extra¬ 
ordinary  exultation,  both  in  the  senate-house  and  in  the  as¬ 
sembly  of  the  people  ;  and,  in  a  public  thanksgiving  of  four 

382 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R,459. 

days  continuance,  individuals  concurred  with  hearty  zeal  in 
celebrating  the  public  rejoicings.  These  successes  were  not 
only  important  in  themselves,  but  peculiarly  seasonable  ;  for 
it  happened,  that,  at  the  same  time,  intelligence  was  brought 
of  the  Etrurians  being  again  in  arms.  The  reflection  natu¬ 
rally  occurred,  how  it  would  have  been  possible,  in  case  any 
misfortune  had  happened  in  Samnium,  to  have  withstood  the 
power  of  Etruria;  which,  being  encouraged  by  the  conspira¬ 
cy  of  the  Samnites,  and  seeing  both  the  consuls,  and  the 
whole  force  the  Romans,  employed  against  them,  had 
made  use  of  that  Juncture,  in  which  the  Romans  had  so  much 
business  on  their  hands,  for  reviving  hostilities.  Ambassa¬ 
dors  from  the  allies  being  introduced  to  the  senate  by  the 
praetor  Marcus  Atilius,  complained  that  their  countries  were 
wasted  with  fire  and  sword  by  the  neighbouring  E^urians, 
because  they  had  refused  to  revolt  from  the  Romans ;  and 
they  besought  the  Conscript  Fathers  to  protect  them  from 
the  violence  and  injustice  of  their  common  enemy.  The  am¬ 
bassadors  were  answered,  that  ^  the  senate  would  take  care 
that  the  allies  should  not  repent  their  fidelity.  That  the 
Etrurians  should  shortly  be  in  the  same  situation  with  the 
Samnites.”  Notwithstanding  which,  the  business  respecting 
Etruria  would  have  been  prosecuted  with  less  vigour,  had 
not  information  been  received,  that  theTaliscians  likewise, 
who  had  for  many  years  lived  in  friendship  with  Rome,  had 
united  their  arms  with  those  of  the  Etrurians.  ^  The  conside¬ 
ration  of  the  near  vicinity  of  that  nation  quickened  the  atten¬ 
tion  of  the  senate  ;  insomuch  that  they  passed  a  decree  that 
heralds  should  be  sent  to  demand  satisfaction ;  which  being 
refused,  war  was  declared  against  the  Faliscians  by  direction 
of  the  senate,  and  order  of  the  people ;  and  the  consuls  were 
desired  to  determine,  by  lots,  which  of  them  should  lead  an 
army  from  Samnium  into  Etruria.  Carvilius  had,  in  the 
mean  time,  taken  from  the  Samnites  Volana,  Palumbinum, 

BOOK  X, 

383 

BX.  S93.] 
and  Herculaneum :  Volana  after  a  siege  of  a  few  days,  Pa- 
lumbinum  the  same  day  on  which  he  approached  the  walls. 
At  Herculaneum,  it  is  true,  the  consul  had  two  regular  en¬ 
gagements  without  any  decisive  advantage  on  either  side, 
and  with  greater  loss  than  was  suffered  by  the  enemy :  but 
afterwards,  encamping  on  the  spot,  he  slmt  them  up  within 
their  works,  besieged  and  took  the  town.  In  these  three 
towns  were  taken  or  slain  ten  thousand  men,  of  whosa  the 
prisoners  composed  somewhat  the  greater  part.  On  the 
consuls  casting  lots  for  the  provinces,  Etruria  fell  to  Carvi- 
lius,  to  the  great  satisfaction  of  the  soldiers,  who  now  found 
the  cold  too  severe  in  Samnium.  Papirius  was  opposed  at 
Sepinum  with  a  more  powerful  force :  he  was  obliged  to  fight 
often  in  pitched  battles ;  often,  on  a  march ;  and  often,  un¬ 
der  the  walls  of  the  city,  against  the  irruptions  of  the  ene¬ 
my;  and  could  neither  besiege,  nor  engage  them  on  equal 
terms :  for  the  Samnites  had  not  only  the  advantage  of  walls, 
but  likewise  of  numbers  of  men  and  arms  to  protect  their 
walls.  At  length,  after  a  great  deal  of  fighting,  he  forced 
them  to  submit  to  a  regular  siege.  This  he  carried  on  with 
vigour,  and  made  himself  master  of  the  city  by  means  of 
his  works,  and  by  storm.  The  rage  of  the  soldiers  on  this 
occasion  caused  the  greatest  slaughter  in  the  taking  of  the 
town  ;  seven  thousand  four  hundred  fell  by  the  sword  ;  the 
number  of  the  prisoners  did  not  amount  to  three  thousand. 
The  spoil,  of  which  the  quantity  was  very  great,  the  whole 
substance  of  the  Samnites  being  collected  in  a  few  cities, 
was  given  up  to  the  soldiers. 
XL VI.  The  snow  had  now  entirely  covered  the  face  of 
the  country,  and  rendered  the  shelter  of  houses  absolutely 
necessary :  the  consul  therefore  led  home  his  troops  from 
Samnium,  While  he  was  on  his  way  to  Rome,  a  triumph 
was  decreed  him  with  universal  consent :  and  accordingly  he 
triumphed  while  in  office,  and  with  extraordinary  splendour, 

384 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  4^9. 

considering  the  circums^iKres  of  those  times.  The  cavalry 
and  infontry  marched  in  Ae  procession,  adorned  with  the 
honourable  presents  which  they  had  received.  Great  num¬ 
bers  of  crowns  were  seen,  which  had  been  bestowed  as  marks 
of  honour,  for  having  sarved  die  lives  of  citizens,  or  for 
having  first  mounted  walls  or  rampart.  Peo^e’s  curiwty 
was  highly  gratified  in  viewing  the  spoils  of  the  Samnites, 
and  comparing  them,  in  respect  of  magnificence  and  beauty, 
with  those  taken  by  his  father,  which  were  well  known,  from 
being  frequently  exhibited  as  ornaments  of  the  public  places. 
Several  prisoners  of  distinction,  renowned  for  their  own  ex¬ 
ploits,  and  those  of,  their  ancestors,  were  led  in  the  caval¬ 
cade.  There  were  carried  in  the  train  two  millions  and 
thirty-three  thousand  asses  in  weight=^,  said  to  be  produced 
by  the  sale  of  the  prisoners ;  and  of  silver,  taken  in  the 
cities,  one  thousand  three  hundred  and  thirty  pounds.  Ail 
the  silver  and  brass  were  lodged  in  the  treasury,  no  share  of 
this  part  of  the  spoil  being  given  to  the  soldiers.  The  ill 
humour  which  this  excited  in  the  commons,  was  farther  ex¬ 
asperated  by  their  being  obliged  to  contribute,  by  a  tax,  to  the 
payment  of  the  army ;  whereas,  said  they,  if  the  vain  parade  of 
conveying  the  produce  of  the  spoil  to  the  treasury  had  been 
disregarded,  donations  might  have  been  made  to  the  soldiers, 
and  the  pay  of  the  army  also  supplied  out  of  that  fumi.  The 
temple  of  Quirinus,  vowed  by  his  father  when  dictator,  (for 
that  he  himself  had  vowed  it  in  the  heat  of  batde,  I  do  not 
find  in  any  ancient  writer,  nor  indeed  could  he  in  so  short  a 
time  have  finished  the  building  of  it,)  the  son  in  the  office  oi 
consul  dedicated,  and  adorned  with  military  spoils.  And  of 
these,  so  great  was  the  abundance,  that  not  only  that  temple 
and  the  Forum  were  decorated  with  them,  Imt  quantities 
were  also  distributed  among  the  allies  and  colonies  in  the 

*  4,9401.  13s.  6d. 

BOOK  X* 

385 

B.C.  imq 

nei^i^uiiiood,  to  serye  to  dieir  temple  and 
puWic  places.  Immediate!;^  aftei^  lus  rtumph,  he  led  bis 
army  into  winter-quarters  in  teirUory  dF  Vcscia ;  that 
country  beii^03q>osed  to  the  inroads^  the  Samnites.  Mean- 
whSe,  JEtmria,  the  consd  Carvilius  first  laid  siege  to 
Troilium,  when  four  hundred  and,  seventy  of  the  richest  in¬ 
habitants,  diering  a  brge  sum  of  money  for  permission  to 
leave  the  place,  he  suffered  them  to  depart ;  the  town,  with 
the  remaintng  multitude,  he  took  by  storm.  He  afterwards 
reduced,  force,  five  forts  strongly  situs^d,  wherein  were 
slain  two  thousand  four  hundred  of  the  enemy,  and  not  quite 
two  thousand  made  prisoners.  To  the  Faliscians,  who  sued 
fmr  peace,  he  granted  a  truce  for  a  year,  on  condUion  of  their 
furpishing  a  hundred  thousand  in  weight*,  and  U  year’s 
pay  for  bis  army.  This  business  completed,  he  returned 
home  to  a  triumph,  which,  though  it  was  less  illus^ious  than 
that  of  his  colleague,  in  respect  of  his  share  in  the  ^feat  of 
the  Samnites,  was  yet  raised  to  an  equality  with  it ;  the  wbqile 
honour  of  t||e  campaign  in  Etruria  belonging  sojely  to  him. 
He  carried  into  idle  treasury  three  hundred  and  ninety  thou¬ 
sand  asses  in  weight.*!  Out  of  the  remamckr  of  the  money 
accruing  to  the  public  firom  the  spoils,  he  a>n^cted  for  the 
builtUng  of  a  temple  to  Fors  Fortuna,  near  to  that  deiUcated 
to  the  same  goddess  by  King  Servius  Tullius  ;  and  gave  to 
the  soldiers,  out  of  the  spoil,  one  hundred  and  two 
each,  and  double  that  sum  to  the  centurions  and  horsemen  ; 
this  donative  was  received  the  more  gratefully^  on  account  of 
the  parsimony  of  his  coUeague. 
XLVII.  The  favour  of  the  consul  saved  from  a  trial,  be¬ 
fore  the  people,  Postumius ;  who,  on  a  prosecution  being 
commenced  against  him  by  Marcus  Scantius,  plebeian  tri¬ 
bune,  evaded,  as  was  said,  the  jurisdiction  of  the  people,  by 
procuring  the  commission  of  lieutenant-general,  so  that  he 

♦  3221. 18s.  4d. 
VOL.  IT. — 3  D 

1 1,2591.  7s.  Cd 

1 6s.  ra. 

386 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R,  459, 

could  only  be  threatened  with  it-  The  year  having  now 
elapsed,  new  plebeian  tribunes  had  come  into  office  ;  and  even 
these,  in  consequence  pf  >Boaic  irregularity  in  their  appoint-* 
ments,  had,  within  five  days  after,  others  substituted  in  their 
rqom.  The  lustrum  was  closed  this  year  by  the  censors  Pub¬ 
lius  Cornelius  Arvina  and  Cains  Marcius  Rutilus.  The 
number  of  citizens  rated  was  two  hundred  and  sixty-two 
thousand  three  hundred  and  twenty-two.  These  were  the 
twenty-sixth  pair  of  censors  since  the  first  instituti<m  of  that 
office  ;  and  this  the  nin^enth  lustrum.  In  this  year,  persons 
who  had  been  presented  with  crowns,  in  consideration  of  me¬ 
ritorious  behaviour  in  war,  first  began  to  wear  them  at  the 
exhibition  of  the  Roman  games.  At  the  same  time  was  first 
introduced  from  Greece,  the  practice  of  bestowing  palms  on 
the  victors  in  the  games.  In  the  same  year  the  curule  aediles, 
who  exhibited  those  games,  completed  the  paving  of  the  road 
from  the  temple  of  Mars  to  Bovillae,  out  of  fines  levied  on  the 
farmers  of  the  puWic  pastures.  Lucius  Papirius  presided  at 
the  consular  election,  and  returned  consuls  Quintus  Fabius 
Gurges,  son  of  Maximus,  and  Decius  Junit^  Brutus  Scaeva. 
Papirius  himself  was  made  praetor.  The  many  prosperous 
events  of  this  yw  were  scarcely  sufficient  to  afford  consola¬ 
tion  for  one  calamity,  a  pestilence,  which  afflicted  both  the 
city  and  c<mntry,and  caused  a  prodigious  mortality.  To  dis¬ 
cover  what  end,  or  what  remedy,  was  appointed  by  the  god? 
for  that  calamity,  the  books  were  consulted,  and  there  it  was 
found  that  iEsculapius  must  be  brought  to  Rome  from  Epi- 
daurus.  However,  as  the  consuls  had  full  employment  in  the 
wars,  no  farther  steps  were  taken  in  that  business  during  this 
year,  except  the  performing  a  supplication  to  iEsculapius,  of 
one  day’s  continuance. 

LOST  BOOKS. 

38r 

HERE  ten  books  of  the  original  are  lost,  making  a  chasm  of 
scveniy-five  years.  The  Translator’s  object  being  to  pub¬ 
lish  the  work  of  Livy  only,  he  has  not  thought  it  his  duty 
to  attempt  to  supply  this  deficiency,  either  by  a  compila¬ 
tion  of  his  own,  or  by  transcribing^or  tninslating  those  of 
others.  The  reader,  however,  who  may  be  desirous  of 
knowing  the  evente  which  took  place  during  this  interval, 
will  find  as  complete  a  detail  of  them  as  can  now  be  given, 
in  Hooke’s  or  Rollin’s  Roman  History. 
The  contents  of  the  lost  books  have  been  preserved,  and 
are  as  follows 

BOOK  XT. 
V.R.4®).  B.C.292, — Fabius  Guides,  consul,  having  fought  an  unsuc¬ 
cessful  battle  with  the  Samnites,  the  senate  deliberate  about  dimissing  him 
from  die  command  of  the  army ;  are  prevailed  upon  not  to  inflict  that  dis¬ 
grace  upon  him,  principally  by  the  entreaties  of  his  father,  Fabius  Maxi¬ 
mus,  and  hy  his  promising  to  join  the  army,  and  serve,  in  quality  of  Ueu- 
tenanttgeneral,  under  his  son  ;  which  promise  he  performs,  and  the  consul, 
aided  by  hia  counsel  and  co-operation,  obtains  a  victoiy  over  Ihe  Samnites, 
and  a  triumph  in  consequence.  G.  Pontius,  the  general  dH  Uie  Samnites, 
led  in  triumph  before  the  victor’s  carriage,  and  afterwards  beheaded. 
A  plague  at  Rome.  Y.R.  461.  B.C.  291. — Ambassadors  sent  to  Bpidaurus, 
to  Imng  from  thence  to  Rome  the  statue  of  iEsculapius ;  a  serpent,  of  it¬ 
self,  goes  on  board  their  ship  ;  supposing  it  to  be  the  abode  of  the  deity, 
they  bring  it  with  them ;  and,  upon  its  quitting  their  vessel,  and  swimming 
to  the  island  in  the  Tyber,  they  consecrate  there  a  temple  to  JEsculapius. 
L,  Postumius,  a  man  of  consular  rank,  condemned  for  employing  the  sol¬ 
ders  under  his  command  in  working  upon  his  farm.  Y.R.  462.  B.C.  290. — 
Curius  Dentatus,  consul,  having  subdued  the  Sammtes,  and  the  rebellious 
Sabines,  triumphs  twice  during  his  year  of  oflice.  Y.R.  463.  B.C,  289. — 
The  colonies  of  Castrum,  Sena,  and  Adria,  established.  Three  judges  of 
capital  crimes  now  first  appointed.  A  census  and  lustrum  :  the  number  of 
citizens  found  to  be  two  hundred  and  seventy -three  thousand.  After  a  long  v 
confinued  sedition,  on  account  of  debts,  the  commons  secede  to  the  Jani- 
culum ;  Y.R.  466.  B.C.  286. — are  brought  back  by  Q.  Horteiislus,  dictator, 

38« 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

who  dies  in  office.  Successful  operations  against  the  Volsinians  and  Lu- 
canians,  against  whom  it  was  thought  expedient  to  send  succov  to  the 
fhoringians.  Y.R.468.  B.C.284. 
BOOK  xn. 
Y.R.  469.  B.C.283.-T-The  Sononian  Gauls  having  slain  the  Roman  ara- 
bassadorsf  war  is  declared  against  them :  they  cut  off  L.  Cxcilius,  praetor, 
with  the  legions  under  his  oommand.  Y.R.  470.  R.C.  282. — Tlie  Roman 
fteet  plimdered  by  the  Tarentines,  and  the  commanded'  dain  :  ambassa' 
dors,  sent  tdT  comphun  of  this  emtrage,  are  ill-treated  ami  sent  bafek ;  where¬ 
upon  war  is  declared  agdnst  Uiem.  The  Samnites  revolt ;  against  whom, 
together  with  the  Lucanxans,  Bruttians,  and  Etruscans,  several  un^ccess- 
fu!  battles  are  fought  by  different  generals.  Y.R.  471.  B.C.281. — Pyrrhus, 
%  Kang  of  Epirus,  comes  into  Italy,  to  succour  the  Tarentines.  A  Campanian 
leg^n  sent,  under  the  command  of  Decius  JubelUus,  to  garrison  Hbegium, 
murder  the  inhabitants,  and  seize  the  city. 
BOOK  XUI. 
Y.R.  472.  B.C.280. — ^Valerius  Lxvinus,  consul,  engages  with  Pyrrhus, 
and  is  beaten,  his  soldiers  being  terrified  at  the  unusual  appearance  of  efe- 
phants.  After  the  battle,  Pyrrhus,  viewing  Oie  bodaes  of  the  Romans  who 
were  slain,  remarks,  that  they  all  of  them  lay  with  their  faces  turned  to¬ 
wards  their  enemy.  He  proceeds  towards  Rome,  ravaging  the  courttry  as 
lie  goes  along.  ^C.  Fabricius  is  sent  by  the  senate  to  treat  for  the  redemp¬ 
tion  of  the  prisoners :  the  King,  in  vain,  attempts  to  bribe  him  to  desert 
his  country.  The  prisoners  restored  without  ransom.  Clneas,  ambassador 
from  Pyrrhus,  to  the  senate,  demands,  as  a  condition  of  peace,  that  the  King 
be  admitted  into  the  city  of  Rome  :  tlie  consideration  of  which  being  de¬ 
ferred  to  a  fuller  meeting,  Appius  Claudius,  who,  on  account  of  a  disorder 
in  his  eyes,  had  not,  for  a  long  time,  attended  in  the  senate,  comes  tli^re  ; 
moves,  and  carries  his  motion,  that  the  demand  of  the  King  be  refused. 
Cneius  Domitius,  the  first  plebeian  censor,  bolds  a  lustrum  ;  the  number  of 
the  citizens  found  to  be  two  hundred  and  seventy-eight  tliousand  two  hun-^ 
dred  and  twenty -two.  A  second,  but  undecided  battle  with  Pyrrhus.  , 
Y.R,  473.  B.G.  279. — The  treaty  with  the  Carthaginians  renewed  a  fourth 
^  time.  Y.R.  474.  B.C.  278, — An  offer  made  to  Fabricius,  the  consul,  by  a 
tr^tor,  to  poison  Pyrrhus  ;  he  sends  him  to  the  King,  and  discovers  to  him 
the  treasonable  offer.  Successful  operations  against  the  Etruscans,  Luca 
mans,  Bruttians,  and  Samnites. 

LOST  BOOKS. 
BOOK  XIV. 

389 

Y.R.  475.  B.C.  277.-^ByniHi«  crosses  over  into  Sicily.  Many  prod%ies, 
among  which,  the  stafcae  of  Jupiter  in  the  Capitol  is  struck  by  lightning, 
and  thrown  down.  Y.B.  476.  B.C.  276.  The  head  of  it  afterwards  found 
by  the  ptiests.  Curias  Dentatus,  holding  a  levy,  putp  up  to  sale  the  good^ 
of  a  person  who  reuses  to  answer  to  his  name  when  called  upon.  Y.R.  477. 
B.C.  275. — PywhuS,  after  1^  return  from  ^cily,  is  defeated,  and  compelled 
to  quit  Italy.  The  cei^KKrs  hold  a  hi^nim,  and  find  the  number  of  the 
cidaens  to  be  two  hundr^  and  seventy-^e  thousand  two  hundred  ai^ 
twenty -four.  Y.R,  479.  B.C.  273. — A  treaty  of  aliiance  formed  with  Ptole¬ 
my,  king  of  .$gypt.  Sextilia,  a  vestal,  found  guilty  of  incest,  and  buried 
aEve.  Two  colonies  sent  forth,  to  Posidonium  and  Cossa.  Y.R.  480. 
B.C.  272.— A  Carthaginian  8^et  sails  in  aid  of  the  Tarentines,  by  which 
act  the  treaty  is  violated.  SuccesAl  operations  against  Uie  Lucanians, 
Satnnites,  and  Bruttians.  Death  of  King  Pyrrhus. 
BOOK  XV. 
The  Tarentines  overcome ;  peace  and  freedom  granted  totliem.  Y.R,  481 . 
B.C.  271  .--The  Campanian  legion,  which  had  forcibly  taken  possesKon  of 
^egium,  besieged  there ;  lay  down  their  arms,  and  are  punished  with 
death.  Some  young  men,  who  had  ill-treated  the  sunbassadors  from  the 
ApoUonians  to  the  senate  of  Rome,  are  delivered  up  to  them.  Peace 
granted  to  the  Picentians.  Y.R.  484.  B.C.  268. — Two  colonies  establish¬ 
ed;  one  at  Ariminum  in  Picenum,  another  at  Beneventum  in  Samnium. 
Silver  coin  now,  for  the  first  time,  used  by  the  Roman  people,  Y.R.  485- 
B.C.  267. — ^The  Umbrians  and  Sallentines  subdued.  The  number  of  quaes 
tors  increased  to  eight. 

BOOK  XVI. 
Y.R.  488.  B.C.  264. — Origin  and  progress  of  the  Carthaginian  state.  Af¬ 
ter  much  debate,  the  senate  resolves  to  succour  the  Maimnertines  against 
the  Carthi^inians,  and  against  Hiero,  King  of  Syracuse.  Roman  cavaliy, 
then,  fOT  the  first  time,  cross  the  sea,  and  engage,  successfully,  in  battle 
wdth  Hiero;  who  solicits  and  obtains  peace.  Y.R.  4^.  B.C.  263. — A  lus¬ 
trum  :  the  number  of  the  citizens  amounts  to  two  hundred  and  ninec^-two  « 
thousand  two  hundred  and  twenty-four.  B.  Junius  Brutus  ezhibfts  the 
first  show  of  gladiators,  in  honour  of  bis  deceased  father.  Y.R.  490.  B.C. 
262. — The  .£sernian  colony  established.  Y.R.  491.  B.C.  261, — Successful 
operations  against  the  Carthaginians  and  Vulsinians.  » 

390 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 
BOOK  xvn. 

y.H.492.  B*C.  260.--p^neius  ComelEua,  Mitsui,  surrounded  by  the  Car- 
tkaginian  fleet;  and,  being  drawn  into  a  e^£erem:e  by  a  ^ratagt^  is 
taken.  YJEL  493.  B.C.  259.— C.  Duillias,  consul,  engages  with,  and  wm- 
qui^s  the  Carthagii^n  fleet :  is  the  first  c<mimander  to  whom  a  triumph 
wm  decreed  for  a  natal  victoiy ;  in  honour  of  which,  he  is  idlowed,  when 
returning  to  his  habitation  at  nig^t,  to  be  attended  wiOi  tordies  and  music. 
L.  consul,  fights  and  i^ihdues  the  Sardinians  and  Corsicans,  to¬ 
gether  with  Hanno,  the  Carthaginian  general,  in  the  i^and  of  Sardinia. 
Y.H,  494.  B.C.  258. — AtUius  Calatinus,  consul,  dwiwn  into  an  ambuscade 
by  the  Carthaginians,  is  rescued  by  the  skill  and  valour  of  M,  Calpumius, 
a  military  tribune,  who,  nmking  a  sudden  attack  upon  the  enemy,  with  a 
body  of  oply  three  hundred  men,  turns  theif  whole  force  ag:wnst' himself. 
I  Y.R.495.  B.C.257.— Hannibid,  die  cmamander  of  the  Carthaginian  fleet 
which  was  beaten,  is  put  to  death  by  his  soldiers, 
BOOK  xvm. 
%  Y.B,496.  B.C.  2^.— Attflius  Regulus,  consul,  having  overcome  the 
Csutht^pnians  in  a  sea-fight,  passes  over  into  Africa  :  kills  a  serpent  of  pro¬ 
digious  magnitude,  with  great  loss  of  his  own  men.  Y.H.  497.  B.C.  255; 
— The  seimte,  on  account  of  his  successful  conduct  of  the  war,  not  appoint¬ 
ing  him  a  succeawr,  he  writes  to  them,  complaining ;  and,  among  other 
reasons  for  desiring  to  be  recalled,  alleges,  that  his  little  farm,  being  all  his 
subsistence,  was  goii^  to  ruin,  owing  to  the  mismanagement  of  hired 
stewards,  Y.K.  498.  B.C.  254. — A  memorable  instance  of  toe  instability 
of  fortune  exhibited  in  the  person  of  Regulus,  who  is  overcome  in  battle, 
and  taken  prisoner,  by  Xanthippus,  a  Lacedaemonian  general.  Y.R.499. 
B.C.  25^ — The  Roman  fleet  shipwrecked ;  which  disaster  entirely  reverses 
the  good  fortune  which  had  hitherto  attended  their  ^airs.  Y.R.  500. 
B.C.  252. — ^Titus  Coruncanius,  the  first  high  priest  chosen  from  among  the 
commons.  Y.R.  501.  B.C.251. — P.  Sempronius  Sophus,  and  M.  Valerius 
Maximus,  censors,  examine  into  the  state  of  the  senate,  and  expel  thirteen 
of  the  members  of  that  body.  They  hold  a  lustrum,  and  find  the  number* 
of  citizens  to  be  two  hundred  and  ninety-seven  thousand  seven  hundred 
and  mne^ASeven.  Y.R,  502.  B.C.250. — Regulus,  being  sent  by  the  Car¬ 
thaginians  to  Rome  to  treat  for  peace,  and  an  excliange  of  prhwiners,  binds 
himself  by  oath  to  return,  if  these  objects  be  not  attained ;  dissuades  the 
senate  from  agreeing  to  the  propositions ;  and  then,  in  observance  of  his 
•ato,  returning  to  Carthage,  is  put  to  death  by  torture. 

LOST  BOOKS. 
BOOR  XIX. 

391 

Y.R.  502.  B.C.250.-— C.  CaccUius  Metellus^  having  been  successful  in 
several  engagements  wiRi  the  Carthaginians,  triumphs  with  more  splen- 
dour  than  had  ever  yet  been  seen ;  thirteen  generals  of  the  enemy,  and 
one  hundred  and  twenty  elephants,  being  exhibited  in  the  procesrion. 
y.R.503.  B.C.249. — Claudius  Fulcher,  c<msul,  obstinately  persisting,  not¬ 
withstanding  the  omens  were  inauspicious,  engages  the  encmy^s  fleet,  and 
is  beaten ;  drowns  the  sacred  chickens  which  wouM  not  feed :  recdled  by  • 
the  senate,  and  ordered  to  nominate  a  dictator ;  he  appoints  Claudius  Gii- 
cla,  one  of  the  lowest  of  the  people,  who,  notwithstanding  his  being  order¬ 
ed  to  abdicate  the  office,  yet  attends  the  celebration  of  the  public  games 
in  his  dictator's  robe.  Y.R.  504.  B.C.248. — Atilius  Calatinos,  the  first 
dictator  who  marches  with  an  army  out  of  Italy.  An  exchange  of  prison¬ 
ers  with  the  Carthaginians.  Two  colonies  established  at  Fregenae  and 
Brundusium,  in  the  Sallentine  territories.  Y.R.  505.  B.C.  247.— A  lus-^ 
trum:  the  citizens  numbered  amount  to  two  hundred  and  fifty-one  thou¬ 
sand  two  hundred  and  twenty-two.  Y.R.  506.  B,C.  246. — Claudia,  the  sis¬ 
ter  of  Claudius,  who  had  fought  unsuccessfully,  in  contempt  of  the  aus¬ 
pices,  being  pressed  by  the  crowd,  as  she  was  returning  from  the  game, 
cries  out,  I -wish  my  brother  were  aHve,  and  hadag^ain  the  commando/  the 
fieet:  for  which  offence  she  is  tried  and  fined.  Y.R.  507.  B.C.  245.— .Two 
praetors  now  first  created.  Y.R,  508.  B.C.  244.— Aldus  Po^umius,  consul, 
being  priest  of  Mars,  forcibly  detained  in  the  city  by  Cacilius  Metellus, 
the  high-priest,  and  not  suffered  to  go  forth  to  war,  being  obliged  by  law 
to  attend  to  the  sacred  duties  of  his  office.  Y.R.  509.  B.C.  243.— After 
several  succeed  engag^ents  with  the  Carthaginians,  Caius  Lutatius, 
consul,  puts  an  end  to  the  war,  by  gaining  a  complete  victory  over  their 
fleet,  at  the  island  of  ^gatc.  y.R.510.  B.C.  242.— The  Cartha^niims  sue 
for  peace,  which  is  granted  to  them.  Y.R.  511.  B.C.  241.— The  temple  of 
Vesta  being  on  fire,  the  high  priest,  Caeciiius  Metellus,  saves  the  sacred 
utensils  from  the  flames.  Two  new  tribes  added,  the  Veline  and  Quirine. 
The  Falisci  rebel ;  are  subdued  in  ax  days. 

BOOK  XX. 
Y.R.  512.  B.C.  240.— A  colony  settled  at  Spoletum.  An  army  sent  agsunst 
the  Ugurians}  being  the  first  war  with  that  state.  The  Saidinians  and 
Corsicans  rebel,  suid  are  subdued.  Y.R.  514.  B.C.  238.— Tuccia,  a  vestal, 
found  gmlty  of  incest.  War  declared  against  the  Illyrians,  who  had 
an  amba^ador ;  tliey  are  subdued  and  brought  to  submission.  Y.R.  515. 
B.G.  237.— The  number  of  praetors  increased  to  four  The  Trans- 

39a 

HISTORY  OF  SOME 

al^me  Oauts  make  an  irruption  into  Itafy :  we  conquered  and  put  to 
tke  sword.  Y.R.  516.  B.C.  236, — Hie  Roman  am^,  in  conjunction 
udth  the  Latines,  is  said  to  have  amounted  to  no  less  than  three  hun¬ 
dred  thoo^d  men.  Y.R.  517.  B.C.  235w— The  Koimm  army  fw  the 
first  ^me,  cro^s  the  Fo ;  ii^ts  with  and  subdues  the  Insubrian  Gauls. 
Y.R.  530.  B.C.  222. — Claudius  Marcellas,  consul,  hatdng  ^ain  Vmd<nnaru3, 
the  general  of  the  in^brian  Gauls,  cames  off  the  9peUa  9pima.  YJft.  531. 
B.C. 221. — The  Istmns  subdued;  also  the  Illyrians,  who  had  rebelled. 
Y.R.  532,  B.C.  ^0. — ^The  censors  hold  a  lustrum,  in  which  the  number  of  t 
the  citizens  is  found  to  two  hundred  and  seventy  thousand  two  hundred 
and  thirteen.  The  sons  of  freedmen  formed  into  four  tribes :  die  Bsqui- 
line.  Palatine,  Suburran  and  ColUne.  Y.R.  533.  B.C.  219. — Caius  Ftoi- 
nlus,  censor,  constructs  the  Fiaminian  road,  and  builds  the  Flaminiar 

circus. 

r 
THK 
HISTORY  OF  HOME. 

BOOK  XXI. 

Rise  of  the  second  Punic  war.  Hannibal,  contrary  to  treaty,  passes  the 
Iben^  :  besieges,  and,  after  eight  montlis,  takes  Sag^ntum.  The  Romans 
send  an  embassy  to  Carthage;  declare  war.  Hannibal  crosses  th.e  Py- 
rennees ;  makes  his  way  through  Gaul ;  with  great  fatigue  passes  the 
Alps ;  defeats  the  Romans  at  the  river  Ticinus,  in  a  fight  between  the 
cavalry,  in  which  P.  Cornelius  Scipio,  being  wounded,  is  saved  by  his 
son,  afterwards  Africanus.  The  Romans  again  defeated  at  the  Trebia. 
Cneius  Cornelius  Scipio  defeats  the  Carthaginian  array  in  Spain,  and 
makes  Hannb,  their  general,  prisoner. 
I.  To  this  division  of  my  work,  I  may  be  allowed  to  pre¬ 
fix  a  remark,  which  most  writers  of  history  make  in  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  their  performance :  that  I  am  going  to  write  of  a 
war,  the  most  memorable  of  all  that  were  ever  waged  ;  that 
which  the  Carthaginians,  under  the  conduct  of  Hannibal, 
maintained  with  the  Roman  people.  For  never  did  any  other# 
states  and  nations,  of  more  potent  strength  and  resources, 
engage  in  a  contest  of  arms ;  nor  did  these  same  nations  at 
any  other  period,  possess  so  great  a  degree  of  power  and 
strength.  The  arts  of  war  also,  practised  by  each  party,  were 
VOL.  II. — 3  E 

394 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

tiot  unknown  to  the  other  ;  for  they  had  already  gamed  ex¬ 
perience  of  them  in  the  first  Punic  war ;  and  so  various  was 
the  fortune  of  this  war,  so  great  its  vicissitudes,  that  the  par- 
t}",  whkh  proved  in  the  end  victorious,  was,  at  times,  brought 
the  nearest  to  the  brink  of  ruin.  Besides,  they  exerted,/  in, 
the  dispute,  almost  a  greater  degree  of  rancour  than  of 
^  strength  ;  the  Romans  being  fired  with  indignation  at  a  van- 
qui^ed  people  presuming  to  take  up  airms  against  their  con¬ 
querors  :  the  Carthaginians,  at  the  haughtiness  and  avaritc, 
which  they  thought  the  others  showed  in  their  imperious  ex¬ 
ercise  of  the  superiority  which  they  had  acquired.  We  are 
told  that,  when  Hamilcar  was  about  to  march  at  the  head  of 
an  army  into  Spain,  after  the  conclusion  of  the  war  in  Africa, 
and  was  offering  sacrifices  on  the  occasion,  his  son  Hannibal, 
then  about  nine  years  of  age,  solicited  him,  with  boyish  fond¬ 
ness,  to  take  him  with  him,  whereupon,  he  brought  him  up 
to  the  altars,  and  competed  him  to  lay  his  hand  on  the  con¬ 
secrated  victims,  and  swear,  that  as  soon  as  it  should  be  in 
his  power,  he  would  show  himself,  an  enemy  to  the  Roman 
people.  'Being  a  nian  of  high  spirit,  he  was  deeply  chagrined 
at  the  loss  of  Sicily  and  Sardinia ;  fDt  he  considered  Sicily 
as  given  up  by  his  countrymen  through  too  hasty  despair  of 
their  affairs ;  and  Sardinia  as  fraudulently  snatched  out  of 
their  hands  by  the  Romans,  during  the  commotions  in  Afri¬ 
ca,  with  the  additional  insult  of  a  farther  tribute  imposed  on 
them, 
II.  His  mind  was  filled  with  these  vexatious  reflections ; 
and  during  the  five  years  that  he  was  employed  in  Africa, 
which  followed  soon  after  the  late  pacification  with  Rome  ; 
and  likewise  during  nine  years  which  he  spent  in  ^tending 
the  Carthaginian  empire  in  Spain  ;  his  conduct  was  such,  as 
afforded  a  demonstration  that  he  meditated  a  more  important 
war  than  any  in  which  he  was  then  engaged  ;  and  that,  if  he 
^  had  lived  some  time  longer,  the  Carthaginians  would  have 

BOOK  XXI. 

395 

carried  their  arms  into  Italy  under  the  command  of  Hamil- 
car,  instead  of  under  that  of  Hannibal.  The  death  of  Hamil- 
car,  which  happened  most  seasonably  for  Rome,  and  the 
unripe  age  of  Hannibal,  occasioned  the  delay.  During  an 
interval  of  about  eight  years,  between  the  demise  of  the  father, 
and  the  succession  of  the  son,  the  command  was  held  by 
Hasdrubal ;  whom,  it  was  said,  Hamilcar  had  first  chosen  as 
a  favourite,  on  account  of  his  youthful  beauty,  and  after¬ 
wards  made  him  his  son-in4aw,  on  account  of  his  eminent 
abilities ;  in  consequence  of  which  connection,  being  support¬ 
ed  by  the  interest  of  the  Barcine  facticKi,  which,  among  the 
army  and  the  commons,  was  exceedingly  powerful,  he  was 
invested  with  the  command  in  chief,  in  opposition  to  the 
wishes  of  the  nobles.  He  prosecuted  his  designs,  more  fre¬ 
quently  by  means  of  policy  than  of  force ;  and  augmented  the 
Carthaginian  power  considerably,  by  forming  connections 
with  the  petty  princes  ;  and  through  the  friendship  of  their 
leaders,  conciliating  the  regard  of  nations  hitherto  strangers. 
But  peace  proved  no  security  to  himself.  One  of  the  barba¬ 
rians,  in  resentment  of  his  master  having  been  put  to  death, 
openly  assassinated  him,  and  being  seiaxd  by  the  persons 
present,  showed  no  kind  of  concern  ;  nay,  even  while  racked 
with  tortures,  as  if  his  exultation,  at  having  effected  his  pur¬ 
pose,  had*  got  the  better  df  the  pains,  the  expression  of  his 
countenance  was  such  as  carried  the  appearance  of  a  smile^ 
With  this  Hasdrubal,  who  •  poafees&ed  a  surprising  degree  »of 
skill  in  negotiation,  and  in  attaching  foreign  nations  to  his 
government,  the  Romans  renewed  the  treaty,  on  the  terms, 
that  the  river  Iberus  should  be  the  boundary  of  the  two  em¬ 
pires,  and  that  the  Saguntines,  who  lay  between  them,  should 
retain  their  liberty. 
III.  There  was  no  room  to  doubt  that  the  suffrages  of  the 
commons,  in  appointing  a  successor  to  Hasdrubal,  would 
follow  the  direction  pointed  out  by  the  leading  voice  of  the 

396 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

zrmy^  who  had  instantly  carried  young  Hannibal  to  the 
head-quarters,  and  with  one  consent,  and  universal  acclama¬ 
tions,  saluted  him  general.  This  youth,  when  scarcely  ar¬ 
rived  at  the  age  o£  manhood,  Hasdrubal  had  invited  by  let¬ 
ter  to  come  to  him ;  and  that  affair  had  even  been  taken  into 
deliberation  in  the  senate,  where  the  Barcine  faction  showed 
a  desire,  that  Hannibal  should  be  accustomed  to  military 
service,  and  succeed  to  the  power  of  his  father.  Hanno,  the 
leader  of  the  other  faction,  said,  although  what  Hasdrubal 
demands,  seems  reasonable;  nevertheless,  I  do  not  think 
that  his  request  ought  to  he  granted  and  when  all  turned 
their  eyes  on  him,  wjth  surprise  at  this  ambiguous  declara¬ 
tion,  he  proceeded,  Hasdrubal  thinks  that  he  is  justly  en¬ 
titled  to  demand,  from  the  son,  the  bloom  of  youth,  which 
he  himself  dedicated  to  the  pleasures  of  Hannibal’s  father. 
It  would  however  be  exceedingly  improper  in  us,  instead  of 
a  military  education,  to  initiate  our  young  men  in  the  lewd 
practices  of  generals.  Are  we  afraid  lest  too  much  time 
should  pass,  before  the  son  of  Hamilcar  acquires  notions  of 
the  unlimited  airthority,  and  the  parade  of  his  father’s  sove¬ 
reignty  :  or  that  after  he  had,  like  a  king,  bequeathed  our 
armies,  as  hereditary  property*  to  his  son-in-law,  we  should 
not  soon  enough  become  slaves  to  his  son  ?  I  am  of  opinion 
that  this  youth  should  be  kept  at  Tiome,  where  h^  will  be 
amenable  to  the  laws,  and  to  the  magistrate^ ;  and  that  he 
should  be  taught  to  live  on  an  equal  footing  with  the  rest  of 
his  countrymen ;  otherwise  this  spark,  small  as  it  is,  may 
hereafter  kindle  a  terrible  conflagration.”  ^ 
IV.  A  few,  particularly  those  of  the  best  understanding, 
concurred  in  opinion  with  Hanno  ;  but,  as  it  generally  hap¬ 
pens,  the  more  numerous  party  prevailed  over  the  more  ju¬ 
dicious.  Hannibal  was  sent  into  Spain,  and  on  his  first  arri¬ 
val  attracted  the  notice  of  the  whole  army.  The  veteran 
soldiers  imagined  that  Hamilcar  was  restored  to  them  from 

BOOK  XXL 

397 

the  dead,  observing  In  him  the  same  animated  look,  and 
penetrating  eye ;  the  same  expression  of  countenance,  and 
the  same  features.  Then,  such  was  his  behaviour,  and  so 
conciliating,  that,  in  a  short  time,  the  memory  of  his  father 
was  the  least  among  their  inducements  to  esteem  him.  Never 
man*  possessed  a  genius  so  admirably  fitted  to  the  discharge 
of  offices  so  very  opposite  in  their  nature  as  obeying  and 
commanding:  so  that  it  was  not  easy  to  discern  whether  he 
were  more  beloved  by  the  general  Or  by  the  soldiers.  There 
was  none  to  whom  Hasdrubal  rather  wished  to  intrust  the 
command  in  any  case  where  courage  and  activity  were  re¬ 
quired  ;  nor  did  the  soldiers  ever  feel  a  greater  degree  of 
confidence  and  boldness,  under  any  other  commander.  With 
perfect  intrepidity  in  facing  danger,  he  possessed,  in  the 
midst  of  the  greatest,  perfect  presence  of  mind.  ^No  degree 
of  labour  could  either  fatigue  his  body  or  break  his  spirit : 
heat  and  cold  he  endured  with  equal  firmness  :  the  quantity 
of  his  food  and  drink  was  limited  by  natural  appetite,  not  by 
the  pleasure  of  the  palate.  His  seasons  for  sleeping  and 
waking  were  not  distinguished  by  the  day,  or  by  the  night  j 
whatever  time  he  had  to  spare,  after  business  was  finished, 
that  he  gave  to  repose,  which,  however,  he  never  courted, 
cither  by  a  soft  bed,  or  a  quiet  retirement :  he  was  often 
seen,  covered  with  a  cloak,  lying  on  the  ground  in  the  midst 
of  the  soldiers  on  guard,  and  on  the  advanced  posts.  His 
dress  had  nothing  particular  in  it,  beyond  that  of  others  of 
the  same  rank  ;^i5  horses,  and  his  artnour,  he  was  alwa}  s 
remarkably  attentive  to :  and  whether  ^he  acted  among  the 
horsemen,  or  the  infantry,  he  was  eminently  the  first  of  either, 
the  foremost  in  advancing  to  the  fight,  the  last  who  quitted 
the  field  of  battle.  These  great  virtues  wei  e  counterbalanced^ 
in  him  by  vices  of  equal  magnitude  ;  inhuman  cruelty  ;  per¬ 
fidy  beyond  that  of  a  Carthaginian  j  a  total  disregard  of  truth, 
and  of  every  obligation  deemed  sacred  ;  utterly  devoid  of  all 

398 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

reverence  for  the  gods,  he  paid  no  regard  to  an  oath,^o  re¬ 
spect  to  religion.  Endowed  with  such  a  disposition,  a  com¬ 
pound  of  virtues  and  vices,  he  served  under  the  command  of 
Hasdrubal  for  three  years,  during  which  he  omitted  no  op¬ 
portunity  of  improving  himself  in  every  particular,  both  of 
theory  and  practice,  that  could  cemtribute  to  the  forming  of 
an  accomplished  general. 
V.  But,  from  the  day  on  which  he  was  declared  chief,  he 
acted  as  if  Italy  had  been  decreed  to  him  as  his  province, 
and  he  had  been  commissioned  to  wage  war  with  Rome. 
Thinking  every  kind  of  delay  imprudent ;  lest,  while  he 
procrastinated,  some  unforeseen  event  might  disconcert  lus 
design,  as  had  been  the  case  of  his  father  Hamilcar,  and  af¬ 
terwards,  of  Hasdrubal,  he  determined  to  make  war  on  the 
Saguntines.  And,  as  an  attack  on  them  would  certainly  call 
♦  forth  the  Roman  arms,  he  first  led  his  army  into  the  territo¬ 
ry  of  the  Oicadians,  a  nation  beyond  the  Iberus ;  which, 
though  within  the  boundaries  of  the  Carthaginians,  was  not 
under  their  dominion,  in  order  that  hq  might  not  seem  to 
have  aimed  directly  at  the  Saguntines,  but  to  be  drawn  on 
into  a  war  with  them  by  a  series  of  events,  and  by  advancing 
progressively,  after  the  conquest  of  the  adjoining  nations,* 
from  one  place  to  the  next  contiguous.  Here  he  took  and 
plundered  Althea,  the  capital  of  the  nation,  abounding  in 
wealth ;  and  this  struck  such  terror  into  the  smaller  cities, 
that  they  submitted  to  his  authority,  and  to  the  imposition 
of  a  tribute.  He  then  led  his  army,  flushed  with  a  victory, 
and  enriched  with  spoil,  into  winter-quarters,  at  New  Car¬ 
thage.  Here,  by  a  liberal  distribution  of  the  booty,  and  by 
discharging  punctually  the  arrears  of  pay,  he  ^iply  secured 
the  attachment,  both  of  his  own  countrymen,,  and  of  the  al¬ 
lies  ;  and,  at  the  opening  of  the  spring,  carried  forward  his 
arms  against  the  Vaccseans,  from  whom  he  took^by  storm, 
the  cities  Hermandica  and  Arbacala,  Arbacala,  by  the  bra- 

BOOK  XXL 

399 

very  and  number  of  its  inhabitants,  was  enabled  to  make  a 
long  defence.  Those  who  escaped  from  Hermandica,  join¬ 
ing  the  exiles  of  the  Olcadians,  the  nation  subdued  in  the 
preceding  summer,  roused  up  the  Carpetans  to  arms,  and  at¬ 
tacking  Hannibal,  as  he  was  returning  from  the  country  of 
the  Vaccseans,  not  far  from  the  river  Tagus,  caused  a  good 
deal  of  disorder  among  his  troops,  encumbered,  as  they  were, 
with  spoil.  Hannibal  avoided  fighting,  and  encamped  on 
the  bank ;  then,  as  soon  as  the  enemy  afforded  him  an  oppor¬ 
tunity,  he  crossed  the  river  by  a  ford,  and  carried  his  ram¬ 
part  to  suth  a  distance  from  its  edge,  as  to  leave  room  for 
the  enemy  to  pass  over,  resolving  to  attack  them  in  their 
passage.  He  gave  orders  to  his  cavalry,  that,  as  soon  as  they 
should  see  the  troops  advance  into  the  water,  they  should  fall 
upon  them:  hh  infantry  he  formed  on  the  bank,  with  forty 
elephants  in  their  front.  The  Carpetans,  with  the  addition 
of  the  Olcadians  and  Vaccaeans,  were  one  hundred  thousand 
in  number,  an  army  not  to  be  overcome,  if  a  fight  were  to 
take  place  in  an  open  plain.  These  being  naturally  of  an  im¬ 
petuous  temper^,  and  confiding  in  their  numbers,  believing 
also  that  the  enemy’s  retreat  was  owing  to  fear,  and  thinking 
that  there  was  no  obstruction  to  their  gaining  an  immediate 
victory,  but  the  river  lying  in  their  way,  they,  raised  the 
shout,  and  without  orders,  rushed  from  all  parts  into  it, 
every  one  by  the  shortest  way.  At  the  same  time  a  vast 
body  of  cavalry  pushed  from  the  opposite  bank  into  the  river, 
and  the  conflict  began  in  the  middle  of  the  channel,  where 
they  fought  upon  very  unequal  terms :  for  in  suqh  a  situation 
the  infantry,  not  being  secure  of  footing,  and  scarcely  able 
to  bear  up  against  the  stream,  were  liable  to  be  borne  down 
by  any  shock  from  the  horse,  though  the  rider  were  unarmed, 
and  took  no  trouble  ;  whereas  a  horseman,  having  his  limbs 
at  liberty,  and  his  horse  moving  steadily,  even  through  the 
midst  of  the  eddie&^  could  act  either  in  close  fight,  or  at  a 

wo 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

distance.  Qreat  numbers  were  swallowed  up  in  the  current ; 
while  several,  whom  the  eddies  of  the  river  carried  to  the 
Carthaginian  side,  were  trodden  to  death  by  the  elephants. 
The  hindmost,  who  could  more  safely  retreat  to  their  own 
bank,  attempting  to  collect  themselves  into  one  body,  from 
the  various  parts  to  whkh  their  terror  and  confusion  had  dis¬ 
persed  them,  Hannibal,  not  to  give  them  time  to  recover  from 
their  consternation,  marched  into  the  river  with  his  infantry 
in  close  order,  and  obliged  them  to  fly  from  the  bank.  Then, 
by  ravaging  their  country,  he  reduced  the  Carpetans  also,  in 
a  few  days,  to  submission. '  And  now,  all  parts  of  the  coun¬ 
try  beyond  the  Iberus,  except  the  territory  of  Saguntum, 
was  under  subjection  to  the  Carthaginians. 
VI.  As  yet  there  was  no  war  with  the  Saguntines ;  but 
^  disputes,  which  seemed  likely  to  be  productive  of 
B  C  218  industriously  fomented  between  them 
and  their  neighbours,  particularly  the  Tufdetans  : 
and  the  cause  of  these  latter  being  espoused  by  the  same  per¬ 
son,  who  first  sowed  the  seeds  of  the  contention,  and  plain 
proofs  appearing,  that  not  an  amicable  discussion  of  rights, 
but  open  force  was  the  means  intended  to  be  used,  the  Sa¬ 
guntines  despatched  ambassadors  to  Rome,  to  implore  assist¬ 
ance  in  thc^war,  which  evidently  threatened  them  with  im¬ 
mediate  danger.  The  consuls  at  Rome,  at  that  time  were 
'Publius  Cornelius  Seipio  and  Tiberius  Sempronius  Longus  ; 
W'ho  after  having  introduced  the  ambassadors  to  the  senate, 
proposed,  that  the  state  of  the  public  'i^airs  should  be  taken 
into  consideration.  It  was  resolved,  that  ambassadors  should 
be  sent  into  Spain,  to  inspect  the  affairs  of  the  allies  ;  in¬ 
structed,  if  they  saw  sufficient  reason,  to  warn  Hannibal  not 
to  mplest  the  Saguntines,  the  confederates  of  the  Roman  peo¬ 
ple  ;  and  also  to  pass  over  into  Africa,  to  represent,  at  Car¬ 
thage,  the  complaints  of  these  to  the  Romans.  After  this  em¬ 
bassy  had  been  decreed,  and  before  it  was  despatched,  news 

BOOK  XXL 

BX.  218.]  * 
arrived^  which  no  one  had  expected  so  soon,  that  Saguntum 
was  besieged*  The  business  was  then  laid  entire  before  the 
senate,  as  if  no  resolution  had  yet  passed.  Some  were  of 
opinion,  that  the  aflEair  should  be  prosecuted  with  vigorous 
exertions,  both  by  sea  and  land.)  and  proposed,  that  Spain  and 
Africa  should  be^  decreed  as  the  provinces  of  the  consuls  : 
others  wished  to  direct  the  whole  force  of  their  arms  against 
Spain  and  Hannibal ;  while  many  thought  that  it  would  be 
imprudent  to  engage  hastily  in  a  matter  of  so  great  impor¬ 
tance,  and  that  they  ought  to  wait  for  the  return  of  the  am¬ 
bassadors  from  Spain.  This  opinion  being  deemed  the  safest, 
was  adopted  ;  and  the  ambassadors,  Publius  Valerius  Flac- 
cus  zmd  Quintus  Bsebius  Taraphilus,  were  on  that  account 
despatched,  with  the  greater  speed,  to  Saguntum,  to  Hanni¬ 
bal  j  and,  in  case  of  his  refusing  to  desist  from  hostilities, 
from  thence  to  Carthage,  to  insist  on  that  general  being  de¬ 
livered  up,*to  atone  for  the  infraction  of  the  treaty. 
VII.  While  the  Romans  were  employed  in  these  delibe¬ 
rations  and  preparatory  measures,  the  siege  of  Saguntum  was 
prosecuted  with  the  utmost  vigour.  This  city,  by  far  the 
most  wealthy  of  any  beyond  the  Iberus,  stood  at  the  distance 
of  about  a  mile  from  the  sea  ;  the  inhabitants  are  said  to  have 
come  originally  from  the  island  Zacynthus,  and  to  have  been 
joined  by  some  of  the  Rutulian  race  from  Ardea,  They  had 
grown  up,  in  a  very  short  time,  to  this  high  degree  of  opu¬ 
lence,  by  means  of  a  prohtable  commerce,  both  by  sea  and 
land,  aided  by  the  increase  of  their  numbers,  and  their  reli¬ 
gious  observance  of  compacts,  which  they  carried  so  far  as  to 
maintain  the  faith  of  all  engagements  inviolate,  even  should 
they  tend  to  their  own  destruction.  Hannibal  marched  into 
their  territory  in  a  hostile  manner,  and,  after  laying  all  the 
country  waste,  attacked  their  city  on  three  different  sides. 
There  was  an  angle  of  the  wall  w’hich  stretched  down  into  a 
vale,  more  level  and  open  than  the  rest  of  the  ground  round 
\'OL.  II. — F 

4 

402 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  534. 

the  place :  against  this  he  resolved  to  carry  on  his  approaches, 
by  means  of  which  the  battering  ram  might  be  advanced  up 
to  the  walls.  But  although  the  ground,  at  some  distance,  was 
commodious  enough  for  the  management  of  his  machines, 
yet,  when  the  works  came  to  be  applied  to  the  purpose  in¬ 
tended,  it  was  found  to  be  no  way  favourable  to  the  design ; 
for  it  was  overlooked  by  a  very  large  tower  ;  and,  as  in  that 
part  danger  was  apprehended,  the  wall  had  been  raised  to  a 
height  beyond  that  of  the  rest.  Besides,  as  the  greatest  share 
of  fatigue  and  danger  was  expected  there,  it  was  defended 
with  the  greater  vigour,  by  a  band  of  chosen  young  men. 
These,  at  first  with  missile  weapons,  kept  the  enemy  at  a  dis¬ 
tance,  nor  suffered  them  to  carry  on  any  of  their  works  in 
safety.  In  a  little  time,  they  not  only  annoyed  them  from 
the  tower  and  the  walls,  but  had  the  courage  to  sally  out  on 
the  works  and  posts  of  the  enemy  ;  in  which  tumultuary  en¬ 
gagements  the  Saguntines  generally  suffered  not  a  greater  loss 
of  men  than  the  Carthaginians.  But  Hannibal  himself  hap¬ 
pening,  as  he  approached  the  wall  with  too  little  caution,  to 
be  wounded  severely  in  the  forepart  of  the  thigh  with  a  heavy 
javelin,  and  falling  in  consej^uence  of  it,  such  consternation 
and  dismay  spread  through  all  the  troops  around  him,  that 
they  were  very  near  deserting  their  posts. 
VIII.  For  some  days  following,  while  the  general’s  wound 
was  under  cure,  there  was  rather  a  blockade,  than  a  siege. 
But  although,  during  this  time,  there  was  a  cessation  of  arms, 
there  was  no  intermission  of  the  preparations^  either  for  at¬ 
tack  or  defence.  Hostilities  therefore  commenced  anew, 
with  a  greater  degree  of  fury,  and  the  machines  began  to  be 
advanced,  and  the  battering  rams  to  be  brought  up,  in  a 
greater  number  of  places,  so  that  in  some  parts  there  was 
scarcely  room  for  the  works.  The  Carthaginian  had  great 
'  abundance  of  men,  for  it  is  credibly  asserted  that  the  number 
of  his  troops  was  not  less  than  one  hundred  and  fifty  thou- 

BOOK  XXI. 

4i)J 

B.C.  218.] 
sand  :  the  townsmen  were  obliged  to  have  recourse  to  vari¬ 
ous  shifts,  in  order,  with  their  small  numbers,  to  execute 
every  necessary  measure,  and  to  make  defence  in  so  many 
different  places  ;  nor  were  they  equal  to  the  task  :  for  now 
the  walls  began  to  be  battered  with  the  rams  ;  many  parts  of 
them  were  shattered ;  in  one  place,  a  large  breach  left  the  city 
quite  exposed  ;  Three  towers,  in  one  range,  together  with  the 
whole  extent  of  wall  between  them,  tumbled  down  with  a  pro¬ 
digious  crash,  and  so  great  was  the  breach,  that  the  Cartha¬ 
ginians  looked  on  the  town  as  already  taken.  On  which,  as 
if  the  wall  had  served  equally  for  a  covering  to  both  parties, 
the  two  armies  rushed  to  battle.  Here  was  nothing  like  the 
disorderly  kind  of  fight,  which  usually  happens  in  the  assault 
of  towns,  each  party  acting  as  opportunity  offers  advantage, 
but  regular  lines  were  formed,  as  if  in  the  open  plain,  on  the 
ground  between  the  ruins  of  the  walls  and  the  buildings  of 
the  city,  which  stood  at  no  great  distance.  Their  courage 
was  animated  to  the  greatest  height,  on  one  side  by  hope  j 
on  the  other  by  despair ;  the  Carthaginian  believing,  that 
only  a  few  more  efforts  were  necessary  to  render  him  mas¬ 
ter  of  the  place  ;  the  Saguntines  forming,  with  their  bodies, 
a  bulwark  to  their  native  city,  instead  of  its  wall,  of  which  it 
had  been  stripped ;  not  one  of  them  giving  ground,  lest  he 
should  make  room  for  the  enemy  to  enter  by  the  space.  The 
greater  therefore  the  eagerness  of  the  combatants,  and  the 
closer  their  ranks,  the  more  wounds  consequently  were  re¬ 
ceived,  no  weapon  falling  without  taking  place,  either  in  their 
bodies  or  armour. 
The  Saguntines  had  a  missile  weapon  called  Falarica,^ 
*  with  a  shaft  of  fir,  round,  except  towards  the  end,  to  which 
the  iron  was  fastened  ;  this  part,  which  was  square,  as  in  a 
javelin,  they  bound  about  with  tow  and  daubed  with  pitch  ; 
it  had  an  iron  head  three  feet  long,  so  that  it  could  pierce 
both  armour  and  body  together :  but  what  rendered  it  most 

404 

HISl"ORY  OF  ROME. 

[y.R.  534. 

formidable,  was,  that  being  discharged  with  the  middle  part 
on  fire,  and  the  motion  itself  increasing  greatly  tlie  violence 
of  the  flame,  though  it  struck  in  the  shield  without  penetrat¬ 
ing  to  the  body,  it  compelled  the  soldier  to  throw  away  his 
arms,  and  left  him,  without  defence,  against  succeeding  blows. 
Thus  the  contest  long  continued  doubtful,  and  the  Sagun- 
tiiles,  finding  that  they  succeeded  in  their  defence  beyond  ex¬ 
pectation,  assumed  new  courage  ;  while  the  Carthaginian, 
because  he  had  not  obtained  a  victory,  deemed  himself  van¬ 
quished.  On  this,  the  townsmen  suddenly  raised  a  shout, 
pushed  back  the  enemy  among  the  ruins  of  the  wall,  drove 
them  off  from  that  ground,  where  they  were  embarrassed 
and  confused,  and,  in  fine,  compelled  them  to  fly  in  disor¬ 
der  to  their  camp. 
In  the  mean  time,  an  account  was  received,  that  am¬ 
bassadors  had  arrived  from  Rome  ;  on  which  Hannibal  sent 
messengers  to  the  sea-shore,  to  meet  them,  and  to  acquaint 
them,  that  it  would  not  >be  safe  for  them  to  come  to  him, 
through  the  armed  bands  of  so  many  savage  nations  ;  and, 
besides,  that,  in  the  present  critical  state  of  affairs,  he  had 
not  leisure  to  listen  to  embassies.  He  saw  clearly,  that  on 
being  refused  audience,  they  would  proceed  immediately  to 
Carthage:  he  therefore  despatched  messengers  and  letters 
bf^srehand,  to  the  leaders'  of  the  Barcine  faction,  charging 
them  to  prepare  their  friends  to  act  with  spirit,  so  that  the 
other  party  should  not  be  able  to  carry  any  point  in  favour  of 
the  Romans.  Thus  the  embassy  there  proved  equally  vain 
and  fruitless,  excepting  that  the  ambassadors  Wete  received 
and  admitted  to  audience.  Hanno  alone,  in  opposition  to  the 
sentiments  of  the  senate,  argued  for  their  complying  with  the* 
terms  of  the  treaty,  and  was  heard  with  great  attention,  rather 
out  of  the  respect  paid  to  the  dignity  of  his  character,  than 
from  the  approbation  of  the  hearers.  He  said,  that  be  bad 
formerly  charged  and  forewarned  them,  as  they  regarded  the 

B.C.  218.] 

BOOK  XXL 

405 

gods,  who  were  guarantees  and  witnesses  of  the  treaties,  not 
to  send  the  son  of  Hamilcar  to  the  army.  That  man’s  shade,’' 
said  he,  cannot  be  quiet,  nor  any  one  descended  from  him  ; 
nor  will  treaties  with  Rome  subsist,  as  long  as  one  person  of 
the  Barcine  blood  and  name  exists.  As  if  with  intent  tc 
supply  fuel  to  fire,  ye  sent  to  your  armies  a  young  man,  burn¬ 
ing  with  ambition  for  absolute  power,  to  which  he  cou|,d  see 
but  one  road,  the  exciting  of  wars,  one  after  another,  in  order 
that  he  might  live  surrounded  with  arms  and  legions.  You 
yourselves  therefore  have  kindled  this  fire,  with  which  ye 
are  now  scorched  ;  your  armies  now  invest  Saguntum,  a  place 
which  they  are  bound  by  treaty  not  to  molest.  In  a  short 
time  the  Roman  legions  w*ill  invest  Carthage,  under  the  gui¬ 
dance  of  those  same  deities,  whi  enabled  them,  in  the  former 
war,  to  take  vengeance  for  the  breach  of  treaties.  Are  you 
strangers  to  that  enemy,  or  to  yourselves,  or  to  the  fortune 
attending  both  nations  ?  When  ambassadors  came  from  allies, 
in  favour  of  allies,  your  worthy  general,  disregarding  the  law 
of  nations,  refused  them  admittance  into  his  camp.  Never¬ 
theless,  after  meeting  a  repulse,  where  ambassadors,  even 
from  enemies,  are  not  refused  access,  they  have  come  to  you, 
requiHhg  satisfaction  in  conformity  to  treaty.  Thev  charge 
no  crime  on  the  public,  but  demand  the  author  of  the  trans¬ 
gression,  the  person  answerable  for  the  offence.  The  more 
moderation  there  appears  in  their  proceedings,  and  the  slower 
they  are  in  beginning  a  warfare,  so  much  the  more  unrelent¬ 
ing,  I  fear,  will  prove  the  fury  of  their  resentment,  when  they 
do  begin.  Place  before  your  eyes  the  islands  iEgates  and 
Eryx,  the^  calamities  which  you  underwent,  on  land  and  sea, 
faring  the  space  of  twenty-four  years  ;  nor  were  your  tpoops 
then  Ifed  by  this  boy,  but  by  his  father  Hamilcar,  another 
Mars,  as  those  men  choose  to  call  him.  But  at  that  time  we 
had  not,  as  we  were  bound  by  treaty?,  avoided  interfering 
with  Tarentum  in  Italy,  as,  at  present,  we  do  not  avoid  in- 

406 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  534. 

terfering  with  Saguntum.  Wherefore  gods  and  men  united 
to  conquer .  us,  and  the  question  which  words  couW  not  de¬ 
termine,  ‘  which  of  the  nations  had  infringed  the  treaty  V  the 
issue  of  the  war  made  known,  as  an  equitable  judge,  giving 
victory  to  that  side  on  which  justice  stood.  Hannibal  is  now 
raising  works  and  towers  against  Carthage  ;  with  his  batter¬ 
ing  rams  he  is  shaking  the  walls  of  Carthage.  The  ruins  of 
Saguntum  (oh  !  that  I  may  prove  a  false  prophet !)  will  fall 
on  our  heads ;  and  the  war  commenced  against  the  Sagun- 
tines  must  be  maintained  against  the  Romans.  Some  will 
say,  shall  we  then  deliver  up  Hannibal  ?  I  am  sensible  that, 
with  respect  to  him,  my  authority  is  of  little  weight,  on  ac¬ 
count  of  the  enmity  between  me  and  his  father.  But  as  I 
rejoiced  at  the  death  of  Hamilcar,  for  this  reason,  that  had 
he  lived,  we  should  now  have  been  embroiled  in  a  war  with 
the  Romans,  so  do  I  hfUe  and  detest  this  youth  as  a  fury  and 
a  firebrand  kindling  the  like  troubles  at  present.  Nor  is  it 
my  opinion,  merely,  that  he  ought  to  be  delivered  up,  as  an 
expiation  for  the  infraction  of  the  treaty,  but  that,  if  no  one 
demanded  him,  he  ought  to  be  conveyed  away  to  the  remo¬ 
test  coasts,  whence  no  accounts  of  him,  nor  even  his  name, 
should  ever  reach  us,  aftd  where  he  would  not  be  abk4o  dis¬ 
turb  the  tranquillity  of  our  state.  I  therefore  move  you  to 
resolv^,  that  ambassadors  be  sent  instantly  to  Rome,  to  make 
apologies  to  the  senate  ;  others,’  to  order  Hannibal  to  with¬ 
draw  the  troops  from  Saguntum,  and  to  deliver  up  Hannibal 
himself  to  the  Romans,  in  conformity  to  the  treaty  ;  and  that 
a  third  embassy  be  sent,  to  make  restitution  to  the  Sagun- 
tines.”  When  Hanno  had  ended  his  discourse,  there  w'as  no 
occ^ion  for  any  one  to  enter  into  a  debate  wdth  him,  so  en¬ 
tirely  were  almost  the  whole  body  of  the  senate  in  the  interest 
of  Hannibal,  and  they  blamed  him  as  having  spoken  with 
greater  acrimony  than  even  Valerius  Flaccus,  the  Roman 
ambassador.  They  then  answered  the  Roman  ambassadors. 

B.C.  218.] 

BOOK  XXL 

407 

that  “  the  war  had  been  begun  by  the  Saguiltines,  not  by 
Hannibal ;  and  that  the  Roman  people  acted  unjustly  and 
unwisely,  if  they  preferred  the  interest  of  the  Saguntines  to 
that  of  the  Carthaginians,  their  earliest  allies.”* 
XI.  While  the  Romans  wasted  time  in  sending  embassies, 
Hannibal,  finding  his  soldiers  fatigued  with  fighting  and  la¬ 
bour,  gave  them  a  few  dafys  to  rest,  appointing  parties  to 
guard  the  machines  and  works.  This  interval  he  employed 
in  reanimating  his  men,  stimulating  them  at  one  time*  with 
resentment  against  the  enemy,  at  another,  with  hope  of  re¬ 
wards  ;  but  a  declaration  which  he  made  in  open  assembly, 
that,  on  the  capture  of  the  city,  the  spoil  should  be  given  to 
the  soldiers,  inflamed  them  with  such  ardolir,  that,  to  all  ap¬ 
pearance,  if  the  signal  had  been  given  immediately,  no  force 
could  have  withstood  them.  The  Saguntines,  as  they  had 
for  some  days  enjoyed  a  respite  from  fighting,  neither  offer¬ 
ing  nor  sustaining  an  attack,  so  they  had  never  ceased,  either 
by  dd[y  or  night,  to  laboui^hard  in  raising  a  new'  wall,  in  that 
part  w^ere  the  city  had  been  left  exposed  by  the  fall  of  the 
old  one.  After  this,  the  operations  of  the  besiegers  were 
carried  6n  with  much  greater  briskness  than  before  ;  nor 
could  the  besieged  well  judge,  whilst  all  places  resoun^d 
with  clamouirs  of  various  kinds,  to  what  side  they  should  first 
send  succour,  or  where  it  was  most  necessary..  Hannibal  at¬ 
tended  in  person,  to  encourage  a  party  of  his  men  who 
bringing  forward  a  moveable  tower,  which  exceeded  in  hci^S- 
all  the  fortifications  of  the  city.  As  soon  as  this  had  reached 
the  proper  distance,  and  had,  by  means  of  jthe  engines  for 
throwing  darts  and^stones,*  disposed  in  all  its  stories,  cleared 
^he  ramparts  of  all  who  were  to  defend  it,  then  Hannibal, 
.seizing  the  opportunity,  sent  about  five  hundred  Africans, 
*  The  ballista  was  an  engine  for  throwing  large  stones;  catapuUa^  a 
smaller  one  for  throwing  the  falaricay  and  other  large  kinds  of  javelins , 
Scorpio  was  a  still  smaller  one,  for  throwing  darts  of  leaser 

408 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  SU, 

with  pick-axes,  to  undermine  the  wall  at  the  bottom ;  which 
was  not  a  difficult  work,  because  the  cement  was  not  strength¬ 
ened  with  lime,  but  the  interstices  filled  up  with  clky,  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  ancient  method  of  building:  other  parts  of  it, 
therefore,  fell  down,  together  with  those  to  which  the  strokes 
•  were  applied,  and  through  these  breaches  several  bands  of 
soldiers  made  their  way  into  th^  city.  They,  likewise,  there 
look  possession  of  an  eminence,  apd  collecting  thither  a  num¬ 
ber  of  engines  for  throwii^  darts  and  stones,  surrounded  it 
with  a  wall,  in  order  that  they  might  have  a  fortress  within 
the  city  itself,  a  citadel,  as  it  were,  to  command  it.  The 
Saguntines,  on  their  part,  raised  an  inner  wall  between  that 
and  the  division  of  the  city  not  yet  taken.  Both  sides  exerted 
themselves  to  the  utmost,  as  well  in  forming  their  works  as 
in  fighting.  But  the  Saguntines,  while  they  raised  defences 
for  the  inner  parts,  contracted,  daily,  the  dimensions  of  the 
city.  At  the  same  time  the  scarcity  of  all  things  increased, 
in  consequence  of  the.  long  continuance  of  the  siege,  while 
their  expectations  of  foreign  aid  diminished  ;  the  Romans, 
iheir  only  hope,  being  at  so  great  a  distance,  and  all  the  coun¬ 
tries  round  being  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy.  However, 
th^ir  sinking  spirits  were  for  a  short  time  revived,  by  Hanni¬ 
bal  setting  out ’Suddenly  on  an  expedition  against  the  Cretans 
and  Carpetans.  For  these  two  nations,  being  exasperated  by 
the  severity  used  in  levying  soldiers,  had,  by  detaining  the 
commissaries,  afforded  roonv  to  apprehend  a  revolt;  but  re¬ 
ceiving  an  unexpected  check,  from  the  quick  exertions  of 
Hannibal,  they  laid  aside  the  design  of  insurrection, 
XI 1.  In  the  mean  time  the  vigour  of  the  proceedings 
against  Saguntum  was  not  lessened ;  Mahafbal,  son  of  Hi- 
milco,  whom  Hannibal  had  left  in  the  command,  pushing  for¬ 
ward  the  operations  with  such  activity,  that  neither  his  coun¬ 
trymen,  nor  the  enemy,  perceived  th^t  the  general  was  ab¬ 
sent.  Ke  not  only  engaged  tlie  Saguntines  several  times  wnth 

BOOK  XXL 

409 

B,C.  218.] 
success,  but,  with  three  battering  rams,  demolished  a  con¬ 
siderable  extent  of  the  wall ;  and  when  Hannibal  arrived,  he 
showed  him  the  whole  ground  covered  with  fresh  ruins.  The 
troops  were  therefore  led  instantly  against  the  citadel,  and 
after  a  furious  engagement,  in  which  great  loss  was  suffered 
on  both  sides,  part  of  the  citadel  was  taken.  Small  as  were 
the  hopes  of  an  accommodation,  attempts  were  now  made  to 
bring  it  about  by  two  persons,  Alcon  a  Saguntine,  and  Alor* 
cus  a  Spaniard.  Alcon,  thinking  that  he  might  effect  some¬ 
thing  by  submissive  entreaties,  went  over  to  Hannibal  by  night, 
without  the  knowledge  of  the  Sagunlines ;  but,  his  piteous 
supplications  making  no  impression,  and  the  terms  offered  by 
his  enemy  being  full  of  rigour,  and  such  as  might  be  expected 
from  an  enraged  and  not  unsuccessful  assailant,  instead  of  an 
advocate,  he  became  a  deserter,  affirming,  that  if  any  man 
were  to  mention  to  the  Sagunlines  an  accommodation  on 
such  conditions,  it  would  cost  him  his  life ; — for  it  was  re¬ 
quired  that  they  should  make  restitution  to  the  Turdetans ; 
should  deliver  up  all  their  gold  and  silver ;  and,  departing 
from  the  city  with  single  garments,  should  fix  their  residence 
in  whatever  place  the  Carthaginian  should  order,  WTien 
Alcon  declared  that  his  countrymen  would  never  accept  these 
conditions  of,  peace,  Alorcus,  insisting,  that  when  men’s  bodi¬ 
ly  powers  are  subdued,  their  spirits  are  subdued  along  with 
them,  undertook  the  office  of  mediator  in  the  negociation. 
Now  he  was  at  this  time  a  soldier  in  the  service  of  Hannibaj^^ 
but  connected  with  the  state  of  Saguntum  in  friendship  and 
hospitality.  Delivering  up  his  sword  to  the  enemy’s  guards, 
he  passed  openly  through  the  fortifications,  and  was  conduct¬ 
ed  at  his  ow  n  desire  to  the  praetor.  A  concourse  of  people 
of  every  kind  having  immediately  assembled  about  the  place, 
the  senate,  ordering  the  rest  of  the  multitude  to  retire,  give 
audience  to  Alorcus,  who  addressed  them  in  this  manner: 
VOL.  II. — 3  G 

410 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y,R.  534. 

Xlll.  ‘‘  If  your  countryman  Alcon,  after  coming  to  the 
general  to  sue  for  peace,  had  returned  to  you  with  the  offer¬ 
ed  terms,  it  would  have  been  needless  for  me  to  have  pre¬ 
sented  myself  before  you,  as  I  woidd  not  appear  in  die  cha¬ 
racter  either  of  a  deputy  from  Hannibal,  or  of  a  deserter - 
But  since  he  has  remained  with  your  enemy,  either  through 
his  own  fault,  or  yours ;  through  his  own,  if  he  counterfeited 
fear  ;  through  yours,  if  he  who  tells  j^ou  truth,  is  to  be  pun¬ 
ished  :  I  have  come  to  you,  out  of  my  regard  to  the  ties  of 
hospitality  so  long  subsisting  between  us,  in  order  that  you 
should  not  be  ignorant  that  there  are  certain  conditions  on 
which  you  may  obtain  both  peace  and  safety.  Now,  that 
what  I  say  is  merely  out  of  regard  to  your  interest,  and  not 
from  any  other  motive,  this  alone  is  sufficient  proof :  that,  so 
long  as  you  were  able  to  maintain  a  defence  by  your  own 
strength,  or  so  long  as  you  had  hopes  of  succour  from  the 
Romans,  I  never  once  mentioned  peace  to  you.  Now,  when 
you  neither  have  any  hopes  from  the  Romans,  nor  can  rely 
for  defence  either  on  your  arms  or  walls,  I  bring  you  terms 
of  peace,  rather  unavoidable  than  favourable.  And  there 
may  be  some  chance  of  carrying  these  into  effect,  on  this 
condition,  that,  as  Hannibal  dictates  them,  in  the  spirit  of  a 
conqueror,  so  you  should  listen  to  them  with  the  spirit  of 
men  conquered;  that  you  consider  not  what  you  part  with 
as  loss,  for  all  things  are  the  property  of  the  victor,  but 
whatever  is  left  to  you  as  a  gift.  The  city,  a  great  part  of 
which  is  already  demolished,  and  almost  the  whole  of  which 
he  has  in  his  possession,  he  takes  from  you :  your  lands  he 
leaves  to  you,  intending  to  assign  a  place  where  you  may 
build  a  new  town :  all  your  gold  and  silver,  both  public  and 
private  property,  he  orders  to  be  brought  to  him  :  your  per¬ 
sons,  with  those  of  your  wives  and  children  he  preserves  in¬ 
violate,  provided  you  are  satisfied  to  quit  Saguntum,  without 

BOOK  XXL 

B.C.  218.] 

411 

arms,  and  with  single  garments.  These  are  the  terms,  which, 
as  a  victorious  enemy,  he  enjoins ;  with  these,  grievous  and 
afflicting  as  they  are,  your  present  circumstances  counsel  you 
to  comply.  I  do  not  indeed  despair  but  that,  when  the  en¬ 
tire  disj^osalof  every  thin^  is.  given  up  to  him,  he  may  remit 
somewhljt  of  the  severity  of  these  articles.  But  even  these, 
I  think  it  advisable  to  endure,  rather  than  to  suffer  your¬ 
selves  to  be  slaughtered,  and  your  wives  and  children  seized, 
and  dragged  into  slavery,  before  your  eyes,  according  to  the 
practice  of  war.” 
XIV.  The  surrounding  crowd,  gradually  approaching  to 
hear  this  discourse,  had  formed  an  assembly  of  the  people 
conjoined  with  the  senate,  when  the  men  of  principal  dis- 
tmction,  withdrawing  suddenly  before  any  answer  was  given, 
collected  all  the  gold  and  silver  both  from  their  private  and 
public  stores,  into  the  Forum,  threw  it  into  a  fire  hastily  kin¬ 
dled  for  the  purpose,  and  then  most  of  them  cast  themselves 
in  headlong  after  it.  While  the  dismay  and  confusion,  which 
this  occasioned,  filled  every  part  of  the  city,  another  uproar 
was  heard  from  the  citadel.  A  tower,  after  ^ing  battered 
for  a  long  time,  had  fallen  down,  and  a  cohort  of  the  Car¬ 
thaginians,  having  forced  their  way  through  the  breach,  gave 
notice  to  ti|eir  general,  that  the  place  was  destitute  of  the 
usual  guards  and  watches.  Hannibal,  judging  that  such  an 
opportunity  admitted  no  delay,  assaulted  the  city  with  his 
whole  force,  and,  instantly  making  himself  master  of  it,  g|(ve 
orders  that  every  person  of  adult  age  should  be  put  to  dte^ 
sword  :  which  cruel  order  was  proved  however,  by  the  event, 
to  have  been  in  a  manner  induced  by  the  conduct  of  the  peo¬ 
ple  ;  for  how  could  mercy  have  been  extended  to  any  of 
^  those  who,  shutting  themselves  up  with  their  wives  and 
children,  burned  their  houses  over  their  heads  j  or  who,  be- 
in  arms,  continued  fighting,  until  stopped  by  death? 

412 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  534- 

XV.  In  the  town  was  found  a  vast  quantity  of  spoil,  not¬ 
withstanding  that  the  greater  part  of  tfie  effects  had  been 
purposely  injured  by  the  owners ;  and  that,  during  the  car¬ 
nage,  the  rage  of  the  assailants  had  made  hardly  any  dis¬ 
tinction  of  age,  although  the  prisoners  were  the  property  of 
the  soldiers.  Nevertheless  it  appears,  that  a  large  sum  of 
money  was  brought  into  the  treasury,  out  of  the  price  of  the 
goods  exposed  to  sale,  and  likewise  that  a  great  deal  of  valua¬ 
ble  furniture  and  apparel  was  sent  to  Carthage.  Some  wri- 
^  ters  have  asserted,  that  Saguntum  was  taken  in  the  eighth 
month  from  the  beginning  of  the  siege  ;  that  Hannibal  then 
retired  into  winter  quarters  to  New  Carthage ;  and  that,  in 
the  fifth  month,  after  leaving  Carthage,  he  arrived  again  in 
Italy.  But  if  these  accounts  were  true,  it  is  impossible  that 
Publius  Cornelius  and  Tiberius  Sempronius  could  have  been 
the  consuls,  to  whom,  in  the  beginning  of  the  siege,  the  am¬ 
bassadors  were  sent  from  Saguntum  ;  and  who,  during  their 
office,  fought  with  Hannibal ;  the  one  at  the  river  I'idnus, 
and  both,  a  considerable  time  after,  at  the  Trebia.  Either 
all  these  matters  must  have  been  transacted  in  less  time,  or 
Saguntum  must  have  been  taken,. not  first  invested,  in  the 
beginning  of  that  year  wherein  Publius  Cornelius  and  Tibe¬ 
rius  Sempronius  were  consuls.  For  the  battle  at  the  Trebia 
could  not  have  happened  so  late  as  the  year  of  Cn.  Servilius 
and  Caius  Flaminius ;  because  Caius  Flaminius  entered  on 
the  office  of  consul  at  Arimrnum,  having  been  elected  thereto 
by  Tiberius  Sempronius,  who,  after  the  engagement  at  the 
Trebia,  had  gone  home  to  Rome  for  the  purpose  of  electing 
consuls  ;  and,  when  the  election  was  finished,  returned  into 
winter  quarters  to  the  army. 
XVI.  The  ambassador’s  returning  from  Carthage,  brought 
information  to  Rome,  that  every  thing  tended  to  war  ;  and, 
nearly  at  the  same  time,  news  was  received  of  the  destruc- 

BOOK  XXL 

413 

B.C.  218.] 
tion  of  Sagustutn.  Grief  seized  the  seaate,  for  the  de{dora« 
bic  catastrophe  of  their  allies,  and  shame  for  not  having  af¬ 
forded  them  succour ;  rage  against  the  Carthaginians,  and 
such  apprehensions  for  the  public  safety,  as  if  the  enemy  were 
already  at  their  gates  ;  so  that  their  minds  being  agitated  by 
so  many  passions  at  once,  their  meetings  were  scenes  of  con¬ 
fusion  and  disorder,  rather  than  of  deliberation.  For,  ^  ne-  ♦ 
ver,”  they  observed,  had  an  enemy,  more  enterprising  smd 
warlike,  entered  the  field  with  them  |  and,  at  no  other  pe¬ 
riod  had  the  Roman  power  been  so  unfit  for  great  exertions, 
or  so  deheient  in  practice.  As  to  the  Sardinians,  Corsicans, 
Istrians,  and  Illyrians,  they  had  only  roused  the  Roman  arms, 
without  affording  them  exercise  ;  and  with  the  Gauls  the  af¬ 
fair  was  really  a  tumult,  rather  than  a  war.  The  Carthagi¬ 
nians,  another  kind  of  foe,  were  crossing  the  Iberus  ;  trained 
to  arms  during  twenty-three  years,  in  the  most  laborious  ser¬ 
vice,  among  the  nations  of  Spain  ;  accustomed  to  conquer  on 
every  occasion  ;  habituated  to  the  command  of  a  most  able 
general  j  fluked  with  their  late  conquest  of  a  very  opulent 
city,  and  bringing  with  diem  many  Spanish  states  ;  while  the 
Gauls,  ever  glad-  of  an  opportunity  of  fighting,  would  doubt¬ 
less  be  engaged  in  the  expedition.  War  must  then  be  waged* 
against  all  world,  in  the  heart  of  Italy,  and  under  the 
walls  of  Rome.” 
XVII.  '^The  provinces  had  been  already  named  for  the  con¬ 
suls,  but  now  they  were  ordered  to  cast  l®ts.  Spain  fel^  tp 
Cornelius  ;  Africa,  with  Sicily,  to  Sempronius.  For  the  ser¬ 
vice  of  the  year,  six  legions  were  decreed,  with  such  a  num¬ 
ber  of  the  troops  of  the  allies  as  the  consuls  should  deem  re¬ 
quisite,  and  a  fleet  as  great  as  could  be  fitted  out.  Of  Romans  ^ 
were  enlisted  twenty-four  thousand  foot,  and  one  thousand  eight 
hundred  horse ;  of  the  allies,  forty  thousand  foot,  and  four  thou¬ 
sand  four  hundred  horse.  The  fleet  consisted  of  two  hundred 
and  twenty  ships  of  five  banks  of  oars,  and  twenty  light  gallies. 

414 

HISTOBY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.B.  5a4. 

The  was  tbei;i^mposed  to  the  |»opIe,  wbeih<^  ‘‘ 
dbpse  asid  orderecl,  that  war  shofild  be  declared  a^^iiist  the 
This  beii^  deterpaiiued  a  geiieral 
shppt^iMdaD  was  perfimaed  in  Ae  city,  and  prayers  ctfered 
to  Ae  gods,  Aat  Ac  war  which  Ac  Roman  people  hri  or¬ 
dered  might  have  a  prosperous  and  happy  issue*  \Tbe  £^ces 
were  divided  between  Ae  consub  m  tim  manner :  Sem- 
pronius  were  assigned  two  legion^^  contmning  caA  fotzr  tlKui- 
sand  foot  and  three  humired  hors^  and  of  tl^  aAes  ^icCeeo 
thousand  foot,  and  thousand  eight  hundred  horse,  wiA 
one  hundred  and  sixty  Alps  of  war,  and  twelve  light  gailies. 
With  these  land  and  sea  forces,  Tiberius  Sempronius  was 
sent  to  Sicily,  with  intentiem  that  he  shouki  cross  over  to  Af¬ 
rica,  in  case  the  other  consul  should  be  able  to  prevent  the 
CarA^inijns  from  entering  Italy.  The  army  assigned  to 
Cornelius  was  less  numerous,  because  Lucius  Manlius,  a 
praetor,  was  also  sent  into  Gaul  with  a  considerable  force^  Of 
ships,  particularly,  Cornelius’s  share  was  small :  sixty  quin- 
queremes  only  were  given  Him,  for  it  was  not  supposed  either 
that  the  enemy  would  come  by  sea,  or  that  he  would  exert 
himself  on  that  element.  Two  Roman  legions,  with  their 
regular  proportion  of  cavalry,  and,  of  the  allies,  fourteen  thou¬ 
sand  foot,  and  sixteen  hundred  horse  were  assigned  to  him. 
In  this  year,  the  province  of  Gaul,  though  not  yet  threatened 
with  a  Carthaginian  war,  had  posted  in  it  two  Roman  legions, 
and  ten  thousand  confederate  infantry,  with  one  Aousand 
confederate  horsemen  and  six  hundred  Roman. 
XVIII.  These  adjustments  being  made,  they  yet  deter¬ 
mined,  previous  to  the  taking  up  arms,  to  send  Quintus  Fa- 
bius,  Marcus  Livius,  Lucius  Amilius,  Caius  Licinius,  and 
Quintus  Bsebius,  men  venerable  on  account  of  their  age,  into 
Africa,  as  ambassadors,  to  require  an  explanation  from  the 
Cartliaginians,  whether  Hannibal’s  attack  on  Saguntum  had 
been  auAorized  by  the  state  ;  and,  in  case  Aey  should  ac- 

BOOK  XXI, 

415 

B.C,  tia] 
IdBowledge  k,as  it  was  expected  they  would,  and  defend  that 
proceeding,  tl»n  to  declare  war  agaimt  Ae  i^ople  of  Car¬ 
thage.  When  the  Romans  arrived  at  Carthage,  and  were  in* 
tfodueed  to  an  audience  of  the  senate,  Quintus  Fabius,  with-  < 
enlarging  on  the  subject,  simply  propped  die  question, 
as  stated  in  their  instructions  ;  on  which  cate  of  the  Caatha- 
gbians  replied,  Romans,  in  your  former  embassy,  ye  were 
too  precipiu^,  wten  you  demanded  that  Hannibal  should 
be  delivered  up,  as  attacking  Saguntum  of  his  own  authm-ity. 
But  your  present  proceeding,  though  hitherto  milder  in  wor<k, 
is,  in  elfect,  more  unreasonably  severe.  A  charge  was  made 
against  Hannibal,  only  when  you  required  him  to  be  deliver¬ 
ed  up  :  now,  you  endeavour  to  extort  from  us  a  confession  of 
wrong  committed,  and  at  the  same  instant,  as  if  we  had  al¬ 
ready  pleaded  guilty,  insist  on  reparation.  For  myself,  I  am 
of  opinion  that  the  question  proper  to  be  asked  is,  not  whether 
Saguntum  was  attacked  by  public  authority,  or  private,  but 
whether  jjuady  or  unjustly  ?  For  with  respect  to  a  subject  of 
our  government,  whether  acting  under  direction  of  the  pub¬ 
lic,  or  not,  the  right  of  enquiry,  and  of  puni^ing,  is  exclu¬ 
sively  our  own.»-  The  only  point,  then,  that  comes  into  dis¬ 
cussion  with  you,  is,  whether  the  act  was  allowable  accord- 
mg  to  trea^  ?  Wherefore,  since  you  chose  that  a  distinction 
should  be  made,  between  what  commanders  do  by  public  au¬ 
thority,  and  what  of  their  own  will,  there  is  a  treaty  subsist¬ 
ing  between  us,  concluded  by  your  consul  Lutatius,  in  w^ic|;i 
provision  is  made  for  the  interest  of  the  allies  of  both  natic^. 
But  there  is  no  clause  in  favour  of  the  Saguntines  ;  for  they 
were  not  at  the  time  m  alliance  with  you.  But  then,  in  the 
treaty  entered  into  with  Hasdrubal,  the  Saguntines  are  ex¬ 
pressly  exempted  from  hostilities.  In  answer  to  which,  I 
shall  urge  nothing  but  what  I  have  learned  from  yourselves. 
For  you  asserted,  that  the  treaty  which  your  consul  Caius  Lu¬ 
tatius  at  first  concluded  with  us,  inasmuch  as  it  had  been  con- 

416 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.534. 

eluded  without  either  the  approbation  of  the  senate,  or  an 
order  of  the  people,  was  not  binding  on  you  ;  and  that  for 
that  reason,  another  treaty  was  ratified  anew,  under  the  Ac¬ 
tion  of  public  authority.  Now,  if  your  treaties  do  not  bind 
you,  unless  sanctioned  by  your  approbation  and  order,  surely 
the  treaty  of  Hasdrubal,  under  the  same  circumstances,  can¬ 
not  be  binding  on  us.  Cease  therefore  to  talk  of  Saguntum, 
and  the  Iberus  ;  and  let  your  minds  at  length  give  birth  to 
the  burthen  of  which  they  are  long  in  labour.”  The  Roman 
then,  folding  up  a  corner  of  his  robe,  said,  here  we  bring 
you  peace,  and  war  ;  take  which  you  choose,”  Which  pro¬ 
posal  they  answered  with  an  equal  degree  of  peremptory 
heat,  calling  out,  that  “  he  should  give  whichever  he  chose.” 
He  then  threw  open  the  fold  againV'  and  said  that  ‘‘  ^  gave 
war  they  with  one  voice  replied,  that  “  they  accepted  it ; 
and,  with  the  same  spirit  with  which  they  accepted  it,  would 
prosecute  it.” 
XIX.  This  mode  of  a  direct  demand,  and  declaration  of 
war,  was  deemed  suitable  to  the  dignity  of  the  Roman  peo¬ 
ple,  even  before  this  time ;  but  more  particularly  after  the 
destruction  of  Saguntum,  than  to  enter  into  a  verbal  disqui¬ 
sition  concerning  the  construction  of  treaties.  For,  if  the 
business  were  to  be  decided  by  argument,  what  similitude 
was  there  between  the  treaty  of  Hasdrubal,- and  the  former 
treaty  of  Lutatius,  which  was  alteredJ^Since  in  the  latter, 
there  was  an  express  clause  inserted,  that  “  it  Aould  be  valid, 
provided  the  people  should  ratify  it;”  hut  in  that  of  Has¬ 
drubal,  there  was  no  such  provisiont^  Besides,  this  treaty 
was  confirmed,  in  such  a  manner,  by  the  silent  approbation 
of  so  many  years,  during  the  remainder  of  his  life,  that  even 
after  the  death  of  its  author,  no  alteradon  was  made  in  it ; 
although,  even  were  the  former  treaty  adhered  to,  there  was 
sufficient  security  provided  for  the  Saguntines,  by  the  ex¬ 
empting  from  hostilities  the  allies  of  both  nations ;  there  be- 

BOOK  XXI- 

B.C.  218.] 

4ir 

ing  no  distinction  made  of  ^lose  who  then  were,  or  of  those 
who  should  afterwards  become  such.  And,  as  it  was  evi- 
dendy  allowable  to  form  new  alliances,  who  could  think  it 
reasonable,  either  that  persons  should  not  be  received  into 
friendship  on  account  of  any  degree  of  merit  whatever ;  or, 
that  people,  once  taken  under  protection,  should  not  be  de¬ 
fended  ?  The  only  restriction  implied  was,  that  the  allies  of 
the  Carthaginians  should  not  be  solidted  to  revolt,  nor,  re¬ 
volting  of  their  own  accord,  should  be  received.  The  Ro¬ 
man  ambassadors,  m  pursuance  of  their  instructions  received 
at  Rome,  passed  over  from  Carthage  into  Spain,  in  order  to 
make  application  to  the  several  states  of  that  country,  and 
either  to  engage  their  alliance,  or  at  least  dissuade  them  from 
joining  the  Carthaginians.  They  came,'  first,  to  the  Bargu- 
sian,  by  whom  being  favourably  received,  because  that  peo¬ 
ple  were  dissatisHed  with  the  Carthaginian  government,  they 
roused  the  spirits  of  many  powers  on  the  farther  side  of  the 
Iberus,  by  the  flattering  prospect  of  a  change  in  their  circum¬ 
stances.  Thence  they  came  to  the  Volscians,  whose  aSswer, 
which  was  reported  with  applause  through  every  part  of 
Spain,  deterred  !he  otheV  states  from  joining  in  alliance  with 
Home.  thus  the  oldest  member  of  their  assembly 
plied,  Where  is  your  sense  of  shame,  Romans,  when  you 
require  of  us,  that  we  should  prefer  your  friendship  to  that 
of  the  Carthaginiani  ?  The  Saguntine*s,  who  embraced  it, 
have  been  abandoned  by  you :  in  which  abandonment  ypif, 
their  allies,  have  shown  greater  cruelty,  than  the  Carthagini¬ 
ans,  their  etiemy,  showed  in  destroying  them.  What  I  re¬ 
commend  is,  that  you  seek  connections  where  the  fatal  disas- 
/  ter  of  Saguntum  is  unknown.  To  the  states  of  Spain,  the 
ruins  of  that  city  will  be  Iboth  a  melancholy,  and  a  forcible 
warning,  not  to  confide  in  the  faith  or  alliance  of  Rome,” 
They  were  then  ordered  to  depart  immediately  from  the  ter¬ 
ritories  of  the  Volscians  ;  nor  did  they  afterwards  meet,  from 
VOL.  II, — 3  H 

418 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  534. 

4my  assembly  in  Spain,  a  more  fevourable  reception ;  there¬ 
fore,  after  making  a  circuit  through  all  parts  of  that  country, 
without  effecting  any  thing,  they  passed  over  into  Gaul. 
XX.  At  Ruscino  they  encountered  a  new  and  terrifying 
spectacle;  the  people  coming  hi  arms  to  the  assembly,  for 
such  is  the  custom  of  that  country.  After  displaying,  in 
magnificent  terms,  the  renown  and  the  valour  of  the  Roman 
people,  and  the  greatness  of  their  empire,  they  requested 
that  the  Gauls  would  not 'grant  a  passage  through  their  cities 
.and  territories  to  the  Carthagiinan,  who  was  preparing  to  in- 
4  vade  Italy.  On  which,  we  are  told,  such  .a  laugh  was  raised, 
accompanied  by  a  general  outcry  of  displeasure,  that  the  ma¬ 
gistrates  and  the  t  Ider  members  of  the  assembly  could,  with 
difficulty,  bring  the  younger  men  into  order,  so  unreasonable, 
and  so  absurd  did  it  appear,  to  require  that  the  Gauls  should 
not  suffer  the  war  to  pass  into  Italy,  but  should  draw  it  on 
themselves,  and  expose  their  own  lands  to  devastation,  in¬ 
stead  of  those  of  strangers.  When  the  uproar  was  at  length 
app/eased,  an  answer  was  given  to  the  ambassadors,  that 
the  Gauls  had  never  received  either  any  kindness  from  the 
Romans,  or  ill  treatment  from  the  Carthaginians,  that  should 
induce  them  to  take  arms  either  in  favour  of  the  former,  of 
in  opposition  to  the  latter.  On  the  contrary,  they  had  been 
informed,  that  their  countrymen  were  expelled  by  the  Roman 
people  from  the  lanHs,  and  out  of  the  *limits  of  Italy,  com¬ 
pelled  to  pay  tribute,  and  subjected  to  indignities  of  every 
kind,”  To  the  same  tqiplication,  they  received  the  same  an¬ 
swer,  from  the  other  assemblies  in  Gaul ;  nor  did  they  meet 
any  very  friendly  or  peaceable  reception  until  they  arrived  at 
Marseilles.  There,  in  consequence  of  the  diligent  inquiries 
made  by  those  faithful  allies,  they  learned,  that  ‘‘  the  minds 
of  the  Gauls  had  been  already  prepossessed  in  favour  of 
Hannibal.  But  that  even  he  would  find  that  nation  not  very 
tractable,  so  ferocious  and  ungovernable  were  their  tempers, 

BOOK  XXL 

419 

B.C.  218.] 
unless  he  frequently  revived  the  attachment  of  their  chiefs 
with  gold,  of  which  that  people  were  remarkably  greedy.” 
Having  thus  finished  their  progress  through  the  states  of 
Spain  and  Gaul,’Hhe  ambassadors  returned  to  Rome,  shortly 
after  the  consuls  had  set  out  for  their  provinces,  and  found 
the  passions  of  every  man  warml)^  excited  by  the  prospect  of 
the  approaching  war,  for  all  accounts  now  agreed  that  the 
Carthaginians  had  passed  the  Iberus. 
XXI.  Hannibal,  after  taking  Saguntum,  had  retired  into 
winter  quarters,  at  New  Carthage ;  where,  receiving  infor¬ 
mation  of  all  the  transactions  and  resolutions  ’  which  had 
passed  at  Rome,  and  at  Carthage,  and  that  he  was  not  only 
the  leader,  but  likewise  the  cause  of  the  war,  he  determined 
no  longer  to  defer  his  measures,  and  having  distributed  and 
sold  off  the  remains  of  the  plunder,  he  called  together  his 
Spanish  troops,  and  spoke  to  this  effect ;  Fellow  soldiers,  as 
we  have  already  established  peace  through  all  the  states  of 
Spain,  we  most  either  lay  aside  our  arms,  and  disband  our 
forces,  or  transfer  the  seat  of  war  to  other  countries, 
the  way  to  make  these  nations  flourish,  with  the  blessings 
not  only  of  peace,  but  of  victory,  is,  for  us  to  seek  gloiy^  and 
spoil  from  others.  Wherefore  as  we  shall  soon  be  called  to 
service,  at  a  distance  from  home,  and  as  it  is  uncertain  when 
you  may  see  your  families,  and  whatever  is  dear  to  you,  if 
any  choose  to  visit  your  friends,  I  now  give  you  leave  of 
absence.  At  the  beginning  of  spring,  I  charge  you  to  attend 
here,  in  order  that,  with  the  aid  of  the  Gods,  we  may  enter 
on  a  war,  from  which  we  shall  reap  abundance  both  of  hon¬ 
our  and  riches.”  This  voluntary  offer,  of  leave  to  revisit  their 
/  homes,  was  highly  pleasing  to  almost  every  one  ot  them  ;  for 
they  already  longed  to  see  their  friends,  and  foresaw  a  longer 
absence  from  them,  likely  to  happen.:  This  interval  of  rest 
renewed  the  powers  of  their  minds  and  bodies,  enabling  them 
to  encounter  every  hardship  anew ;  for  the  fatigues  they  had 

420 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  534. 

already  sustained,  and  those  they  were  soon  to  undergo,  ap- 
*peared  to  be  little  thought  of.  At  the  beginning  of  spring- 
they  therefore  assembled  according  to  orders.  Hannibal, 
after  reviewing  the  auxiliaries  of  the  several  nations,  went  to 
Gades,  where  he  fulfilled  his  vows  to  Hercules,  and  bound 
himself  in  new  ones,  in  case  his  future  operations  should  be 
crowned  with  success.  Then  dividing  his  attention,  between 
the  measures  requisite  for  annoying  the  enemy,  and  those  ne¬ 
cessary  for  defence,  lest,  while  he  should  be  making  his  way 
to  Italy  by  land,  through  Spain  and  Gaul,  Africa  should  be 
naked  and  open  to  an  attack  of  the*  Romans  from  Sicily,  he 
resolved  to  provide  for  its  security  by  sending  thither  a 
strong  body  of  forces.  In  the  room  of  these,  he  required  a 
reinforcement  to  be  sent  to  him  from  Africa,  consisting 
chiefly  of  light  armed  spearmen.  This  he  did  with  the  view, 
that  the  Africans  serving  in  Spain,  and  the  Spaniards  in 
Africa,  whei^  each  would  be  better  soldiers .  at  a  distance 
from  home,  they  might  be,  as  it  were,  mutual  hostages  for 
the  good  behaviour  of  each  other.  He  sent  into  Africa,  of 
infantry,  thirteen  thousand  eight  hundred  and  fifty  targeteers, 
with  eight  hundred  and  seventy  Balearick  sUngers  ;  of  ca¬ 
valry,  collected  from  many  nations,  one  thousand  two  hun¬ 
dred.  Part  of  these  forces  he  ordered  to  garrison  Carthage, 
the  rest  to  be  distributed  through  Africa.  At  the  same  time 
he  ordered  four  thousand  chosen  young  men,  whom  he .  had 
enlisted  by  means  of  commissaries  sent  among  the  several 
states,  to  be  conducted  to  Carthage,  both  as  an  addition  of 
strength  and  as  hostages. 
XXII.  Judging  also,  that  Spain  ought  not  to  be  neglected, 
in  which  opinion  he  w^as  not  the  less  confirmed  by  having 
been  acquainted  with  the  tour  made  through  it  by  the  Romsm 
ambassadors,  for  the  purpose  of  engaging  the  friendship  of 
the  chiefs,  he  allotted  that  province  to  Hasdrubal  his  brother, 
a  man  of  talents  and  activity  ;  and  he  formed  his  strength 

BOOK  XXL 

'421 

BX,  218.] 
mostly  of  the  troops  from  Africa,  giving  him  eleven  thou¬ 
sand  eight  hundred  and  fifty  African  foot,  with  three  hun¬ 
dred  Ligurians,  and  five  hundred  Bakarians.  To  these 
bodies  of  infantry,  were  added  four  hundred  and  fifty  horse¬ 
men  of  the  Liby-Phoenicians,  a  race  composed  of  a  mixture 
of  Phoenicians  with  Africans ;  of  Numidians  and  Maurita¬ 
nians,  who  inhabit  the  coast  of  the  ocean,  to  the  number  of 
one  thousand  eight  hundred  ;  a  small  b^d  of  the  Ikrgetans, 
a  Spanish  nation,  amounting  to  two  hundred  horsemen  ;  and, 
that  he  might  not  be  destitute  of  any  kind  of  force,  which 
might  be  useful  in  operation^  on  land,  cn  elephants. 
Also  for  the  defence  of  the  sea  coast,  because,  as  the  Ro¬ 
mans  had  been  formerly  victorious  at  sea,  it  was  probable 
that  they  would  now  likewise  exert  fhemselvcs  in  the  same 
line,  a  fleet  was  assigned  him  of  fifty  quinqueremes,  two 
quadriremes,  and  five  triremes ;  but,  of  these,  only’  thirty-two 
quinqueremes,  and  the  five  triremes,  were  fully  equipped 
and  manned  with  rowers.  From  Gades  he  returned  to  Car- 
thage,  the  winter  quarters  of  the  army.  Then  putting  his 
troops  in  motion,  he  led  them  by  the  city  of  Etovissa  to  the 
Iberus,  and  the  sea  coast.  Here,  jis  is  said,  he  saw,  in  his  ^ 
sleep,  a  youth  of  divine  figure,  who  told  him  that  he  was  sent 
by  Jupiter  to  guide  him  into  Italy,  and  bade  him  therefore 
m  follow,  and  not  turn  bis  eyes-to  any  side.  Filled  with 
terror,  he  followed  at  first  without  looking  to  cither  side,  or 
behind ;  but  afterwards,  out  of  the  curiosity  natural  to  man¬ 
kind,  considering  what  that  could  be  at  which  he  was  forbid¬ 
den  to  look  back,  he  could  no  longer  restrain  his  eyes:  he 
then  saw  behind  him  a  serpent  of  immense  size,  moving 
along  and  felling  all  the  bushes  and  trees  in  its  way:  and 
after  it,  followed  a  dark  clodd  with  loud  thundering  in  the 
air.  On  which,  asking  what  was  the  nature  of  this  great 
commotion,  or  what  it  portended,  he  was  told  that  it  meant 
the  devastation  of  Italy  ;  he  was  then  ordered  to  proceed  in 

42^ 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  534. 

his  coarse,  and  not  to  enquire  farther,  but  let  the  decrees  of 
the  destinies  remain  in  obscurity. 
XXIII.  Overjoyed  at  this  vision,  he  led  his  forces  in  three 
divisions  over  the  Iberus,  having  sent  forward  emissaries  to 
conciliate  by  presents  the  friendship  of  the  Gauls,  through 
whose  country  the  army  was  to  pass,  and  to  explore  the 
passes  of  the  Alps.  The  number  of  forces,  which  he  brought 
across  the  Iberus,  was  ninety  thousand  foot,  and  twelve  thpu- 
sand  horse.  He  then  reduced  the  Ilergetans,  the  Bargusians, 
the  Ausetauians,  and  the  province  of  Lacetania,  which  lay  at 
the  foot  of  the  Pyrenean  mountains.  The  government  of  all 
this  tract  he  gave  to  Hanno,  with  intention  to  retain  the  com- 
mand  of  the  narrow  passes,  which  lead  from  Spain  into  Gaul : 
and,  to  enable  him  tp  ^ecure  the  possession  of  it,  assigned 
him  a  body  of  forces,  consisting  of  ten  thousand  foot  and  one 
thousand  horse.  When  the  army  began  to  pass  the  defiles 
of  the  Pyrenees,  and  a  rumour  spread  with  greater  certain¬ 
ty  among  the  barbarians,  that  the  war  was  intended  against 
the  Romans,  three  thousand  of  the  Carpetan  foot  left  him, 
and  marched  away,  actuated,  as  clearly  appeared,  not  so 
much  by  dread  of  the  enemy,' as  of  the  great  length  of  the 
march,  and  the  insuperable  difficulty  of  crossing  the  Alps. 
Hannibal,  considering  that  to  recall  or  detain  them  by  force, 
might  be  attended  with  dangerous  consequences,  and  wishing 
to  avoid  eveiy  thing  that  might  irritate  the  ferocious  tem¬ 
pers  of  the  rest,  sent  home  above  .en  thousand  men,  in 
whom  he  had  discovered  an  equal  aversion  from  the  service, 
pretending  that  he  had,  in  like  manner,  dismissed  the  Car- 
petans. 
XXIV.  Then,  lest  delay  and  idleness  should  inspire  them 
with  improper  notions,  he  crossed  the  Pyrenees  with  rest 
of  his  forces,  and  pitched  his  camp  near  the  town  of  Illibe- 
ris.  The  Gauls  had  been  told  that  his  operations  were  di¬ 
rected  against  Italy  ;  nevertheless,  having  been  informed  that 

BOOK  XXI. 

B.C.  218.] 

4^3 

the  Spaniards  on  the  other  side  of  the  Pyrenees  had  been  re¬ 
duced  by  force,  and  that  a  powerful  guard  was  stationed  in 
their  country,  they  were  so  much  alarmed  for  their  liberty, 
that  they  hastily  took  arms,  and  several  states  formed  a  ge¬ 
neral  meeting  at  Ruscino.  When  Hannibal  was  informed  of 
this,  dreading  delay  more  than  the  power  of  the  enemy,  he 
despatched  envoys  to  their  petty  princes,  acquainting  them, 
that  he  wished  to  confer  with  them  in  person,  and  proposing, 
that  either  they  should  come  nearer  to  lUiberis,  or  that  he 
would  advance  to  Ruscino ;  that  he  would,  with  great  pleas¬ 
ure,  receive  them  in  his  camp,  or,  without  hesitation,  go  him¬ 
self  to  theirs :  for  he  came  into  Gaul  as  a  friend,  not  as  an 
enemy  ;  and  meant  not  to  draw  a  sword,  if  the  Gauls  would 
allow  him  to  hold  his  resolution,  until  he  arrived  in  Italy. 
This  passed  through  messengers ;  but  the  Gauls  immediately 
removed  their  camp  to  Illiberis,  came  without  reluctance  to 
the  Carthaginian,  and  were  so  highly  captivated  by  his  pre¬ 
sents,  that,  with  great  cheerfulness,  they  conducted  his  army, 
by  the  town  of  Ruscino,  through  their  territories. 
XXV.  In  Italy,  at  this  time,  nothing  farther  was  known, 
than  that  Hannibal  had  passed  the  Iberus,  intelligence  of 
which  had  been  brought  to  Rome  by  ambassadors  from 
Marseilles  ;  yet,  as  if  he  had  already  passed  the  Alps,  the 
Boians  engaging  the  concurrence  of  the  Insubrians,  began  a 
revolt,  their  motive  for  which  was  not  their  ancient  enmity 
towards  the  Roman  people,  but  the  offence  which  they  lately 
conceived,  at  the  establishment  of  the  colonies  on  the  Po,  at 
Cremona,  and  Placentia,  within  the  limits  of  the  Gallic  terri¬ 
tories.  For  this  reason,  they  hastily  took  arms,  and,  making 
an  irruption  into  those  very  soils,  caused  such  terror  and 
cemfusion,  that  not  only  the  country  people,  but  even  the 
Roman  commissioners,  who  had  come  thither  to  distribute 
the  lands,  doubting  their  safety  within  the  walls  of  Placen¬ 
tia,  fled  to  Mutina.  These  were  Caius  Lutatius,  Caius  Ser- 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

^24< 

[YJl.  534. 

vUtus,  and  Titua  Annius.  There  is  no  doubt  the  name 
of  Lutatius ;  but  some  annals,  instead  of  Caius  Servilius  and 
Thus  Annius,  have  Quintus  Acilius,  and  Caius  Herrennius ; 
others,  Publius  Cornelius  Asina,  and  Caius  Papirius  Maso. 
There  is  also  an  uncertainty,  whether  ambassadors,  sent  to 
expostulate  with  the  Boians,  suffered  vitdence,  or  whether 
the  iU  treatment  was  offered  to  the  commissioners  who  were 
measuring  out  the  lands.  While  they  were  shut  up  in  Mu- 
tina,  and  the  besiegers,  a  people  quite  unskilled  in  the  Juts  of 
attacking  towns,  and  remarkably  lazy  with  respect  to.^  mi¬ 
litary  operations,  lay  inactive  round  the  walls,  which  they 
cojddMaol^jure,  a  pretended  treaty  for  an  accommodation 
was  set  on  foot,  and  the  ambassadors  being  invited  out  to  a 
conference  by  the  chiefs  of  the  Gauls,  were,  in  violation,  not 
only  of  the  laws  of  nations,  but  of  the  faith  pled^d  on  the 
occasion,  seized  and  put  into  confinement,  the  Gauls  declar¬ 
ing,  that  they  would  not  set  thetn  at  liberty,  unless  their  own 
hostages  were  returned  to  diem.  On  hearing  of  this  trcift- 
ment  of  the  ambassadors,  and  the  danger  which  threatoied 
MiHina  and  the  garriscm,  Lucius  Manlius  the  praetor,  in¬ 
flamed  with  resentment,  led  his  army  in  a  rapid  march  to¬ 
wards  that  city.  The  groumi,  mi  both  sides  of  the  road,  wa», 
at  diat  time,  covered  with  woods,  and  mostly  uninhabited. 
Advancing  into  these  places,  without  having  examined  the 
country,  he  fell"  into  an  ambush,  and  widi  much  difikulty, 
after  l<^ng  a  g^at  nuipber  of  .  men,  made  his  way  into  the 
open  pimns.  }  Here  he  fortified  a  camp,  which  the  l&mis  not 
having  resolution  to  attack,  the  soldiers  recovered  their  spi¬ 
rits,  though  it  was  evident  that  their  strength  was  greatly 
diminished  :  they  then  began  their  march  anew,  and,  as  long 
as  their  road  lay  through  open  grounds,  the  enemy  never  ap¬ 
peared  ;  but  falling  on  t^d^ rear,  when  the  Romans  again 
entered  the  woods,  they  threw  all  into  fright  and  disorder, 
slewxight  hundred  scfldiers,  and  carried  off  six  standards. 

BOOK  XXI. 

B.C.  218.} 

4^ 

As  soon  as  the  troops  had  got  clear  of  that  difficult  azHi  trou* 
bleiome  pass,  the  Gauls  ceased  from  their  attempts,  and  the 
Romans  from  their  fears,  and  die  latter,  afterwards,  easily 
securing  the  safety  of  their  march  through  the  open  country, 
proceeded  to  Tanetum,  a  small  town  on  the  Po.  Here,  by 
means  of  a  temporary  fortification,  which  they  raised,  ihc 
supply  of  provisions  conveyctf  by  the  river,  and  the  aid  of 
the  Brescian  Gauls,  they  maintained  their  ground  against 
the  numerous  forces  of  the  enemy,  though  daily  augmented. 
XXVI.  When  news  of  this  sudden  insurrection  arrived  at 
Rome,  and  th^  senate  understood,  diat,  besides  the  Cartha¬ 
ginian  war,  they  had  another  to  maintain  with  the  Gauls,  they 
ordered  Caius  Atilius,  a  prsetor,  to  march  to  the  relief  of 
Manlius  with  one  Roman  legion,  and  five  thousand  allied 
troops,  iniisted  by  the  consul  in  the  late  levy  ;  with  these  he 
arrived  at  Tanetum  without  any  interruption,  for  the  enemy 
through  fear,  had  retired  at  his  approach.  At  the  same  time 
Publius  Cornelius,  having  raised  a  new  legion,  in  the  room 
of  that  which  had  been  sent  with  the  praetor,  set  out  from  the 
city  with  sixty  ships  of  war  9  and  coasting  along  Etruria, 
Liguria,  and  the  Salyan  mountains,  he  arrived  at  Marseilles, 
and  pitched  his  camp  on  the  nearest  mouth  of  the  Rhone^, 
for  that  river,  dividing  itself,  flows  into  the  sea  through  seve* 
rd  chai^ls^’  scarcely  believing,  yet,  that  Hannibal  had  pas¬ 
sed  the  Pyrenean  mountains.  But  when  be  learned  that  he 
was,  even  then,  employed  in  preparations  for  passing  the 
Rhone,  being  unable  to  determine  in  what  place  be  might 
meet  him,  and  his  men  being  not  yet  sufliciencly  recovered 
from  the  fatigue  of  the  voyage,^e  despatched  three  himdred 
chosen  horsemen,  guided  by  some  Massilians  and  auxiliary 
Gaub,  to  gain  information  of  every  particular,  and  to  take 
view  of  the  enemy,  without  danger.  Hannibal  procuring,  ci¬ 
ther  by  threats  or  presents,  %n  unmolested  passage  through  the 
other  provinces,  had  arrived  at  the  country  of  the  Volcae,  a 
VOL.  II. — 3  I 

426 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  534. 

pDwerfui  state.  These  possessed  territories  on  both  sides  of 
the  Rhone,  but,  doubting  their  ability  to  repel  the  Carthagi¬ 
nian  from  the  country  on  the  hither  side,  in  order  to  avail 
themselves  of  the  river  as  a  defence,  they  had  transported 
almost  all  their  effects  beyond  it,  and  were  ready  in  arms  to 
defend  the  opposite  bank.  Hannibal,  by  means  of  presents, 
prevailed  on  the  inhabitants  of  the  other  districts  contiguous 
to  the  river,  and  even  on  those  of  that  very  state,  who  staid 
in  their  own  habitations,  to  collect  ships  from  every  quarter, 
and  to  build  others  ;  themselves  being  desirous  that  his  army 
should  be  transported,  and  their  country  freed,  as  speedily  as 
might  be,  from  the  burthen  of  such  a  multitude  of  men  A 
vast  number  of  vessels  therefore  were  brought  together,  and 
of  boats  rudely  cons  true  ted.  for  the  purpose  of  short  passages. 
Others  were  formed  by  hollowing  single  trees,  the  Gauls  first 
showing  the  way  ;  and  afterwards  the  soldiers  themselves, 
encouraged  by  the  plenty  of  timber,  and  likewise  by  the  easi¬ 
ness  of  the  work,  hastily  formed  clumsy  hulks  to  transport 
themselves  and  their  effects,  regardless  of  every  other  cir¬ 
cumstance,  provided  they  would  but  float,  and  contain  a  bur- 
tlieo. 
XX  Vi  I.  And' now,  when  all  preparatory  measures  for  ef¬ 
fecting  their  passage  were  completed,  the  enemy,  on  the 
farther  side,  threatened  them  with  a  violent  opposition,  co¬ 
vering  the  whole  bank  with  horse  and  foot.  But,  in  order  to 
remove  these  out  of  his  way,  Hannibal  ordered  Hanno,  son  of 
Bomilcar,  to  set  out  by  night,  at  the  first  watch,  with  a  body 
of  forces  composed  mostly  of  Spaniards,  to  march  up  the 
river  to  the  distance  of  one  day’s  journey,  and  then  crossing 
as  secretly  as  possible,  to  lead  round  his  detachment  with 
all  ^pedition,  that  he  might  fall  on  the  rear  of  the  enemy 
when  so  required.  The  Gauls,  who  were  given  him  as  guides 
on  the  occasion,  informed  him  that,  at  the  distance  of  about 
twenty.five  miles  above  that  place,  the  river  spreading  round 

BOOK  XXL 

427 

B.C.  218.] 
a  small  island,  showed  the  passage,  where  it  divided  itself, 
broader,  and  the  channel  consequently  shallower.  At  this 
place,  felling  timber  with  the  utmost  haste,  they  formed  rafts 
for  carrying  over  the  men,  horses,  and  other  weighty  mat¬ 
ters.  As  to  the  Spaniards,  they  took  no  trouble  about  any 
means  of  conveyance,  but  thrusting  their  clothes  into  leath¬ 
ern  bags,  and  resting  their  bodies  on  their  bucklers  placed 
under  them,  swam  over  the  river.  The  rest  of  the  troops, 
having  also  passed  over  on  the  rafts  joined  together,  they  en¬ 
camped  near  the  river,  and  being  fatigued  by  the  march  dur¬ 
ing  the  night,  and  by  the  labour  of  the  work,  refreshed  them¬ 
selves  with  rest  for  one  day,  while  their  leader  was  earnestly 
studying  how  to  execute  the  design  in  proper  season.  Next 
day,  having  marched  from  thence,  they  made  a  signal,  by 
raising  a  smoke,  that  they  had  effected  their  passage,  and 
were  not  far  distant ;  which  being  perceived  by  Hannibal,  he 
gave  the  signal  for  his  troops  to  pass  the  river.  The  infantry 
had  the  boats  equipped  and  in  readiness,  and  a  line  of  larger 
vessels,  with  the  horsemen,  most  of  whom  had  their  horses 
smimming  near  them,  crossed  higher  up  the  river,  in  order 
to  break  the  force  of  the  current,  and  thereby  render  the  w- 
ter  smooth  for  the  boats  passing  below.  The  horses,  for  the 
most  part,  were  led  after  the  sterns  by  collars,  those  only  ex¬ 
cepted  which  bad  been  put  on  board  the  ships  bridled  and 
accoutred,  in  order  that  the  riders,  on  their  landing,  might 
have  them  ready  for  instant  use. 
XXVIIL  The  Gauls  ran  down  to  the  bank  to  meet  them, 
with  various  kinds  of  cries  and  songs,  according  to  their  cus¬ 
tom,  tossing  their  shields  above  their  heads,  and  with  their 
right  hands  brandishing  their  javelins,  notwithstanding  the 
terrible  appearance  of  such  a  vast  number  of  ships,  together 
with  the  loud  roaring  of  the  river,  and^he  confused  clamours 
of  the  mariners  and  soldiers,  both  of  those  who  were  strug¬ 
gling  to  force  their  way  through  the  violent  current,  and  of 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

4^8 

[Y  jl.  isu. 

those  who  from  the  opposite  bank  encouraged  dieir  ^ends 
their  passage.  While  they  saw  sufficient  cause  of  lerrmr 
cm  their  front,  a  more  terrifying  shout  assailed  them  from 
hind,  where  their  camp  was  taken  by  Hanno.  PresenUy  he 
came  up  ;  so  that  they  were  encompassed  by  dangers  ;  such 
a  vast  number  of  soldiers  being  brought  by  the  ships,  and 
another  army  quite  unexpectedly  pressing  on  their  rear.  The 
Gauls  finding  that,  instead  of  being  the  assailants  as  they  had 
intended,  they  were  even  driven  from  their  own  ground, 
made  off  hastily  through  the  clearest  opening  that  they  could 
find,  and  in  the  utmost  confusion  dispersed  to  their  several 
towns.  Hannibal  now  looked  with  contempt  on  the  boister¬ 
ous  menaces  of  this  people,  and  bringing  over  the  rest  of  his 
forces  at  leisure,  encamped  on  the  spot.  Various  plans,  I 
should  suppose,  were  projected  for  conveying  the  elephants 
across  the  river,  ^it  least  the  accounts  transmitted  of  the  man¬ 
ner  in  which  it  was  performed  are  various.  Some  relate,  that 
being  brought  all  together  to  the  river  side,  the  fiercest 
among  them  was  provoked  to  anger  by  his  keeper,  who  pur¬ 
sued  him  by  swimming  as  he  fled  into  the  water  ;  that  this 
drew  down  the  rest  of  the  herd  ;  and  that  each,  as  soon  as  he 
lost  the  bottom,  was  by  the  mere  force  of  the  stream  hurried 
to  the  opposite  bank.  But  it  is  more  generally  agreed,  that 
they  were  carried  over  on  rafts  ;  and  as  this  must  have  ap¬ 
peared  the  safer  method,  it  is  now  more  easy  to  believe,  that 
the  business  was  so  effected.  One  raft,  of  two  hundred  foet 
in  length  and  fifty  in  breadth,  was  extended  from  the  b^k 
into  the  river,  the  upper  part  of  it  being  firmly  fastened  to  the 
shore  with  st\  eral  strong  cables,  to  prevent  its  being  carried 
with  the  stream,  and  this  was  covered  with  a  layer  of 
earth,  like  a  bridge,  in  order  that  the  beasts  might,  with¬ 
out  fej^r,  walk  on  it  as  bn  solid  ground.  Another  raft  of  equal 
breadth,  and  one  hundred  feet  long,  was  fastened  to  this,  and 
when  the  elephants,  being  driven  over  the  fixed  raft  as  on  a 

BOOK  XXL 

429 

JSkC.  218.] 
road,  die  females  going  foremost,  passed  over  to  the  smaller 
oaie  which  was  joined  to  it,  then  the  ropes  with  which  this 
latter  had  been  slightly  tied  were  instantly  loosed,  and  it  was 
towed  away  by  «veral  light  v^sels  to  the  other  bank.  When 
the  first  were  thus  landed,  it  was  brought  back  for  the  test. 
As  long  as  they  were  driven,  as  it  were,  on  a  bridge  con* 
nected  with  the  land,  they  showed  no  signs  of  fear :  they  first 
began  to  be  frightened  when,  the  raft  being  set  loose,  they 
were  separated  from  the  rest,  and  dragged  into  the  deep : 
then  pressing  close  on  one  another,  as  those  on  the  outside 
drew  back  from  the  water,  they  occasioned  a  good  deal  of 
disorder  j  but  terrified  by  seeing  the  water  on  every  side  of 
them,  they  soon  became  quiet.  Some,  indeed,  becoming  out¬ 
rageous,  tumbled  into  the  river,  but  their  own  weight  ren¬ 
dering  them  steady,  though  their  riders  were  thrown  off,  they . 
cautioudy  marched  out  the  shallow  parts,  and  came  safe  to 
land* 
'  XXIX.  While  thus  employed  in  transporting  the  ele^- 
phants,  Hannibal  had  despatched  five  hundred  Numidiiui 
horsemen  towards  the  camp  of  the  Romans,  to  discover 
where  they  lay,  what  were  their  numbers,  and,  if  possible, 
what  their  designs.  This  detachment  of  cavalry  was  met  by 
the  three  hundred  Roman  horse,  sent,  as  mentiemed  above, 
from  the  mouth  of  the  Rhone*  A  battle  ensued,  more  furious 
than  common,  between  such  small  numbers :  for,  besides 
many  wounds,  there  was  a  great  loss  of  lives,  nearly  equal 
t>n  both  sides,  and  it  was  not  until  the  Romans  were  tho¬ 
roughly  fatigued,  that  the  dismay  and  flight  of  the  Numidians 
^yielded  them  the  victory.  On  the  side  of  the  conquerors  fell 
one  hundred  and  sixty,  not  all  Romans  however,  some  of 
them  being  Gauls  ;  and  of  the  vanquished  more  than  two 
hundred.  \  As  this  prelude,  and  omen  likewise,  of  the  war, 
portended  to  the  Romans  a  favourable  issue  on  the  whole,  so 
did  it  a  victory  not  unbloody,  nor  to  be  purchased  without  a 

430 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  534. 

dangerous  struggle.  After  this  action,  the  parties  returned 
to  their  respective  commanders.  On  the  one  hand,  Scipio 
could  form  no  determination,  farther  than  to  regulate  his 
measures  by  the  designs  and  proceedings  of  the  enemy  ;  and, 
on  the  other,  Hannibal  was  in  doubt,  whether  he  should  con¬ 
tinue  his  march  into  Italy  without  intermission,  or  come  to 
an  engagement  with  the  first  Roman  army  that  threw  itself 
in  his  way.  However,  from  the  thoughts  of  an  immediate 
engagement  he  was  diverted  by  the  arrival  of  ambassadors 
from  the  Boians,  and  of  a  chieftain  called  Magalus,  who, 
assuring  him  that  they  would  be  his  guides  on  the  march, 
and  companions  in  the  dangers,  recommended  him  to  reserve 
the  first  essay  of  bis  entire  force  for  the  attack  of  Italy,  and 
not,  pTevioiisIy,  to  hazard  any  diminution  of  his  strength, 
H  s  troops  feared  indeed,  the  enemy,  for  the  memory  of  the 
former  war  was  nv-^t  yet  obliterated  ;  but  much  more  did 
:b  y  dread  the  extreme  difficulty  of  the  march,  and  the  pas- 
j.age  of  the  Alps,  a  matter  exceedingly  formidable,  at  least 
bv  report,  and  to  people  unacquainted  with  those  moun¬ 
tains. 
X  '%X.  Hannibal,  therefore,  as  soon  as  he  had  determined 
to   oct  \l  forward,  and  ditcct  his  operations  against  Italy, 
caii^  d  an  assembly  of  the  soldiers,  and  endeavoured,  by  the 
different  methods  of  reproof  and  exhortation,  to  mould  their 
minds  to  his  purpose.  ^‘'  •He  wondered,”  he .  said,  what 
sudden  ten*or  could  have  taken  possession  of  breasts  hither¬ 
to  always  undaunted.  During  such  a  number  of  years  in 
which  they  carried  arms,  they  were  constantly  victorious ; 
nor  had  left  Spain  until  all  the  nations  and  countries  compre¬ 
hended  between  the  two  opposite  seas  were  under  subjection 
to  Cardiage.  Then,  seized  with  indignation  at  the  Roman 
people  demanding  that  every  person,  concerned  in  the  siege 
of  Saguntum,  should  be  delivered  into  their  hands  as  crimi¬ 
nals,  they  had  passed  the  Iberus,  resolved  to  exterminate  the 

BOOK  XXL 

431 

B.C.  218.] 
Roman  race,  and  to  set  the  world  at  liberty.  No  one,  at  that 
time,  thought  the  march  too  long,  though  they  were  to  con¬ 
tinue  it  from  the  setting  place  of  the  sun  to  that  of  its  rising. 
Now,  when  they  saw  by  far  the  greater  part  of  the  journey 
accomplished,  after  conquering  the  obstructions  of  the  Pyre¬ 
nean  forests,  in  the  midst  of  the  fiercest  nations  ;  after  effect¬ 
ing  their  passage  over  so  great  a  river  as  the  Rhone,  in  the 
face  of  so  many  thousands  of  Gauls  opposing  them  ;  nay, 
when  they  had  the  Alps  within  view,  the  other  side  of  which 
was  a  part  of  Italy,  just  in  the  gates  of  their  enemy’s  coun¬ 
try,  they  grew  weary  and  halted. — Was  it  that  they  conceived 
the  Alps  to  be  any  thing  more  than  high  mountains  ?'  Sup¬ 
pose  them  higher  than  the  summits  of  the  Pyrenees ;  surely 
no  part  of  the  earth  reached  to  the  heaven,  nor  was  of  a  height 
insuperable  by  mankind.  These  eminences  in  reality  were 
inhabited,  cultivated,  produced  and  supported  animals.  Were 
they  passable  by  small  parties,  and  impassable  by  armies  f 
Those  very  ambassadors,  before  their  eyes,  had  not  been 
carried  aloft  on  wings  over  the  Alps.  Neither  had  their  an¬ 
cestors  been  natives  of  the  soil,  but  settlers,  who  came  from 
other  countries  into  Italy,  and  who  crossed  with  safety  those 
same  hills,  often  in  vast  bodies,  with  their  wives  and  chil¬ 
dren,  as  other  colonies  emigrate.  To  a  soldier  carrying  no¬ 
thing  with  him  but  the  implements  of  war,  what  could  be 
impassable  or  insuperable  ?  In  order  to  gain  possessitm  of 
Saguntum,  what  toils,  what  dangers,  did  they  not  undergo, 
for  the  space  of  eight  months  ?  Now,  when  their  object  was 
Rome,  the  capital  of  the  world,  what  difficulty  or  danger 
should  be  deemed  capable  of  retarding  the  enterprize?  1  he 
Gauls  formerly  made  themselves  masters  of  those  very  places 
which  the  Carthaginians  despaired  of  approaching.  Either, 
therefore,  they  must  yield  the  superiority  in  spirit  and  cou¬ 
rage  to  that  nation,  wffiich,  during  a  short  time  past,  the}  had 
so  frequently  overcome  ;  or  they  must  look  for  the  terinin»- 

432 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  534. 

tion  of  their  inarch,  in  the  field  lying  between  the  Tiber  and 
the  walls  of  Rome.” 
XXXI.  When,  by  these  exhortations,  he  had  reanimated 
dieir  courage,  he  ordered  them  to  take  refreshment,  and  pre¬ 
pare  for  a  march.  On  the  following  day,  he  proceeded  up¬ 
wards  along  the  bank  of  the  Rhone,  directing  his  route  to¬ 
wards  the  interior  parts  of  Gaul ;  not  because  that  was  the 
more  direct  road  to  the  Alps,  but  because  he  thought  that 
the  fardi^r  he  withdrew  from  the  sea,  the  less  probability 
there  wodld  be  of  his  meeting  with  the  Romans,  with  whom 
he  did  not  intend  to  come  to  battle,  until  he  should  have  ar¬ 
rived  in  Italy.  After  a  march  of  fou^days,  he  came  to  the 
Island.  Here  the  rivers  Isara  and  Rhone,  which  run  down 
from  different  parts  of  the  Alps,  after  encompassing  a  pretty 
large  tract  of  ground,  unite  their  streams,  and  the  plain  en¬ 
closed  between  them  is  called  the  Island.  The  adjacent 
country  is  inhabited  by  the  AUobroges,  a  nation,  even  in 
those  times,  inferior  to  none  in  Gaul  in  power  and  reputation, 
but  at  that  juncture  weakened  by  discord.  Two  brothers 
disputed  the  sovereignty.  The  elder,  who  had  been  invested 
with  the  government,  by  name  Brancus,  was  dispossessed  by 
the  younger  brother,  and  a  combination  of  the  younger  men ; 
on  which  side,  though  there  was  less  justice,  there  was  more 
strength.  Most  opportunely,  the  parties  in  this  dtssensioii 
referred  their  pretensions  to  the  judgment  of  Hannibal,  who 
being  appointed  arbitrator  of  the  disputed  sovereignty,  gave 
a  decision  agreeable  to  the  sense  of  the  senate,  and  of  the 
principal  men  of  the  state ;  that  the  government  should  be 
restored  to  the  elder.  In  requital  of  which  favour,  he  was 
assisted  with  a  supply  of  provisions,  and  plenty  of  all  kind 
of  necessaries,  particularly  of  clothing,  which  the  terrible  ac¬ 
counts  of  the  cold  of  the  higher  regions  made  it  necessary  to 
provide.  After  settling  the  disputes  of  the  AUobroges,  though 
now  bent  on  proceeding  to  the  Alps,  he  took  not  the  direct 

BOOK  XXL 

433 

B,C.  218.] 

road  thidier,  but  turned  to  the  left  into  the  country  of  the  Tri- 
castines ;  thence,  through  the  extreme  boundaries  of  the  Vo- 
cpntian  ter^tory^  he  advanced  into  that  of  the  Tricorians, 
meetmg  no  obstruction  until  he  came  to  the  river  Druentia* 
This  also,  deriving  its  source  from  the  Alps,  is,  of  all  the 
rivers  in  Gaul,  the  most  difficult  to  pass ;  for,  though  con- 
veying  a  vast  body  of  water,  it  admits  not  the  i^e  of  ships ; 
because,  being  confined  by  no  banka,  it  flows  in  several,  and 
not  ^ways  the  same  channels,  continually  forming  new  shal¬ 
lows,  and  new  whirlpools,  so  that  a  person  is  in  danger  of 
missing  his  way ;  and  besides,  rolling  down  loose  gritty 
stones,  the  footing  is  unsteady.  Happening  too,  at  that  time, 
to  be  swelled  by  rain^,  it  caused  the  utmost  disorder  among 
the  troops  on  their  ^passage,  and  which  was  much  increai^d 
by  their  own  huny^  and  confused  clamours. 
XXXII.  In  about  three  days  after  HannibaPs  moving 
from  the  bank  of  the  Rhone,  the  consul  Publius  Cornelius 
had  come  with  his  forces,  in  order  of  battle,  to  the  camp  of 
the  enemy,  intending  to  fight  them  without  delay.  But  find¬ 
ing  the  fortifications  abandoned,  and  concluding  that,  as  they 
had  got  the  start  of  him  so  far,  it  would  be  difficult  to  over¬ 
take  them,  he  marched  back  to  the  sea,  where  his  ships  lay  ; 
for  he  judged  that  he  might  thus  with  greater  ease  and  safety 
meet  Hannibal  on  his  descent  from  the  Alps.  However, 
not  to  leave  Spain,  the  province  which  the  lots  had  assigned 
to  his  care,  destitute  of  the  aid  of  Roman  troops,  he  sent  his 
brother  Cncius.  Scipio,  with  the  greater  part  of  his  forces, 
against  Hasdrubal,  with  the  expectation  not  merely  of  pro¬ 
tecting  old  allies,  and  acquiring  new,  but  of  driving  him  out 
of  Spain.  He  himself,  with  a  very  small  ^force,  repaired  to 
Genoa,  proposing,  with  the  army  which  was  stationed  on 
the  Po,  to  provide  for  the  security  of  Italy.  From  the  Dru- 
eotia,  Hannibal,  passing  through  a  tract  in  general  level,  with¬ 
out  any  molestation  from  the  Gauls  inhabiting  those  regionS| 
voi/.  II. — 3  K 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

4U 

[Y.R.534. 

at  the  And  nom^  notwithstairfmg  that  Ae  mat 
had  already  ccHiceived  Botkms  of  the  scene  from  repeat, 
which,  ia  cases  capable  of  misrcfaesentatioa,  generally  goes 
beyond  the  truth,  yet  the  present  view  es^ibited  such  ob¬ 
jects  as  renewed  all  their  terrors  j  the  height  of  the  laoim- 
^ms,  die  snows  almost  touching  the  sky,  die  wretched  hats 
standing  on^he  cliffs,  the  ciude  and  leasts  shivering  with  die 
cold,  the  people  squalid  and  in  uncouth  dress,  all  diings,  in 
short,  animate  and  inanimate,  stiffened  ^ith  fi^st,  besides 
other  circumstances  more  shocking  to  the  sight  than  can  be 
represented  in  words.  As  they  marched  up  the  first  acclivi¬ 
ties,  they  beheld  the  eminences  which  hung  over  diem  cover¬ 
ed  with  parties  of  the  mountaineers,  who,  if  they  had  posted 
themselves  in  the  vallies  out  of  view,  and,  rushing  out  sud¬ 
denly,  had  made  an  unexpected  attack,  must  have  occasioned 
the  most  terrible  havoc  and  dismay.  Hannibal  commanded 
the  troops  to  halt,  zad  having  discovered  from  some  Gauls, 
whom  he  sent  forward  to  examine  the  ground,  that  there  was 
no  passage  on  that  side,  encamped  in  the  widest  vaHcywhith 
he  could  find,  where  the  whole  circuit  around  consisted  of 
rocks  and  precipices.  Then,  having  gained  intelligence  by 
means  of  the  same  Gauls,  (who  differed  not.  much  from  the 
others  in  language  or  manners,  and  who  had  entered  into 
conversation  with  them,)  that  the  pass  was  blocked  up  only 
by  day,  and  that,  at  nig^t,  they  separated  to  their  several 
dwellings,  he  advanced  at  the  first  dawn  to  the  eminences, 
as  if  with  the  design  of  forcing  his  way  through  the  pass. 
This  feint  he  carried  on  through  the  whole  day,  his  men  at 
the  same  time  fortifying  a  camp  in  the  spot  where  they  were 
drawn  up.  As  soon  as  he  understood  that  the  mountaineers 
had  retired  from  the  heights,  and  withdrawn  their  guards, 
he  made,  for  a  show,  a  greater  number  of  fires  than  was  pro¬ 
portioned  to  the  troops  who  remained  in  the  camp,  and,  leav¬ 
ing  behind  the  baggage,  with  the  cavalry  and  the  greatest 

435 

BX.  2i8.]  BOOK  XXI, 
part  o£,4Ke  in&i^rjr,  he  himself  widi  a  light-armed  band, 
^mp^ed  of  the  mt^t  dmng  men  in  the  army,  pushed  rapid¬ 
ly  dvroo^  tl^  pass,  and  took  pc»t  mi  ^ose  very  eminences 
of  wbi<^  die  enemy  had  in  poss^i^pn.  ^ 
XXXXXI.  At  the  $rst  dawn  of  the  next  day,  die  rest  of 
the  arn^  began  to  maHh  By  this  time  the  maun* 
tmneers,  op  a  signal  given,  were  cmning  together  out  erf  dieir 
fortresses  to  their  usual  .station ;  wt^n,  cm  a  smiden^Vthey 
perceived  a  part  of  the  enemy  over  thehr^heads  in  possession 
of  their  own^sOroi^  fpst,  and  die  rest  pas^ng  along  the  road. 
Bc4h  these  cirepmataiKes  Itrildng  diem  at  once,  they  were 
some  time  incaqiable  pf  thought,  or  of  turning  their  eyes 
tomiyodier  object.  Aft^^4rd%  when  they  observed  the 
ccmhi^on  in  the  pass,  and  diat  the  body  of  the  e^my  was 
disordered  on  their  march,  faj^  the  hurry  among  tlujmselves, 
and  particularly  by  the  muruiiness  of  the  affrighted  horses,  it 
was  imagined  that,  to  augment  in  any  degree  the  terror  under 
which  they  already  laboured,  were  effectually  to  destroy 
them:  they  therefore  ran  down  the  rocks  in  an  oblique  di¬ 
rection  through  pathl^s  and  circuitous  ways,  which  habitual 
practice  rendered  easy  to  them:  and  now  the  Carthaginians 
had  to  cemte^,  at  once,  with  the  Gauls  and  the  disadvantage 
of  the  ground  V  an<|  there  was  a  greater  struggle  among 
themselves  tl|an  with  the  enemy,  for  every  one  strove  to  get 
first  out  of  danger.  But  the  greatest  disorder  was  occasion¬ 
ed  by  the  horses,  which,  affrighted  at  the  dissonant  clamours, 
multiplied  by  the  echoes  from  tiie  woods  and  vaUies,  became 
nearly  unmanageable  ;  and  when  they  happened  to  receive 
a  stroke  or  a  wound,  grew  so  unruly  as  to  overthrow  num¬ 
bers  of  men,  and  heaps  of  baggage  of  all  sorts  ;^nd  as  there 
were  abrupt  precipices  on  each  side  of  the  pass,  their  vio¬ 
lence  cast  dpwn  many  to  an  immense  depth,  so  that  the  fiiR 
of  such  great  masses  produced  a  dreadful  effect.  Although 
these  were  shocking  sights  to  Hannibal,  yet  he  kept  his  jdace 

4M 

HISTOEY  OF  EOME, 

[Y,R.  534. 

f<M:  a  whik,  and  restraini^  the  troops  that  were  with  him, 
he  should  ehcrease  the  tumult  and  confusioa.  Afier^ 
wards, ^  seeing  line  <d  the  army  broken,  and  that  there 
was  danger  of  their  bei^  wholly  deprived  of  their  baggage,' 
in  whieh  ca^  die  eflfecting  of  their  passage  would  ans#er 
no  purpose,  be  hastened  down  from  die  higher  ground ;  and 
whilejby  the  mere  rapidity  of  Ins  moumi,  be  dispersed  the 
forces  of  the  enemy,  he  at  ^e  same  time  increased  the  con¬ 
fusion  among  lus  own.  But  this,  when  the  roads  were  clear¬ 
ed  by  the  flight  ^f  the  mountaineers,  instantly  remedied, 
and  the  t^hole  army  was  so<m  brought  through  the  pass  not 
only  widiout  disturbance,  but  ahnpst  without  nobe.  He 
then  seized  a  fo^  which  was  tte  capital  of  that  district,  and 
several  villages  that  lay  round  it,  and  fed  his  army  for  three 
days  with  catde  taken  from^the  fugitives.  During  these 
three  days,  as  he  was  not  incommoded  by  the  nKnintaineers, 
nor  much  by  the  nature  of  the  grouhd,  he  made  a  considera¬ 
ble  prigress  in  his  march. 
XXXIV .  He  then  reached  the  territory  of  another  state, 
which  was  thickly  inhabited  for  a  mountainous  country : 
there,  he  was  very  near  suffering  a  defeat,  not  by  open  force, 
but  by  his  own  ^  arts,  treachery  and  ambush.  Some  men  of 
advanced  age,  governors  of  their  forts,  came  to  the  Cartha¬ 
ginian  as  ambassadors,  with  humble  representations,  that  as 
the  calamities  of  others  had  afforded  them  a  profitable  lesson, 
they  wished  to  make  trial  of  the  frieindship,  rather  than  of 
the  strength,  of  the  Carthaginians.  '^That  they  were,  there¬ 
fore,  resolved  to  yield  obedience  to  all  iiis  commands,  mid 
requested  him  to  accept  of  provisions  and  guides  on  his 
march,  and  hostages  to  ensure  the  performance  of  tteir  en¬ 
gagements.”  Hannibal  neither  hastily  crediting,  nor  yet 
slighting  their  c^ers,  lest,  if  rejected,  they  might  dechire 
openly  against  him,  after  returning  a  favourable  answer,  ac¬ 
cepted  the  hostages,  and  made  use  of  the  provision  which 

^OK  xxi: 

B.c.  2ia,] 

4Sf 

they  had,  of  theii*  own  aceord,  brought  to  I  but  fol* 
lowed  die  guides,  not  as  through  a  friendly  country,  Inlt  with 
the  strictest  order  in  his  march.  The  elephants  mxd  cavahy 
com[Kk^d  the  van,  and  he  himself  followed  with  the  main 
body  of  tte  infantry,  carefully  inspecting  every  particular. 
On  their  eomtng  into  a  road  narrower  than  the  rest,  conimed, 
on  one  side,  Iqr  an  impending  hill,  the  barbarians  rising  upon 
all  sides  from  places  where  they  had  lain  concealed,  assailed 
them  in  iront  and  rear,  in  close  and  ki  distant  rolling 
down  also  htfge  iwks  on  the  troops.  The  most  numerous 
body  pressed  on  the  rear.  There,  the  main  force  of  infantry 
was  ready  to  oppose  them  ;  but  hadTnoi  that  been  very  strong, 
it  must  undoubtefiy,  in  such  a  difficult  pass,  have  sirffered 
very  great  loss ;  feven  as  the  case  stood,  it  was  brought  to  the 
extremity  of  danger,  and  almc^t  to  destruction.  For  whilst 
Hannibal  hesitated  to  lead  down  his  horsemen  into  Ae  nar¬ 
row  road,  though  he  had  left  no  kind  of  support  at  the  back 
of  the  infantry,  the  mountaineers,  rushing  across  and  break¬ 
ing  through  between  the  two  *divisions  of  the  army,  took 
possession  of  the  pa§s,  and  Hannibal  spe^tme  night  separa¬ 
ted  from  his  cavalry  and  baggage. 
XXXV.  Next  day,  Ae  barbarians  having  rdanDed  the  vio¬ 
lence  of  their  attacks  in  A^^entre,  the  trcK^s  were  re-united, 
and  emried  Arough  the  defile,  but  nc^  without  loss  ;  the  des¬ 
truction,  however,  was  greater  among  Ae  leasts  of  burthen 
than  amoi^  \the  men.  ^  Thenceforward,  the  mounmineers 
made  Aeir  attacks  in  smaHer  i^rties,  more  hke  rtAl^rs  Aan 
an  army ;  at  one  time,  on  the  van^  at  another,  cm  Ae  rear ; 
just  as  the  ground  happened  to  afford  them  an  advantage,  or 
as  stragglers  advancing  before  the  r^t,  or  *stapng  behind, 
gave  Aem  an  opportunity.  As  the  driving  the  elephants 
through  the  narrow  roads,  even  with  all  the  baste  that  could 
be  made,  occasioned  much  loss  of  time,  so  wherever  ttey 
went,  they  effectually  secured  the  troops  from  the  enemy. 

48*  a0M£.  [Y.». 
iN^g  iMlfM^^aied' to* «acli  oefttureB,  cbmed  tgx3A,po 
«8ine  «|Bar  duf  die  sraif  ^«es|deted  ^ 
mc^totkatmuok  t^  d^  Alpe^  ia|Mtfy  llQ»agk  {^^tden 
tmet*  aad  wroag  inio,  wbidi  they  ha4  hec^  lei^  othor 
fqrths  «reacheiy>  <d^dKir  guid^i  ox,  not 
trusted,  rashly,  ea  ^  stre^^tb  t£  4bdz  omxitp^eetures,  fol> 
kwii^  die  cstisa^ea  4^  die  s^iei|...  vite  dhe  stwraih  4tey  ri^ 
mained  enciunped  two  4^,  vw  erdter  Jd  jredvsh^tbe  sdtdiersi 
wlui  weiaiiMkt  sqai  S^ttagj  «nd,i«s  dme, 
severd  ctf  'ttie  bea^^  jBdien  adsorb  the  rocks,  f(d- 
lowii^  the  tracfa  of  the  unay,  came  into  dm  eam|>.<  .  Tired 
as  die  tro(^  #jere,ef  sti^|^^-SGf  Ipog  wtdt  hardships,  diey 
fc^ad  their  tetasrs  very  msi^  -mcreased.  of,.snotr, 
thu  belag  the  ^ason  of  the  setting  of  die^eo^^Batimiof  die 
]^iades4.  The  troopt-  isere  pat  4a‘B^>twa^wi|h  the  first 
light ;  -rad  as  th^  marched  jt^m%5««Br~grou^  which  vm 
endrefy  covered,  with  spe^,.|h^^eoQemvilhd  desfair  beisg 
strongly  marked  in  evety  Awe,  Haraibid  went  fiarward  im> 
fore  the  standarde,  rad  orderutgjthestddiers  to  hah  cm  a 
jectmg  eminen;^.  from  whid>  there  was  a  widenex^nded 
prospect,  made^tihem  take  a  vi^  cdF  Italy,  and  of  the  pbins 
about  the  Pc^  stretching  dong  the  footmf  dw  mouQhtiasj 
them  told  them,  thd'  “  they  were  now  scding  the  waUs,'  not 
only  of  Italy,,  hat  of  the  eky  of  Rome.  That .  all  the  rest 
would  be  plain  and  smooth,  and  i&er  one,  or,  sd  most,  a-  se* 
ccmd  batde,  they  wodd  have  the  bulwark  and  cafutal  of  Italy 
in  their  power  rad  disposal,”  The  army  then  be^ra  to  ad* 
vrace,  -die  enemy  now  desisting  from  any  fardier  attempts 
oo  them,  except  .by  trifling  paties  for  pil^ging,  as  opportu* 
si^teffa^.  But  the  vi3ey  was  much  mmre  difficult  than  it 
had  been  in  the  ascent;  the  declivity,  on  the  Itdhm  side  of 
the  Ai^,  behig,  m  most  places,  shorter,  and  coiwequendy 

The  beginning  Novend^. 

XXI. 

4^ 

Jk€. 
moi%  per^i^tcuto  3  wh^e  die  whcde  was  ti^rrow  and 
,  so  tb^t  the  soyiers^eoi^Mttst^l^Vefi^  their  feet  frnm 
sliding,  nor  if  they  made  tbs  least  false  step,  could  they,  cm 
faUti^,  stop  tbemselv^  in.  1^  place ;  and  thi^  men  and 
beasts  tumbled  promiscuously  over  one  another. 
XXXVI.  Tfiey  then  ^me  to  a  ridge  amch  narrowjer  than 
the  c^hers^  and  composed  of  rock  so  upnght,  that  a  lij^t- 
armed  soldier^  making  the  trial,  coidd  with  much  difficidty, 
by  laying  hold  of  bushes  and  roots,  which  appeared  here  and 
there,  accomplUh  the  descent.  In  this  place  the  precipice, 
originally  great,  bad,  by  a  late  falling  away  of  the  earth,  been 
increased  to  the  depdi  of  at  least  one  thousand  feet.  Here 
the  cav^ry  stopped,  ^  if  at  the.  end  of  their  journey,  and 
Hannibal,  wondering  what  could  be  the  cause  ot  the  tremps 
halting,  was  told  that  the  cliff  was  impassable.  ^Ilien  going 
up  himself  to  view  die  place,  it  seemed  clear  to  him  tfa^^lie 
roust  lead  his  army  in  a  circuit,  though  ever  sp  great,  and 
through  tracts  never  trodden  before.  That  way,  however, 
was  foimd  to  be  impracticable.  0Th^  old  snow,  indeed,  had 
become  hard,  and  being  covered  with  the  new  of  a  mcnlerate 
depth,  the  men  fotmd  good  footing  as  they  walked  through 
it  3  but  when  that  was  dissolved  by  the  treading  of  so  mahy 
men  and  beasts,  they  then  trod  on  the  naked  ice  below.  Here 
they  were  much  impeded,  because  the  foot  could  take  ho  hold 
on  the  smooth  ice,  and  was  besides  the  more  apt  to  slip,  on 
account  of  the  declivity  of  the  ground  ;  and  whether  they  at¬ 
tempted  to  rise,  either  by  the  aid  of  hands  or  knees,  the^ 
slipping,  they  fell  again  ;  add  to  this,  that  there  weie  neither 
stumps  nor  roots  within  reach,  on  which  they  could  leam  for 
support ;  so  that  they  wallowed  in  the  melted  snow  on  one 
entire  surface  of  slippery  ice.  This  the  cattle  sometimes 
penetrated  as  soon  as  their  feet  reached  the  lower  bed,  and 
sometimes,  when  they  lost  their  footing,  by  striking  mop: 
stiongly  with  theia  hoofs  in  striving  to  keep  themselves  up. 

440  HISTOSy  OF.ROME.  [Y.R.  534* 
1)1^  iHxjke  it  eatirely  through  ;  so  that  greatest  part 
oCthem,  as  if  caught  in  traps,  stiwk  fast  in  the  hard  and  deep 
ice. 
XXXVII.  At  leug^th,  after  men  and  beasts  were  heartily 
fatigued  to  no  purporo,  they  fixed  a  cwnp  on  the  summit, 
having  with  very  great  difficulty  cleared  even  the  ground 
which  that  required,  sogp-eat  was  the  quantity  of  snow  to  be 
dug  and  carried  off.  The  soldiers  were  then  employed  to 
make  a  way  down  the  steep,  through  which  alone  >t  was  p{»- 
sible  to  effect  a  passage ;  and,  as  it  was  necessary  to  tneak 
the  mass,  they  felled  and  lopped  a  number  of  huge  trees 
whidi  stood  near,  which  they  rais«l  into  a  vast  pile,  and  as 
soon  as  a  smart  wind  arose,  to  forward  the  kindling  of  it,  set 
it  on  fire,  and  then,  when  the  stone  was  violently  heated, 
made  it  crumble  to  pieces  by  pouring  on  vinegar.  When  the 
rock  was  thus  disjointed,  by  tjje  power  of  the  heat,  dicy 
opened  a  way  through  it  with  iron  instruments,  and  inclined 
the  descents  in  such  a  manner,  that  not  only  the  beasts  of 
burthen,  but  even  the  elephants,  could  be  brou^t  down. 
Four  days  were  spent  about  this  rock,  during  which  the  cat. 
tie  were  nearly  destroyed  by  hunger,  for  the  summits  are,  for 
the  roost  part,  bare,  and  whatever  litde  pasture  there  might 
have  been,  was  covered  by  the  snow.  In  the  lower  parts  arc 
vallies  and  some  hills,  which  enjoying  the  benefit,  of  the 
with  rivulets  at  the  side  of  the  woods,  are  better  suited  to  be¬ 
come  the  residence  of  human  Wings.  There  the  hpmes  were 
sent  out  to  pasture,  and  the  men,  fatigued  with  their  labour 
on  the  r^,  allowed  to  rest  for  three  days.  They  then  de¬ 
scended  into  the  plains,  where  the  climate,  and  likewise  the 
temper  of  the  inhabitants,  were  of  a  still  milder  casf. 
XXXVIII.  In  this  maDner,.as  nearly  as  can.be  ascertained, 
they  accomplished  their  passage  into  Italy,  in  the  fifth  month, 
according  to  some  authors,  after  leaving  New  Carthage,  hav¬ 
ing  spent  fifteen  days  in  crossing  the  Alps.  As  to  what  nom- 

BOOK  XXI. 

441 

B.C.218.] 
bcr  of  forces  Hannibal  had  when  he  arrived  in  Italy^  writers 
by  no  means  agi:ee.  Thow  who  state  them  at  the  highest, 
make  them  amount  to  one  hundred  thousand  foot,  and  twen¬ 
ty  thousand  horse ;  while  those  who  state  them  at  the  lowest, 
say  twenty  dtousand  foot,  and  six  of  horse.  The  authority 
of  Lucius  Cincius  Alimentus,  who  writes  that  he  was  taken 
prisoner  by  Hannibal,  would  have  the  greatest  weight  wWi 
me,  did  he  not  confound  the  number,  by  adding  the  Gauls 
and  Ligurians.  He  says  that,  including  these,  (who  it  is 
more  piobable  however  flocked  to  him  afterwards,  and  so 
some  writers  assert,)there  were  brought  into  Italy  eighty  thou-  # 
sand  foot,  and  ten  thousand  horse  ;  and  that  he  heard  from 
Hannibal  himself,  that  from  the  time  of  his  passing  the  Rhone, 
he  had  lost  thirty-six  thousand  men,  together  with  a  vast  num¬ 
ber  of  horses,  and  other  beasts  of  burthen,  before  he  left  the 
country  of  the  Taurinians,  the  next  nation  to  the  Gauls,  as 
he  went  down  into  Italy.  That  he  came  through  this  state, 
is  agreed  on  by  all ;  I  am  therefore  the  more  surprised  at  its 
remaining  doubtful  by  what  road  he  crossed  the  Alps  ;  and  # 
that  the  opinion  should  commonly  prevail,  that  he  passed 
over  the  Pennine  hill,  and  that  from  thence  that  summit  of 
these  mountains  got  its  name.  Coelius  says,  that  he  passed 
over  the  hill  of  Cremo.  Either  of  these  passes  would  have  led 
him  not  into  the  territory  of  the  Taurinians,  but  through  that 
of  the  mountaineers,  called  Salassians,  to  the  Libuan  Gauls. 
Nor  is  it  probable,  that  those  roads  into  hither  Gaul  should, 
at  that  time,  have  been  open  ;  those,  especially,  which  lead 
to  the  Pennine  hill,  would  have  been  blocked  up  by  nations 
half  German.  And  besides,  if  the  asserdons  of  the  inhabi¬ 
tants  be  admitted  as  an  argument  of  any  weight,  it  must  be 
allowed,  that  the  Vcragrians,the  inhabitant  of  that  very  hiH, 
deny  that  the  name  was  given  to  these  mountains  from  any 
passage  of  the  Cartha^nians,  and  allege  that  it  was  so  named 
VOL.  it.1^  L 

443 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

lY.R.  534. 

frpfl®  a  persoa,  xalled  by  the  mouatak^ers  Pennicus,  wor¬ 
shipped  as  a  divinity  on  the  highest  top. 
^XXIX.  Hannibal  had  now  a  favourable  opportunity  for 
commencing  his  operations  j  the  Tauriuians,  the  nation  lying 
nearest  in  his  way^  being  at  war  with  iJie  Insnbrians.  But 
be  could  not  put  bis  forces  under  arms  to  assist  either  party, 
because  they  now  felt  most  sensibly,  while  endeavouring  to 
remedy  them,  the  maladies  which  they  had  before  contract¬ 
ed.  For  rest  after  toil,  plenty  after  scarcity,  and  care  of  dieir 
persons  after  a  course  of  filth  and  nastiness,  produced  little 
effect  in  the  various  disorders  of  those  whose  bodies  were 
grown  squalid  and  filthy  to  a  degree  of  brutality.  This  con¬ 
sideration  induced  the  consul  Publius  Cornelius,  as  soon  as 
he  arrived  with  the  fleet  at  Pisae,  though  the  army  which  he 
received  from  Manlius  .and  Atilius  was  composed  of  raw 
troops,  and  dispirited  by  their  late  disgraces,  to  hasten  to  the 
Po,  in  order  that  he  might  engage  the  enemy  before  he  should 
recover  his  vigour.  But  by  the  time  the  consul  came  to  Pla- 
centia»  Hannibal  had  moved  from  his  post,  and  had  taken  by 
storm  a  city  of  the  Taurinians,  the  metropolis  of  the  nation, 
becai^e  it  had  refused  an  offer  of  his  friend^ip  j  and  he 
would  have  drawn  over  to  his  side,  either  by  their  fears  or 
inclinations,  all  the  Gauls  dwelling  near  the  Po,  had  not  the 
sodden  arrival  of  Cornelius,  when  they  were  watching  for  an 
occasion  of  revolting,  put  a  stop  to  their  measures.  Hannibal 
likewise  advanced  towards  them  from  the  country  of  the 
Taurinians,  in  expectation  that,  as  they  had  not  yet  resolved 
what  party  they  would  join,  his  presence  might  determine 
them  m  his  favour.  The  armies  were  now  almost  within 
view  of  each  other,  and  the  leaders,  thoi^h  not  yet  thorough- 
acquainted,  brought  with  them  a  degree  of  mutual  adnal- 
ration :  for  the  name  of  Hannibal,  even  before  the  destruc¬ 
tion  of  Saguntum,  was  highly  famed  among  die  Romans ; 
and  the  very  circumstance  of  Scipio  having  been  particularly 

BOOK  XXL 

443 

B.C.  218.] 
chosen  for  the  commas^,  »upp<»ed  him  a  person  of  extraor¬ 
dinary  merit.  They  were  exsdted  still  higher  in  each  ewer’s 
opitiicm ;  Scipio,  by  the  celerity  with  which,  though  left  be¬ 
hind  in  Gaul,  he  had  met  Hannibal  at  his  coming  down  into 
Italy :  Hannibal,  by  having  not  only  formed,  but  executed, 
the  daring  design  of  passing  over  the  Alps.  Scipio,  how¬ 
ever,  frst  crossed  the  Po,  and  removed  his  camp  to  the  river 
Ticinus  ;  where,  wishing  to  encourage  his  soldiers  before  he 
led  them  out  to  battle,  he  addressed  them  in  a  speech  to  thH 
effect. 
XL.  ^  Soldiers,  if  I  were  marching^  to  battle  at  the  head 
of  the  army  which  I  had  with  me  in  Gaul,  I  should  have 
thought  it  needless  to  use  any  words  to  you :  for  why  exhort 
either  those  horsemen,  who,  without  difficulty,  defeated  the 
enemy’s  cavalry  at  the  river  Rhone  j  or  those  legions,  with 
whom  I  pursued  this  same  enemy,  and  obtained,  by  their  re¬ 
fusing  to  Eght,  and  actually  flying  before  us,  an  acknowledg¬ 
ment  of  victory  ?  in  the  present  state'rff  things,  as  that  army, 
which  was  enlisted  for  the  province  of  Spain,  is  employed 
with  my  brother  Cneius  Scipio,  under  my  auspices,  in  the 
place  where  it  was  the  will  of  the  senate  and  people  of  Rome, 
that  it  should  be  employed  ;  and  thsft  I,  in  order  that  you 
might  have  a  consul  to  lead  you  against  Hannibal  and  the 
Carthaginians,  have  taken  a  voluntary  part  in  this  contest  j 
as  a  new  commander,  I  think  it  requisite  to  speak  a  few  words 
to  soldiers  who  are  new  to  me.  Now,  that  you  shotdd  not 
be  unacquainted  either  with  the  nature  of  the  war,  or  with 
the  enemy,  know,  soldiers,  that  you  are  to  fight  against  men 
whom,  in  the  former  war,  you  conquered  both  on  land  and 
sea  ;  from  whom  you  have  exacted  tribute,  for  twenty  years 
past ;  from  whom  you  took,  and  sttH  hold,  Sicily  and  Sardi¬ 
nia,  the  prizes  of  your  victory.  In  the  present  dispute,  con¬ 
sequently,  the  spirit  of  the  parties  will  be — yours,  that  of 
conquerors  ^  theirs,  that  of  men  conquered.  Nor  is  it  con- 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

iYM.  534 

but  necesaity,  which  txcuw  promps  ihem  to 
lUilesB  you  suppose,  that  those  who  avcu^d  fightk^,  when 
their  £0tcc  was  entire,  have  acquired  greater  c<wfidtoce  after 
the  hm  of  two^thirds  of  tl^  infaa^  cavalry,  in 
^issage  over  the  Alps ;  after  greater  numbeta  have  {^rished 
than  survive.  But  it  may  be  said,  they  are  few  inde^,  but 
vigorous  in  mind  and  body,  having  a  power  mid  stre^di  no 
force  can  withstand.  On  the  contrary,  they  are  but  the  re¬ 
semblance,  mere  shadows  of  men^  r«idered  lifeless  by  him- 
ger,  cold,  filth,  and  nastiness  ;  battered  and  disabled  among 
the  rocks  and  precipices.  Add  to  this,  their  joints  benumbed, 
their  sinews  stiffened,  their  limbs  shrivelled  by  the  frost,  their 
armour  shattered  and  broken,  their  hm'ses  lamed  mad  enfee¬ 
bled.  Such  is  the  infantry,  such  the  cavalry,  with  whom  you 
are  to  %ht.  You  will  have  to  deal,  not  with  ^lemies,  but 
the  remams  of  enemies.  And  nothing  do  1  fear  more,  than, 
lest,  before  you  come  to  a  battle,  die  Al|^  may  appear  to 
have  conquered  Hannibal.  But  ppkaps  it  was  right  diat  it 
should  be  so ;  that,  gainst  a  natimi  mad  commander,  ^Ity 
of  a  breach  of  treades,  the  Gods  tteo^elves  shcHild  commence 
the  war,  and  break  the  force  of  thp  enemy ;  smd  diat  we  who, 
next  to  the  gods,  were  the  party  it^ured,  should  then  tate  it 
up,  and  carry  it  on  to  a  conclusion. 
XLl.  In  what  1  say  on  this  head,  I  am  not  afraid  of  be¬ 
ing  suspected  of  ostenl^ious  boating,  for  die  purpm^  of 
encouraghig  you  j..  while  my  reaf  Sentiments  are  difierept.^l 
might  have  proceeded  with  my  army  into  Spain,  my^n 
province,  to  which  I  had  gone  part  of  die  way  j  where  I  should 
have  had  my  brother  to  assist  me  in  commil,  and  to  share  the 
danger ;  and,  instead  of  Hannibal,  I  should  have  had  Has- 
druba!  to  contend  with ;  and,  certainly,  a  less  difficult  war 
to  manage.  Nevertheless,  as  I  sailed  derng  the  cemt  of  Gaul, 
havmg  heard  of  the  approach  of  this  enemy,  I  landed,  sent 
forward  my  cavalry,  and  moved  my  camp  to  the  Rhone,  In 

BOOK  XXI. 

445 

8.C.  2IB.3 
m  battle,  fought  by  die  cavalry,  the  only  part  of  my  forces 
Which  had  an  opportunity  of  fighting,  the  enemy  was  routed ; 
and  because  1  could  not,  on  land,  overtake  their  body  df  in« 
fantry,  which  was  carried  away  with  all  the  rapidity  of  flight, 
1  returned  to  my  ships,  and  with  the\itmoat  expedition  that 
1  could  make,  through  such  a  long  circuit  by  sea  ami  land,  I 
have  met  him  at  die  foot  of  the  Alps.  Now,  whether  do  I 
appear  to  have  fallen  in  unawares  with  this  formidable  foe, 
while  I  wished  to  decline  a  contest  with  him,  or  to  have 
designedly  thrown  myself  in  the  way  of  his  route,  to  chal¬ 
lenge  and  fm-ce  him  to  a  trial  of  strength  ?  I  feel  a  strong 
desire  to  try  whether,  in  these  twenty  years  past,  the  emh 
has  ail  at  emee  fu^oduced  a  new  breed  of  Carthaginians ;  or 
whetlwr  they  are  the  same  with  those  who  fought  at  the 
islands  iEgates,  whom  you  ransomed  at  £ryx  at  a  vdt^on 
of  eighteen  denari*  a  head ;  and  whether  this  Hannibal  be,  - 
as  he  represents  himself,  another  Hercules,  equ^y  renowned 
for  his  expedition  ;  or  one  left  by  his  father,  a  subject,  a 
tributary,  and  slave  to  the  Roman  people  ;  w’^ho,  if  he  were 
not  struck  with  madness,  as  a.  punishment  for  the  guilt  of 
his  behaviour  at  Saguntum,  would  reflect,  if  not  on  the  con¬ 
quest  of  his  country,  at  least  on  the  acts  of  his  own  family  ; 
on  his  father,  on  the  treaties  written  by  the  hand  of  Hamil- 
car  ;  who,  in  ol^dtence  to  the  commands  of  our  consul,  with¬ 
drew  Ws  finrees  frmn  Eryx ;  who,  agitated  with  extreme  sor¬ 
row,  accepted  the  burthensome  conditions  imposed  on  the 
conquered  Carthaginians,  and  signed  an  engagement  to  eva¬ 
cuate  Sicily,  and  to  pay  tribute  to  the  Roman  people.  Where- 
forcf  soldiers,  I  wish  that  you  may  fight,  not  only  with  the 
aame  spirit  which  you  usus^y  show  against  other  foes,  but 
with  a  degree  of  resentment  and  imfignation,  as  if  you  saw 
your  own  slaves  suddenly  taking  arms  against  you. 

11r.7<3 

416 

Hisroar  of  Rome. 

[¥JR.  su. 
tdight  have  ke{^  them  shut  at  Erpt^  ub^  ptf^s^d 
with  huuger,  the  severest  suffmiig  dmt  mm  cm  wdergo ; 
we  have  carried  over  our  victorious  fleet  to  Africa  ; 
and^  ui  the  space  of  a  few  dafs^  without  opptm^^bat,  hi^re 
dexucdished  Carthage.  At  their  sup^ications,  we  grauti^l 
pardon  :  we  gave  them  liberty  to  depart  liom  the  place  where 
we  held  them  confiaed,|  after  conquering  tbem^  we  made 
peace  with  them ;  afterwards^  when  tb^  were  dis^^ed  by 
a  war  in  Africa,  we  considered  them  as  entitled  to  our  pfo- 
tec^on.  la  return  for  these  favours,  they  follow  %ht  lead  of 
a  hm^braiaed  youth,  and  come  to  invade  our  country^  I 
wish,  that  on  our  side,  diis  contest  was  merely  for  g^ory,  lud 
&at  for  safety.  We  are  not  to  fight  about  the  j^^sskar  uf 
Sicily  and  Sardinia,  the  subjects  of  the  ibrmer  dispute,  hut 
in  defence  of  Italy ;  neither  is  there  another  army  behind  us, 
which,  if  we  fail  to  conquer,  might  withsmnd  the  enemy ; 
nor  arc  there  other  Alps,  during  his  passage  over  which  new 
forces  might  be  procured.  Here,  seddiers,  we  must  make  a 
stand,  as  if  we  were  fighting  under  the  walls  of  Rome.  Let 
every  one  persuade  him^lf  that  be  is  protecting,  with  his 
arms,  not  only  his  own  person,  but  hk  wife,  and  his  mSmt 
chiidrcD.  Nor  let  him  consider,  solely,  his  own  domestic 
concerns,  but  frequently  reflect,  tte^  the  senate  and  people 
of  Rome  look  Ibr  safety  at  our  hands  ,$  that  our  strength  and 
our  courage  are  now  to  determine,  what  will  henceforth  be 
the  condition  of  that  city  and  of  the  Rornim  empire.” 
XLII.  Thus,  cm  the  side  of  the  Romans,  was  the  consul 
employed.  Haimihal,  cdioosing  to  rouse  the  courage  of  his 
soldiers  by  the  exhibition  of  facts  before  he  made  use  of 
words,  formed  his  troops  in  a  circle,  and  then  placed  in  the 
middle  the  prisoners  taken  cm  the  mountains,  bound  in  fet- 
tef%^  when,  a^ch  arms  as  are  used  by  the  Gauls  being  thrown 
at  dieir  feet,  he  ordered  an  interpreter  to  ask,  whether  any 
of  them  were  willing,  on  the  condition  of  being  released  from 

BOOH  XXL 

44T 

IX.  218*3 

bosds,--.-aiH!,  in  case  of  proving  victorious^  of  recei  ving  each 
a  horse  and  armour, — to  bis  life  in  a  comb^  i  They 
ail,  to  a  for  arms  and  the  combat  |  and  when  lo^ 
were  cast,  to  single  out  the  parties,  every  one  wished  himself 
to  be  the^ortunate  person  who  should  be  chosen  for  the  trial: 
wbUe  b^on  whom  it  had  fallen,  dancing  according  to  their 
custom,  eagerly  snatched  up  the  arms,  full  of  spirit,  and  ex¬ 
ulting  with  his  companions  congratul^ing  him  on  bis 
good  fortune.  ^  While  they  were  fighting,  such  were  the  sen¬ 
sations  excited  in  the  breasts,  not  only  of  their  comrades,  but 
of  the  spectators  in  general,  that  the  fate  of  those  who  died 
bravely,  was  deemed  not  less  happy  than  that  of  the  success¬ 
ful  combatants. 
XLllI.  The  minds  of  his  men  being  thus  afifected  by  the 
sight  of  several  pairs  of  combatants,  he  dismissed  the  remain¬ 
der  ;  and  then,  summoning  an  assembly,  addressed  them,  it 
is  srid,  in  the  following  manner :  “  If,  soldiers,  you  form  a 
judgment  of  your  own  circumstances,  on  the  same  princi¬ 
ples  which  actuated  you  just  now,  on  the  exhibition  of  a  case 
wherein  others  were  concerned,  we  are  conquerors.  For  that 
'  s^N&ctacle  was  not  intended  as  a  gratification  to  you,  but  a 
ptetme,  in  some  sort,  of  your  own  situation*  Indeed,  I  know 
not  whether  fiartune  has  not  imposed  on  you  still  stronger 
bonds,  and  a  more  powerful  necessity,  for  using  arms  than 
on  your  prisoners.  You  are  inclosed,  on  the  right  and  left, 
by  two  seas,  without  so  much  as  even  a  single  ship  to  aid  an 
escape :  hemmed  in  on  the  front  by  the  Po,  a  river  larger 
and  more  violent  than  the  Rhone  ;  and  behind  by  the  Alps, 
which  in  your  full  strength  and  vigour  you  passed,  not  with¬ 
out  die  utmost  difficulty*  Here,  soldiers,  where  you  have 
first  met  the  enem)^,,you  must  conquer  or  die;  and  the  same 
fortune  whirii  compels  you  to  Bght,  holds  out  to  you  priitea 
V  of  victory ;  ^eater  than  which^  men  seldom  wish  for  at  Ae. 
of  the  immortal  gods.  Were.^e,  by  our  braverj’,  to 

44a 

HISTOftT  OF  W&ME. 
only  Sicily  and  Sardinia,  ravished  from  otir  fathers, 
thibe  would  be  a  very  ample  recompense.  But  whatever  fhc 
RoiiiBii%}utve  acquired  and  amassed,  in  consequence  of  dieir 
the  whole  of  this,  tc^dier  widi  the 
oiin^rs,  is  tq  Income  your  property-  Anhgni^d  l^n,  by 
41*6^  prospect  if  so  rich  a  spoil,  take  arms,  with  tBe  favour  of 
the  gods-  You  have  been,  hitherto,  employed  b  the  pursuit 
of  cattle,  through  the  waste  mountains  of  Lusitania  and  Cel- 
tiberia,  without  any  prospect  of  emolument  from  so  many 
toils  and  dangers-  It  is  now  time  to  make  profitable  and  rich 
campaigns  ;  and  that,  after  measuring  such  a  length  of  way, 
through  so  many  mountains  and  rivers,  and  so  many  armed 
nations,  you  be  at  last  abundantly  rewarded  for  your  lahour| 
Here  fortune  has  fixed  the  period  of  your  toils ;  here,  on 
your  finishing  your  course  of  service,  will  she  give  you  am¬ 
ple  retribution.  And  do  not  imagine  the  victory  to  be  as  dif- 
ficidE,  as  the  character  of  the  war  is  important.  Often  has  a 
despised  enemy  mmntained  a  bloody  contest,  |and  renowned 
nations  and  kings  been  vanquished  by  exertions  of  very  mo- 
den^  force.  For,  setting  aside  singly  the  present  splendour 
of  the  Roman  name,  in  what  one  particular  are  they  to  be 
compared  widi  you  ?  Not  to  mention  your  service,  for  the 
last  twenty  years,  performed  with  so  great  bravery,  and  so 
great  success,  you  have  effected  a  march  to  this  place  from 
the  piUars  of  Hercules,  from  the  ocean,  and  the  remotest 
limits  of  the  world ;  opening  your  way,  with  your  victorious 
arms,  through  so  many  of  the  fiercest  nations  of  Spain  and 
Gml.  You  will  now  fight  with  an  army  of  raw  troops,  who, 
during  this  very  summer,  were  beaten,  routed,  and  besieged 
by  die  Gauls  j  who,  as  yet,  neither  know,  nor  are  known  by, 
their  commanders.  Ought  I,  if  not  bom,  at  least  educated, 
in  the  very  tent  of  that  most  illustrious  general  my  father ;  I 
who  have  iubdued  both  Spain  and  Gaul ;  the  conqueror, 
likewise,  not  only  of  die  Alpine  tribes,  but  what  is  much 

BOOK  XXI. 

44^ 

B.C  218.] 
more,  of  the  Alps  themselves ;  ought  I  to  put  myself  m 
comparison  with  such  a  commander  as  theirs  ?  a  general  of 
six  months  standing,  who  ran  away  from  his  own  army  ;  to 
whom,  if  any  one,  taking  away  the  ensigns  from  both,  should 
show  this  day  the  Carthaginians,  and  the  Romans,  I  am  con¬ 
fident  that  he  would  not  know  of  which  army  he  was  consul. 
On  my  part,  soldiers,  I  esteem  it  a  circumstance  of  no  trivial 
import,  that  there  is  not  one  of  you  who  has  not  often  been 
an  eye-witness  of  my  performing  some  military  exploit ;  and 
to  whom,  on  the  other  hand,  I  cannot,  as  having  been  a  spec¬ 
tator  and  witness  of  his  bravery,  recount  his  own  honoura¬ 
ble  acts,  with  the  marks  of  time  and  place.  At  the  head  of 
troops  whom  I  have  a  thousand  times  honoured  with  praises 
and  presents,  I^who  have  been  a  pupil  to  you  all,  before 
I  became  your  commander,  shall  enter  the  field  against  men 
unknowing  and  unknown  to  each  other. 
XL IV.  ‘‘  On  whatever  side  I  turn  my  eyes,  I  see  spirit  and 
firmness  ;  a  veteran  body  of  infantry,  cavalry  composed  of 
the  most  gallant  nations ;  you  our  most  brave  and  faithful 
allies,  and  you,  Carthaginians,  ready  to  fight  in  the  cause  of 
your  country,  and  at  the  same  time  with  the  justest  resent¬ 
ment.  We  are  the  assailants  in  the  war,  and  are  carrying 
anlnvasion  into  Italy  ;  we  shall  fight  therefore  with  so  much 
the  greater  boldness  and  courage,  as  he  who  makes  the  at¬ 
tack  has  ever  more  confidence  and  spirit^  than  he  who  stands 
on  the  defensive.  Besides,  we  are  inflamed  and  stimulated 
by  reflections  on  past  sufferings,  by  injuries  and  Indignities : 
for,  first,  they  insisted,  that  I,  your  leader,  should  be  deliver¬ 
ed  up  to  punishment,  with  every  one  concerned  in  the  siege 
of  Saguntum.  Had  we  been  put  into  their  hands,  there  is  no 
degree  of  torture  which  they  would  not  have  made  us  suffer. 
That  nation,  so  unbounded  are  its  cruelty  and  arrogance, 
would  have  the  whole  world  at  its  disposal;  thinks  it  has  a 
right  to  impose  regul^ons  cm  us,  and  to  prescribe  with  whom 
VOL.  II. — 3  M 

4^ 

HISTOKY  OF  HOME.  [Y.R.  534. 

we  are  to  have  peace^  with  whom  war ;  circumacribes,  ai^ 
ahuts  tis  up  within  houndiwies  of  mountains  smd  rivers, 
which  we  must  not  pass ;  yet  observes  TOt  itself  the  Unuts 
whi(^  it  establishes.  You  must  not  the  Iberus ;  you 
must  not  meddle  with  the  Saguntines :  Saguntum  is  on  our 
side  of  the  Iberus ;  you  must  not  stir  a  foot.  Is  it  imt 
enough  that  you  take  Sicily  and  Sardinia,  provinces  whidi 
have  been  mine  from  the  earliest  times?  Will  you  take  Spain 
also  ?  when  I  shall  have  retired  thence,  you  will  pass  over 
into  Africa.  Will  pass,  did  I  say!  cf  the  two  cemsids  of 
the  present  year  they  have  sent  one  to  Africa,  the  other  to 
Spain.  There  is  nothing  left  to  us  any  where,  unless  we 
make  good  our  claim  by  arms.  They  may  be  timid  and  das¬ 
tardly,  who  can  look  for  refuge  behind  them,  who  can  fiy 
through  safe  and  quiet  roads,  and  be  received  into  their  own 
territories  and  their  own  lands.  For  your  pan,  necessity 
(d>liges  you  to  be  brave  ;  and,  since  every  mean  between  vic¬ 
tory  and  death  is  sunk  out  of  reach,  you  must  resolve  to  ctm- 
quer,  or  should  feu-tune  be  unfavouraWe,  to  meet  death  in 
battle  rather  thmx  in  flight.  If  this  determination  be  firmly 
fixed  in  every  one  of  your  breasts,  I  affirm  again,  you  are 
conquerors.  Ihe  immortal  gods  never  gave  to  man  a  more 
invigorating  incentive  to  conquest.’’ 
XLV.  The  cotTOge  of  the  soldiers  on  both  sides  i^ing 
anifnated  to  the  content  by  these  exhortations,  the  Romans 
threw  a  bridge  over  the  Ticinus,  and  emeted  a  fiwrt  tm  it  for 
its  security.  While  they  were  emfdoyed  in  this  work,  the 
Cardiaginian  sent  Malrnrhai,  with  a  squadron  of  five  hun¬ 
dred  Numidian  horse,  to  ravage  rite  lands  of  fihe  allies  of 
the  Roman  people.  He  oordered  him  to  spare  the  Gauls,  as 
much  as  possible,  and  to  endeavour,  by  persuasion,  to  bring 
over  iheir  dtnth  to  Im  sHe.  Wh^  the  bridge  was  bailed, 
the  Bomab  army  marclied  over  into  rite  country  o£ the  JUmu- 
bfimts,  and  sat  4mm  at  the  distamto  of  frre  miies  frenn  ¥tc- 

HOOK  XXI. 

451 

B.C. 

At  this  place  lay  Haimibars  camp,  who,  perceiving 
the  approach  of  a  batde,  hastily  recalled  Maharbal  and  the 
horsemen,  and  thinking  that  he  conld  never  apply  too  many 
argutnents  and  encouragements  to  inspirit  his  soldiers,  called 
them  to  an  assembly,  with  promises  of  several  kinds  of  re-« 
wards  to  be  conferred  on  them,  that  the  certain  hope  of  these 
might  animate  their  exertions  in  the  fight.  **  He  would  give 
them  land,”  he  told  diem,  ^  in  Italy,  Africa,  or  Spain, 
wherever  they  should  choose ;  exempt  from  all  charges,  to 
the  person  who  should  receive  it,  aond  to  his  children.  Should 
any  prefer  money  to  land,  he  '^ould  give  him  an  equivalent 
in  silver.  To  such  of  the  allies,  as  wished  to  become  cid- 
zens  of  Carthage,  that  privilege  should  be  granted.  With 
regard  to  those  who  chose  rather  to  return  to  their  native 
homes,  he  would  take  care  that  they  should  not  have  cause 
to  wish  for  vm  exchange  of  situation  with  any  one  of  their 
counttymen.”  To  the  slaves  also  who  attended  their  mas¬ 
ters  he  promi^d  liberty,  engaging  to  give  the  owners  two 
slaves,  in  the*  room  of  each  of  these.  Then,  to  give  them 
full  security  for  the  performance  of  all  this,  holding  in  his 
left  hand  a  lan^,  and  in  his  right  a  flint  steme,  he  prayed  to 
Jupiter  and  the  rest  of  the  gods,  that  if  he  did  not  fulfil 
these  engagements,  they  would  slay  him,  in  like  maimer  as 
he  slew  that  lamb ;  and  after  this  imprecation,  he  broke  the 
animaPs  head  with  the  st<Hie.  This  had  such  an  effect,  that 
all  the  soldiers,  as  if  they  had  now  received  the  surety  of  the 
gods  for  the  ratification  of  their  hopes,  and  thinking  that  no¬ 
thing  delayed  the  enjoyment  their  wishes,  but  the  batt|^t 
not  being  begun,  with  one  mind,  and  one  voice,  demanded 
the  fight. 
XL VI.  Nothing  like  the  same  alacrity  appeared  among 
the  Romans,  who,  besides  other  matters,  were  dispirited  by 
some  late  prodigies.  A  wolf  had  entered  the  camp,  and 
after  tearing  such  as  he  met,  made  his  escape  unhurt.  A 

452 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  534. 

swarm  of  bees  also  had  pitched  on  a  tree,  which  huog  over 
the  geoeral’s  tent.  After  expiating  these  prodigies,  Scipio, 
at  the  head  of  his  cavalry,  and  light  spearmen,  set  out  toward 
the  camp  of  the  enemy,  in  order  to  discover,  by  a  near  view 
of  their  forces,  how  great  and  of  what  kind  they  were  ;  and 
was  met  by  Hannibal,  who  had  likewise  advanced  with  his 
cavalry  to  reconnoitre  the  adjacent  grounds.  For  some  time 
neither  party  descried  the  other.  Afterwards  the  dust,  being 
raised  in  thicker  clouds  by  the  moving  of  so  many  men  and 
horses,  gave  notice  of  approaching  enemies,  both  detach¬ 
ments  halted,  and  made  ready  for  battle.  Scipio  placed  his 
spearmen  and  Gallic  cavalry  in  front,  keeping  the  Romans 
and  the  body  of  allies  which  accompanied  him,  as  a  reserve, 
Hannibal  drew  the  bridled  cavalry  into  the  centre,  strength¬ 
ening  his  wings  with  the  Numidians.  The  shout  was  scarce¬ 
ly  raised,  before  the  spearmen  fled  to  the  second  line  ;  then 
the  battle  was  maintained  by  the  cavalry,  for  a  considerable 
time  with  doubtful  success,  but  afterwards,  in  consequence 
of  the  confusion  caused  among  the  horses^  by  the  footmen 
being  intermixed  with  them,  many  of  the  riders  fell  from 
their  seats,  and  others,  on  seeing  their  friends  surrounded 
and  distressed,  dismounted  to  assist  them ;  so  that  the  fight 
was  now  carried  on  mostly  on  foot,  until  the  Numidians, 
posted  on  the  wings,  taking  a  small  compass,  showed  them¬ 
selves  on  the  rear.  This  terrified  and  dismayed  the  Romans, 
whose  fears  were  augmented  by  a  wound  received  by  the 
consul,  who  was  rescued  from  farther  danger  by  the  speedy 
intervention  of  his  son,  just  arrived  at  the  age  of  maturity. 
This  is  the  same  youth,  who  is  afterwards  to  enjoy^the  re¬ 
nown  of  terminating  this  war,  and  to  receive  the  tide  of 
Africanus,  on  account  of  his  glorious  victory  over  Hannibal 
and  the  Carthaginians.  However,  very  few  fled  precipitately, 
except  the  spearmen,  on  whom  the  Numidians  made  the 
first  charge.  The  rest  formed  a  compact  body  of  cavalry; 

BOOK  XXI. 

453 

B.C.218.] 
who,  taking  the  consul  into  their  centre,  and  covering  him, 
not  only  with  arms,  but  with  their  bodies,  without  any  disor¬ 
der  or  precipitation  in  their  retreat,  brought  him  back  to  the 
camp.  Coelfus  attributes  the  honour  of  saving  the  consul  to 
a  slave,  by  nation  a  Ligurian :  but  I  rather  wish  the  account 
to  be  true  which  gives  it  to  his  son ;  and  so  the  fact  is  repre¬ 
sented  by  most  authors,  and  generally  believed, 
XLVII.  Such  was  the  first  battle  with  Hannibal,  in  which 
it  manifesdy  appeared  that  the  Carthaginian  was  superior  in 
cavalry  ;  and,  consequently,  that  open  plains,  such  as  those 
between  the  Po  and  the  Alps,  were  unfavourable  to  the  Ro¬ 
mans  in  their  operations.  Wherefore  the  consul,  on  the  night 
following,  ordering  his  men  to  prepare  in  silence  for  a  march, 
decamped  from  the  Ticinus,  and  hastened  to  the  Po,  in  order 
that,  before  the  rafts  should  be  loosened,  of  which  he  had 
formed  the  bridge  over  that  river,  he  might  carry  over  his 
forces  without  tumult  or  interruption  from  the  enemy’s  pur¬ 
suit.  They  got  as  far  as  Placentia,  before  Hannibal  received 
any  certain  information  of  their  departure  from  the  Ticinus. 
Nevertheless,  he  made  prisoners  six  hundred  men,  who  de¬ 
layed  on  the  hither  hank,  spending  too  much  time  in  unbind¬ 
ing  the  raft.  He  could  not  pass  over  the  bridge,  because,  as 
soon  as  the  extremities  were  untied,  the  whole  collection  of 
rafts  floated  down  with  the  current.  Ccelius  relates,  that 
Mago,  with  the  cavalry,  and  the  Spanish  infantry,  immedi¬ 
ately  swam  over  the  river ;  and  that  Hannibal  himself  led 
over  the  rest  of  the  army,  through  fords  somewhat  higher 
up,  forming  the  elephants  in  a  line,  above  them,  to  break  the 
force  of  the  current.  These  accounts  can  hardly  gain  credit 
with  people  acquainted  with  the  river  Po :  for  it  is  not  credi¬ 
ble,  that  the  cavalry  could  stem  such  a  violent  current,  with¬ 
out  losing  their  arms  and  horses,  even  allowing  that  all  the 
Spaniards  were  conveyed  over  on  leathern  bags  inflated  ;  be¬ 
sides,  that  it  would  have  cost  a  circuit  of  manv  days  march 

4S4 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  534. 

10  feid  fords  in  die  Po,  through  which  an  army,  heavily  en* 
cumbered  with  baggage,  could  make  a  pipage*  Those  au¬ 
thors  seem  to  me  more  worthy  of  credit,  who  relate,  that, 
with  difficulty,  after  two  days  search,  a  place  was  fotmd  where 
a  bridge  of  rafts  could  be  constructed  ;  and  that,  over  this, 
the  cavalry  and  light-armed  Spaniards  were  sent  forwards 
under  Mago,  While  Hannibal,  who  waited  on  the  same 
side  of  the  river  to  give  audience  to  embf^sies  from  the 
Gauls,  was  bringing  over  the  heavy  troops,  Mago  and  his 
horsemen,  in  one  day’s  march  after  passing  the  river,  came 
up  with  the  enemy  at  Placoatia.  In  a  few  days  after,  Han¬ 
nibal  fortified  a  camp  within  six  miles  of  Placentia,  and  next 
day,  drawing  up  his  forces  in  the  enemy’s  v^w,  offered  them 
battle. 
XL VIII.  On  the  night  fc^lowing,  there  was  a  violent  out¬ 
rage  committed  in  the  Roman  camp,  by  the  auxiliaty'  Gauls ; 
which,  however,  was  attended  with  greater  tumuh,  than  loss 
of  lives.  A  number  of  them,  amounting  to  two  thousand 
foot  and  two  hundred  horse,  killing  the  guards  at  the  gates, 
deserted  to  Hannibal.  The  Carthaginian  received  them  with 
expressions  of  much  kindness,  and  after  animating  their  zeal 
by  prospects* of  vast  rewards,  dismissed  them  to  their  respec¬ 
tive  states,  to  engage  the  rest  of  their  countrymen  in  his  in¬ 
terest.  Scipio,  apprehending  that  this  outrage  was  a  signal 
for  a  general  revolt  of  the  Grauls  ;  and  that,  infected  with  the 
same  treacherous  i^rit,  they  would  run  like  madmen  to 
arms,  though  still  very  ill  of  his  wound,  marched  away  in 
silence,  at  the  fourth  watch  of  the  following  night,  toward 
the  river  Trebia,  and  removed  bis  camp  to  higher  grounds, 
and  hills  less  advantageous  to  die  operations  of  cavalry.  His 
departure  was  not  so  secret  as  at  the  Ticinus ;  Hannibal,  there¬ 
fore,  sending  on  first  the  Numidians,  afterwards  all  his  ca¬ 
valry,  w^ould  have  caused  great  disorder,  at  least  in  the  rear 
of  the  army,  had  not  the  Numidians^  out  of  their  greediness 

BOOK  XXI. 

45,5 

B.C.  218.] 
for  plunder,  tiirsed  aside  ioto  the  forsaken  camp  of  the  Ro¬ 
mans.  While  seaiehing  narrowly  every  part  of  it,  without 
finding  any  pri^e  to  compensate  for  the  loss  of  time,  they  let 
the  enemy  slip  out  of  their  hands.  Afterwards,  coming 
within  sight  of  the  Romans,  when  they  had  already  ^ssed 
the  Trebia,  and  were  pitching  their  camp,  they  cut  off  a  few, 
who  loitered  behind  the  rest  on  that  side  of  the  river.  Scipio, 
unable  to  endure  any  longer  the  pain  of  his  wound,  which 
was  exasperated  by  the  rough  motion  in  travelling,  and  at 
the  same  time  judging  it  prudent  to  wait  for  his  colleague, 
(for  he  had  by  this  time  heard  that  he  was  recalled  frmn 
Sicily,)  chose  a  spot  near  the  river,  which  seemed  the  safest 
for  a  fixed  station,  and  there  fortified  his  camp.  Hannibal 
took  post  at  a  small  distance ;  and  though  he  felt  much  joy 
at  the  success  of  his  cavalry,  yet  .finding  no  less  cause  of 
anxiety  in  the  scarcity  of  necessaries,  daily  increasing  as  he 
marched  through  an  enemy’s  country  without  magazines  pre* 
pared,  he  sent  a  detachment  to  the  small  town  of  Clastidtum, 
where  the  Romans  had  collected  a  large  store  of  com.  Here, 
while  the  troops  were  preparing  for  an  assault,  a  prospect 
offered  of  the  town  being  betrayed  to  them,  and  accordingly 
die  commander  of  the  garrison,  one  DasitK,  a  Brundusian,  for 
a  bribe  of  no  great  amount,  only  four  hundred  pieces  of  gold*, 
surrendered  Clastidium  to  HannibaL  This  served  die  Car- 
thaginiMis  as  a  granary,  while  they  lay  encamped  on  the  Tre¬ 
bia.  The  prisoners,  who  fell  into  his  hands  on  the  surren¬ 
der  of  the  garrison,  he  treated  without  ^verity,  being  de¬ 
sirous  that,  at  the  commencement  of  Im  proceedings,  a  good 
opinion  should  ccmceived  of  his  clemency. 
XLIX.  While  die  operations  of  the  land-forces  on  the 
Trebia  were  at  a  stand,  much  was  effected  by  land  and  sea, 
in  and  round  Sicily,  and  the  other  islands  adjacent  to  Italy, 
*  2$).  16s.  84* 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  534, 

456 
both  by  Sempronius  the  consul,  and  before  his  arrival.  Of 
twenty  quinqueremes,  sent  by  the  Carthaginians  with  one 
thousand  soldiers,  to  ravage  the  coast  of  Italy^  nine  arrived 
at  Liparse,  eight  at  the  island  of  Vulcan,  and  three  were 
driven  by  the  current  into  the  streight.  As  soon  as  these 
were  seen  from  Messana,  twelve  ships  were  despatched  by 
Hiero,  King  of  Syracuse,  who  happened  to  be  then  in  that 
city  waiting  for  the  Roman  consul,  and  these  took  them 
without  opposition,  and  brought  them  into  port  to  Mes~ 
Sana,  From  the  prisoners  it  was  discovered  that,  besides 
the  fleet  of  twenty  ships  to  which  they  belonged,  and  which 
had  been  sent  against  Italy,  another  of  thirty-five  quin- 
queremes  was  on  its  way  to  Sicily,  to  rouse  their  ancient 
allies  in  their  cause ;  that  their  principal  object  was  the  get¬ 
ting  possession  of  Lilybeeum,  and  it  was  the  opinion  of  the 
prisoners  that  the  same  storm  by  which  they  had  been  dis¬ 
persed,  had  driven  the  other  fleet  to  the  islands  iEgates. 
This  intelligence,  just  as  he  received  it,  the  King  despatched 
in  a  letter  to  Marcus  iEmilius,  the  praetor,  whose  province 
Sicily  was,  and  cautioned  him  to  secure  Lilybaeum  with  a 
strong  garrison.  Immediately  the  lieutenants-general  and 
tribunes,  who  were  with  the  praetor,  were  sent  off  to  the 
several  states,  with  orders  to  keep  their  men  attentive  and 
alert  in  guarding  their  posts;  and  that,  above  all  things,  Lily- 
bsBum  should  be  effectually  secured.  A  proclamation  was 
also  published,  that  besides  every  warlike  preparation,  the 
mariners*  should  bring  on  board  the  ships  provisioim  for 
ten  days  ready  dressed,  so  that  no  one  should  have  any  delay 
to  prevent  his  embarking  the  moment  the  signal  should  be 
given ;  and  that,  through  the  whole  extent  of  die  coast,  those 
*  Socii  navales.  These  words  ^metimes,  as  here,  mean  merely  tlie 
mariners,  such  as  the  rowers,  and  others  whose  business  it  is  to  navigate 
the  ship  :  at  other  times,  they  mean  the  soldiers,  who  served  regularly  on 
board  the  fleet,  as  those  corps  who,  with  us,  are  distinguished  by  the  name 
of*  Blarines.’ 

BOOK  XXL 

457 

fix.  218.] 

stadoned  at  the  watch-towers  should  be  vigilant  in  looking 
out  for  the  approach  of  the  enemy’s  fleet.  In  consequei^e 
of  these  precautions,  notwithstanding  that  the  Carthaginians 
purposely  slackened  the  course  of  their  ships,  designing  to 
reach  Lilybaeum  a  little  before  day,  they  were  observed  on 
their  approach ;  for  the  moon  shone  through  the  whole  night, 
and  they  c^e  with  their  sails  aloft :  in  the  same  instant  the 
signal  was  made  on  the  watch-towers,  the  alarm  given  in  the 
tovra,  and  the  men  embarked  in  the  ships  ;  one-half  of  the 
soldiers  mounted  guard  on  the  walls  and  at  the  gates,  the 
other  were  on  board  the  fleet.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Car¬ 
thaginians  perceiving  that  preparations  were  made  for  their 
reception,  remained  until  day-break  at  the  mouth  of  their 
harbour,  employing  the  intermediate  time  in  taking  down 
their  rigging,  and  fitting  their  ships  for  action.  When  day 
appeared,  they  drew  back  their  fleet  into  the  open  sea,  in  or¬ 
der  that  they  might  have  room  for  fighting,  and  give  the  ene¬ 
my’s  ships  free  egress  from  the  harbour.  Nor  did  the  Ro¬ 
mans  decline  an  engagement,  being  emboldened  by  the  recol¬ 
lection  of  their  former  successes  near  that  very  spot,  and  by 
confidence  in  the  number  and  bravery  of  their  men. 
L.  When  they  got  into  the  open  sea,  the  Romans  showed 
a  desire  erf  coming  up  with  the  enemy,  and  trying  their 
strength  with  them  in  close  fight.  The  Carthaginians,  on 
the  contrary,  wished  to  elude  their  attacks,  to  cflcct  the  busi¬ 
ness  by  skill,  not  by  force,  and  to  make  it  a  contest  of  ships, 
not  of  men  or  arms :  for  there  was  on  board  their  fleet  an 
abundance  of  mariners,  but  a  scarcity  of  soldiers,  and  when 
a  ship  was  grappled,  their  number  of  fighting  men  to  defend 
it  was  by  no  means  equal  to  that  of  the  enemy.  This  cir-*^ 
cumstance  being  discovered,  the  Romans  assumed  additional 
courage  from  the  fulness  of  their  numbers ;  and  while  the 
others  were  dUpiriied  by  their  deficiency  in  that  respect, 
VOL.  II. — 3  N 

458 

HISTORY  OF  HOME. 

[Y.R.  534, 

seven  Carthaginian  ships  were  quickly  surrounded,  and  the 
rest  betook  themselves  to  flight.  In  the  captured  ships,  there 
were  of  soldiers  and  mariners  one  thousand  seven  hundred, 
among  whom  were  three  Carthaginian  nobles.  The  Roman 
fleet  without  loss  returned  into  the  harbour,  one  ship  only 
being  bulged,  and  even  that  brought  into  port.  Very  soon 
after  this  battle,  before  those  who  were  at  Messana  had  heard 
of  it,  Tiberius  Sempronius,  the  consuly-came  to  that  city.  On 
his  entering  the  streight,  King  Hiero,  with  a  fleet  complete¬ 
ly  equipped,  sailed  to  meet  him,  and  going  from  the  royal 
galley  on  board  that  of  the  consul,  congratulated  him  on  his 
safe  arrival  with  his  ships  and  army.  After  praying  for  a 
successful  and  happy  issue  to  his  expedition  into  Sicily,  he 
represented  to  him  the  state  of  the  island  and  the  attempt 
lately  made  by  the  Carthaginians,  assuring  him  that,  as  he 
had,  in  the  early  part  of  his  life,  supported  the  Roman  peo¬ 
ple  in  the  former  war,  so  would  he  now,  advanced  as  he  was 
in  years,  support  them  still  with  the  same  degree  of  spirit ; 
that  he  would,  at  his  own  expense,  furnish  the  consul’s  le¬ 
gions,  and  the  crews  of  his  ships,  with  com  and  clothing ; 
and  then,  acquainting  him  that  Lilybaeum  and  all  the  mari¬ 
time  states  were  exposed  to  imminent  danger,  he  informed 
him  that  there  were  many  to  whom  a  revolution  would  be 
highly  agreeable.  For  these  reasons  the  consul  judged  that 
he  ought,  without  making  any  delay,  to  sail  on  directly  to 
Lilybaeum,  whither  he  was  accompanied  by  the  King  and  his 
fleet.  On  their  passage,  they  received  the  news  of  the  fight 
of  Lilybaeum,  of  the  discomfiture  of  the  enemy,  and  the  cap¬ 
ture  of  their  ships. 
LI.  From  Lilybaeum,  the  consul,  after  dismissing  King 
Hiero  with  his  fleet,  and  leaving  the  praetor  to  defend  the 
coast  of  Sicily,  sailed  over  to  the  island  of  Melita,  which 
was  in  the  possession  of  the  Carthaginians.  Immediately  on 
his  arrival,  Hamilcar,  son  of  Gisgo,  commander  of  the  gar- 

BOOK  XXI. 

459 

B.C.  218.] 
nson,  and  smnewhat  less  than  two  thousand  soldiers,  toge¬ 
ther  with  the  town  and  the  island,  were  surrendered  into  his 
hands.  From  thence  he  returned  in  a  few  days  to  Lilybaeum, 
where  all  the  prisoners  taken  by  the  consul,  and  by  the  prae¬ 
tor,  except  those  who  were  of  distinguished  birth,  were  sold 
by  public  auction.  When  the  consul  thought  that  side  of 
Sicily  sufficiently  secured,  he  sailed  over  to  the  islands  of 
Vulcan,  because  there  was  a  report  that  the  Carthaginian 
fleet  lay  there  ;  but  he  met  with  none  at  those  islands,  for 
it  happened  that  they  had  already  passed  over  to  ravage  the 
coast  of  Italy,  and,  after  laying  waste  the  territory  of  Vibo, 
were  now  threatening  that  city.  When  he  was  on  his  return 
to  Sicily,  he  was  informed  of  the  descent  made  by  the  enemy 
on  the  territory  of  Vibo.  Letters  were,  at  the  same  time, 
delivered  to  him  from  the  senate,  containing  an  account  of 
Hannibal’s  having  entered  Italy,  and,  also,  orders  to  come  to 
the  support  of  his  colleague  with  all  possible  expedition.  So 
many  objects  demanding  his  attention  at  once,  he  instantly 
embarked  his  troops,  and  sent  them  by  the  upper  sea  to  Ari- 
rntnum ;  appointed  Sextus  Pomponius  lieutenant-general, 
with  twenty  ships  of  war,  to  defend  the  territory  of  Vibo 
and  the  sea-coast  of  Italy  ;  made  up  a  fleet  of  flfty  sail  for 
the  praetor  Marcus  ^milius  ;  and,  after  settling  the  affairs  of 
Sicily,  sailed  himself  with  ten  ships  along  the  coast  of  Italy 
to  Ariminum,  from  whence  he  marched  his  army  to  the  river 
Trebia,  and  formed  a  junction  with  his  colleague. 
LII.  And  now,  both  the  consuls  and  the  whole  of  the 
Roman  strength  being  opposed  to  Hannibal,  afforded  suffi¬ 
cient  reason  to  suppose  either  that  the  Roman  empire  would 
be  effectually  protected  by  that  force,  or  that  there  would  be 
no  room  for  any  farther  hopes.  Nevertheless,  Scipio,  dispi¬ 
rited  by  the  event  of  the  battle  between  the  cavalry, -and  by 
his  own  wound,  wished  to  defer  coming  to  action ;  while 
Sempronius,  whose  spirit  had  vet  met  no  check,  and  whoj 

4$0 

HISTOE¥  OF  HOME. 

[y  Ji.  su. 

therefore,  passewd  the  gpreater  confidesce,  was  impatient  of 
any  delay*  The  lands  between  the  Trebia  and  the  Po  were 
at  that  time  inhabited  by  Gauls,  who,  during  this  struggle 
between  two  such  potent  naticms,  showed  no  partiality  to 
eititer  party,  evidently  intending  to  court  the  favour  of  dbe 
conqueror.  With  this  conduct  the  Romans  were  weU  satis* 
fied,  provided  they  kept  themselves  entirely  quiet ;  but  the 
Carthaginian  was  highly  displeased,  giving  out  that  he  had 
come  thitiker  on  an  invitation  from  the  Gauls,  to  set  them  at 
liberty.  In  order  to  gratify  his  resentment  on  that  account, 
and  at  the  same  time  to  maintain  his  troops  with  plunder,  he 
ordered  two  thousand  foot  and  one  thousmid  horse,  mostly 
Numidians,  with  some  Gauls  intermixed,  to  ravage  the  whole 
country,  from  thence  onward  to  the  banks  of  the  Po.  The 
Gauls,  destitute  of  support,  though  they  had  hitherto  kept 
their  inclinations  doubtful,  being  now  compelled  by  necessi¬ 
ty,  declared  against  the  authors  of  their  sufferings  in  favour 
of  those  who  were  to  avenge  them  ;  and  sent  ambassadors  to 
the  consul  to  implore  the  aid  of  the  Romans  for  a  country 
which  was  suffering  severely,  in  consequence  of  the  too  faith¬ 
ful  attachment  of  its  inhabitants  to  the  people  of  Rome.  Sci- 
pio  approved  not  either  of  the  cause  or  of  the  season  for 
vmdertaking  it ;  for  he  doubted  the  sincerity  of  that  people, 
both  on  account  of  many  instances  of  treacherous  behaviour, 
and  particularly,  though  the  others  through  length  of  time 
might  have  been  forgotten,  on  account  trf  the  recent  perfidy 
of  the  Boians.  Sempronius,  on  the  contrary,  was  of  opinion, 
that  it  would  be  the  strongest  tie  on  the  fidelity  of  the  allies, 
to  let  them  see  that  the  first  who  stood  in  need  of  aid  had 
found  protection.  He  then,  while  his  colleague  hesitated, 
despatched  his  own  cavity,  joined  by  one  thousand  foot, 
mostly  .light  spearmen,  over  the  Trebia,  to  protect  the  lands 
of  the  Gauls.  These  falling  unexpectedly  on  the  enemy, 
while  they  were  straggling  in  disorder,  and  most  of  them 

TOOK  XXL 

461 

B.C. 
loaded  with  spoil,  caused  great  eimsteraation,  slew  many, 
and  drove  the  rest  flying  before  them  to  their  camp^  Though 
repulsed  by  the  multitude  which  sallied  out,  yet,  as  socm  as 
the  rest  of  their  party  came  up,  they  again  renewed  the  flght* 
Success  afterwards  remained  doubtful ;  sometimes  they  re* 
treated,  sometimes  pursued  ;  but  though,  at  last,  the  advmi* 
tages  were  equal  on  both  sides,  yet  the  honour  of  the  victoiy 
was  more  generally  attributed  to  the  Romans. 
LlII.  But  to  no  one  did  it  appear  more  important  and 
complete,  than  to  the  consul  himself.  He  was  transported 
with  joy,  at  having  obtained  a  victory  with  that  part  of  the 
troops,  which,  under  his  associate,  had  been  defeated.  The 
spirits  of  the  soldiers,”  he  said,  were  now  revived  ;  nor 
was  there  any  one,  except  his  colleague,  who  wished  a  delay 
of  action.  He,  more  disordered  in  mind  than  in  body,  and 
reflecting  on  his  wound,  shuddered  at  the  thoughts  of  flght- 
ing  and  of  arms.  But  others  ought  not  to  sink  into  feeble* 
ness  along  with  a  sick  man.  For  to  what  purpose  was  farther 
delay,  or  waste  of  time  ?  What  third  consul  or  what  other 
surmy  was  to  be  waited  for  ?  The  Carthaginians  were  encamp* 
cd  in  Italy,  almost  within  sight  of  the  city.  Their  designs  did 
not  aim  stf  Sicily  and  Sardinia,  which  were  taken  from  them, 
nor  at  the  parts  of  Spain  on  this  side  of  the  Iberus,  but  at  the 
expulsion  of  the  Romans  horn  the  land  of  their  fathers,  from 
xht  soil  in  which  they  were  born.  What  sighs  would  it  draw 
from  these,”  said  he,  “  who  were  accustomed  to  cany  war  to 
the  very  walls  of  Carthage,  if  they  were  to  see  us,  their  off* 
spring,  at  the  head  of  consular  armies,  skulking  within  our 
camp  in  the  heart  of  Italy  ;  and  a  Carthaginian  possessed  of 
the  dominion  over  the  whole  extent  of  country  between  the 
Alps  and  the  Apennine  ?”  In  this  manner  did  he  argue, 
sitting  with  his  colleague,  and  also  at  the  head  quarters,  as  if 
he  were  haranguing  an  assembly.  He  was,  besides,  incite4 
to  expeditious  me^ures  by  the  approach  of  the  time  of  the 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  534. 

462 
elections,  for  he  feared  lest  the  war  should  be  protracted  un¬ 
til  the  new  consuls  came  into  office  ;  wishing,  likewise,  to  se¬ 
cure  the  present  opportunity,  and  while  his  colleague  was 
indisposed,  of  engrossing  to  himself  the  whole  of  the  glory. 
For  these  reasons,  while  Scipio  remonstrated  in  vain,  he  is¬ 
sued  orders  to  the  soldiers  to  be  ready  for  bailtie  at  a  short 
warning.  Hannibal,  plainly  perceiving  what  line  of  conduct 
would  be  more  advantageous  to  the  enemy,  scarcely  enter¬ 
tained  any  distant  hope  that  the  consuls  would  enter  on  any 
action  without  caiftion  and  foresight :  but  understanding,  first 
from  report,  and  afterwards  from  experience,  tijat  the  temper 
of  one  of  them  was  fiery  and  presumptuous,  and  supposing 
his  presumption  augmented  by  the  success  of  the  battle  with 
the  plundering  party,  he  then  made  little  doubt  but  that  he 
should  soon  have  an  opportunity  of  coming  to  action — an  oc¬ 
casion  which  he  was  earnestly  solicitous  to  improve,  while 
the  troops  of  the  enemy  were  raw,  while  the  more  able  of 
their  commanders  was,  by  his  wound,  rendered  incapable  of 
exertion,  and  while  the  Gauls  were  disposed  to  act  with  vi¬ 
gour  ;  for  he  well  knew  that  these,  whose  number  was  veiy- 
great,  would  follow  him  with  the  less  zeal,  in  proportion  as 
they  were  drawn  away  to  a  greater  distance  from  home.  Thus 
wishing  for  a  speedy  engagement,  he  intended,  should  any 
delay  he  given,  to  use  every  means  to  bring  it  about.  The 
Gauls,  whom  he  employed  as  spies,  (because  they  were  the 
better  fitted  for  it,  especially  as  men  of  that  nation  served  in 
both  camps,)  brought  intelligence  that  the  Romans  were  pre¬ 
pared  for  battle ;  on  which,  the  Carthaginian  began  to  look 
about  for  a  place  where  he  might  form  an  ambuscade. 
LIV.  In  the  middle,  between  the  camps,  ran  a  rivulet, 
whose  banks  were  uncommonly  steep  ;  the  adjacent  ground 
was  covered  with  such  herbs  as  grow  in  marshes,  with  bushes 
and  brambtes,  which  usually  overspread  uncultivated  ground. 
On  examining  the  place  himself,  and  finding  it  to  be  capable 

BOOK  XXL 

463 

B,C.  218.] 
of  concealing  even  horsemen,  he  said  to  Mago,  his  brother, 
‘‘  This  is  the  spot  which  you  must  occupy.  Choose  out  from 
the  whole  number  of  horse  and  foot  a  hundred  men  of  each, 
and  come  wkh  them  to  me  at  the  first  watch.  It  is  now  Ume 
to  take  refreshment.”  Thus,  the  attending  officers  were  dis¬ 
missed.  In  some  little  time  Mago  came  with  his  chosen 
band,  and  Hannibal  said,  ‘‘  I  see  you  are  very  able  men ;  but 
that  you  may  be  strong,  not  only  in  spirit,  but  in  number,  let 
each  of  you  choose  nine  like  yourselves  out  of  the  troops  and 
companies  ;  Mago  will  shew  you  the  place  where  you  are  to 
lie  in  wait.  You  will  have  to  deal  with  an  enemy  who  is  blind 
with  respect  to  these  stratagems  of  war.”  Having  thus  sent  off 
this  detachment  of  one  thousand  horse  and  one  thousand  foot 
under  Mago,  Hannibal  ordered  the  Numidian  cavalry  to  cross 
the  riverTrebiaat  the  first  light;  to  ride  up  to  the  enemy ’s  gates, 
and,  discharging  their  weapons  against  their  men  on  guard,  to 
draw  them  out  to  battle,  and  then,  as  soon  as  the  fight  should 
be  commenced,  to  retreat  leisurely,  and  by  that  means  draw 
them  on  to  the  other  side  of  the  river.  These  were  his  or¬ 
ders  to  the  Numidians.  To  the  other  officers,  both  of  cavalry 
and  infantry,  he  gave  directicns  to  cause  their  men  to  take 
refreshment ;  and  then,  under  arms,  and  with  their  horses 
accoutered,  to  wait  the  signal.  On  the  alarm  first  given  by 
the  Numidians,  Sempronius,  eager  for  action,  led  out,  first, 
all  the  cavalry,  being  full  of  confidence  in  that  part  of  his 
force  ;  then  six  thousand  foot,  and  at  last  the  whole  body  of 
infantry,  to  the  ground  previously  fixed  upon  in  the  plan 
which  he  had  adopted.  It  was  then  winter,  and  the  weather 
snowy,  in  those  places  which  lie  between  the  Alps  and  the 
Apennine,  and  the  cold  was  rendered  exceedingly  intense  by 
the  proximity  of  rivers  and  marshes.  Besides  this,  both  men 
and  horses  being  drawn  out  in  a  hurry,  without  having  first 
taken  food,  or  used  any  precaution  to  guard  against  the  in- 
temperature  of  the  air,  were  quite  chilled^  and  as  they  ap- 

404 

HISTORY  OF  ROME* 

[Y.R.  534. 

proached  the  river,  the  more  piercing  were  the  U^ts  which 
assailed  them.  But  having,  in  pursuit  of  the  flying  Numi- 
dians,  entered  the  river,  which  by  rain  in  the  night  was  swefl- 
ed  so  high  as  to  reach  dieir  l^easts,  their  bodies,  on  coming 
out,  were  all  so  perfectly  bemmibed,  that  they  were  scarcely 
capable  of  holding  their  arms,  and,  as  the  day  advanced,  they 
also  grew  faint  through  hunger. 
LV.  Meanwhile  Hannibal’s  soldiers  had  fires  made  before 
their  torts ;  oil  WM  distributed  to  eveiy  company  to  lubri¬ 
cate  their  joints,  and  they  had  at  leisure  refreshed  themselves 
with  food.  As  soon,  therefore,  as  intelligence  was  brought, 
that  the  enemy  had  p^ed  the  river,  they  took  arms  with 
sprightly  vigour  both  of  mind  and  body,  and  thus  advanced 
to  battle.  Hannibal  |^ed  in  the  van  the  Balearians  and 
light-armed  troops,  amounting  to  about  eight  thcmsmid  ;  and, 
in  a  second  line,  his  heavier-armed  infantry,  the  main  power 
and  strength  of  his  army.  The  flanks  he  covered  with  ten 
thousand  cavalry,  and  dividing  the  elephants,  placed  half  of 
them  on  the  extremity  of  each  wing.  The  consul  seeing  his 
cavalry,  who  pressed  the  pursuit  with  disorderly  haste,  taken 
at  a  disadvantage  the  Numidians,  suddenly  turning  upon 
them,  recaQed  them  by  the  signal  for  retreat,  and  posted  them 
on  die  fismks  of  the  foot.  His  army  cemsisted  of  eighteen 
dioimand  twenty  thousand  of  die  allies  and  Latine 
cemfedm^es,  beside  the  auxiliary  troops  of  the  Cenomanians, 
the  only  Oallic  stsrte  that  continued  faithful  to  their  cause. 
TIus  wmi  the  firtfee  employed  in  that  engagement.  The  battle 
was  begun  by  die  Bsdearians,  who  being  too  powerfully  op- 
legkms,  the  light-armed  troops  were  hastily 
drawn  off  ^  die  wings  j  which  circumstance  prov^  the  cause 
of  dm  Ronum  caviflry  being  quickly  overpowered :  for  being 
in  but  four  thousand^  they  had  before  been  hardly 
able  to  marntain  ^ir  ground  against  ten  thousand  ;  especi¬ 
ally  as  they  were  fi^gued,  and  the  others  mostly  fresh  j  but 

BOOK  XXI. 

1S5 

B.C.  218.] 
now  they  were  overwhelmed  under  a  cloud  as  it  were  of 
javelins  thrown  by  the  Balearians.  |  Besides  this,  the  ele¬ 
phants  advancing  on  the  extremities  of  the  wings,  so  terrified 
the  horses,  as  to  occasion  a  general  rout.  The  fight  between 
the  infantry  was  maintained  by  an  equality  of  spirit  rather 
than  of  strength^  for,  with  respect  to  the  latter,  the  Cartha¬ 
ginians  had  brought  theirs  fresh  into  the  battle,  invigorated 
by  food  ;  the  Romans,  on  the  contraiy^  were  enfeebled  by 
fasting  and  fatigue,  and  their  limbs  stiffened  and  benumbed 
with  cold..  They  would,  notwithstanding,  have  maintained 
their  ground  by  dint  of  courage,  had  the  conflict  rested  solely 
between  them  and  the  infantry.  But  the  Balearians,  after 
the  discomfiture  of  the  cavalry,  poured  darts  on  their  flanks, 
and  the  elephants  had  now  made  their  way  to  the  centre  of 
the  line  of  the  infantry  ;  while  Mago,  with  his  Numidians, 
as  soon  as  the  army  had  passed  by  their  lurking  place  with¬ 
out  observing  them,  started  up  at  once,  and  caused  dreadful 
confusion  and  terror  in  the  rear. 
LVI.  Encompassed  by  so  many  perils,  the  line,  notwith¬ 
standing,  stood  for  a  long  time  unbroken,  even  (which  was 
most  surprising  to  all)  by  the  attack  of  the  elephants.  The 
light  infantry,  stationed  for  that  purpose,  plying  these  brisk¬ 
ly  with  iron  javelins,  made  them  turn  back  ;  and  then,  follow¬ 
ing  them  behind,  darted  their  weapons  into  them,  under  the 
tails,  in  which  part,  the  skin  being  softest,  it  is  easy  to  wound 
them.  When  they  were  by  these  means  put  into  disorder,  and 
ready  to  vent  their  fury  on  their  own  party,  Hannibal  order¬ 
ed  them  to  be  driven  away  from  the  centre  towards  the  ex- 
tremity  of  the  left  wing,  against  the  auxiliary  Gauls* I 
they  instantly  put  to  open  flight,  which  spread  ^tiCw  terrtn: 
among  the  Romans,  They  were  now  obliged  to  fight  in  die 
form  of  a  circle  ;  when  about  ten  thousand  of  them,  having  no 
other  means  of  escape,  forced  their  way,  with  great  slaugh¬ 
ter,  through  the  centre  of  the  African  line,  which  was  com* 
VOL.  ii.^ — 3  O 

466 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  534. 

posed  of  the  Gallic  auxiliaries ;  and,  as  they  could  neither 
return  to  their  camp,  from  which  they  were  shut  out  by  the 
river,  nor,  by  reason  of  the  heavy  rain,  discover  in  what  part 
they  could  assist  their  friends,  they  proceeded  straight  to 
Placentia.  After  this,  several  similar  irruptions  were  made 
from  all  quarters,  and  those  who  pushed  towards  the  river 
were  either  drowned  in  the  eddies,  or,  hesitating  to  enter  the 
water,  were  cut  off.  Some,  who,  in  their  flight,  dispersed 
themselves  over  the  country,  falling  in  with  the  tracks  of  the 
body  of  troops  which  had  retreated,  followed  them  to  Pla¬ 
centia  ;  others,  from  their  fears  of  the  enemy,  assumed  bold¬ 
ness  to  attempt  the  stream,  and,  accomplishing  their  passage, 
arrived  at  the  camp.l  The  rain,  mixed  with  snow,  and  the 
intolerable  severity  of  the  cold,  destroyed  great  numbers  of 
men  and  horses,  and  almost  all  the  elephants.  I'he  Cartha¬ 
ginians  continued  the  pursuit  no  farther  than  the  river  Tre- 
bia,  and  returned  to  their  camp  so  benumbed  with  the  cold, 
as  to  be  scarcely  capable  of  feeling  joy  for  the  victory  ;  inso¬ 
much  that  though,  during  the  following  night,  the  guard  of 
the  Roman  camp,  and  a  great  part  at  least  of  their  soldiers, 
passed  the  Trebia  on  rafts,  the  Carthaginians  either  perceived 
nothing  of  the  matter  through  the  noise  made  by  the  rain,  or 
being,  by  weariness  and  wounds,  disabled  to  move,  pretend¬ 
ed  that  they  did  not  perceive  it ;  and  the  enemy  lying  quiet, 
the  consul  Scipio  led  the  troops  in  silence  to  Placentia,  and 
thence  across  the  Po  to  Cremona,  lest  the  two  armies,  win¬ 
tering  in  one  colony,  should  be  too  great  a  burthen. 
LVII.  The  news  of  this  disaster  caused  such  consterna¬ 
tion  in  Rome,  that  people  supposed  the  enemy  would  come 
directly  to  attack  the  city ;  and  they  could  see  no  hope  nor 
aid  to  enable  them  to  repel  an  assault  from  the  walls  and 
gates.  One  consul  had  been  defeated  at  the  Ticinus,  the 
other  recalled  from  Sicily ;  and  now  that  both  the  consuls, 
and  two  cmsidar  armies,  bad  been  defeated,  what  other  com- 

BOOK  XXL 

4Sf 

B.C. 
manders,  what  other  legions  were  there  tvhom  they  could 
call  to  their  support?  While  they  were  possessed  by  such 
desponding  fears,  the  consul  Sempronius  arrived  ;  for  though 
the  enemy’s  cavalry  were  scattered  over  the  whole  face  of 
the  country  in  search  of  plunder,  yet  he  had  passed  through 
the  midst  of  them  with  the  utmost  hazard,  and  with  a  greats 
er  degree  of  boldness  than  of  prudence,  or  of  hope,  either  of 
escaping  notice,  or  of  being  able  to  make  resistance  in  case- 
he  were  discovered.  After  holding  the  election  of  consuls, 
the  only  business  which  rendered  his  presence  particularly 
necessary  at  the  time,  he  returned  to  his  win  ter- quarters. 
The  consuls  elected  were  Cneius  Servillus  and  Caius  Flami- 
nius.  Even  in  their  winter-quarters  the  Romans  were  not 
allowed  to  rest,  the.Numidian  cavalry  spreading  themselves 
round  on  every  side ;  the  Celtiberians  and  Lusitanians  doing 
the  same,  where  the  ground  was  too  difficult  for  the  horse  ; 
so  that  no  provisions  of  any  kind  could  be  brought  in,  except 
what  were  conveyed  on  the  Po  in  ships.  There  was,  near 
Placentia,  a  magazine  fortified  with  strong  works,  and  sup¬ 
plied  with  a  numerous  garrison.  In  hopes  of  gaining  pos¬ 
session  of  this  strong  hold,  Hannibal  marched  at  the  head  of 
his  cavalry  and  light  infantry;  and  judging  that  the  success 
of  the  enterprize  would  depend,  principally,  on  the  design 
being  kept  secret,  made  the  attack  by  night ;  but  he  did  not 
escape  the  vigilance  of  the  guards,  as  a  shout  was  instantly 
raised  so  loud  that  it  was  heard  even  at  Placentia.  In  con¬ 
sequence  of  this,  the  consul  came  to  the  spot  before  day  with 
his  cavalry,  having  ordered  the  legions  to  follow  in  order  of 
battle.*  Meanwhile,  the  action  began  between  the  cavalry, 
in  which  Hannibal,  being  wounded,  and  retiring  from  the 
J^nien  qiiadratum,  signifies  not  a  reg^ilar  line  of  battle,  butthetroopa 
marching  in  the  same  order  in  which  they  were  formed  in  the  field  of 
battle,  tlie  Velites  in  froDt,  and  then  the  Hastati^  PrincipeB^  and  XWenV,  in 
their  order 

4m 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y*S.  534. 

fight,  his  men  became  dispirited  ;  and  the  defence  of  the  fm*- 
tress  was  eflFectually  maintained.  After  this,  taking  but  a 
few  days  to  rest,  and  scarcely  allowing  time  for  his  wound 
to  be  thoroughly  healed,  he  set  out  to  lay  siege  to  Victum- 
viae.  This  bad  been  fortified  by  the  Romans  for  a  magazine, 
in  the  time  of  the  Gallic  war.  Afterward,  numbers  of  peo¬ 
ple,  from  all  the  neighbouring  states,  fixing  their  residence 
round  it,  made  it  a  populous  place,  and  at  this  juncture,  fear 
of  the  enemy’s  depredations  had  driven  into  it  the  greater 
part  of  the  country  people.  The  multitude,  thus  composed, 
being  accited  to  a  warmth  of  courage  by  the  report  of  the 
gallant  defence  made  by  the  garrison  near  Placentia,  snatch¬ 
ed  up  arms,  and  marched  out  to  meet  Hannibal.  The  parties 
engaged  on  the  road,  in  the  order  of  march  rather  than  of 
battle,  and  as  there  was,  on  one  side,  nothing  more  than  a 
disorderly  crowd,  on  the  other  a  leader  confident  of  his  sol¬ 
diers,  and  a  soldiery  confident  of  then*  leader,  a  number,  not 
less  than  thirty-five  thousand,  was  routed  by  a  small  party. 
Next  day  they  capitulated,  and  received  a  garrison  within 
their  walls.  They  were  then  ordered  to  deliver  up  their  arms, 
with  which  they  had  no  sooner  complied,  than  a  signal  was 
suddenly  given  to  the  conquerors  to  sack  the  city,  as  if  taken 
by  storm.  Nor  have  WTiters,  in  cases  of  the  like  nature, 
mentioned  any  one  calamity  which  was  not  suffered  on  this 
occasion :  every  outrage,  which  lust,  cruelty,  and  inhuman 
insolence  could  dictate,  being  practised  on  those  wretched 
people.  Such  were  Hannibal’s  enterprizes  during  the  win¬ 
ter. 
LVIII.  After  this  he  gave  rest  to  his  troops,  but  not  for 
any  great  length  of  time,  only  while  the  cold  was  intolera¬ 
ble,  Upon  the  first,  and  even  uncertain  appearances  of  spring, 
he  left  his  winter-quarters,  and  marched  towards  Etruria, 
determined,  either  by  force  or  persuasion,  to  prevail  on  that^ 
nation  to  join  him,  as  he  had  already  managed  the  Gauls 

BOOK  XXL 

469 

B.C.  218.] 
and  Ligiirians.  As  he  was  attempting  to  cross  the  Apen¬ 
nines  he  was  encountered  by  a  storm  so  furious,  that  its 
eifects  almost  equalled  in  severity  the  disasters  of  the  Alps, 
The  rain,  which  was  attended  with  a  high  wind,  being  driven 
directly  into  the  men’s  faces,  they  at  first  halted,  because 
they  must  either  have  cast  away  their  arms,  or,  if  they  per¬ 
sisted  to  struggle  forward,  would  be  whirled  round  by  the 
hurricane,  and  thrown  on  the  ground.  Afterwards,  scarcely 
able  to  respire,  they  turned  their  backs  to  the  wind,  and  for 
awhile  sat  down.  But  now,  the  whole  atmosphere  resounded 
with  loud  thunder,  and  lightnings  flashed  between  the  tre¬ 
mendous  peals,  by  which  all  were  stunned,  and  reduced,  by 
terror,  nearly  to  a  state  of  insensibility.  At  length  the  vio¬ 
lence  of  the  rain  abating,  and  the  fury  of  the  wind  increasing, 
the  more  necessary  it  was  judged  to  pitch  their  camp  on  the 
very  spot,  where  they  had  been  surprised  by  the  tempest. 
But  this  was,  in  a  manner,  beginning  their  toils  anew.  For 
neither  could  they  well  spread  their  canvass,  nor  fix  the  poles ; 
and  such  tents  as  they  did  get  raised,  they  could  not  keep 
standing,  the  wind  tearing  and  sweeping  off  every  thing  in 
its  way.  And  soon  after,  the  water,  being  raised  aloft  by 
the  force  of  the  wind,  and  congealed  by  the  cold  which  pre¬ 
vailed  above  the  summits  of  the  mountains,  came  down  in 
such  a  torrent  of  snowy  hail,  that  the  men,  giving  over  all 
their  endeavours,  threw  themselves  fiat  on  their  faces,  buried 
under,  rather  than  protected  by,  their  coverings.  This  was 
followed  by  cold  so  intense,  that  when  they  wished  to  rise 
from  among  the  wretched  crowd  of  prostrated  men  and  cat¬ 
tle,  they  were  for  a  long  time  unable  to  effect  it,  their  sinews 
being  .so  stiffly  frozen  that  they  were  scarcely  able  to  bend 
their  joints.  In  some  time,  when,  after  many  efforts,  they  at 
length  regained  the  power  of  motion,  and  recovered  some 
degree  of  spirits,  and  when  fires  began  to  be  kindled  in  a  few 
places,  every  one  who  w^as  unable  to  assist  himself  had  re- 

HISTCmY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R,  534, 

4ro 
course  to  the  aid  others.  Two  days  they  re/nained  in  that 
spot,  as  if  pent  up  by  an  enemy.  Great  numbers  of  men  and 
cattle  perished,  and  likewise  seven  of  the  eleph^ts,  which 
had  survived  the  battle  at  the  Trebia. 
LIX.  Descending  therefore  from  the  Apennine,  he  direct¬ 
ed  his  route  back  towards  Placentia  ;  and,  having  marched 
ten  miles,  pitched  his  camp.  Next  day  be  led  out  against 
the  enemy  twelve  thousand  foot,  and  five  thous^d  horse. 
Nor  did  the  consul  Sempronius  (for  he  had  by  this  time  re¬ 
turned  from  Rome)  decline  a  battle ;  and,  during  that  day, 
the  armies  lay  encamped  within  three  miles  of  each  other. 
On  the  following,  they  fougfit  with  the  greatest  bravery,  and 
with  variable  success.  At  the  first  onset,  the  superiority  was 
so  great  on  the  side  of  the  Romans,  that  they  not  only  had 
the  better  in  the  fight,  but  drove  the  enemy  from  their 
ground,  pursued  them  to  their  camp,  and  presently  attacked 
the  camp  itself.  Hannibal,  after  posting  a  few  to  defend  the 
rampart  and  gates,  collected  the  rest  in  close  order,  in  the 
middle  of  the  camp,  ordering  them  to  watch  attentively  the 
signal  for  sallying  forth.  It  was  now  near  the  ninth  hour  of 
the  day,  when  the  Roman,  having  fatigued  his  troops  without 
effect,  and  seeing  no  prospect  of  success,  gave  the  signal  for 
retreat.  As  soon  as  Hannibal  perceived  that  they  slackened 
their  efforts,  and  were  retiring  from  the  camp,^he  instantly 
sent  out  his  cavalry  against  them,  on  the  right  and  left ;  and 
he  himself,  at  the  head  of  the  main  body  of  infantry,  rushed 
out  m  the  middle.  Seldom  has  there  been  a  fight  more  des¬ 
perate,  and  never,  perhaps,  one  more  remarkable  for  the  loss 
on  both  sides  than  this  would  have  been,,  had  the  day-light 
allowed  it  to  continue ;  but  night  put  a  stop  to  the-  battle, 
while  its  fury  was  at  the  highest,  llie  numbers  slain,  there¬ 
fore,  were  not  great,  in  proportion  to  the  violence  of  the  con¬ 
flict  ;  and  as  both  parties  had  met  nearly  equal  success,  so 
they  separated  with  equal  loss.  On  neither  side  fell  more 

B.C.  218.]  BOOK  XXI.  4Tt 
t 
than  six  hundred  foot,  and  half  that  number  of  horse.  But 
the  loss  of  the  Romans  was  more  considerable  in  regard  of 
the  quality,  than  of  the  number  of  their  slain  ;  for  among  the 
killed  were  several  of  equestrian  rank,  five  military  tribunes, 
and  three  praefects  of  the  allies.  Immediately  after  this  bat¬ 
tle,  Hannibal  removed  into  Liguria  ;  Sempremius,  to  Luca. 
On  Hannibal’s  arrival  among  the  Ligurians,  that  people,  in 
order  to  convince  him  of  their  sincerity  in  the  treaty  of  peace 
and  alliance  which  they  had  concluded,  delivered  into  his 
hands  two  Roman  quaestors,  Caius  Fulvius  and  Lucius  Lu¬ 
cretius,  with  two  military  tribunes,  and  five  persons  of  eques¬ 
trian  rank,  mostly  the  sons  of  senators,  all  of  whom  they  had 
seized  in  a  treacherous  manner. 
LX.  While  these  transactions  passed  in  Italy,  Cneius  Cor¬ 
nelius  Scipio,  who  was  sent  with  the  fleet  and  army  into 
Spain,  after  his  departure  from  the  mouth  of  the  Rhone, 
sailing  round  the  Pyrenean  mountains,  put  into  Emporiae, 
where  he  disembarked  his  army  ;  and  beginning  with  the 
Lacetans,  partly  by  renewing  old  treaties,  partly  by  forming 
new  ones,  he  brought  under  the  dominion  of  the  Romans  the 
whole  coast,  as  far  as  the  river  Iberus.  The  reputation  of 
clemency,  which  he  acquired  by  these  means,  had  the  most 
powerful  effect,  not  only  on  the  maritime  states,  but  on  the 
more  barbarous  nations  in  the  interior  and  mountainous  parts ; 
insomuch  that,  besides  agreeing  to  terms  of  peace,  they  con¬ 
cluded  also  an  alliance  with  him,  and  several  strong  cohorts 
of  auxiliaries  were  raised  among  them.  The  country  on  this 
side  the  Iberus  was  the  province  of  Hanno,  whom  Hannibal 
had  left  behind  for  the  defence  of  that  tract.  Seeing,  there¬ 
fore,  a  necessity,  before  the  whole  country  should  join  the 
enemy,  of  exerting  himself  to  obviate  that  evil,  he  encamped 
his  forces  within  sight  of  them,  and  offered  them  battle ;  this 
offer  the  Roman  did  not  hesitate  to  accept ;  for,  knowing  that 
he  must  fight  Hanno  and  Hasdnd)al,  he  was  better  pleased 

472 

HISTORY  ROME. 

[  Y.R.  534. 

«t>  engage  each  of  them  separately,  to  have  to  deal  with 
both  together.  Nor  was  the  dispute  i^ry  strongly  contested. 
Six  thousand  of  the  enemy  were  slain,  and  two  thousand  ta¬ 
ken,  besides  the  guard  of  the  camp,  for  that  also  was  storm¬ 
ed,  and  the  general  himself,  and  many  principal  o^ers,  made 
prisoners.  The  town  of  Scissis  too,  which  stood  not  far 
from  the  camp,  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  conquerors.  The 
spoil  of  this  town  consisted  of  Articles  of  triSing  value  j  the 
furniture  was  mean,  suiting  barbarians,  and  the  slaves  of  litde 
price.  But  the  camp  amply  enriched  the  soldiers  with  the 
effects,  not  only  of  the  army  just  now  conquerors,  but  like¬ 
wise  with  those  of  the  army  serving  under  Hannibal,  who,  to 
avoid  being  encumbered  on  their  march  with  heavy  baggage, 
had  left  almost  all  their  valuable  substance  on  that  side  of  the 
Pyrenees. 
LXL  Hasdrubal,  before  any  certain  account  of  this  disas¬ 
ter  reached  him,  had  crossed  the  Iberus  with  eight  thousand 
foot  and  one  thousand  horse,  intending  to  meet  the  Romans 
at  their  first  arrival ;  as  soon  as  he  was  informed  of  the  ruin 
of  afiPairs  at  Scissis,  and  the  loss  of  the  camp,  he  turned  his 
route  towards  the  sea.^  Not  far  from  Tarraco,  meeting  the 
soldiers  belonging  to  the  fleet,  and  the  mariners  scattered  and 
straggling  through  the  country,  among  whom  success,  as  is 
usual,  had  begotten  negligence,  he  detached  his  cavalry  in 
several  parties  against  them,  and  with  great  slaughter  and 
greater  affright  drove  them  to  their  ships.  But  not  daring 
to  continue  longer  in  that  quarter,  lest  he  might  be  surprised 
by  Scipio,  he  withdrew  to  the  other  side  of  the  Iberus.  On 
the  other  hand,  Scipio,  on  hearirf^f  this  new  enemy,  has¬ 
tened  to  the  spot  with  all  expedition,  and,  after  punishing  a 
few  of  the  commanders  of  sl^s,  and  leaving  a  small  garri¬ 
son  at  Tarraco,  returned^with  the  fleet  to  Emporise.  Scarcely 
had  he  departed,  when  Hasdrubal  arrived,  and  having  pre¬ 
vailed  on  the  state  of  the  Ilergctans,  which  had  given  hos- 

B.C.  218.] 

tages  to  Scipio  ^  olmgo  sMes,  he,  with  the  yotmg  mem  of 
that  state,  ravaged  the  lands  of  those  who  adhered  wkh  Ede* 
lity  to  their  aUiamce  with  the  Romans.  Afterwards,  on  fimt- 
ing  ths^  Scipio  was  roosed  dicreby  from  his  winter-quarters^ 
he  again  entirely  evacuated  the  country  <m  this  aide  of  die 
Iberus.  Scipio^  leading  bis  army  to  take  vengeance  <m  the 
Ilergetans,  thus  abandoned  by  the  author  of  their  revdit, 
and  driving  them  all  into  Athanagia,  invested  the  city, 
which  was  the  capital  of  the  state.  In  the  space  of  a  few 
days  he  reduced  them  to  entire  submission  and  obedience, 
compelled  them  to  give  a  greater  number  of  hostages  than 
befmre,  and  also  to  pay  a  sum  of  money  as  a  fine.  From 
thence  he  proceeded  against  the  Ausetanians  near  the  Ibe¬ 
rus,  who  had  likewise  joined  in  a  league  with  ti:^  Carthagi¬ 
nians.  After  he  had  invested  their  city,  the  Lacetans  at¬ 
tempted  by  night  to  bring  succour  to  their  neighbours  j  but 
he  surprised  them  by  an  ambuscade,  when  they  were  close 
to  the  city  and  just  about  to  enter ;  twelve  thousand  of  them 
were  slain,  and  the  rest,  mostly  without  their  arms,  dispers¬ 
ing  up  at^  down  through  the  country,  fled  to  their  hon^ 
by  different  ways.  Neither  would  the  besieged  have  been 
able  to  make  a  defence,  but  for  the  severity  of  the  wimmr, 
which  obstructed  the  operations  of  the  besiegers.  The  sie|^ 
lasted  thirty  days,  during  which  the  snow  lay  seldom  less 
than  four  feet  deep,  and  it  had  covered  over  the  machine 
and  engines  of  die  Romans,  in  such  a  manner,  as  that  of 
self  alone  it  proved  a  sufficient  defence  against  the  fires 
which  were  often  thrown  on  them  by  the  enemy.  At  last, 
Hamusitus  their  chiefuun,  having  fied  away  m  Hasdrubal, 
they  capitulated  on  the  terms  of  paying  twenty  talents  of 
sUver.^^  The  army  then  returned  into  wintcr-qumters  at 
Tanraco. 

VOL*  ii.~3  P 

474 

HISTOinr  O#  ROME. 

[YJLS^ 

IfXII.  Oaitef  this  wiHler,  at  Uowt,  vmi  m  its  vlcimty^ 
tmwy  happes^d^  or,  as  k  when 
peopled  ^indb^  Iwe  once  tsdcen  a  tain  ^mmdn  superstition, 
mmy  were  reported  and  credulonsfy  admitted.  Among 
otiiers,  it  was  said^  thH  sm  infant  of  a  itmilf,  at^ 
<mly  six  months  cdd,  had,  in  the  heiiKmarket,  called  out, 
“  lo,  Trmmphe  thi^,  in  the  cattle^^market,  an  ox  had,  of 
hb  own  ^ctnrd,  moun^d.  up  to  the  third  stcay  s#  a  hou^, 
whenec,  being  affrighted  the  noise  and  bustle  of  tiie  hdia^ 
Ititants,  he  threw  himself  down ;  that  a  light  had  a^^eaml 
in  tile  sky  in  the  form  of  ships  ;  tiiat  the  tein|de  of  Hope, 
in  tile  herb-market,  was  struck  by  lightning  j  that,  at  Larni^ 
vium,  the  spear  of  Juno  had  shaken  of  itself ;  and  that  a 
crow  had  flown  into  the  temple  of  Juno  and  pitched  on  the 
very  couch;  that,  in  the  district  of  Amitemum,  in  many 
places,  apparitions  of  men  in  white  gmments  had  been  seen 
at  a  distance,  but  had  not  come  close  to  any  body ;  that  in 
Picenum,  a  shower  of  stones  had  fallen  ;  at  Caere,  the  divin* 
ii^  tickets  were  diminished  in  size ;  in  Gaul,  a  wolf  snatched 
the  sword  of  a  soldier  on  guard  out  of  the  scabbard,  and 
away  with  it.  With  respect  to  the  other  prodigies,  the  de¬ 
cemvirs  were  commanded  to  consult  the  books :  but  on  ac¬ 
count  of  the  shower  of  stones  in  Picenum,  the  nine  days’ 
festival  was  ordered  to  be  celebrated,  and  the  expiating  of 
the  rest,  one  after  another,  was  almost  the  sole  occupation  of 
the  state.  In  the  first  place  was  performed  a  purification  of 
the  city ;  victims,  of  the  greater  kinds,  were  offered  to  such 
gods  as  were  pointed  out  by  directions.  An  fJTeringof  forty 
p^aoKls  weight  of  gold  was  carried  to  the  temple  of  Juno  at 
Lmmvmm,  and  the  matrons  dedicated  a  biazeti  sta^]^  to  Ju¬ 
no  on  the  ATentine.  A  Lcctistemium  was  ordered  at  Cwe, 
where  the  divining  tickets  were  diminished ;  also  a  su^Uea- 
tion  to  Fortune  at  Algidum,  At  Rome,  likewise,  a  Lectis- 
temium  was  ordered  in  honour  of  the  goddess  Youth,  and  a 

W>QK 

B.C.31&3 

4n 

sop^Lkatbn  lo  %e  pesioii&ed,  by  mdmduals,  at  tbe  temple 
of  md  th<m,  by  riic  whole  body  of  the  people^  at 
aH  the  aevmd  shrine.  To  Genius  five  of  the  greater  vie- 
rtms  weie  efflfered ;  and  the  prsetor  Caius  Atilius  Senant:^ 
was  ordered  to  vow  certain  perforinances,  in  case  the  com** 
monweakh  should  continue  for  ten  years  m  its  present  state. 
These  expiatiems  and  vows  being  performed,  in  conformity 
to  die  directions  of  die  Sibylline  books,  people’s  minds  were, 
in  a  good  measure,  relieved  from  the  burthen  of  religious  ap¬ 
prehensions. 
LXIII.  Flaminius,  one  of  the  consuls  elect,  to  whom  had 
faHen  by  lot  the  legions  which  wintered  at  Placentia,  sent  an 
edict  and  letter  to  the  consul,  desiring  that  those  troops  should 
be  ready  in  camp  at  Ariminum  on  the  ides  of  March.  His 
design  was  to  enter  on  the  office  of  consul  In  his  province : 
for  he  remembered  his  old  disputes  with  the  j^tricians,  the 
contests  in  which  he  had  engaged  with  them  when  tribune 
of  the  commons,  and  afterwards,  when  consul,  first  about  the 
consulship,  his  election  to  which  they  wanted  to  annul,  and 
then  about  a  triumpdi.  He  was  besides  hated  by  the  patri¬ 
cians  on  account  of  a  new  law,  prejudicial  to  the  senators, 
introduced  by  Caius  Claudius  a  plebeian  tribune,  to  which 
Caius  Flaminius  alone,  of  all  the  patricians,  had  given  his 
support, — that  no  senator,  or  son  of  a  senator,  should  be 
owner  of  a  ship  fit  for  sea-voyages,  which  contained  more 
than  three  hundred  amphoras*.  This  size  was  thought  suffi¬ 
cient  for  ctmveying  the  produce  of  their  farms,  and  every 
kind  of  traffic  was  deemed  unbecoming  a  senator.  This 
business  had  been  contested  with  the  utmost  degree  of  heat, 
and  had  procured  to  Flaminius,  the  advocate  for  the  law, 
great  hatred  among  the  nobility,  but  as  great  popularity 
among  the  commons,  and,  in  consequence  of  this,  a  second 

About  ten  tons. 

m  Kmmmit  of  rome.  tVM.  su. 
ccmsiilis8iip«  For  i^asons,  suapec^g  ibef  woidd^ 
by  kkifyit^  the  auspices,  by  the  fielay  of  celehrsi^^  the 
Ladue  festival,  and  other  impediments  to  which  a  consul  was 
lidbJb,  detain  him  in  die  city,  he  pretended  a  journey,  and, 
while  yet  in  a  private  capacity,  went  secretly  into  die  pro* 
This  step,  when  it  beemne  known,  added  fresh  t*e* 
sentment  to  the  smimosity  which,  before  this,  possessed  the 
breai^s  of  the  senators ;  they  exclaimed,  that  Caius  Fla* 
minius  now  waged  war,  not  only  with  the  senate,  Intt  with 
the  immortal  gods.  j^That  formerly  having  been  made  cem- 
sul  under  propitious  auspices,  though  gods  and  men  united 
in  recalling  him  when  ready  to  give  batde,  he  had  refused 
obedience  j^^^and  now,  conscious  of  having  treated  them  with 
disrespect,  had  fled  to  avoid  the  Capitol,  and  the  cus^cmiary 
offering  of  vows ;  unwilling,  on  the  day  of  his  entering  into 
office,  to  approach  the  temple  of  Jupiter  supremely  good  and 
great ;  to  see  and  consult  the  senate,  to  whom  he  knew  that 
he  was  odious ;  and  that  be  was  the  only  person  by  whom 
they  were  hated ;  that  he  had  failed  to  proclsum  the  Latine 
festival,  and  to  perform  on  the  Alban  mount  the  customary 
sacrifices  to  Jupiter  Latiaris  |  to  go  up  to  the  Capitol,  under 
the  direction  of  auspices,  in  order  to  offer  vows,  and  thence 
to  proceed  to  his  province  in  the  h^hit  of  a  commander,  and 
attended  by  Uctors.  Instead  of  which,  he  had  gone  off,  with¬ 
out  badges  of  authority,  withmit  lictors,  like  a  soldier^s  ser¬ 
vant,  privately  and  by  stealth :  just  as  if  he  were  quitting  bis 
country  to  go  into  exile ;  supposing,  no  doubt,  diat  he  might 
a^ume  his  office  in  a  manner  more  suitable  to  the  dignity  of 
supreme  magistrate  at  Ariminum,  than  at  Rome,  and  put  on 
the  consular  robe  in  a  public  inn  better  than  in  his  own  dwel¬ 
ling.’’  They  resolved,  unimniiously,  tlmthe  should  be  recal¬ 
led  ;  that  his  return  should  be  insisted  upem  i  and  that  he 
should  be  compeEed  to  perform,  in  person,  all  duties  both  to 
gods  and  men,  befiare  he  went  to  hts  province.  On  this  em- 

BOOK  XStk 

B.c. 

m 

Imsy  (for  it  was  resaive4  foat  fie 
we&t  l^^itus  Terendus  aed  Msorccm  Andstlus^  wiicm  argu» 
meQ^  bad  no  more  weight  with  him  tbaa  had  the  fetto*  sent 
to  him  by  the  senate  in  his  former  consular.  In  a  few  days 
after,  he  entered  on  his  office,  and  m  he  was  offering  a  sacri* 
fice  on  the  occasion,  a  calf,  after  receiving  a  stroke,  made  ite 
escape  out  of  the  hands  of  those  who  officiated  at  the  sacii* 
fice,  and  ^tixdded  many  of  the  by*standers  with  its  blood. 
The  confismon  and  disorder  was  great,  but  still  greater  amc^ 
those  a  distance,  who  knew  not  the  cause  of  the  disturb* 
smce.  This  was  generally  interpreted  as  an  omen  of  dread*  ^ 
ful  import.  Then,  after  receiving  two  legions  firom  Sempro* 
nius,  the  consul  of  the  former  year,  and  two  from  the  praetor, 
Caius  Atilius  began  his  march  towards  Etruria,  through  die 
passes  of  die  A{^mnes. 

END  OF  THE  SECOND  TOLUISE. 

TBE 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 
BY 
TITUS  LIVIUS. 

TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  ORIGINAL^ 
WITH  NOTES  ANP  ILLUSTRATIONS, 
BY  GEORGE  BAKER,  A.  M. 

Histoiy  is  Philosophy  teachi&g  bj  eumples. 
BOLINGBROEE. 

FIRST  AM£B1CAX»  FROM  THE  LAST  LONDON  EDITION. 
IN  SIX  VOLUMES.-- VOL,  III. 

NEW  YORK: 
PUBLISBCD  BY  PETER  A.  MSSIER,  COLLINS  &  CO.  J.  &  T.  SWORDS,  A.  T. 
GOODRICH,  HENRY  I.  MEG  ARY.  R,  &  W.  A.  BARTOW,  S.  GODLD,  W.  B. 
OlLLET,  JAMES  EASTBVRK,  GEORGE  LONG,  PRIOR  &  DUNNING,  SAMUEL 
CAMPBELL  k  SON,  E.  BLISS  k  E,  WHITE,  A.  DURELL  &  CO.  AND  JAMES 
V.  SEAMAN. 

WiUiam  Fry^  Printer. 
1823. 

T>6r 
Zoy 
'  / 
9  i»  W 
/923i» 

PBOPERfY  OF  CulLLhl  L.':'*:Ah'Y 
HAN\PDtN-SYT^‘-^FY .  V FF ‘y\m 

CONTENTS 

07 
THE  THIRD  VOLUME. 

Page. 
BOOK  XXII . 1 
BOOK  XXIIT  - . 91 
BOOK  XXIV. . 169 
BOOK  XXV . 343 
BOOK  XXVI. . Sir 
BOOK  XXVII. . 401 

13295 

THE 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

BOOK  XXII. 
Hannibal,  after  a  kboHotis  mar^  of  four  days  and  three  'ad^out  re« 
pose,  through  the  marshes,  in  which  he  lost  an  eye,  andves  in  Etnma. 
Caius  Flaminius,  consul,  a  man  of  rash  and  inconsiderate  conduct.  Is  in* 
volved,  by  the  artifice  of  Hannibal,  in  a  dangerous  defile,  and  cut  of,  with 
the  greatest  part  of  his  army  Fabius  Maximus  created  dictator,  and 
against  Hannibal;  avoids  %hting  and  baffles  Hannibal's  efi^rts.  The 
master  of  the  hmoe,  Msucus  Minucius,  excites  genend  dissatis&ction 
against  the  dictator's  dilatoiy  conduct ;  is  made  equal  to  him  in  authmHity; 
engages  the  enemy  with  his  half  of  the  forces,  and  is  saved  from  utter 
destruction  by  Fabius  coming  opportunely  to  his  relief,  with  the  other 
half  of  the  Homan  army ;  ackno  .ledges  his  misconduct,  and  puts  himself 
s^^n  under  the  command  of  the  dictator.  Hannibal,  shut  up  b\  Fabius, 
in  a  valley  at  CamUnum,  extricates  himself  by  a  stratagem  of  ^ing  fire> 
brands  to  the  boms  of  oxen.  .£miUu$  Paullus  and  Terentius  Varro  uttei^ 
def.;ated  at  Cannae,  the  former  being  slain,  with  forty -five  thousand  men, 
af  w’hom  were  eighty  senators,  and  thirty  who  had  served  the  office  of 
consul,  prxtor,  or  xdile.  A  project  of  abandoning  Italy  quashed  by 
Publius  Cornelius  Scipto,  a  military  tribune,  who  afterwards  acquired  the 
surname  of  Africanus.  Prosperous  e' ents  in  Spain.  The  Romans  enli^ 
slaves;  refuse  t  ransom  the  prisoners;  go  out,  in  a  body,  to  meet  Vairo, 
and  thank  him  for  not  despairing  of  the  commonwealth. 
I.  AT  the  first  approach  of  spring,  Hannibal  quitted  his 
winter  station.  He  had  been  foiled  before,  in  his  y.  R.  5S5, 
attempt  to  pass  over  the  Appennine,  by  the  intolera-  C.  21^, 
ble  severity  of  the  cold ;  for  he  would  gladly  have  el^&cted  it, 
exposed  as  he  was,  during  his  stay  in  quarters,  to  the  utmost 
degree  apprehension  and  danger.  For,  when  the  Gauls, 
VOL.  in.— A 

HISTORY  OF  ROME,  [Y.R,  535. 
whom  the  hopes*  of  spoil  and  pillage  had  allured  to  his 
standard,  perceived,  that,  instead  of  carrying  off  booty  from 
the  lands  of  others,  their  own  had  become  the  seat  of  war, 
and  that  they  were  burthened  with  the  winter  residence  of 
both  the  contending  armies,  they  turned  upon  Hannibal  the 
enmity  which  they  had  harboured  against  the  Romans. 
Many  plots  were  formed  against  him,  by  their  chiefs,  from 
the  effects  of  which  he  was  preserved,  by  their  treacherously 
betraying  one  another,  and  discovering  their  designs,  through 
the  same  inconstancy  which  led  them  to  conspire  against  him. 
But  still  he  was  careful  to  guard  himself  against  their  plots, 
by  frequent  disguises ;  changing  sometimes  his  dress,  some¬ 
times  the  covering  of  his  head.  However,  his  fears,  on  this 
account,  were  his  principal  motives  for  leaving  his  winter 
quarters  earlier  than  usual.  In  the  mean  time  at  Rome, 
Cneius  Servilius  entered  on  the  office  of  consul,  on  the 
ides  of  March.  He  proposed  to  the  senate  to  take  under 
consideration  the  state  of  the  commonwealth  ^  whereupon  the 
clamour  against  Caius  Flaminius  was  renewed.  “  They 
created, they  said,  ‘‘  two  consuls,  yet  had  but  one.  For 
what  legal  authority,  what  auspices  did  the  other  possess  ? 
These  the  magistrates  carried  with  them  from  home,  from 
their  own  tutelar  gods;  and  also  those  of  the  public,  the 
Latine  festival  being  celebrated,  the  sacrifices  on  the  Alban 
mount  performed,  and  vows  duly  offered  in  the  Capitol. 
Setting  out  in  a  private  capacity,  he  could  not  carry  the  aus¬ 
pices  with  him,  neither  could  he  take  them  new,  and  for  the 
first  time,  in  a  foreign  soil.”  Their  apprehensions  were  in¬ 
creased  by  reports  of  prodigies,  brought  from  various  places 
at  once.  In  Sicily,  a  number  of  arrows,  and  in  Sardinia,  the 
truncheon  of  a  horseman,  as  he  was  going  the  rounds  of  the 
watch  on  the  walls  of  Sulci,  took  fire,  as  was  said ;  many  fires 
were  seen  blazing  on  the  shore ;  two  shields  sweated  blood ; 
several  soldiers  were  struck  by  lightning ;  and  the  sun’s  orb 
apf^a^ed  to  be  contracted.  At  Praeneste,  red-hot  stones  fell 

»<K)K  XXII. 

3 

B.c.  21 rj 
from  the  sky.  At  Arpi,  bucklers  were  seetf  iu  the  air,  and  the 
sun  fighting  with  the  moon.  At  Capena,  two  moons  app^ed  in 
the  day-time.  At  Cjere,  the  streams  of  water  were  mixed 
with  blood ;  and  even  the  fountain  of  Hercules  was  tinged 
with  bloody  spots*  In  the  district  of  Antium,  while  people 
were  reaping,  bloody  ears  of  corn  fell  into  a  basket.  At  Fa- 
lerii,  the  sky  seemed  to  be  rent  asunder  with  a  very  wide 
cleft,  and  through  the  opening  a  strong  light  burst  forth ;  the 
divining  tickets,  without  any  apparent  cause,  were  diminished 
in  size,  and  one  fell  out,  which  had  this  inscription,  *  Mars 
brandishes  his  spear.’  About  the  same  time,  at  Rome,  the 
statue  of  Mars,  on  the  Appian  road,  and  the  images  of  the 
wolves,  sweated.  At  Capua,  the  sky  appeared  as  if  on  fire, 
and  the  moon  as  falling  amongst  rain.  Afterwards,  prodigies 
of  lesser  note  were  heard  of :  some  asserted  that  goats  were 
converted  into  sheep ;  that  a  hen  was  turned  into  a  male,  and 
a  cock  into  a  female.  The  consul,  laying  before  the  senate 
all  these  matters,  as  reported,  and  bringing  the  authors  of 
the  reports  into  the  senate-house,  proposed  to  their  conside¬ 
ration  the  affairs  of  religion.  They  decreed,  that  those  pro¬ 
digies  should  be  expiated,  some  with  the  greater,  some  with 
the  lesser  victims ;  and  that  a  supplication  for  three  days 
should  be  performed  at  all  the  shrines  ;  that,  when  the  de¬ 
cemvirs  should  have  inspected  the  books,  all  other  particulars 
should  be  conducted  in  such  manner  as  the  gods  should  de¬ 
clare,  in  their  oracles,  to  be  agreeable  to  them.  By  the  di¬ 
rection  of  the  decemvirs,  it  was  decreed,  that,  first,  a  golden 
thunderbolt,  of  fifty  pounds  weight,  should  be  made  as  an 
offering  to  Jupiter;  and  that  offerings  of  silver  should  be 
presented  to  Juno  and  Minerva ;  that  sacrifices  of  the  greater 
victims  should  be  offered  to  Juno  Regina,  on  the  Avenline, 
and  to  Juno  Sospita,  at  Lanuvium;  that  the  matrons,  con¬ 
tributing  such  sums  of  money  as  might  be  convenient  to 
each,  should  carry  an  offering  to  Juno  Regina,  to  the  Aven- 
tine,  and  celebrate  a  lectisternium  to  her:  and  that  even  the 

4 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  535, 

descendants  of  freed  women  should  make  a  contribution,  ia 
|«x>portion  their  abilities,  out  of  which  an  offering  should 
be  made  to  Feronia.  When  these  orders  were  fulfilled,  the 
decemvirs  sacrificed,  with  the  greater  victims,  in  the  Forum 
at  Ardea:  and,  lastly,  so  late  as  the  month  of  December, 
sacrifices  were  offered  at  the  temple  of  Saturn,  in  Rome,  and 
a  lectisternium  was  ordered :  on  which  occasion  the  couches 
were  laid  out  by  senators,  and  also  a  public  banquet.  Pro¬ 
clamation  was  likewise  made  through  the  city,  of  a  feast  of 
Saturn,  to  be  celebrated  during  a  day  and  a  night,  and  the 
people  were  commanded  to  keep  diSit  day  as  a  festival,  and  to 
observe  it  for  ever. 
II.  While  the  consul  was  employed  at  Rome  in  endea¬ 
vouring  to  procure  the  favour  of  the  gods,  and  in  levying 
troops,  Hannibal,  set  out  from  his  winter  quarters,  and  hear¬ 
ing  that  the  consul  Flaminius  had  already  arrived  at  Arre- 
tium,  he  chose  —  notwithstanding  that  another  road,  less 
difficult,  but  longer,  was  pointed  out  to  him,  —  the  shorter 
one  through  marshes,  which,  at  that  time,  were  overflowed 
by  the  river  Arnus,  to  an  unusual  height.  He  ordered  the 
Spaniards  and  Africans,  the  main  strength  qf  his  veteran 
troops,  to  march  in  the  van,  with  their  baggage  between  their 
divisions ;  that,  in  case  they  should  be  obliged  to  halt,  they 
might  not  be  at  a  loss  dor  a  supply  of  necessaries  ;  then  the 
Gauls  to  follow,  so  that  they  should  compose  the  centre  of 
the  line,  the  cavalry  in  the  rear ;  and  after  them  Mago,  with 
the  light-armed  Numidians,  as  a  rear  guard,  to  prevent  the 
troops  from  straggling ;  particularly  to  hinder  the  Gauls,  if 
weary  of  the  labour,  or  of  the  length  of  the  journey,  from 
attempting  either  to  slip  away,  or  to  stay  behind :  for  that 
people,  it  had  been  found,  want  firmness  to  support  fatigue. 
The  troops  in  the  van,  though  almost  swallowed  in  mud,  and 
frequently  plunging  entirely  under  water,  yet  followed  the 
standards  wherever  their  guides  led  the  way,  but  the  Gauk 
could  neither  keep  their  feet,  nor,  when  they  fell,  raise  them- 

BOOK  XXII. 

5 

B.c.  21  r.] 

^ives  out  of  Ae  gulfs,  which  were  foroed  by  Ae  river 
from  Ae  steepness  of  its  bsuiks.  They  were  destitute  of 
spirits  and  almost  hope ;  and  while  some,  with  difficulty, 
dragged  on  their  enfeebled  limbs,  others,  exhausted  by  Ae 
lengA  of  way,  having  once  fallen,  lay  there,  and  died  among 
the  cattle,  of  which  great  numbers  also  perished.  But  what 
utterly  overpowered  them,  was  the  want  of  sleep,  which  they 
had  now  endured  for  four  days  and  Aree  nights ;  for  no  dry 
spot  could  be  found  on  which  they  might  streteh  Aeir  wea¬ 
ried  limbs,  so  that  they  could  only  throw  their  baggage  into 
Ae  water  in  heaps,  on  Ae  top  of  which  they  laid  themselves 
down.  Even  the  cattle,  which  lay  dead  in  abundance  along 
Ae  whole  course  of  their  march,  afforded  them  a  temporary 
bed,  as  Aey  looked  for  no  further  accommodation  for  sleep¬ 
ing,  than  something  raised  above  the  water.  Hannibal  him¬ 
self,  having  a  complaint  in  his  eyes,  occasioned,  at  firet,  by 
the  unwholesome  air  of  the  spring,  when  changes  are  fre¬ 
quent  from  heat  to  cold,  rode  on  the  only  elephant  which  he 
had  remaining,  in  order  to  keep  himself  as  high  as  possible 
above  the  water ;  but,  at  length,  Ae  want  of  sleep,  Ac 
damps  of  the  night,  with  those  of  the  marshes,  so  disordered 
his  head,  that,  as  he  had  neiAer  place  nor  time  to  make  use 
of  remedies,  he  lost  one  of  his  eyes. 
III.  At  length,  after  great  numbers  of  men  and  cattle  had 
perished  miserably,  he  got  clear  of  the  marshes  j  and,  on  Ae 
first  dry  ground  at  which  he  arrived,  pitched  his  camp. 
Here,  from  scouts,  whom  he  had  sent  forward,  he  learned  with 
certainty,  that  Ae  Roman  army  lay  round  the  walls  of  Ar- 
retium.  He  then  employed  Ae  utmost  diligence  in  inquiring 
into  Ae  disposition  and  designs  of  the  consul,  Ae  nature  of 
Ae  several  parts  of  the  countiy,  the  roads,  and  the  sources 
from  which  provisions  might  be  procured,  with  every  oAer 
circumstance  requisite  to  be  known.  As  to  the  country,  it 
was  one  of  the  most  fertile  in  Italy :  Ae  Etrurian  plains, 
which  lie  between  FaesuUe  and  Arretium,  abounding  with 

6 

HISTORY  OP  ROME. 

[Y.R.535. 

com  and  cattle,  and  plenty  of  every  thing  useful.  The  con¬ 
sul  was  inflated  with  presumption  since  his  former  consulate, 
and  too  regardless,  not  only  of  the  laws  and  the  dignity  of 
the  senate,  but  even  of  the  gods.  This  head-strong  self-suf¬ 
ficiency,  natural  to  his  disposition,  Fortune  had  cherished, 
by  the  prosperous  course  of  success  which  she  had  granted 
him,  in  his  administration  of  affairs,  both  civil  and  military. 
There  was,  therefore,  suflicient  reason  to  suppose,  that  with¬ 
out  regarding  the  sentiments  of  gods  or  men,  he  would  act 
on  all  occasions  with  presumption  and  precipitancy  ;  and  the 
Carthaginian,  in  order  the  more  effectually  to  dispose  him  to 
follow  the  bias  of  his  natural  imperfections,  resolved  to  ir¬ 
ritate  and  exasperate  him.  With  this  view,  leaving  the 
enemy  on  his  left,  and  pointing  his  route  towards  Faesulae, 
he  marched  through  the  heart  of  Etruria,  ravaging  the 
country,  and  exhibiting  to  the  consul,  at  a  distance,  a  view 
of  the  greatest  devastations  that  could  be  effected  by  fire  and 
sword.  Flaminius,  even  had  the  enemy  lain  quiet,  would 
not  have  been  content  to  remain  inactive ;  but  now,  seeing 
tiic  property  of  the  allies  plundered  and  destroyed  before 
his  eyes,  he  thought  that  on  him  must  fall  the  disgrace  of 
HannibaFs  overrunning  the  middle  of  Italy;  and  even  march¬ 
ing,  without  opposition,  to  attack  the  very  walls  of  Rome. 
Notwithstanding  that  every  member  of  his  council  recom¬ 
mended  safe,  rather  than  specious  measures ;  that  he  should 
wait  the  arrival  of  his  colleague,  when  they  might  enter  on 
the  business  with  joint  forces,  and  with  united  spirit  and 
judgment ;  and  that,  in  the  mean  tnne,  the  enemy  should  be 
restrained  from  his  unbounded  license  in  plundering,  by 
means  of  the  cavalry  and  light  auxiliaries  ;  he  burst  away  in 
a  rage,  and  displayed,  at  once,  the  signals  botii  for  marching 
and  fighting.  ‘‘  We  must  lie,  then,”  said  he,  “  under  the 
walls  of  Arretium,  because  here  is  our  native  city,  and  our 
household  gods ;  let  Hannibal  slip  out  of  our  hands,  ravage 
Italy,  and,  after  wasting  and  burning  all  the  rest,  sit  down 

mOK  XXIL 

B.C.  217  ] 

before  Rome  ;  not  stir  from  hence,  in  short,  until  the  senate 
summons  Caius  Flaminius  from  Arretium,  as  formerly  Ca- 
millus  from  Veii.”  While  he  upbraided  them  in  this  manner,^ 
he  ordered  the  standards  to  be  raised  with  speed ;  and 
having  mounted  on  horseback,  the  animal,  by  a  sudden 
plunge,  displaced  him  from  his  seat,  and  direw  him  over  his 
head.  All  present  were  greatly  dismayed  by  such  an  inaus¬ 
picious  omen,  at  the  opening  of  the  campaign  ;  and,  to  add 
to  their  uneasiness,  an  account  was  brought,  that  one  of  the 
standards  could  not  be  pulled  out  of  the  ground,  thou^  the 
standard-bearer  endeavoured  it  with  his  utmost  strength* 
The  consul,  turning  to  the  messenger,  said,  Do  you  also 
bring  a  letter  from  the  senate,  forbidding  me  to  act  ?  Go, 
bid  them  dig  up  the  standard,  if  fear  has  so  benumbed  their 
hands,  that  they  cannot  pull  it  out.”  The  army  then  began 
to  march,  while  the  principal  officers,  besides  being  averse 
from  die  design,  were  terrified  at  the  two  prodigies ;  but 
the  generality  of  the  soldiers  rejoiced  at  the  presumptuous 
conduct  of  the  general ;  for  they  looked  no  farther  than  the 
confidence  which  he  displayed,  and  never  examined  the 
grounds  on  which  it  was  founded- 
IV.  Hannibal,  die  more  to  exasperate  the  enemy,  and 
provoke  him  to  seek  revenge  for  the  sufferings  of  his  allies, 
desolated,  widi  every  calamity  of  war,  the  whole  tract  oi 
country  between  the  city  of  Cortona  and  the  lake  Trasi- 
menus.  And  now  the  army  had  arrived  at  a  spot,  formed  by 
nature  for  an  ambuscade,  where  the  Trasimenus  approaches 
closest  to  the  Crotonian  mountains.  Between  them  is  only 
a  very  narrow  road,  as  if  room  had  been  designedly  left  for 
that  purpose  ;  farther  on,  the  ground  opens*  to  somewhat  a 
greater  width,  and,  beyond  that,  rises  a  range  of  hills.  On 
these,  he  formed  a  camp  in  open  t^iew,  where  himself,  with 
the  African  and  Spanish  infantry^  only,  was  to  take  post. 
The  Balearians,  and  other  light-armed  troops,  he  drew 
round  behind  the  mountains,  and  posted  the  cavalrv  near  the 

a 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.S35. 

entrance  of  the  defile,  ^here  they  were  effectually  concealed 
by  some  rising  grounds ;  with  design,  that  as  soon  as  the 
Romans  entered  the  pass,  the  cavalry  should  take  possession 
of  the  road,  and  thus  the  whole  space  be  shut  up,  between 
the  lake  and  the  mountains.  Flaminius,  though  he  arrived 
at  the  lake  about  sunset,  took  no  care  to  examine  the  ground, 
but  next  morning,  before  it  was  clear  day,  passed  thremgh 
the  narrow  way,  and  when  the  troops  be^n  to  spread  into 
the  wider  ground,  they  saw  only  that  party  of  the  enemy 
which  fronted  them ;  those  in  ambush  on  their  rear,  and  over 
their  heads,  quite  escaped  their  notice.  The  Carthaginian, 
having  now  gained  the  point  at  which  he  mmed,  the  Roman 
being  pent  up  between  the  mountains  and  the  lake,  and  sur¬ 
rounded  by  his  troops,  immediately  gave  the  signal  for  the 
whole  to  charge  at  once.  They  accordingly  poured  down, 
every  one  by  the  shortest  way  he  could  find,  and  the  sur¬ 
prize  was  the  more  sudden  and  alarming,  because  a  mist, 
rising  from  the  lake,  lay  thicker  on  the  low  grounds,  than 
on  the  mountains ;  while  the  parties  of  the  enemy,  seeing 
each  other  distinctly  enough  from  the  several  eminences, 
were  the  better  able  to  run  down  together.  The  Romans, 
before  they  could  discover  their  foe,  learned,  from  the  shouts 
raised  on  all  sides,  that  they  were  surrounded ;  and  the  at¬ 
tack  began  on  their  front  and  flank,  before  they  could  pro¬ 
perly  form  a  line,  or  get  ready  their  arms,  and  draw  their 
swords. 
V.  In  the  midst  of  the  general  consternation,  the  consul, 
perilous  as  the  conjucture  was,  showed  abundance  of  intre¬ 
pidity  ;  he  restored,  as  well  as  the  time  and  place  would  al¬ 
low,  the  ranks,’  which  were  disordered  by  the  men  turning 
themselves  about  at  all  the  various  shouts,  and  wherever  he 
could  come  or  be  heard,  encouraged,  and  charged  them  to 
stand  steady,  and  to  fight ;  telling  them,  that  ‘‘  they  must 
not  expect  to  get  clear  of  their  present  situation,  by  vows 
and  prayers  to  the  gods,  but  by  strength  and  courage.  By  the 

BOOK  XXIL 

9 

B.C.  217.] 
sword,  men  opened  a  way  through  the  midst  of  embattled 
foes  ;  and,  in  general,  the  less  fear  the  less  danger.”  But 
such  was  the  noise  and  tumult,  that  neither  his  counsel  nor 
commands  could  be  heard  with  distinctness ;  and  so  far 
were  the  soldiers  from  knowing  each  his  own  standard,  his 
rank,  and  post,  that  scarcely  had  they  sufficient  presence  of 
mind  to  take  up  their  arms,  and  get  ready  for  fighting ;  so 
that  many,  while  they  were  rather  encumbered  than  defended 
•by  them,  were  overpowered  by  the  enemv.  Besides,  the  dark¬ 
ness  was  so  great,  that  they  had  more  use  of  their  ears  than 
of  their  eyes.  The  groans  of  the  wounded,  the  sound  of 
blows  on  the  men’s  bodies  or  armour,  with  the  confused 
cries  of  threatening  and  terror,  drew  attention  from  one  side 
to  another.  Some,  attempting  to  fly,  were  stopped  by  running 
against  a  party  engaged  in  fight ;  others,  returning  to  the 
fight,  were  driven  back  by  a  body  of  runaways.  At  length, 
after  they  had  made  many  fruitless  essays  in  eveiy  quarter, 
and  inclosed,  as  they  were,  by  the  mountains  and  lake  on 
the  sides,  by  the  enemy’s  forces  on  the  front  and  rear,  they 
evidently  perceived  that  there  was  no  hope  of  safety  but  in 
their  valour  and  their  weapons.  Every  one’s  own  thoughts 
then  supplied  the  place  of  command  and  exhortation  to  ex¬ 
ertion,  and  the  action  began  anew,  with  fresh  vigour ;  but 
the  troops  were  not  marshalled  according  to  the  distinct  bo¬ 
dies  of  the  different  orders  of  soldiers,  nor  so  disposed,  that 
the  van-guard  should  fight  before  the  standards,  and  the  rest 
of  the  troops  behind  them ;  or  that  each  soldier  %vas  in  his 
own  legion,  or  cohort,  or  company  ;  chance  formed  their 
bands,  and  every  man’s  post  in  the  battle,  either  before  or 
behind  the  standards,  was  fixed  by  his  own  choice.  So  in¬ 
tense  was  the  ardour  of  the  engagement,  so  eagerly  was 
their  attention  occupied  by  the  fight,  that  not  one  of  the 
combatants  perceived  a  great  earthquake,  which,  at  the.time, 
overthrew  large  portions  of  many  of  the  cities  of  Italy, 
turned  rapid  rivers  out  of  their  courses,  carried  up  the  sea 
VOL.  ni. — B 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

10 

[Y.R.535, 

into  the  rivers,  and  by  the  violence  of  the  convulsion, 
levelled  mountains. 
VI.  They  fought  for  near  three  hours,  and  furiously  in 
every  part :  but  round  the  consul  the  battle  was  particularly 
hot  and  bloody.  The  ablest  of  the  men  attended  him,  and 
he  was  himself  surprisingly  active  in  supporting  his  troops, 
wherever  he  saw  them  pressed,  or  in  need  of  assistance ; 
and,  as  he  was  distinguished  above  others  by  his  armour, 
the  enemy  pointed  their  utmost  efforts  against  him,  while 
his  own  men  defended  him  with  equal  vigour.  At  length, 
an  Insubrian  horseman,  (his  name  Decario,)  knowing  his 
face,  called  out  to  his  countiy^men,  Behold,  this  is  the  con¬ 
sul,  who  cut  to  pieces  our  legions,  and  depopulated  our 
country  and  city.  I  will  now  offer  this  victim  to  the  shades 
of  my  countrymen,  who  lost  their  lives  in  that  miserable 
manner then,  giving  spurs  to  his  horse,  he  darted  through 
the  thickest  of  the  enemy ;  and,  after  first  killing  his  armour- 
bearer,  who  threw  himself  in  the  way  of  the  attack,  ran  the 
consul  through  with  his  lance.  He  then  attempted  to  spoil 
him  of  his  arms,  but  the  veterans,  covering  the  body  with 
their  shields  drove  him  back.  This  event  first  caused  a 
great  number  of  the  troops  to  fly ;  and  now,  so  great  was 
their  panic,  that  neither  lake  nor  mountain  stopped  them ; 
through  every  place,  however  narrow  or  steep,  they  ran  with 
blind  haste,  and  arms,  and  men,  were  tumbled  together  in 
promiscuous  disorder.  Great  numbers,  finding  no  room  for 
farther  flight,  pushed  into  the  lake,  and  plunged  themselves 
in  such  a  manner,  that  only  their  heads  and  shoulda*s  were 
above  water.  The  violence  of  their  fears  impelled  some  to 
make  the  desperate  attempt  of  escaping  by  swimming ;  but 
this  proving  impracticable,  on  account  of  the  great  extent  of 
the  lake,  they  either  exhausted  their  strength,  and  were 
drowned  in  the  deep,  or,  after  fatiguing  themselves  to  no  pur¬ 
pose,  made  their  way  back,  with  the  utmost  difficulty,  to  the 
shallows,  and  were  there  slain,  wherever  they  appeared,  hv 

BOOK  XXIL 

11 

B.c.sir.] 
the  enemy’s  horsemen  wading  into  the  same.  About  six 
thousand  of  the  van^guard,  bravely  forcing  their  way  through 
the  opposite  enemy,  got  clear  of  the  defile,  and  knowing 
nothing  of  what  was  passing  behind  them,  halted  on  a  rising 
ground,  where  they  could  only  hear  the  shouting,  and  the 
din  of  arms,  but  could  not  see,  by  reason  of  the  darkness, 
nor  judge  with  any  certainty,  as  to  the  fortunes  of  the  day: 
At  length,  after  the  victory  was  decided,  the  increasing  heat 
of  the  sun  dispelling  the  mist,  the  prospect  was  opened. 
The  mountains  and  plains  showed  the  desperate  condition 
of  their  affairs,  and  the  shocking  carnage  of  the  Roman  army: 
wherefore,  lest,  on  their  being  seen  at  a  distance,  the  cavalry 
should  be  sent  against  them,  they  hastily  raised  their  stand¬ 
ards,  and  hurried  away  with  all  possible  speed.  Next 
day,  when,  besides  their  other  distresses,  they  were  threat¬ 
ened  with  the  extremity  of  hunger,  INIaharbal,  who,  with  the 
whole  body  of  cavalr}%  had  overtaken  them  during  the  night, 
pledging  his  faith,  that  if  they  surrendered  their  arms,  he 
would  suffer  them  to  depart  with  single  garments,  they  de¬ 
livered  themselves  into  his  hands.  But  this  capitulation 
Hannibal  observed  with  Punic  sincerity,  and  thre\v'  them  i 
into  chains. 
VII.  Such  was  the  memorable  fight  at  tlie  Thrasimenus, 
and  the  severe  blow  there  received  by  the  Romans,  remarkable 
among  the  few  disasters  of  the  kind,  which  the  nation  has 
ever  undergone.  Of  the  Romans,  fifteen  thousand  were  slain 
in  the  field;  ten  thousand,  who  fled,  and  dispersed  themselves 
through  every  part  of  Etruria,  made  their  way  afterwards, 
by  different  roads,  home  to  the  cit\'.  Of  the  enemy,  one  thou¬ 
sand  five  hundred  perished  in  the  fight,  and  a  great  manv  af¬ 
terwards  of  their  wounds.  By  some  writers,  the  loss  of  men 
on  both  sides  is  represented  as  vastl}'  greater:  for  my  part, 
besides  that  I  wish  to  avoid  the  magnifying  any  particular 
whatever,  an  error  to  which  writers  arc  in  general  too  prone, 
I  think  it  reasonable  to  give  the  preference  to  the  authority 
of  Fabius,  who  lived  in  the  very  time  of  this  war,  Hannibal 

12 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  535. 

dismissed,  without  ransom,  such  of  the  prisoners  as  were  na¬ 
tives  of  Latium^  the  Romans  he  loaded  with  chains.  He  then 
ordered  that  the  bodies  of  his  own  men  should  be  collected, 
from  among  the  heaps  of  the  enemy->  and  buried;  directing, 
at  the  same  time,  that  the  body  of  Flaminius  should  be  sought 
for,  with  intention  to  honour  him  with  a  funeral;  but  after  a 
most  diligent  search,  it  could  not  be  found.  As  soon  as  the 
first  news  of  this  disaster  arrived  at  Rome,  the  people,  in 
great  terror  and  tumult,  crowded  together  into  the  Forum. 
The  matrons,  running  up  and  down  the  streets,  asked  every¬ 
one  who  came  in  their  way,  what  sudden  calamity  was  said 
to  have  happened;  in  what  state  was  the  army?  At  length,  af¬ 
ter  a  crowd,  not  less  numerous  than  that  of  a  full  assembly 
of  the  people,  had  collected  in  the  Coniitium,  and  about  the 
senate- house,  calling  on  the  magistrates  for  information,  a 
little  before  sun-set,  Marcus  Pomponius,  the  praetor,  told 
them,  “  We  have  been  defeated  in  a  great  battle.”  Though 
nothing  more  particular  was  heard  from  him,  yet  the  people, 
catching  up  rumours,  one  from  another,  returned  to  their 
houses  with  accounts,  that,  the  consul  was  slain,  together 
with  a  great  part  of  his  army;  that  few  survived,  and  that 
these  were  either  dispersed  through  Etruria,  or  taken  by  the 
enemy.”  Every  kind  of  misfortune,  which  had  ever  befallen 
vanquished  troops,  was  now  pictured  in  the  anxious  minds 
of  those,  whose  relations  had  served  under  the  consul  Caius 
Flaminius,  having  no  positive  information  on  which  they 
could  found  either  hope  or  fear.  During  the  next,  and  seve¬ 
ral  succeeding  days,  a  multitude,  composed  of  rather  more 
women  than  men,  stood  round  the  gates,  watching  for  the 
arrival,  either  of  their  friends,  or  of  some  who  might  give 
intelligence  concerning  them;  and  whenever  any  person  came 
up,  they  crowded  about  him  with  eager  inquiries;  nor  could 
they  he  prevailed  on  to  retire,  especially  from  such  as  were 
of  their  acquaintance,  until  they  had  examined  minutely  into 
every  particular.  Then,  when  they  did  separate  from  about 

BOOK  XXII. 

13 

B.C.aif.] 
the  informants,  might  be  seen  their  countenances  expressive 
of  various  emotions,  according  as  the  intelligence,  which 
each  received,  was  pleasing  or  unfavourable;  and  numbers, 
surrounding  them,  returned  to  their  houses  offering  either 
congratulations  or  comfort.  Among  the  women,  particularly, 
the  effects  both  of  joy  and  grief  were  very  conspicuous;  one, 
as  we  are  told,  meeting,  unexpectedly,  at  the  very  gate,  her 
son  returning  safe,  expired  at  the  sight  of  him;  another,  who 
sat  in  her  house,  overwhelmed  with  grief,  in  consequence  of 
a  false  report  of  her  son’s  death,  on  seeing  that  son  return¬ 
ing,  died  immediately,  through  excess  of  joy.  The  praetors, 
during  several  da)S,  kept  the  senate  assembled  in  their 
house,  from  the  rising  to  the  setting  of  the  sun,  deliberating 
by  what  commander,  or  with  what  forces,  opposition  could 
be  made  to  the  victorious  Carthaginians. 
VIII.  Before  they  had  fully  determined  on  the  plans  to 
be  pursued,  they  received  an  account  of  another  unexpected 
disaster;  four  thousand  horsemen,  who  had  been  sent  by  $ 
Serviiius,  the  consul,  to  the  aid  of  his  colleague,  under  the 
command  of  Caius  Centenius,  pro-praetor,  were  cut  off  by 
Hannibal,  in  Umbria,  whither,  on  hearing  of  the  fight  at  the 
Thrasimenus,  they  had  marched  to  avoid  him.  The  news  of 
this  event  affected  people  differently:  some,  having  their 
minds  occupied  by  grief,  for  misfortunes  of  a  momentous 
kind,  certainly  deemed  the  recent  loss  of  the  cavalry  light, 
in  comparison:  others  judged  not  of  the  accident  by  its  own 
intrinsic  importance;  but  considered,  that,  as  in  a  sickly  con¬ 
stitution,  a  slight  cause  is  attended  with  more  sensible  effects, 
than  a  more  powerful  one  in  a  constitution  possessed  of  vigour; 
so  any  kind  of  misfortune,  happening  to  the  commonwealth 
in  its  present  debilitated  condition,  ought  to  be  estimated, 
not  by  the  magnitude  of  the  affair  itself,  but  by  the  enfeebled 
state  of  the  same,  which  could  not  endure  any  degree  of  ag¬ 
gravation  to  its  distresses.  Accordingly,  the  state  had  re¬ 
course  to  a  remedy,  which  for  a  long  time  past  had  neither  been 

14 

HISTORY  OF  ROME,  [Y.R.  535, 

used  nor  wanted^  the  nomination  of  a  dictator:  and  because 
the  consul,  who  alone  was  supposed  to  possess  the  power  of 
nominating  that  officer,  was  abroad,  and  it  was  difficult  to 
send  either  messenger  or  letter,  through  those  parts  of  Italy, 
occupied,  as  they  were,  by  the  Carthaginian  arms;  and  as  the 
people  could  not  create  a  dictator,  no  precedent  having  yet 
existed  for  it,  they  therefore,  in  an  assembly,  created  a  pro¬ 
dictator,  Quintus  Fabius  Maximus,  and  a  master  of  the 
horse,  Marcus  Minucius  Rufus.  These  received  a  charge 
from  the  senate,  to  strengthen  the  walls  and  towers  of  the 
city;  to  post  troops  in  proper  places,  and  to  break  down  the 
bridges  on  the  rivers;  since,  having  proved  unequal  to  the 
defence  of  Italy,  they  must  fight  at  their  own  doors  in  de¬ 
fence  of  the  city. 
IX.  Hannibal  marched  straight  forward,  through  Umbria, 
as  far  as  Spoletum;  which  town,  after  he  had  utterly  wasted 
all  the  adjoining  country,  he  attempted  to  take  by  storm, 
but,  being  repulsed,  with  the  loss  of  a  great  number  of  men, 
and  judging,  from  the  strength  of  that  single  colony,  his  at¬ 
tempt  on  which  had  ended  so  little  to  his  advantage,  what 
great  difficulties  he  had  to  surmount,  before  he  could  master 
the  city  of  Rome,  he  changed  the  direction  of  his  route  to¬ 
ward  the  territory  of  Picenum,  which  not  only  abound<^ 
with  provisions  of  all  sorts,  but  was,  besides,  well  stored 
with  booty,  which  his  needy  and  rapacious  soldiers  greedily 
seized.  There  he  remained,  during  several  days,  in  one  fixed 
post,  and  refreshed  his  men,  who  had  been  severely  fatigued 
by  their  long  marches  in  the  winter  season,  and  through  the 
marshes,  as  well  as  by  the  battle,  which,  thou^  favourable 
in  the  issue,  was  not  gained  without  danger  and  fatigue.  Af¬ 
ter  allowing  sufficient  rest  to  his  troops^  who,  however,  de¬ 
lighted  more  in  plundering  and  ravaging,  than  in  ease  and 
repose,  he  put  them  in  motion,  and  spread  devastation 
through  the  territories  of  Praetulia  and  Adria,  the  country  of 
the  Marsians,  Manucinians,  and  Pelegnians,  and  the  neigh- 

BOOK  XXII.  . 

15 

B.C. 2170 
bouring  tract  of  Apulia,  round  Arpi  and  Luceria.  The  con-  i 
sul,  Cneius  Servilius,  had  fought  some  slight  battles  with  the 
Gaulsj  and  taken  one  town  of  no  great  consequence;  when, 
hearing  of  the  disaster  of  his  colleague,  and  the  troops  under 
his  command,  and  being  filled  with  apprehensions  for  the  ca¬ 
pital  of  his  country,  he  resolved  not  to  be  out  of  the  way,  in 
a  conjuncture  of  such  extreme  danger;  he  therefore  marched 
directly 'towards  Rome.  Quintus  Fabius  Maximus,  dictator, 
a  second  time,  on  the  day  wherein  he  entered  into  office,  as¬ 
sembled  the  senate,  when  he  commenced  his  administration 
with  attention  to  the  gods.  Having  proved,  to  the  conviction 
of  the  assembly,  that  the  faults  committed  by  Caius  Flami- 
nius,  the  consul,  through  his  neglect  of  the  established  sa¬ 
cred  rites,  and  the  auspices,  were  even  greater  than  those 
which  arose  from  his  rashness  and  want  of  judgment;  and 
that  it  was  necessary  to  learn  from  the  gods  themselves,  what 
atonements  would  appease  their  wrath,  he  prevailed  on  them 
to  pass  an  order,  which  was  not  usual,  except  when  some 
terrible  prodigies  were  announced,  that  the  decemvirs  should 
consult  the  Sibylline  leaves.  These,  after  inspecting  those 
books  of  the  fates,  reported  to  the  senate,  that,  ‘‘  the  vow- 
made  to  Mars,  on  occasion  of  the  present  war,  had  not  been 
duly  fulfilled;  that  it  must  be  performed  anew,  and  that  in  a 
more  ample  manner;  that  the  great  games  must  be  vowed 
to  Jupiter;  and  temples  to  Venus  Erycina  and  Mens;  that  a 
supplication  and  lectistemium  must  be  performed,  and  a 
sacred  spring  vowed,  in  case  success  attended  their  arms, 
and  that  the  commonwealth  remained  in  the  same  state  in 
which  it  had  been  when  the  war  began.^’  The  senate,  con¬ 
sidering  that  Fabius  would  have  full  employment  in  the 
management  of  the  war,  ordered  that  Marcus  iEmilius,  the- 
praetor,  should  take  care,  that  all  these  matters  might  be  per¬ 
formed  in  due  time,  according  to  the  directions  of  the  college 
of  pontiffs. 
X.  On  the  passing  of  these  decrees  of  the  senate,  the  chief 

16 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  535. 

pontiff,  Lucius.  Cornelius  Lentulus,  being  advised  with  by 
the  college  of  praetors,  gave  his  opinion,  that  before  any 
other  steps  were  taken,  the  people  should  be  consulted  with 
respect  to  the  sacred  spring;  for  that  a  vow  of  that  import 
could  not  be  made  without  their  order.  Accordingly,  the 
question  was  proposed  to  the  people  in  these  words:  Do  ye 
choose  and  order,  that  what  I  am  going  to  propose,  shall  be 
performed  in  this  manner:  that,  in  case  the  commonwealth  of 
the  Roman  people,  the  Quirites,  shall  (as  I  wish  it  may)  be 
preserv  ed  in  safety,  during  the  next  five  years,  from  these 
wars,  namely,  the  war  which  subsists  between  the  Roman 
people  and  the  Carthaginians;  and  the  wars  subsisting  with 
the  Gauls,  who  dwell  on  this  side  of  the  Alps;  then  the 
Roman  people,  the  Quirites,  shall  present,  as  an  offering, 
whatever  the  spring  shall  produce,  from  the  herds  of  swine, 
sheep,  goats,  or  oxen;  of  which  produce,  accruing  from  the 
day  when  the  senate  and  people  shall  appoint,  whatever  shall 
not  have  been  appropriated  by  consecration,  shall  be  sacrificed 
to  Jupiter.  Let  him  who  makes  the  offering,  make  it  at  what 
time,  and  in  what  form  he  shall  choose:  in  whatsoever  manner 
he  does  it,  let  the  offering  be  deemed  proper:  if  that  which 
ought  to  be  sacrificed  die,  let  it  be  deemed  as  unconsecrated; 
and  let  no  guilt  ensue.  If  any  person  undesignedly  shall 
break,  or  kill  it,  let  him  incur  no  penalty.  If  any  shall  steal 
it,  let  not  guilt  be  imputed  to  the  people,  nor  to  him  from 
whom  it  is  stolen.  If  any,  unknowingly,  offer  the  sacrifice  on 
a  forbidden  day,  let  the  offering  be  deemed  good.  Whether 
the  offering  shall  be  made  by  night  or  by  day,  whether  by  a 
freeman  or  a  slave,  let  it  be  deemed  good.  If  the  senate  and 
people  shall  order  it  to  be  made  on  an  earlier  day  than  a 
person  shall  make  it,  let  the  people  be  acquitted,  and  free 
from  the  guilt  thereof.’^  On  the  same  account,  a  vow  was 
made  to  celebrate  the  great  games,  at  the  expense  of  three 
hundred  and  thirty-three  thousand  three  hundred  and  thirty- 

BOOK  XXIL 

IT 

B,€.  Sir.] 
Afee  asses  and  one.  third  besides  Aree  hundred  oxen  to 
be  off^d  to  Jupiter;  and  white  oxen,  and  other  victims,  to 
nanny ^Aer  deities.  The  vows  being  duly  made,  a  proclama- 
tibn  was  issued  for  a  supplication,  in  the  performance  of 
which  joined,  not  only  the  inhabitants  of  the  city,  with  their 
wives  and  children,^  bun  also  those  of  the  country,  who, 
having  any  property  of  their  own,  were  interested  in  the 
welfare  of  the  public.  Then  was  performed  the  lectisternium, 
dtfring  the  space  of  three  days,  under  the  direction  of  the 
decemvirs  of  religious  rites.  There  were  six  couches  ex¬ 
hibited  to  view,  one  for  Jupiter  and  Juno,  another  for  Nep¬ 
tune  and  Minerva,  a  Aird  for  Mars  and  Venus,  a  fourth  for 
Ap6llo  aU)d  Diana,#  fifth  for  Vulcan  and  Vesta,  and  the  six  A 
for  Mercury  mid  Ceres.  The  temples  were  then  vowed;  that 
to  Venus  Erycina,  by  Quintus  Fabius  Maximus,  dictator;  for 
such  was  Ae  direction  found  in  the  books  of  the  fates,  that 
Ae  person  who  held  Ae  highest  authority  in  the  state  should 
vow  it.  Titus  Otacilius,  AC  prsetor,  vowed  Ae  temple  to 
Mens. 
XI.  Tlie  business  relating  to  religion  being  Aus  concluded, 
Ae  dictator  then  proposed  to  the  senate,  to  take  into  consi¬ 
deration'  Ae  state  of  the  commonwealth  and  Ae  war;  and  to 
determine  how  many,  and  what  legions,  should  be  employed 
to  stop  the  progress  of  Ae  victorious  enemy.  They  passed  a 
decree,  that  “  he  should  receive  the  army  from  Ae  consul, 
Cneius  ServiliuS;  in  addition  to  which,  he  should  levy,  among 
Ae  citizens  and  allies,  such  numbers  of  horse  and  foot  as  he 
should  judge  requisite;  and,  in  every  other  particular,  should 
act  and  manage  in  such  a  manner  as  he  should  see  conducive 
to  the  public  good.’^  Fabius  declared  his  intention  to  make 
an  addition  of  two  legions  to  the  army  of  Servilius;  these'  he 
ordered  to  be  levied  by  Ae  master  of  Ae  horse,  and  appointed 
a  day  on  which  Aey  were  to  assemble  at  Tibur.  Th«Q, 
*  J,or6/.  1^.  6d. 
VOL.  in — C 

18 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

[Y,R.  53S. 
having  published  a  proclamation,  that  those  who  dwelt  in 
towns  or  forts  which  were  incapable  of  defence,  should  re¬ 
move  into  places  of  safety;  and  that  all  the  inhabitants  of 
that  tract,  through  which  Hannibal  was  to  march,  should 
likewise  remove  out  of  the  country,  after  first  burning  the 
houses,  and  destroying  the  fruits  of  the,  earth,  to  prevent  his 
meeting  any  kind  of  supply;  he  himself  set  out,  by  the  Fla- 
minian  road,  to  meet  the  consul  and  the  army.  Coming 
within  sight  of  the  troops,  on  their  march  on  the  bank  of  the 
Tiber,  near  Ocricutum,  and  observing  the  consul,  with  some 
horsemen,  advancing,  he  sent  a  beadle  to  acquaint  him,  that 
he  must  approach  the  dictator  without  lictors.  This  order 
he  obeyed;  and  their  meeting  raised  ati^xalted  idea  of  the 
dictatorship  in  the  minds  both  of  citizens  and  allies;  who  had 
now,  in  consequence  of  the  long  disuse,  almost  forgotten  that 
office.  Here  he  received  a  letter  from  the  city,  with  intelli¬ 
gence,  that  the  transport  ships,  canying  supplies  from  Ostia 
to  the  army  in  Spain,  had  been  captured  by  a  fleet  of  the 
enemy  near  the  port  of  Cossa:  in  consequence  of  which,  the 
consul  was  ordered  to  proceed  immediately  to  Ostia,  to  man 
all  the  ships  which  were  at  the  city  of  Rome,  or  at  Ostia, 
with  soldiers  and  mariners,  to  pursue  the  enemy,  and  guard 
the  coasts  of  Itaty.  Great  numbers  of  men  had  been  levied  at 
Rome;  even  the  sons  of  freedmen,  who  had  children,  and  were 
of  militar}^  age,  had  enlisted^  Of  these  troops,  such  as  were 
under  thirty-five  years  of  age  were  put  on  board  the  ships; 
the  rest  were  left  to  guard  the  city. 
XIL  The  dictator,  receiving  the  consurs  army  from 
Fulvius  Flaccus,  his  lieutenant-general,  came  through  the 
Sabine  territory  to  Tibur,  on  the  day  which  he  had  appoint¬ 
ed  for  the  assembling  of  the  new-raised  troops ;  thence  he 
went  back  to  Praeneste,  and,  crossing  the  country  to  the 
Latine  road,  led  forward  his  army ;  examining,  with  the  ut¬ 
most  care,  the  country  through  which  he  vras  to  pass,  being 
determined  in  no  case,  to  subject  himself  to  the  disposal  of 

BOOK  xxn. 

19 

BX.  2ir.] 
fortune,  except  so  far  as  necessity  might  constrain  him. 
When  he  first  pitched  his  camp  within  the  enemy’s  view, 
not  far  from  Arpi,  the  Csathaginian  on  the  same  day,  with¬ 
out  delaying  an  hour,  led  out  his  forces,  and  offered  battle  ; 
but,  seeing  every  thing  quiet,  and  no  huriy^  or  bustle  in  the 
Roman  camp,  he  returned  within  his  lines,  observing,  with 
a  sneer,  that  the  spirit  which  the  Romans  boasted  to  have 
inherited  from  Mars,  was  at  length  subdued  ;  that  they  had 
given  over  fighting,  and  made  open  acknowledgment  of 
their  abatement  in  courage  and  love  of  glory.  His  mind, 
however,  was  sensibly  affected,  on  finding  that  he  had  now 
to  deal  with  a  commander  very  unlike  Flaminius  and  Sem- 
pronius ;  and  that  the  Romans,  instructed  by  misfortunes, 
had  at  length  chosen  a  leader  >vhich  was  a  match  for  Han¬ 
nibal  ;  and  he  quickly  perceived  that,  in  the  dictator,  he  had 
to  dread  provident  skill  more  than  vigorous  exertion.  Hav¬ 
ing,  however,  not  yet  fully  experienced  his  steadiness,  he  at¬ 
tempted  to  rouse  and  provoke  his  temper  by  frequently  re¬ 
moving  his'camp,  and  ravaging  under  his  eyes  the  lands  of 
the  allies,  at  one  time  withdrawing  out  of  sight  by  a  hasty 
march ;  at  another,  halting  in  a  place  of  concealment  at  a 
turn  of  the  road,  in  hopes  of  taking  him  at  a  disadvantage 
on, his  coming  down  into  the  plain.  Fabius  led  his  forces 
along  the  high  grounds  at  a  moderate  distance  from  the 
* 
enemy ;  so  as  nc^  to  let  him  be  out  of  reach,  nor  yet  to 
come  to  an  engagement.  His  men  were  confined  within  their 
camp,  except  when  called  forth  by  some  necessary  occasion ; 
and  his  parties,  sent  for  forage  and  wood,  were  neither 
small  in  number,  nor  were  they  allowed  to  ramble.  An  ad¬ 
viced  guard  of  cavalry  and  light  infantry,  properly  equipped, 
and  formed  for  the  purpose  of  repressing  sudden  alarms, 
rendered  everyplace  safe  to  those  of  their  own  side,  and 
dangerous  to  such  of  the  enemy  as  straggled  in  search  of 
plunder.  Thus,  a  decisive  trial  in  a  general  engagement  was 
avoided.  At  same  time  slight  skirmishes  of  no  great 

20 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.535. 
importance  commenced  on  safe  ground  and  where  a  place  of 
retreat  was  at  hand,  which  accustomed  the  soldiers,  dispirit¬ 
ed  by  former  misfortunes,  to  place  more  confidence  both  in 
their  own  courage  and  their  fortune.  But  he  found  not  Han¬ 
nibal  more  inclined  to  disconcert  such  wise  plans  than  his 
own  master  of  the  horse,  whom  nothing  but  being  subordi¬ 
nate  in  command,  prevented  from  plunging  the  common¬ 
wealth  into  ruin.  Confident  and  precipitate  in  his  measures, 
and  ailowdng  his  tongue  an  exorbitant  license,  he  used,  at 
first  in  small  circles,  afterwards  openly  in  public,  to  call  the 
dictator  sluggish  instead  of  cool ;  timid  instead  of  cautious  ; 
imputing  to  him  as  faults  what  had  the  nearest  affinity  to 
virtue^.  Thus,  by  the  practice  of  depressing  the  merit  of  his 
superior, — a  practice  of  the  basest  nature,  and  which  has 
become  too  general,  in  consequence  of  the  favourable  suc¬ 
cess  so  often  attending  it, — he  exalted  himself. 
XIII.  Hannibal  led  away  his  forces  from  the  territory  of 
Arpi  into  Samnium,  ravaged  the  lands  of  Beneventum, 
took  the  city  of  Telesia,  and  used  every  means  to  irritate 
the  Roman  general ;  in  hopes  that  by  so  many  indignities, 
and  the  sufferings  of  his  allies,  he  might  be  provoked  to 
hazard  an  engagement  on  equal  ground.  Among  the  mul¬ 
titude  of  the  allies  of  Italian  birth,  who  had  been  made  , pri¬ 
soners  by  the  Carthaginian  at  Trasimenus,  and  set  at  liberty, 
were  three  Campanian  horsemen.  Hannibal  on  .that  occa¬ 
sion,  by  many  presents  and  promises,  engaged  them  to  con- 
cihate  the  affections  of  their  countrymen  in  his  favour.  These 
now  informed  him,  that  if  he  brought  his  army  into  Cam¬ 
pania,  he  would  have  an  opportunity  of  getting  possession 
of  Capua.  The  affair  was  of  much  moment,  and  seemed  to 
demand  more  weighty  authority.  Hannibal  hesitated,  in¬ 
clining  at  one  time  to  confide  in  their  assurances,  at  another 
to  distrust  them,  yet  they  brought  him  to  a  resolution  of 
inarching  from  Samnium  into  Campania ;  and  he  dismissed 
them,  with  repeated  charges  to  fulfil  their  promises  by 

BOOK  XXII. 

2i 

B.C.  21  r.] 
deeds,  aod  with  orders  to  return  to  him  with  a  greater  num* 
ber^  and  widi  some  of  their  principal  men.  He  then  com¬ 
manded  his  guide  to  conduct  him  into  the  territory  of  Casi- 
num,  having  learned  from  persons  acquainted  with  the 
country,  that  if  he  seized  on  the  pass  there,  the  Romans 
would  be  shut  out,  so  as  to  prevent  their  bringing  succour 
to  their  allies.  But  speaking  with  the  Carthaginian  ac-** 
cent,  and  mis-pronouncing  the  LaUn  words,  the  guide  mis¬ 
apprehended  him  as  having  said  Casilinum  instead  of  Casi- 
num ;  so  that,  turning  from  the  right  road,  he  led  him 
through  the  territories  of  Allifae,  Galatia,  and  Cales,  down 
into  the  plain  of  Stella.  Here  Hannibal  looking  round,  and 
perceiving  the-place  enclosed  between  mountains  and  rivers, 
called  the  guide,  and  asked  him  where  he  was  ;  and  the  other 
answering,  that  he  would  lodge  that  night  at  Casilinum,  he 
at  last  discovered  the  mistake,  and  that  Casinum  lay  at  a 
very  great  distance,  in  a  quite  different  direction.  On  this,  9 
having  scourged  and  crucified  the  guide,  in  order  to  strike  • 
terror  into  others,  he  pitched  and  fortified  his  camp,  and  des¬ 
patched  Maharbal,  with  the  cavalry,  to  ravage  the  territory 
of  Fakrii.  Here  the  depredations  were  carried  as  far  as  the 
waters  of  Sinuessa,  the  Numidians  committing  dreadful  de¬ 
vastations,  and  spreading  fear  and  consternation  to  a  still 
wider  extent.  Yet  did  not  this  terror,  great  as  it  was,  and 
though  their  whole  country  was  involved  in  the  flames  of 
war,  induce  the  allies  to  swerve  from  their  allegiance.  They  ^ 
had  no  desire  to  change  their  rulers,  for  they  lived  under  a 
mild  and  equitable  government ;  and  there  is  no  bond  of 
loyalty  so  strong. 
XIV.  The  Carthaginians  encamped  at  the  river  Vultur- 
nus,  and  the  most  delightful  tract  in  Italy  was  seen  wasted 
with  fire,  the  country-seats  on  every  side  smoking  in  ruins. 
While  Fabius  led  his  army  along  the  tops  of  the  Massic 
mountains,  the  discontent  in  it  was  inflamed  anew,  and  to 
such  a  degree,  as  to  fall  little  short  of  a  mutiny.  During  a 

22 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  535. 

few  days  past,  as  their  march  had  been  conducted  with  more 
expedition  than  usual,  they  had  been  in  good  temper,  be¬ 
cause  they  had  supposed  that  this  haste  was  owing  to  an  in¬ 
tention  to  protect  Campania  from  further  ravages.  But 
when  they  had  gained  the  heights,  and  the  enemy  appeared 
under  their  eyes,  setting  fire  to  the  houses  of  the  Falernian 
district,  with  the  colony  of  Sinuessa,  and  that  still  no  men¬ 
tion  was  made  of  fighting,  Minucius  exclaimed,  Are  we 
come  hither  to  view  the  burning  and  slaughter  of  our  allies, 
as  to  a  spectacle  grateful  to  the  sight  ?  If  no  other  circum¬ 
stance  strikes  us  with  shame,  do  we  feel  none  with  regard 
to  these  our  countrymen,  whom  our  fathers  sent  as  colonists 
to  Sinuessa,  to  secure  this  frontier  from  the^inroads  of  the 
Samnites  I  And  now  the  frontier  is  wasted  with  fire,  not  by 
the  Samnites,  a  neighbouring  state,  but  by  Carthaginians,  a 
foreign  race,  who,  from  the  remotest  limits  of  the  world, 
have  effected  their  progress  hither,  in  consequence  of  our 
dilatory  and  slothful  proceedings.  Shamefully  are  we  dege¬ 
nerated  from  our  ancestors,  who  considered  it  as  an  affront 
to  their  government,  if  a  Carthaginian  fleet  happened  to  sail 
along  this  coast ;  for  we  now  behold  the  same  coast  filled 
with  the  enemy’s  troops,  and  possessed  by  Moors  and  Nu- 
midians.  We,  who  lately  felt  such  indignation  at  siege 
being  laid  to  Saguntum  that  we  appealed,  not  only  to  man¬ 
kind,  but  to  treaties  and  to  the  gods,  now  look  on  without 
emotion,  while  Hannibal  is  scaling^  the  walls  of  a  Roman 
colony.  The  smoke  from  the  burning  houses  and  lands  is 
carried  into  our  eyes  and  mouths ;  our  ears  ring  with  the 
cries  and  lamentations  of  our  allies,  invoking  our  aid  oftener 
than  that  of  the  immortal  gods ;  yet,  hiding  ourselves  here 
in  woods  and  clouds,  we  lead  about  our  army  like  a  herd  of 
cattle,  through  shady  forests  and  desert  paths.  If  Marcus 
Furius  had  adopted  the  design  of  rescuing  the  city  from 
the  Gauls,  by  the  same  means  by  which  this  new  Camillas, 
this  dictator  of  such  singular  abilities,  selected  for  us  in  our 

BOOK  XXIL 

23 

distresses,  intends  td  recover  Italy  from  Hannibal,  (that  is, 
by  traversing  mountains  and  forests,)  Rome  would  now  be 
the  property  of  the  Gauls ;  and  great  reason  do  I  sec  to 
dread,  if  we  persevere  in  this  dilatory  mode  of  acting,  that 
our  ancestors  have  so  often  preserved  it  for  Hannibal  and 
the  Carthaginians.*  But  he,  who  had  the  spirit  of  a  man, 
and  of  a  thie  Roman,  during  the  very  day  on  which  the  ac¬ 
count  was  brought  to  Veil,  of  his  being  nominated  dictator, 
by  direction  of  the  senate,  and  order  of  the  people,  though 
the  Janiculum  was  of  sufficient  height,  where  he  might  sit 
and  take  a  prospect  of  the  enemy,  came  down  to  the  plain ; 
and,  on  that  same  day,  in  the  middle  of  the  city,  where  now 
are  the  Gallic  piles,  and  on  the  day  following,  on  the  road  to 
Gabii,  cut  to  pieces  the  legions  of  the  Gauls,  What !  when 
many  years  after  this,  at  the  Caudine  forks,  we  were  sent 
under  the  yoke  by  the  Samnites ;  was  it  by  traversing  the 
mountains  of  Samnium,  or  was  it  by  pressing  briskly  the 
siege  of  Luceria,  and  compelling  the  enemy  to  fight,  that 
Lucius  Papirius  Cursor  removed  the  yoke  from  the  necks 
of  the  Romans,  and  imposed  it  on  the  haughty  Samnites  ? 
In  a  late  case,  what  but  quick  dispatch  gave  victory  to  Caius 
Lutatius?  For  on  the  next  day  after  he  came  in  view  of  the 
enemy,  he  overpowered  their  fleet,  heavily  laden  with  pro¬ 
visions,  an#  encumbered  with  their  own  implements  and 
cargoes.  To  imagine  that^  by  sitting  still,  and  offering  up 
prayers,  the  war  can  be^brought  to  a  conclusion,  is  folly  in 
the  extreme.  Forces  must  be  armed,  must  be  led  out  to  the 
open  field,  that  you  may  encounter,  man  with  man.  By  bold¬ 
ness  and  activity,  the  Roman  power  has  been  raised  to  its 
present  height,  and  not  by  these  sluggish  measures,  which 
cowards  term  cautious.”  While  Minucius  harangued  in  this 
manner,  as  if  to  a  general  assembly,  he  was  surrounded  b\ 
a  multitude  of  tribunes  and  Roman  horsemen  ;  and  his  pre¬ 
sumptuous  expressions  reached  even  the  ears  of  the  com¬ 
mon  men,  who  gave  evident  demonstrations,  that  if  the  mat- 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

24 

[Y.R*  535- 

ter  were  submitted  to  the  votes  of  the  soldiery,  they  would 
prefer  Minucius,  as  a  commander,  to  Fabius. 
XV.  Fabius  watched  the  conduct  of  his  own  men  with  no 
less  attention  than  that  of  the  enemy;  determined  to  show, 
with  respect  to  them,  in  the  first  place,  that  his  resolution 
was  unalterable  by  any  thing  which  they,  could  say  or  do. 
He  well  knew  that  his  dilatory  measures  were  severely  cen¬ 
sured,  not  only  in  his  own  camp,  but  likewise  at  Rome,  yet 
he  persisted,  with  inflexible  steadiness,  in  the  same  mode  of 
conduct  during  the  remainder  of  the  summer;  in  consequence 
of  which,  Hannibal,  finding  himself  disappointed  in  his  hopes 
of  an  engagement,  after  having  tried  his  utmost  endeavours 
to  bring  it  about,  began  to  look  round  for  a  convenient  place 
for  his  winter-quarters:  for  the  country  where  he  then  was, 
though  it  afforded  plenty  for  the  present,  was  incapable  of 
furnishing  a  lasting  supply,  because  it  abounded  in  trees  and 
vineyards,  and  other  plantations  of  such  kinds  as  minister 
rather  to  pleasure  than  to  men’s  necessary  demands.  Of  this 
his  intention,  Fabius  received  information  from  scouts;  and 
knowing,  with  a  degree  of  certainty,  that  he  would  return 
through  the  same  pass  by  which  he  had  entered  the  Faler- 
nian  territory,  he  detached  parties  of  moderate  force  to  take 
possession  of  Mount  Callicula,  and  Casilinum,  which  city, 
being  intersected  by  the  river  Vulturnus,  is  the  boundary  be¬ 
tween  the  Falernian  and  Campanian  territories.  He  himself 
led  back  his  army  along  the  same  eminences  over  which  he  had 
come,  sending  out  Lucius  Hostilius  Mancinus,  with  four  hun¬ 
dred  horsemen  of  the  allies,  to  procure  intelligence.  This 
young  man,  who  had  often  made  one  of  the  crowd  of  listen¬ 
ers  to  the  presumptuous  harangues  of  the  master  of  the 
horse,  proceeded,  at  first,  as  the  commander  of  a  party  of 
observation  ought,  watching,  from  safe  ground,  the  motions 
of  the  enemy:  afterwards,  seeing  the  Numidians  scattered 
about  through  the  villages,  and  having,  on  an  opportunity 
that  offered,  slain  some  of  them,  his  whole  mind  was  instantly 

BOOK  XXII. 

B.c.  2ir.i 
occupied  by  the  thoughts  of  fighting,  and  he  lost  all  i^coUec- 
tion  of  die  orders  of  the  dictator,  who  had  charged  him  to 
advance  only  so  far  as  he  might  with  safety,  and  to  retreat 
before  he  should  come  within  the  enemy’s  sight.  Several 
different  parties  of  the  Numidians,  by  skirmishing  and  re¬ 
treating,  drew  him  on  almost  to  their  camp,  by  which  time 
both  his  men  and  horses  were  greatly  fatigued.  Here  Car- 
talo,  commander-in-chief  of  the  cavalry,  advancing  in  full 
career,  obliged  his  party  to  fly  before  he  came  within  a  dart’s 
throw,  and,  almost  without  relaxing  in  speed,  pursued  them 
in  their  flight  through  the  length  of  five  miles.  Mancinus, 
when  he  saw  that  the  enemy  did  not  desist  from  their  pur¬ 
suit,  and  that  there  was  no  prospect  of  escaping,  exhorted  his 
men  to  net  with  courage,  and  faced  about  on  the  foe,  though 
superior  to  him  in  every  particular.  The  consequence  was, 
that  he,  and  the  bravest  of  his  party,  were  surrounded,  and 
cut  to  pieces:  the  rest,  betaking  themselves  to  a  precipitate 
flight,  made  their  escape,  first  to  Cales,  and  thence,  by  ways 
almost  impassable,  to  die  dictator.  It  happened  that,  on  the 
same  day,  Minucius  rejoined  Fabius,  having  been  sent  to 
secure,  by  a  body  of  troops,  a  woody  hill,  which,  above 
Tarracina,  forms  a  narrow  defile,  and  hangs  over  the  sea; 
because  it  was  apprehended,  that,  if  that  barrier  of  the  Ap- 
pian  way  were  left  unguarded,  the  Carthaginian  might  pene¬ 
trate  into  the  territory  of  Rome.  The  dictator  and  master  of 
the  horse,  having  re-united  dieir  forces,  marched  down  into 
the  road,  through  which  Hannibal  was  to  pass.  At  this  time 
the  enemy  were  two  miles  distant. 
XVI.  Next  day  the  Cartha^nians,  marching  forward, 
filled  the  whole  road  which  lay  between  the  two  camps;  smd 
though  the  Romans  had  taken  post  close  to  dieir  own  ram¬ 
part,  with  mi  evident  advant^e  of  situation,  yet  die  Cartha¬ 
ginian  advanced  with  his  light  horsemen,  and,  in  order  to 
provoke  the  enemy,  made  several  skirmishing  attacks,  charg¬ 
ing,  and  then  retreating.  The  Ramans  kept  their  position, 
VOL.  III.— D 

26 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y,R.  $SS. 

and  the  fight  proceeded  without  vigour,  more  agreeably  to 
Hhe  wish  of  the  dictator  than  to  that  of  Hannibal.  Two  hun¬ 
dred  Romans,  and  eight  hundred  of  the  enemy  fell.  There 
was  now  reason  to  think,  that  by  the  road  to  Casilinum  being 
thus  blockaded,  Hannibal  was  effectually  pent  up;  and  that 
while  Capua  and  Samnium,  and  such  a  number  of  wealthy 
allies  at  their  back,  should  furnish  the  Romans  with  sup¬ 
plies,  the  Carthaginian,  on  the  other  hand,  would  be  obliged 
to  winter  between  the  rocks  of  Formiae,  the  sands  of  Linter- 
num,  and  horrid  stagnated  marshes.  Nor  was  Hannibal  in¬ 
sensible  that  his  own  arts  were  now  played  off  against  him¬ 
self.  Wherefore,  seeing  it  impracticable  to  make  hfis  way 
through  Casilinum,  and  that  he  must  direct  his  course  to  the 
mountains,  and  climb  over  the  summit  of  the  Callicula,  lest 
the  Romans  should  fall  on  his  troops  in  their  march,  when 
entangled  in  the  vallies,  he  devised  a  stratagem  for  baffling 
the  enemy  by  a  deception  calculated  to  inspire  terror,  re¬ 
solving  to  ^et  out  secretly  in  the  beginning  of  the  night,  and 
proceed  toward  the  mountains.^  The  means  which  he  con¬ 
trived  for  the  execution  of  his  plan  were  these;  collecting 
combustible  matter  from  all  the  country  round,  he  caused 
bundles  of  rods  and  dry  twigs  to  be  tied  fast  on  the  horns  of 
oxen,  great  numbers  of  which,  trained  and  untrained,  he 
drove  along  with  him,  among  the  other  spoil  taken  in  the 
country,  and  he  made  up  the  number  of  almosj^two  thou¬ 
sand.  He  then  gave  in  charge  to  Hasdrabal,,tlmt  as  soon  as 
the  darkness  of  the  night  came  on,  he  should  drive  this  nu¬ 
merous  herd,  after  first  setting  fire  to  their  horns.,  up  the 
mountains,  and  particularly,  if  he  found  it  practicable,  over 
the  passes  where  the  enemy  kept  guard. 
XVH.  As  soon  as  it  grew^  dark  the  army  decamped  in  si¬ 
lence,  driving  the  oxen  at  some  distance  before  the  van. 
When  they  arrived  at  the  foot  of  the  mountains  and  the  nar¬ 
row  roads,  the  signal  was  instantly  given  that  fire  should  be 
set  to  the  horns  of  the  oxen,  and  th^  they  should  be  driven 

B.C.  217.] 

BOOK  xxir. 

27 
violently  up  the  mountains  in  front;  when  their  own  fright, 
occasioned  by  the  flame  blazing  on  their  heads,  together  with 
the  heat,  which  soon  penetrated  to  the.  quick,  and  to  the 
roots  of  their  horns,  drove  them  on  as  if  goaded  by  madness. 
By  their  spreading  about  in  this  manner  all  the  bushes  were 
quickly  in  a  blaze,  just  as  if  fire  had  been  set  to  the  woods 
and  mountains,  and  the  fruitless  tossing  of  their  heads  serv¬ 
ing  to  increase  the  flames,  they  aflbrded  an  appearance  as  of 
men  running  up  and  down  on  everv  side.  The  troops  sta¬ 
tioned  to  guard  the  passage  of  the  defiles,  seeing  several 
fires  on  the  tops  of  the  mountains,  concluded  thev  were  sur¬ 
rounded,  and  quitted  their  post,  taking  their  wav,  as  the 
safest  course,  towards  the  summits,  where  thev  saw  fewest 
fires  blazing..  Here  they  fell  in  with  several  of  the  oxen, 
which  had  scattered  from  the  herds  to  which  they  belonged. 
At  first,  when  thev  saw  them  at  a  distance,  imagining  that 
they  breathed  out  flames,  they  halted  in  utter  astonishment 
at  the  miraculous  appearance;  but  afterwards,  when  they  dis¬ 
covered  that  it  w’-as  an  imposition  of  human  contrivance,  and 
believing  that  they  were  in  danger  of  being  ensnared,  they 
hastily,  and  with  redoubled  terror,  betook  themselves  to 
flight.  They  met  also  the  enemy’s  light  infantry,  but  night 
inspiring  equal  feafs,  prevented  either  from  beginning  a  fight 
until  day-light.  In  the  mean  time  Hannibal  led  his  whole 
army  through  the  defile,  wherfe  he  surprised  some  Romans 
in  the  very  pass,  and  pitched  his  camp  in  the  territor}^  of  Al- 
lifse. 
XVIII.  Fabius  perceived  the  tumult;  but,  suspecting  some 
snare,  and  being  utterly  averse  from  fighting,  in  the  night 
particularly,  he  kept  his  men  within  their  trenches.  As  soon 
as  day  appeared,  a  fight  commenced  near  the  summit  of  the 
mountain,  in  which  the  Romans,  who  had  considerably  the 
advantage  in  numbers,  would  have  easily  overpowei'ed  the 
light  infantry  of  the  enemy,  separated  as  they  were  from 
their  friends,  had  not  a  cohort  of  Spaniards,  sent  back  by 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

m 

[Y.R.  S3S, 

Haaniba!  for  the  jmrpose,  come  up  to  the  spot-  These,  both  Iqr 
reason  of  the  agility  of  their  iimbs^  and  the  nature  of  their  arms^ 
being  lighter  and  better  qualified  for  skirmishing  among  rocks 
and  cliffs  (to  which  they  were  accustomed),  by  their  manner 
of  fighting,  easily  baffled  the  enemy,  who  were  used  to  act  on 
plain  ground  in  steady  fight,  and  who  carried  weighty  arms. 
After  a  contest  therefore,  by  no  means  equal,  they  both  with- 
db-ew  to  Aeir  respective  camps;  the  Spaniards  with  almost  afl 
^  their  men  safe,  the  Romans  with  the  loss  of  many.  Fabius 
likewise  decamped,  and  pj^ng  through  the  defile,  seated 
himself  in  a  high  and  strong  post  above  Allifae.  Hannibal, 
now  counterfeiting  an  intention  to  proceed  to  Rome  through 
Samnium,  marched  back  as  far  as  the  country  of  the  Pelig- 
nians,  spreading  devastation  every  where  as  he  went.  Fa¬ 
bius  led  his  army  along  the  heights,  between  the  route  of  die 
enemy  and  the  city  of  Rome,  constantly  attending  his  mo¬ 
tions^  but  never  giving  him  a  meeting.  From  the  territory  «F 
Felignum,  Hannibal  altered  his  route;  and,  directing  his 
march  back  towards  Apulia,  came  to  Geranium,  a  city  whose 
inhabitants  had  abandoned  it,  being  terrified  by  a  part  of  die 
walls  having  fallen  in  ruins.  The  dictator  formed  a  strong 
camp  in  the  territor}"  of  Larinum;  and,  being  recalled  thence  to 
Rome,  on  account  of  sodie  religious  ceremonies,  he  pressed  the 
master  of  the  horse,  not  only  with  orders,  but  with  earnest  ad¬ 
vice,  and  almost  with  prayers,  to  confide  more  in  prudence 
than  in  fortune;  and  to  imitate  his  conduct  in  command  rather 
than  that  of  Sempronius  and  Flaminius.  Not  to  think  there 
had  been  no  advantage  gained,  in  having  foiled  the  designs 
of  the  Carthaginian  through  almost  the  whole  length  of  the 
summer;  observing,  that  even  physicians  sometimes  effect 
dieir  |Hirpose  better  by  rest  than  by  motion  and  action;  that 
it  was  a  matter  of  no  small  importance,  to  have  ceased  to  be 
defeated  by  an  enemy  so  inured  to  victory?  and,  after  a  long 
cwtBt  of  to  have  gained  time  to  breadie/^  After 

BOOK  XXII, 

29 

B,C.  21  r.] 
lirging  these  cautions^  which  were  thrown  away  tm  the  mas* 
ter  of  the  horse,  he  set  out^for  Rome. 
XIX.  In  the  beginning  of  the  summer  wherein  these 
transactions  passed,  the  operations  of  the  war  commenced 
in  Spain  also,  both  by  land  ,and  sea.  Hasdrubal,  to  the  num¬ 
ber  of  ships  which  he  had  received  from  his  brother,  manned 
and  in  readiness  for  service,  added  ten;  and  ^ving  the 
command  of  this  fleet  of  forty  ships  to  Himilco,  set  out  from 
New  Carthage,  marching  his  army  along  the  shore,  while 
the  fleet  sailed  o^,  at  a  small  distance  from  the  land ;  so  that 
he  was  prepared  to  fight  on  either  element,  as  the  foe  should 
come  in  his  way,  Cneius  Scipio,  on  hearing  that  the  enemy 
had  moved  from  their  winter-quarters,  at  first  designed  to 
pursue  the  same  plan  of  operations;  but,  afterwards,  on 
hearing  that  they  had  been  joined  by  vast  numbers  of  new 
auxiliaries,  he  judged  it  not  so  prudent  to  meet  them  on  land ; 
sending,  therefore,  on  board  his  ships,  an  additional  number 
of  chosen  soldiers,  he  put  to  sea,  with  a  fleet  of  thirty-five 
sml.  On  the  next  day  after  his  leaving  Tarraco,  he  arrived 
at  an  harbour  widun  ten  miles  of  the  mouth  of  the  river 
Iberus,  and  dispatching  thence  two  Massilian  scout-boats, 
learned  from  them,  that  the  Carthaginian  fleet  lay  in  the 
mouth  of  that  river,  and  that  their  camp  was  pitched  on  the 
bank.  Intending  therefore,  by  a  general  attack  with  his  whole 
force,  at  once  to  overpower  the  enemy,  while  unprovided 
and  off  dieir  guard,  he  weighed  anchor^  and  advanced  to- 
ward%  them.  They  have,  in  Spain,  a  great  many  towers  built 
in  lofty  situations,  which  are  used  both  as  watch-towers, 
and  as  places  of  defence  against  pirates.  From  these  the  Ro¬ 
man  fleet  was  first  descried,  and  notice  gpven  of  it  to  Has- 
drubal.  This  caused  much  confusion  in  the  camp  on  land, 
and  somewhat  earlier  than  the  alarm  reached  the  ships, 
where  they  had  not  heard  the  dashing  of  oars,  nor  any  other 
noise  usually  accompanying  a  fleet.  The  capes,  likewise,  shut 
out  the  enemy  from  their  view,  when  on  a  sudden,  while 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

[Y.R.  535. 

30 
they  were  rambling  about  the  shore,  or  sitting  quietly  in  their 
tents,  expecting  nothing  less  thau,  the  approach  of  an  enemy, 
or  a  fight  on  that  day,  several  horsemen,  dispatched  by  Has- 
drubal,  came  one  after  another,  with  orders  for  them  to  go 
on  board  instantly,  and  get  ready  their  arms,  for  that  the 
Roman  fleet  was  just  at  the  mouth  of  the  harbour.  These 
orders  the  horsemen,  sent  for  the  purpose,  conv^eyed  to 
every  part ;  and  presently  Hasdrubal  himself  arrived  with 
the  main  body  of  the  army.  Ev^er)^  place  was  now  filled  with 
noise  and  tumult:  the  rowers  and  soldiers^ huriydng  to  their 
ships,  like  men  making  their  escape  from  land  rather  than 
going  to  battle.  Scarcely  had  all  got  on  board  when  some  of 
the  vessels,  having  untied  the  hawsers  at  the  stems,  were 
carried  foul  of  their  anchors.  Every  thing  was  done  with 
too  much  hurry  and  precipitation,  so  that  the  business  of  the 
mariners  was  impeded  by  the  preparations  of  the  soldiers, 
and  the  soldiers  were  prevented  from  taking  and  preparing 
their  arms  by  the  bustle  and  confusion  of  the  mariners.  The 
Romans,  by  this  time,  were  not  only  drawing  nigh,  but  had 
already  formed  their  ships  in  order  of  battle.  The*  Cartha¬ 
ginians,  therefore,  falling  into  the  utmost  disorder,  to  which 
the  enemy’s  attack  contributed  not  more  than  the  confusion 
prevailing  among  themselves,  tacked  about,  and  fled;  and  as 
the  mouth  of  the  river,  to  which  they  steered  their  course, 
did  not  afford  an  entrance  to  such  an  extensive  line,  and  as 
such  numbers  crowded  in  together,  their  ships  were  driven 
on  shore;  many  striking  on  banks,  others  on  the  dry  strand. 
The  soldiers  made  their  escape,  some  with  their  arms,  others 
without  them,  to  their  friends,  who  %vere  drawn  up  on  the 
shore.  However,  in  the  first  encounter,  two  Carthaginian 
s}|ips  were  taken,  and  four  sunk. 
XX.  The  Romans,  without  hesitation,  pursued  their  dis¬ 
mayed  fleet,  notwithstanding  that  the  land  was  possesed  by 
the  enemy,  and  that  they  saw  a  line  of  their  troops  under 
arms,  stretched  along  the  whole  shore;  and  all  the  ships 

BOOK  XXII. 

31 

B.C.  217,] 

which  had  either  shattered  their  prows  by  striking  against 
the  shore,  or  stuck  their  keels  fast  in  the  sand  banks,  they 
tied  to  their  sterns  and  towed  out  into  the  deep.  Out  of  the 
forty  ships  they  took  twenty-five.  The  most  brilliant  circum¬ 
stance  attending  their  victory  was,  that  by  this  one  battle, ' 
which  cost  them  so  little,  they  were  rendered  masters  of  the 
sea  along  the  whole  extent  of  that  coast.  Sailing  forward, 
therefore,  to  Honosca,  they  there  made  a  descent,  took  the  city 
by  storm,  and  sacked  it.  Thence  they  proceeded  to  Carthage, 
and,  after  wasting  all  the  country  round,  at  last  set  fire  to 
the  houses  contiguous  to  the  very  walls  and  gates.  The  ships, 
now  heavily  laden  with  booty,  went  on  to  Longuntica,  where 
a  great  quantity  of  okum,^  for  cordage,  had  been  collected  by 
Hasdrubal  for  the  use  of  the  fleet.  Of  this  they  carried  off  as 
much  as  they  had  occasion  for,  and  burned  the  rest*  Nor  did 
they  carry  their  operations  along  the  open  coasts  of  the  con¬ 
tinent  only,  but  passed  over  to  the  island  of  Ehusa,  where 
they  in  vain  attempted,  during  two  d^’^s,  and  with  their  ut¬ 
most  efforts,  to  gain  possessi^on  of  the  capital  city.  Perceiv¬ 
ing,  however,  that  they  were  wasting  time  to  no  purpose,  and 
in  pursuit  of  a  hopeless  design,  they  applied  themselves  to 
the  ravaging  of  the  countr}’;  and  after  plundering  and  burn¬ 
ing  several  towns,  and  collecting  a  greater  quantity  of  booty 
than  they  had  acquired  on  the  continent,  they  retired  on  board 
their  ships;  at  which  time  ambassadors  came  to  Scipio,  from 
the  Balearick  Isles,  suing  for  peace.  From  this  place  the  fleet 
sailed  back,  and  returned  to  the  hither  parts  of  the  province, 
whither  ambassadors  hastily  flocked  from  all  the  nations  ad¬ 
jacent  to  the  Iberus,  and  from^many  even  of  the  remotest 
parts  of  Spain.  The  whole  number  of  states,  which  submit¬ 
ted  to  the  dominion  and  government  of  Rome,  and  gave  hos¬ 
tages,  amounted  to  more  than  one  hundred  and  twenty. 
Wherefore  the  Roman  general,  relying  now  with  sufficient 

^  A  kind  of  brootn 

32 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  m. 
m 
confidence  on  his  ifuid  forces  also,  advanced  as  fer  tlw 
pass  of  Castulo;  On  which  Hasdrubal  withdrew  toward  the 
ocean  into  Lusitania. 
XXI.  It  was  now  supposed  that  the  remainder  of  the  sum¬ 
mer  wcnild  pass  without  farther  action;  and  this  would  have 
been  the  case,  had  it  depended  on  the  Carthaginians;  but,  be¬ 
sides  that  the  native  Spaniards  are  in  their  temper  restless 
and  fond  of  change,  Mandonius  and  Indibilis,  (the  latter  of 
whom  had  formerly  been  ebiefinin  of  the  Ilergetans,)  as  soon 
as  the  Romans  retired  from  the  pass  toward  the  sea-coast, 
roused  their  countrymen  to  arms,  and  made  predatory  irrup¬ 
tions  into  the  peaceful  territories  of  the  Roman  allies.  Against 
these  Scipio  sent  some  milHary  tribunes,  with  a  body  of  light¬ 
armed  auxiliaries;  and  these,  without  much  difficulty,  routed 
all  their  tumultuary  bands,  slaying  and  taking  many,  and 
disarming  the  greater  part  of  them.  This  commotion,  how¬ 
ever,  drew  back  Hasdrubal,  from  his  march  toward  the 
ocean,  to  the  hither  s^fle  of  the  Iberus,  for  the  purpose  of 
supporting  his  confederates.  The  Carthaginians  lay  encamped 
in  the  territory  of  Ilercao,  the  Romansf^  a  place  called  New- 
fleet,  when  a  sudden  piece  of  intelligence  diverted  the  war  to 
another  quarter:  tire  Celtibenans,  who  of  all  die  states  in 
that  tract  were  die  first  who  sent  ambassadors,  and  gave  hos¬ 
tages  to  the  Romans,  had,  in  consequence  of  instructions 
sent  by  Scipio,  taken  up  arms,  and  invaded  die  province  of 
the  Cmthaginians  with  a  powerful  army,  had  reduced  three 
towns  by  assault,  and  had  afterwards  fought  two  batdes 
against  Hasdrubal  himself  with  excellent  success,  killing  fif¬ 
teen  thousand  of  his  men,  md  taking  four  thousand,  with 
many  military  ensigns. 
XXIL  While  affitirs  in  Spain  were  in  this  state,  Publius 
Scipio,  having  been,  on  die  expiration  of  his  consulate,  con¬ 
tinued  in  command,  and  sent  thither  by  the  senate,  arrived 
in  the  province  with  thirty  ships  of  war,  eight  thousand  sol¬ 
diers,  and  a  large  supply  of  provisions,  ^is  fleet,  which. 

BOOK  XXIL 

33 

B,C.  217,] 
when  seen  at  a  distance,  made  a  grand  appearance,  by  reason 
of  the  long  train  of  transport  vessels,  put  into  the  harbour 
Tarraco,  causing  great  joy  among  his  countrymen  and  alii^* 
Here  Scipio  disembarked  his  troops,  and  then  marched  to 
join  his  brother;  and  diey  thenceforth  conducted  the  war 
jointly,  with  perfect  harmony  of  temper,  and  unanimity  in 
their  counsels.  The  Carthaginians  were  now  busily  employed 
in  making  head  against  the  Celtiberians;  they  therefore  with¬ 
out  delay  passed  the  Iberus,  and  not  seeing  any  enemy,  pro¬ 
ceeded  to  Saguntum,  having  received  information  that  the 
hostages  from  every  part  of  Spain  had  been  placed  there,  un¬ 
der  custody,  by  Hannibal,  and  were  guarded  in  the  citadel  by 
a  small  garrison.  This  pledge  was  the  only  thing  which  hin¬ 
dered  all  the  states  from  manifesting  their  inclinations  to  an 
alliance  with  Rome;  as  they  dreaded  lest,  in  case  of  their 
defection,  the  blood  of  their  children  should  be  made  the  ex¬ 
piation  of  their  offence.  From  this  restraint,  one  man,  by  a 
device  more  artful  than  honourable,  set  Spain  at  liberty* 
There  was  at  Saguntum  a  Spaniard  of  noble  birth,  called 
Abelox,  who  had  hitherto  behaved  with  fidelity  to  the  Car¬ 
thaginians,  but  had  now,  out  of  a  disposition  very  general 
among  barbarians,  on  a  change  of  fortune,  altered  his  attach¬ 
ment.  But  considering  that  a  deserter  coming  to  an  enemy 
without  bringing  into  their  hands  any  advantage  of  conse¬ 
quence,  is  no  more  than  an  infamous  and  contemptible  indi¬ 
vidual,  he  studied  how  he  might  procure  the  most  important 
emolument  to  his  new  allies.  Wherefore,  after  reviewing 
every  expedient  within  the  reach  of  his  power  to  effect,  he 
determined  upon  a  plan  of  delivering  up  the  hostages  into 
their  hands;  judging  that  this  alone  would  prove  of  ail  means 
the  most  effectual  towards  conciliating  to  the  Romans  the 
friendship  of  the  Spanish  chieftains.  But  as  he  well  knew 
that,  without  an  order  from  Bostar  the  commander,  ihm 
guards  of  the  hostages  would  do  nothing,  he  artfully  addres¬ 
sed  Bostar  himself;  the  latter  lying  at  the  time  encamped  at 
VOT.  TIT.- — K 

34 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  535. 

some  distance  frrnn  the  city,  on  the  very  shore,  with  intea- 
tion  to  hinder  the  ap^oach  of  the  Romans  from  the  harbour.  . 
Here  the  other,  taking  him  aside  to  a  place  of  secrecy,  re¬ 
presented,  as  if  it  were  unknown  to  him,  the  present  state  of 
affairs;  that  fear  had  hitherto  restrained  the  inclinations  of 
the  Spaniards,  because  the  Romans  had  befen  at  a  great  dis¬ 
tance;  at  present  the  Roman  camp  was  on  their  side  of  the 
Iberus,  serving  as  a  fortress  and  place  of  refuge  to  all  who 
wished  a  change;  wherefore  it  was  necessary  that  those  who 
could  no  longer  be  bound  by  fear,  should  be  bound  by  kind¬ 
ness  and  favour.”  Bostar  showing  surprise,  and  asking  what 
was  this  unthought-of  kindness  of  such  great  moment,  he  an¬ 
swered,  Send  home  the  hostages  to  their  respective  pro¬ 
vinces:  this  will  engage  the  gratitude  of  their  parents  in  par¬ 
ticular,  who  are  men  of  the  first  consequence  in  their  several 
states,,  and  likewise  of  the  communities  in  general.  Every 
man  wishes  to  find  trust  reposed  in  him,  and  trust  reposed 
generally  proves  a  bond  of  fidelity.  The  office  of  restoring 
the  hostages  to  their  families  I  demand  for  myself;  that,  as  I 
have  been  the  proposer  of  the  plan,  I  may  likewise  be  its  pro¬ 
moter,  by  the  pains  which  I  shall  take  in  the  execution  of  it; 
and  may,  as  far  as  lies  in  my  power,  render  a  proceeding, 
which  is  acceptable  in  its  own  nature,  still  more  accep^hk.’’ 
Having  gained  the  approbation  of  Bostar,  who  possessed  not 
the  same  degree  of  crafty  sagacity  as  other  Carthaginians,  hq 
went  out  secretly  by  night  to  the  advanced  guards  of  the 
enemy,  where,  meeting  some  of  the  Spanish  auxiliaries,  and 
being  by  them  conducted  to  Scipio,  he  diseksed  the  business 
on  which  he  came.  Then  mutual  engagements  being  entered 
mtOy  and  time  and  place  appointed  for  delivering  up  the  hos¬ 
tages,  he  returned  to  Saguntum.  The  next  day  he  spent 
with  Bostar,  in  receiving  instructions  for  the  executiem  of  his 
commissiem; and,  before  he  left  him, settled  the  plan  so,  that  he 
was  to  go  by  night,  in  order  to  escape  the  observation  of  the 
enemy’s  watch.  At  an  hour  concerted,  he  called  up  the  guards 

BOOK  XXII. 

BX.air.j 

of  the  boysj  jmd  setdng  out,  he  led  diem,  as  if  unknowingly, 
into  the  snare  prepared  by  his  own  treachery.  They  were  then 
conducted  into  the  Roman  camp.  In  every  other  respect  the 
restoration  of  the  hostages  was  performed  as  had  been  settled 
widi  Bostar,  and  in  the  same  mode  of  procedure,  as  if  the 
fair  were  transacted  in  the  name  of  the  Carthaginians.  But, 
though  the  act  was  the  same,  the  Romans  acquired  a  much 
higher  degree  of  reputation  from  it  than  it  would  have  pro¬ 
duced  to  the  Carthaginians;  because  the  latter,  having  shown 
themselves  oppressive  and  haughty  in  prosperity,  it  might  be 
supposed,  that  die  abatement  of  their  rigour  was  owing  to 
the  change  in  their  fortune,  and  to  their  fears;  whereas  the 
Roman,  on  his  first  arrival,  while  his  character  was  yet  un- 
kiK)wn, commenced  his  administration  with  an  act  of  clemency 
and  liberality;  and  it  was  believed  that  Abelox  would  hardly 
have  voluntarily  changed  sides  without  some  good  reasem  for 
such  a  proceeding.  All  the  states,  therefore,  with  general 
consent,  began  to  meditate  a  revolt;  and  they  would  have 
proceeded  instantly  to  hostilities,  had  they  not  been  pre¬ 
vented  by  die  winter,  which  obliged  even  the  Romans  and 
Carthaginians  to  take  shelter  in  houses. 
XXIIf .  These  were  •the  occurrences  of  the  second  cam¬ 
paign  die  Punic  war,  on  the  side  of  Spain;  while,  in  Italy, 
the  wise  delays  of  Fabius  had  afforded  the  Romans  some 
respite  from  calamities.  However,  though  his  conduct  kept 
Hmmibal  in  a  constant  state  of  no  little  anxiety,  (since  he 
perceived  that  the  Rtnuans  had  at  length  clmsen  such  a  mas¬ 
ter  of  the  military  science,  who  made  war  to  depend  on  wis¬ 
dom,  not  fortune,)  yet  it  excited  in  the  minds  of  his  coun¬ 
trymen,  both  in  die  camp  and  in  the  city,  only  sentiments  of 
ccmteitifrt;  especially  when,  during  his  absence,  the  master  of 
the  horse  had  been  rash  enough  to  hazard  a  battle,  the  issue 
of  which  (though  it  afforded  matter  for  some  present  rejoic¬ 
ing)  was  productive  of  no  real  advantage.  Two  incidents  oc¬ 
curred  which  served  to  increase  the  general  disapprobation 

36 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  535. 

of  the  dictator’s  co«duct;  one  was  an  a^thil  contrivance  em¬ 
ployed  by  Hannibal  to  mislead  the  public  opinion;  for,  on  the 
dictator’s  farm  being  shown  to  him  by  deserters,  he  gave 
orders,  that,  while  every  other  place  in  the  neighbourhood 
was  levelled  to  the  ground,  that  alone  should  be  left  safe 
from  fire  and  sword,  and  every  kind  of  hostile  violence;  in 
order  that  this  might  be  construed  as  a  favour  shown  to  him, 
in  consideration  of  some  secret  compact.  The  other  was  an 
act  of  his  own,  respecting  the  ransoming  of  the  prisoners;  the 
merit  of  which  was,  at  first,  perhaps  doubtful,  because  he  had 
not  waited  for  the  direction  of  the  senate  in  that  case;  but,  in 
the  end,  it  evidently  redounded  to  his  honour  in  the  highest 
degree.  For,  as  had  been  practised  in  the  first  Punic  war,  a 
regulation  was  established  between  the  Roman  and  Cartha- 
ginimi  generals,  that  whichever  party  should  receive  a  great¬ 
er  number  than  he  returned,  should  pay  for  the  surplus,  at 
the  rate  of  two  pounds  and  a  half  of  silver*  for  each  soldier. 
Now  the  Roman  had  received  a  greater  number  than  the 
Carthaginian,  by  two  hundred  and  forty-seven;  and,  though 
the  business  was  frequently  agitated  in  the  senate,  yet,  be¬ 
cause  he  had  not  consulted  that  body  on  the  regulation,  the 
issuing  of  the  money  due  on  this  account  was  too  long  de¬ 
layed.  Sending,  therefore,  his  son  Quintus  to  Rome  for  the 
purpose,  he  sold  off  the  farm  which  had  been  spared  by  die 
enemy",  and,  at  his  own  private  expense,  acquitted  the  public 
faith.  Hajnibal  lay  in  an  established  post  under  the  walls  of 
Geronium,  in  which  city,  when  he  took  and  burned  it,  he  had 
left  a  few  houses  to  serve  as  granaries.  From  hence  he  ge¬ 
nerally  detached  two-thirds  of  his  army  to  forage,  and  the 
other  pan  he  kept  with  himself  on  guard  and  in  readiness  for 
action,  providing  for  the  security  the  camp,  and,  at  the 
same^time,  watching  on  all  sides,  lest  any  attack  might  be 
made  on  the  foragers. 

8/.  U.5Jc?. 

BOOK  XXIL 

B.c.  Sir.] 

*  37 

XXIV.  The  Roman  army  was,  at  that  time,  in  the  terri* 
tory  of  Laiinum,  and  the  command  was  held  by  Minucius 
the  master  of  the  horse,  in  consequence,  as  mentioned  before, 
of  Ae  dictator’s  departure  to  the  city.  But  the  pmp,  which 
had  been  pitched  on  a  high  mountain  in  a  secure  post,  was 
now  brought  down  to  the  plains;  and  more  spirited  designs, 
conformable  to  the  genius  of  the  commander,  were  meditated: 
either  an  attack  on  the  dispersed  foragers,  or  on  their  camp 
when  left  with  a  slight  guard.  It  did  not  escape  Hannibal’s 
observation  that  the  plan  of  conduct  was  changed,  together 
with  the  commander,  and  that  the  enemy  were  likely  to  act 
with  more  boldness  than  prudence.  He  sent  (which  would 
have  been  scarcely  expected,  as  the  foe  was  so  near,)  a 
third  part  of  his  troops  to  forage,  retaining  the  other  two  ; 
and  afterwards  removed  his  camp  to  a  hill  about  two  miles 
from  Geronium,  and  within  view  of  that  of  the  enemy,  to 
show  that  he  was  in  readiness  to  protect  his  foragers,  should 
any  attempt  be  made  on  them.  From  hence  he  saw  a  hill 
nearer  to  and  overhanging  %he  Roman  works,  and  knowing 
that,  if  he  went  openly  in  the  day  to  sieze  on  this,  the 
enemy  would  certainly  get  before  him  by  a  shorter  road,  he 
despatched  secretly,  in  the  night,  a  body  of  Numidians,  who 
took  possession  of  it :  next  day,  however,  the  Romans,  de¬ 
spising  their  small  number,  dislodged  them,  and  .removed 
their  own  camp  thither.  There  was  now,  therefore,  but  a 
small  space  between  the  ramparts  of  the  two  camps,  and  this 
the  Romans  almost  entirely  filled  with  their  troops  in  or¬ 
der  of  battle.  At  the  same  time,  their  cavalry  and  light  in¬ 
fantry,  sent  out  from  the  rear  against  the  foragers,  caused 
great  slaughter  and  consternation  among  the  scattered  troops 
of  the  enemy.  Yet  Hannibal  dared  not  to  hazard  a  general 
engagement,  for  with  his  small  numbers  (one-third  of  his 
army  being  absent)  he  was  scarcely  able  to  defend  his 
camp,  if  it  were  attacked.  And  now  he  conducted  his  mea- 
sut^s  almost  on  the  plans  of  Fabius,  lying  still  and  avoiding 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

38  ‘ 

[Y.R.  535. 

acticm,  while  he  drew  back  his  troops  to  Ws  former  situa¬ 
tion  under  the  walls  of  Geroniima.  According  to  some 
I  writers,  they  fought  a  regular  pitched  battle :  in  the  first 
encounter  the  Carthaginian  was  repulsed,  and  driven  to  his 
camp ;  from  which  a  sally  being  suddenly  made,  the  Ro¬ 
mans  were  worsted  in  turn,  and  the  fight  was  afterwards 
restored  by  the  coming  up  of  Numerius  Decimus,  a  Sam- 
nite.  This  man,  the  first,  with  respect  both  family  and 
fortune,  not  only  at  Bovianum,  of  which  he  was  a  native, 
but  in  all  Samnium,  was  conducting  to  the  am^,  by  order 
of  the  dictator,  a  body  of  eight  thousand  foot  and  five  hun¬ 
dred  horse,  which,  appearing  on  Hannibal^s  rear,  was  sup¬ 
posed,  by  both  jMcrties  to  be  a  new  reinforcement  coming 
from  Rome  with  Fabius.  On  which  Hannibal,  dreading 
likewise  some  stratagem  retired  within  his  works.  The  Ro¬ 
mans  pursued,  and,  with  the  assistance  of  the  Samnite,  took 
two  forts  by  storm  before  might.  Six  thousand  of  the  enemy 
were  slain,  and  about  five  thousand  of  the  Romans.  Yet 
though  the  losses  were  so  equal,  am  account  was  sent  to 
Rome  as  of  a  most  important  victory,  and  letters,  from  the 
master  of  the  horse,  still  more  ostentatious. 
XXV.  These  matters  were  very  often  canvassed,  both  in 
the  senate  and  in  assemblies  of  the  people.  The  dictator 
alone,  amidst  the  genend  joy,  gave  no  credit  either  to  the  news 
or  the  letters  ;  and  declared,  that  though  all  were  true,  he 
should  yet  apprehend  more  evil  from  success  than  from  dis¬ 
appointment;  whereupon  Marcus  Metilius,  a  plebeian  tri¬ 
bune,  insisted,  that  such  behaviour  was  not  to  be  endur¬ 
ed  ;  the  dictator,  not  only  when  present  with  the  army,  ob¬ 
structed  its  acting  with  success,  but  also,  at  this  distance, 
when  it  had  performed  good  service,  impeded  the  good  cot» 
sequences  likely  to  ensue ;  proU*acting  the  war,  in  order 
that  he  might  continue  the  longer  in  office,  and  hold  the  sole 
command  both  at  Rome  and  in  the  army-  One  of  the  con¬ 
suls  had  fallen  in  the  field,  and  the  other,  under  pretext  of 

BOOK  XXII. 

39 

B*C.  217.] 
pursuing  a  Carthaginian  fleet,  had  been  sent  away  far  from 
Italy :  the  two  pnetors  were  employed  in  Sicily  and  Sardi¬ 
nia,  neither  of  which  provinces  had,  at  that  time,  any  occa¬ 
sion  for  the  presence  of  a  praetor.  Marcus  Minucius,  the 
master  of  the  horse,  was  kept,  as  it  were,  in  custody,  lest  he 
should  come  within  sight  of  the  enemy,  gr  perform  smy  mi¬ 
litary  service.  So  that,  in  fact,  not  only  Samnium,  the  pos¬ 
session  of  which  had  been  yielded  up  to  the  Carthaginians, 
as  well  as  that  of  the  country  beyond  the  Iberus,  but  also 
the  Campanian,  Calenian,  and  Falemian  territories  had  been 
ravaged  and  destroyed  j  while  the  dictator  remained  inac¬ 
tive  at  Casilinum,  and,  with  the  Roman  legions,  protected 
his  own  estate.  The  army  and  the  master  of  the  horse,  who 
were  eager  to  fight,  had  been  kept,  in  a  manner,  shut  up 
within  the  trenches,  and  deprived  of  arms,  like  captured 
forces ;  but  when,  at  last,  the  dictator  left  them,  when  they 
were  freed  from  their  confinement,  they  passed  the  trenches, 
defeated  the  enemy,  and  put  him  to  flight.  For  all  which 
reasons,  if  the  Roman  commons  were  possessed  of  their  an¬ 
cient  spirit,  he  would  have  boldly  proposed  to  depose  Quin¬ 
tus  Fabius  from  his  office :  as  matters  stood  at  the  present, 
however,  he  would  offer  a  moderate  proposition,  that  the^* 
master  of  the  horse  should  be  invested  with  authority  equal 
to  that  of  the  dictator ;  and  still,  when  diat  should  be  done, 
that  Quintus  Fabius  should  not  be  sent  to  the  army,  until 
he  should  first  substitute  a  consul  in  the  room  of  Caius  Fla- 
minius.”  The  dictator  shunned  the  assemblies,  knowing  the 
people’s  prejudices  against  any  thing  he  could  say ;  nor 
even  in  the  senate  was  he  very  favourably  heard,  particularly 
when  he  spoke  in  high  terms  of  the  enemy,  and  imputed  to 
the  rashness  and  unskilfiilness  of  the  commanders  the  disas¬ 
ters  of  the  two  preceding  years,  and  declared,  that  the 
master  of  horse  should  be  called  to  account  for  having 
fought  contrary  to  his  orders.  If  the  entire  command  and 
direction  were  in  him,  he  would  soon  give  people  reason  to 

40 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[yR.555, 

be  convinced,  that  to  a  good  commander  fortune  is  a  matter 
of  slight  consideration ;  and  that  wisdom  and  prudence  con¬ 
trol  and  govern  all  things.  For  his  part,  he  deemed  it  more 
glorious  to  have  saved  the  army  at  a  critical  juncture,  and 
without  suffering  disgrace,  than  to  have  slain  many  thou¬ 
sands  of  the  enemy..” 
XXVI.  Having  frequently  discoursed  in  diis  manner 
without  effect,  and  having  created  Marcus  Atilius  Regulus 
consul,  the  dictator,  unwilling  to  be  present  at  a  contest 
concerning  the  authority  of  his  office,  set  out,  during  the 
night  preceding  the  day  on  which  the  affair  of  the  proposi¬ 
tion  was  to  be  decided,  and  went  to  the  army.  As  soon  as 
dav  arose,  the  commons  met  in  assembly,  their  minds  filled 
with  tacit  -displeasure  against  the  dictatq|:,  and  favour 
towards  the  master  of  the  horse  ;  yet  were  not  people  very 
forward  to  stand  forth  in  praise  of  the  measure,  however  ge¬ 
nerally  agreeable ;  so  that  while  the  proposition  had  an 
abundant  majority,  still  it  wanted  support.  The  only  person 
found  to  second  it  was  Caius  Terentius  Varro,  who  had 
been  praetor  the  year  before ;  a  man  not  only  of  humble^  but 
of  sordid  birth.  We  are  told  that  his  father  was  a  buteher, 
who  attended  in  person  the  sale  of  his  meat,  and  that  he 
employed  this  very  son  in  the  servile  offices  of  that  trade. 
5  / .  This  young  man  having,  by  the  money  thus  acquired  and 
-  left  to  him  by  his  father,  conceived  hopes  of  attaining  a 
more  respectable  situation  in  life,  turned  his  thoughts  to  the 
bar  and  the  Forum,  where,  by  the  vehemence  of  his  ha¬ 
rangues  in  favour  of  men  and  causes  of  the  basest  sort,  in 
opposition  to  the  worthy  citizens  of  fortune  and  character, 
he  at  first  attracted  the  notice  of  the  people,  and  afterwards 
obtained  honourable  employments.  Having  passed  through 
the  quaestorship,  two  aedileships,  the  plebeian  and  curule, 
and  lastly,  the  praetorship,  he  now  raised  his  views  to  the 
consulship ;  and  artfully  contriving  to  make  the  general  dis¬ 
pleasure  against  the  dictator  the  means  of  procuring  popu- 

BOOK  XXIL 

41 

B.C.  M7.] 
larity  to  himself,  he  alone  gained  the  whole  credit  of  Ae  or¬ 
der  passed  by  Ac  commons.  Excepting  the  dictator  himself, 
aB  men,  whether  his  friends  or  foes,  in  th^  city  or  in  Ac 
camp,  considered  Aat  order  as  passed  wiA  Ae  intention  of 
affronting  him.  But  he,  with  Ae  same  steadiness  of  mind 
which  he  had  displayed  in  bearing  Ae  charges  made  against 
him  by  his  enemies  before  the  multitude,  bore  likewise  Ais 
ill-treatment  Arown  on  him  by  the  people  in  the  violence  of 
passion ;  and  though  he  received  on  his  journey,  a  letter 
containing  a  decree  of  Ae  senate,  ^ving  equal  auAority  to 
Ae  master  of  the  horse ;  yet  being  fully  conBdent  Aat,  toge¬ 
ther  wiA  Ae  authority  in  command,  Ae  skill  of  Ae  com¬ 
manders  had  not  been  made  equal,  he  proceeded  to  Ae 
army,  wiA  a  spirit  unsubdued  either  by  his  countrymen  or 
the  enemy. 
XXVII.  But  Minucius,  whose  arrogance  was  scarcely  to¬ 
lerable  before,  on  Ais  flow  of  success  and  of  favour  with 
Ae  populace,  Arew  of  all  restraints  of  modesty  and  modera¬ 
tion,  and  openly  boasted  no  less  of  his  victory  over  Quintus 
Fabius  than  of  that  over  Hannibal :  He  was  the  only  com¬ 
mander,”  he  said,  *'*•  who,  in  the  desperate  situation  of  their 
dlairs,  had  been  found  a  match  for  Hannibal ;  and  he  was 
now,  by  order  of  the  people,  set  on  a  level  with  Fabius.  A 
superior  ma^strate,* with  an  inferior;  a  dictator,  with  the 
master  of  Ae  horse  ;  of  which,  no  instance  was  to  be  found 
in  the  records  of  history  ;  and  Ais  in  a  state  where  Ae  mas¬ 
ters  of  Ae  horse  used  to  dread  and  tremble  at  the  rods  and 
axes  of  dictators ;  with  such  a  high  degree  of  lustre  had  his 
good  fortune  and  successful  bravery  shone  forth.  He  was 
resolved,  Aerefore,  to  pursue  his  own  good  fortune,  should 
his  colleague  persist  in  dilator)'  and  slothful  plans,  condemned 
by  the  judgment  both  of  gods  and  men.”  Accordingly,  on 
Ae  first  day  of  his  meeting  Fabius,  he  told  him,  that  they 
ought,  in  the  first  place,  to  determine  in  what  manner  they 
should  exercise  Ae  command,  wiA  which  they  were  now 
VOL,  IIJ. — F 

42 

HISTCmyORROME. 

[Y*R.  535. 

equally  invested;  that,  in  his  judgment,  the  best  method 
would  be,  that  each  should  hold  the  supreme  authority  and 
command  aUepiately,  either  for  a  day,  or  for  some  longer 
fixed  fmrtion  of  time^  if  that  were  more  agreeable ;  to  the 
end,  that  if  he  should  meet  any  favourable  opportunity 
of  acting,  he  might  be  a  match  for  the  enemy,  not  only  in 
conduct,  but  likewise  in  strength.”  This  Quintus  Fabius  by 
no  means  approved  ;  for  ‘‘  fortune,”  he  said,  would  have 
the  disposal  of  every  thing  which  should  be  under  the  direc¬ 
tion  of  his  colleague’s  rashness.  The  command  had  been 
shared  between  them,  not  taken  away  from  him :  he  would 
never,  therefore,  voluntarily  divest  himself  of  the  power  of 
keeping  such  part  of  the  business  as  he  could,  under  the 
guidance  of  prudence.  He  would  not  divide  times,  or  days 
of  command,  with  him ;  but  he  would  divide  the  troops, 
and,  by  his  own  counsels,  would  preserve  as  much  as  he 
could,  since  he  was  not  allowed  to  preserve  the  whole.”  He 
accordingly  prevailed  to  have  the  legions  divided  between 
them,  as  was  the  practice  with  consuls.  The  first  and  fourth 
fell  to  Minucius,  the  second  and  third  to  Fabius.  They  like¬ 
wise  divided,  in  equal  numbers,  the  cavalry,  and  the  allied 
and  Latine  auxiliaries.  The  master  of  the  horse  chose  also 
tiiat  they  should  encamp  separately. 
XXVIII.  Hannibal  was  not  ignorant  of  any  thing  that 
passed  among  the  enemy;  for,  besides  the  intelligence  pro¬ 
cured  through  his  spies,  he  derived  ample  information  from 
deserters.  In  these  proceedings  he  found  a  twofold  cause  of 
rejoicing;  for  the  temerity  of  Minucius,  now  free  from  con¬ 
trol,  he  could  entrap  at  his  will;  and  the  wisdom  of  Fabius 
was  reduced  to  act  with  but  half  his  former  strength.  Be¬ 
tween  the  camp  of  Minucius,  and  that  of  the  Carthaginians, 
stood  a  hill,  of  which,  whoever  took  possession,  would  evi¬ 
dently  render  the  other’s  situation  more  inconvenient.  This 
Hannibal  wished  to  seize;  but  he  was  not  so  desirous  of  gain¬ 
ing  it  without  a  dispute,  .(even  though  it  were  worth  his 

BOOK  tm. 

43 

B.c.  nr.] 
while,)  as  of  bringing  on,  thereby,  an  engagement  with  Mi- 
nucins;  who,  he  well  knew,  would  be  always  ready  to  meet 
him  in  order  to  thwart  his  designs*  The  whole  intervening 
ground  seemed,  at  first  view,  incapable  of  admitting  any  stra¬ 
tagem,  having  on  it  no  kind  of  wood,  nor  being  even  covered 
with  brambles;  but,  in  reality,  it  was  by  nature  formed  most 
commodiously  for  an  ambush,  especially  as,  in  a  naked  vale, 
no  snare  of  that  sort  could  be  apprehended;  and  there  were, 
besides,  at  the  skirts  of  it,  hollow  rocks,  several  of  which 
were  capable  of  containing  two  hundred  armed  men.  In 
these  concealments  were  lodged  five  thousand  horse  and 
foot,  distributed  in  such  numbers  as  could  find  convenient 
room  in  each  place.  Nevertheless,  lest  the  motion  of  any  of 
them,  coming  out  inconsiderately,  or  the  glittering  of  their 
arms,  might  betray  the  stratagem  in  such  an  open  valley,  he 
diverted  the  enemy’s  attention  to  another  quarter,  by  send¬ 
ing,  at  the  first  dawn,  a  small  detachment  to  seize  on  the  hill 
above-mentioned.  Immediately  on  the  appearance  of  these, 
the  Romans,  despising  the  smallness  of  their  numbers,  de¬ 
manded,  each  for  himself,  the  task  of  dislodging  them,  and 
securing  the  hill;  while  the  general  himself,  among  the  most 
foolish  and  presumptuous,  called  to  arms,  and  with  vain  pa¬ 
rade  and  empty  menaces  expressed  his  contempt  of  the  ene¬ 
my*  First,  he  sent  out  his  light  infantry;  then,  the  cavalry, 
in  close  order;  at  last,  seeing  reinforcements  sent  by  the  Car¬ 
thaginian,  he  advanced  with  the  legions  in  order  of  battle. 
On  the  other  side,  Hannibal,  by  sending  up,  as  the  contest 
grew  hotter,  i^veral  bodies  of  troops,  one  after  another,  to 
the  support  of  his  men  when  distressed,  had  now  almost  com¬ 
pleted  a  regular  line;  and  the  contest  was  maintained  with 
the  whole  force  of  both  parties.  The  Roman  light  infantry  in 
the  van,  marching  up  from  the  lower  ground  to  the  hill  al¬ 
ready  occupied  by  die  enemy,  were  repulsed;  and,  being 
forced  to  retreat,  carried  terror  among  the  cavaliy,  who  were 
advancing  in  their  rear,  and  fled  back  to  the  front  of  the  le- 

44 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[y,R.  S2S. 

gtons.  The  Une  of  kifumy  siono  remaiaed  andkmayed, 
amidst  the  geaerai  panic  of  the  rest;  and  there  was  reason  to 
think,  that  in  a  fair  and  regular  battle  they  would  have 
proved  themselves  not  inferior  to  iheir  antagonists,  so  great 
spirits  had  they  assumed  from  their  late  success.  But  the 
troops  in  ambush  rising  on  a  sudden,  and  making  brisk  at* 
tacks  both  on  their  flanks  and  their  rear,  caused  such  dread 
and  confusion,  that  no  one  retained  either  courage  to  fight, 
or  hope  of  escape. 
XXIX.  Fabius,  who  had  first  heard  their  cries  of  dismay^ 
and  afterwards  saw,  at  a  distance,  their  line  in  disorder,  then 
said,  **  it  is  so;  fortune  has  found  out  rashness,  but  not  soon¬ 
er  than  1  feared.  He,  who  was  made  in  command  eqiial  to 
Fabius,  sees  Hannibal  his  superior  both  in  bravery  and  suc¬ 
cess,  But  there  will  be  time  enough  for  reproof  and  resent¬ 
ment;  march  now  out  of  your  trenches.  Let  us  extort 
the  victoiy  from  the  enemy,  and  from  our  countrymen,  an 
acknowledgment  of  their  error.’’  When  a  great  number  were 
now  slain,  and  others  looking  about  for  a  way  to  escape,  on 
a  sudden  Fabius’  army  showed  itself,  as  if  sent  down  from 
heaven  to  their  relief,  and,  by  its  appearance,  before  the  troops 
came  within  a  weapon’s  throw,  or  struck  a  stroke,  put  a  stop 
both  to  the  precipitate  flight  of  their  friends,  and  the  extra¬ 
vagant  fury  of  the  enemy.  Those  who  bad  broken  their  ranks, 
mid  dispersed  themselves  in  different  ways,  flocked 
from  all  sides,  to  the  fresh  army;  such  as  had  fled  in  great  num¬ 
bers  together,  fm:ed  about,  and  forming  in  lines,  now  retread 
leisurely;  then,  several  bodies  uniting,  stood  on  their  ^fence. 
And  now  the  two  armies,  the  vanquished  and  the  fresh,  had 
almost  formed  one  front,  tmd  were  advancing  against  die  f<^, 
when  the  Carthaginians  sounded  a  retreat;  Hannibal  openly 
acknowledging,  that  as  he  had  treated  Minucius,  so  he  had 
been  himself  defeated  by  Fabius.  The  greatest  paat  of  the 
day  being  spent  in  these  various  changes  of  fentune,  when 
the  troops  returned  into  dieir  camps,  Minucius  c^ing  his 

BOOK  XXII. 

4^ 

B,c.2ir,] 
men  together,  said,  Soldiers,  I  have  irften  heard,  that  he  is 
the  first  man,  in  point  of  abilities  who,  of  himself,  forms 
good  counsels;  that  the  next,  is  he,  who  submits  to  good  ad* 
vice;  and  that  he  who  neither  can  himself  form  good  coun¬ 
sels,  nor  knows  how  to  cmnply  with  those  of  another,  is  of 
the  very  lowest  capacity.  Now,  since  our  lot  has  denied  us 
the  first  rank  in  genius  and  cap^ity,  let  us  maintain  the  se¬ 
cond,  the  middle  one;  and,  until  we  learn  to  command,  be 
satisfied  to  be  ruled  by  the  skilful.  Let  us  join  camps  with 
Fabius;  and,  when  we  shall  have  carried  our  standards  to  his 
quarters;  when  I  shall  have  saluted  him  by  the  title  of  Fa¬ 
ther;  for  nothing  less  has  his  kindness  towards  us,  as  well  as 
his  high  dignity  deserved;  then,  soldiers,  ye  will  salute,  as 
your  patrons,  those  men,  whose  arms  and  whose  prowess 
have  just  now  protected  you;  and  then  this  day  will  have  pro¬ 
cured  for  us,  if  nothing  else,  at  least  the  honour  of  possessing 
grateful  minds.*’ 
XXX.  The  signal  was  displayed,  and  notice  given  to  get 
ready  to  march.  They  then  set  out;  and,  as  they  proceeded 
in  a  body  to  the  camp  of  the  dictator,  they  threw  him,  and 
all  around,  into  great  surprise.  When  they  had  planted  their 
standards  before  his  tribunal,  the  master  of  the  horse,  advan¬ 
cing  before  the  rest,  saluted  him  by  the  title  of  Father;  and 
the  whole  body  of  his  men,  with  one  voice,  saluted  those 
who  stood  round  as  their  patrons.  Minucius  then  expressed 
himself  thus;  ^  Dictator,  to  my  parents,  to  whmn  I  have  just 
now  compared  you,  in  the  most  respectful  appellation  by 
which  I  could  address  myself,  I  rnn  indebted  for  life  only;  to 
you,  both  for  my  own  preservation,  and  that  of  all  these  pre¬ 
sent.  ITiat  order  of  the  peOf>le,  therefor^,  by  which  I  have 
been  oppressed  rather  than  honoured,  1  am  the  first  to  cancel 
and  annul;  and,  so  may  it  be  happy  to  you,  to  me,  and  to  these 
your  armies,  the  preserved  and  the  preserver,  I  replace  my¬ 
self  and  them,  these  standards,  and  these  legions,  under  your 
command  and  auspifces;  and  entreat  you,  that,  re-admitting 

46 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.535. 

us  to  your  favour,  you  will  order  me  to  hold  the  post  of  mas* 
ter  of  the  horse,  and  these  their  several  ranks.”  On  this  they 
eordiaUy  embraced^and,  on  the  meeting  being  dismissed,  the 
soldiers  accompanying  Minucius  were  hospitably  and  kindly 
invited  to  refreshment,  both  by  their  acquaintance  and  those 
to  whom  they  were  unknown.  Thus  was  converted  into  a 
day  of  rejoicing,  from  a  day  of  sorrow,  one  which  but  a  little 
before  had  nearly  proved  fatal.  When  an  account  of  these 
events  arrived  at  Rome,  and  was  afterwards  confirmed  by 
letters,  not  only  from  tbe  generals  themselves,  but  from  great 
numbers  of  the  soldiers,  in  both  the  armies,  all  men  warmly 
praised  Maximus,  and  extolled  him  to  the  sky.  Nor  were  the 
sentiments  felt  by  the  Carthaginians,  his  enemies,  and  by 
Hannibal,  less  honourable  to  him.  They  then  at  length  per¬ 
ceived,  that  they  were  waging  war  against  Romans  and  in 
Italy-  For  during  the  two  preceding  years,  they  had  enter¬ 
tained  such  contemptuous  notions,  both  of  the  Roman  gene¬ 
rals  and  soldiers,  as  scarcely  to  believe  that  they  were  fight- 
ing  against  the  same  nation,  of  which  they  had  received  from 
their  fathers  such  a  terrible  character.  We  are  told  like¬ 
wise,  that  Hannibal,  as  he  returned  from  the  held,  observed, 
that  ^  the  cloud  which  hung  over  the  mountains,  had  at  last 
discharged  its  rain  in  a  storm.” 
XXXI.  During  the  course  of  these  transactions  in  Italy, 
Cneius  Servilius  Geminus,  consul,  with  a  fleet  of  one  hundred 
and  twenty  ships,  sailed  round  the  coasts  of  Sardinia  and 
Corsica.  Having  received  hostages  in  both  places,  he  steer¬ 
ed  his  course  towards  Africa,  and,  before  he  made  any  des¬ 
cent  on  the  continent,  ravaged  the  island  of  Meninx,  and  re¬ 
ceived  from  the  inhabitants  of  Cercia  ten  talents  of  silver*  as 
a  contribution,  to  prevent  the  like  devastation  and  burning  of 
their  country;  he  then  drew  near  the  coast  of  Africa,  and  dis¬ 
embarked  his  forces.  Here  the  soldiers  and  mariners  were 

1,95r/.  10^. 

BOOK  XXIL 

47 

BX:.  217*] 

led  out  to  ravage  the  country,  in  as  careless  a  mani^  as  if 
they  were  plundering  the  islands  where  there  were  very  few 
inhabitants;  in  consequence  of  which  rashness  they  fell  un¬ 
awares  into  a  snare.  Being  assailed  on  all  sides,  and  while 
they  were  in  loose  disorder,  by  compact  bodies  of  men  ac¬ 
quainted  with  the  country  of  which  themselves  were  utterly 
iterant,  they  were  driven  back  to  their  ships  in  a  disgraceful 
flight,  and  with  severe  loss.  There  fell  no  less  than  a  thou¬ 
sand  men,  among  whom  was  Sempronius  Biaesus,  the  quaes¬ 
tor.  The  fleet  hastily  setting  sail  from  the  shore,  which  was 
covered  with  die  enemy,  passed  over  to  Sicily,  and  at  Lily- 
baeum  was  delivered  to  the  praetor  Titus  Otacilius,  to  be  con¬ 
ducted  home  to  Rome,  by  his  lieutenant-general  Publius 
Sura.  The  consul  himself,  travelling  by  land  through  Sicily, 
crossed  the  straight  into  Italy,  having  been  summoned,  as 
was  likewise  his  colleague,  Marcus  Atilius,  by  a  letter  from 
Qintus  Fabius,  in  order  that  they  might  receive  the  com¬ 
mand  of  the  army  from  him,  as  the  six  months,  the  term  of 
his  office,  were  nearly  expired.  Almost  all  the  historians  af¬ 
firm,  that  Fabius  acted  against  Hannibal  in  the  capacity  of 
dictator.  Coclius  even  remarks,  that  he  was  the  first  dictator 
created  by  the  people.  But  it  escaped  the  notice  of  Coclius 
and  the  rest,  that  the  privilege  of  nominating  that  officer  be¬ 
longed  solely  to  Cneius  Servilius,  the  only  consul  in  being, 
who  %vas  at  the  time,  far  distant  from  home,  in  the  province 
of  Gaul;  and  so  much  tinfe  must  necessarily  elapse  before  it 
could  be  done  by  him,  that  die  state,  terrified  by  the  late  dis¬ 
aster,  could  not  endure  the  delay,  and  therefore  had  recourse 
to  the  expedient  of  creating,  by  a  vote  of  the  people,  a  pro¬ 
dictator;  and  that  the  services  which  he  afterwards  perform¬ 
ed,  his  distinguished  renown  as  a  commander,  and  the  exag¬ 
gerations  of  his  descendants,  in  the  inscription  of  his  statue, 
may  easily  account  for  his  being  called  dictator  instead  of  pro- 
dictator* 
XXXIIt  The  consuls,  having  taken  the  command  of  the 

46 

HISTORY  OF  ROi«E. 

[Y^R.  m. 

Armies,  Marcus  Atilius  of  that  of  Fabius^  airf  Gemmus  Ser- 
vilius  of  that  of  Minucius,  and  having  ererted  huts  for  the 
winter,  as  the  season  required  (for  it  was  now  nc^  Ae  close 
of  autumn),  conducted  their  operations  conformably  to  the 
plan  of  Fabius,  and  with  the  utmost  hsutnemy  between  them¬ 
selves.  Whenever  Hannibal  went  out  to  forage,  they  came 
upon  him  in  different  places,  as  opportuijity  served,  harras- 
sing  him  on  his  march,  and  cutting  off  stragglers;  but  never 
hazarded  a  general  engagement,  which  the  enemy  endeavour¬ 
ed  to  bring  on  by  every  means  he  could  contrive:  so  that 
Hannibal  was  reduced,  by  scarcity,  to  such  distress,  that  had 
he  not  feared  that  a  retreat  would  have  carried  the  appear¬ 
ance  of  flight,  he  would  have  returned  back  into  Gaul;  not 
having  the  least  hope  of  supporting  his  army  in  those  places*, 
if  the  succeeding  consuls  should  adopt  the  same  plan  of  ope¬ 
rations  with  these.  While,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Gcro- 
nium,  hostilities  were  suspended  by  the  coming  on  of  winter, 
ambassadors  came  to  Rome  from  Neapolis,  who  brought  into 
the  senate-house  forty  golden  bowls  of  great  weight,  and 
spoke  to  this  effect:  “  They  knew  that  the  treasury  of  the  Ro¬ 
man  people  was  exhausted  by  the  present  war,  which  was 
carried  on  no  less  in  defence  of  the  cities  and  lands  of  the  al¬ 
lies,  than  the  empire  and  city  of  Rome,  the  metropolis  and 
bulwark  of  Italy ;  that  the  Neapolitans  had  therefore  thought 
it  reasonable,  that  whatever  gold  had  been  left  to  them  by 
their  ancestors  for  the  decoration  ‘of  their  temples,  or  sup¬ 
port  in  time  of  need,  should  now  be  applied  to  the  aid  of 
the  Roman  people.  That  if  they  had  thought  their  persoxml 
service  of  any  use,  they  would  with  the  same  zeal  have  of¬ 
fered  it.  That  the  Roman  senate  and  people  would  act  in  a 
manner  highly  grateful  to  them,  if  they  would  reckon  eveiy 
thing  in  p  jssession  of  the  Neapolitans  as  their  own,  and 
vouchsafe  to. accept  from  them  a  present,  of  which  the  prin¬ 
cipal  value  and  importance  consisted  in  the  disposition  and 
wishes  of  those  who  cheerfully  offered  it  rather  than  in  its 

1 

FnC-^:-  -n  ■■  ■ 

iWDc.'i 

B.C,217.] 

^  i  D.Nf' 
•^OOK  XXIL 

49 

own  intrinsic  worth.’’  Thanks  were  given  to  the  ambassa¬ 
dors  for  dieir  attention  and  generosity,  and  one  bowl,  which 
was  the  least  in  weight,  was  accepted. 
XXXIII.  About  the  same  time  a  Carthaginian  spy,  who  4 
had  lurked  undiscovered  for  two  years,  was  detected  at 
Ron[ie:  his  hands  were  cut  off,  and  he  was  sent  away. 
Twenty-five  slaves,  for  having  formed  a  conspiracy  in  the 
field  of  Mars,  were  crucified,  and  the  informer  was  rewarded 
with  his  freedom,  and  twenty-thousand  asses  in  weight.* 
Ambassadors^were  sent  to  Philip  King  of  Macedonia,  to  in¬ 
sist  on  his  delivering  up  Demetrius  of  Pharia,  who,  being 
defeated  in  war,  had  fled  to  him ;  others  also  were  sent,  at 
the  same  time,  to  the  Ligurians,,  to  expostulate  on  their  hav¬ 
ing  assisted  the  Carthaginian  with  men  and  supplies,  and  to 
observe  what  was  doing  in  the  neighbourhood  among  the 
Boians  and  Insubrians.  Delegates  were  also  sent  to  Illyrium, 
to  Pineus  the  King,  to  demand  the  tribute,  of  which  the  day 
of  payment  had  elapsed ;  or  to  receive  hostages,  if  he  wish¬ 
ed  to  be  allowed  longer  time.  Thus  the  Romans,  though  ^ 
pressed  at  home  by  a  war  ipimensely  grievous,  yet  relaxed 
not  their  attention  to  the  business  of  the  state  . in  any  part  of 
the  world,  however  distant.  Their  care  was  also  excited  by 
a  matter  of  religious  concernment.  The  temple  of  Concord, 
vowed  two  years  before  by  the  praetor  Lucius  Manlius,  on 
occasion  of  the  mutiny  of  the  soldiers  in  Gaul,  not  having 
been  yet  set  about,  Marcus  Emilius  praetor  of  the  city,  con¬ 
stituted  duumvirs  for  that  purpose,  Cneius  Pupius  and  Caeso 
Quintus  Flamininus,  who  contracted  for  the  building  of  it 
in  the  citadel.  By  the  same  praetor,  in  pursuance  of  a  decree 
*  Mrii  ^avi4,  641. 11«,  Bel,  About  this  time,  in  consequence  of  the 
scarcity  of  money,  the  comparative  value  of  brass  to  silver  was  changed, 
and  a  denarius  made  to  pass  for  twelve  and  afterwards  for  sixteen  assei,^ 
The  words  <es  groove  were  thenceforward  employed  to  signify  not  any  par¬ 
ticular  piece,  or  weight,  of  money,  but  the  old  comparative  standard  of  ten 
eusesy  as  we  aiy  pounds  sterdng. 
voi.  III.— 'G 

so 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.IL  SS5. 

of  the  senate,  a  letter  wm  sent  to  the  consuls,  that  if  they 
thought  proper,  one  of  them  shoiJd  come  to  Rome  to  elect 
succejssors,  and  that  a  proclamation  should  be  issued  for 
holding  the  election,  on  whatever  day  they  might  name.  In 
answer  to  this,  the  consuls  wrote  back,  that,  **  without  de¬ 
triment  to  the  business  of  the  public,  they  could  not  go  to 
any  distance  from  the  enemy.  That  it  would  be  better, 
therefore,  that  the  electicm  should  be  held  by  an  interrex, 
than  that  either  of  them  should  be  called  away  from  the 
war.”  senate  judged  it  more  adviseable  that  a  dictator 
should  be  nominated  by  a  consul,  for  the  purpose  of  holding 
the  election,  and  Lucius  Veturius  Philo  being  accordingly 
nominated,  appointed  Manias  Pomponius  Matho  master  of 
the  horse.  But  some  defect  being  discovered  in  their  appoint¬ 
ment,  they  were  ordered,  on  the  fourteenth  day,  to  abdicate 
their  offices,  and  an  interregnum  took  place. 
Y  R  536  XXXIV.  The  consuls  were  continued  in  command 
B.C.  216,  for  another  year.  The  patricians  declared  interrex 
Caius  Claudius  Centho,  son  of  Appius,attd  afterwards  Publius 
Cornelius  Asina,  under  whose  direction  the  election  was 
held;  which  was  attended  with  a  warm  contention  between  the 
patricians  and  plebeians.  The  populace  struggled  hard  to 
raise  to  the  consulship,  Caius  Terentius  Varro,  a  person  of 
their  own  rank,  who,  as  before  observed,  by  railing  against 
the  patricians,  and  by  other  popular  arts,  had  acquired  their 
affection  ;  and  who,  by  undermining  the  interest  of  Fabius 
and  the  dictatorial  authority,  had  made  the  public  displea¬ 
sure  against  him  the  means  of  adding  a  lustre  to  his  own 
character.  The  patricians  opposed  him  with  their  utmost 
efforts,  lest  a  power  should  be  given  to  those  men  of  raising 
themselves  to  the  level  of  nobles,  by  means  of  malignant  as¬ 
persions  on.  their  characters.  Quintus  Baebius  Herennius,  a 
plebeian  tribune,  a  relation  of  Caius  Terentius,  censured  not 
only  the  senate,  but  likewise  the  augurs,  for  having  hinder¬ 
ed  the  dictator  from  holding  the  election,  and  thought,  by 

BOOK  XXII. 

B.C.  216.] 

SI 

rendering  them  odious,  to  inorease  the  popularity  of  his  fa¬ 
vourite  candidate.  He  asserted,  that,  by  certain  of  the 
nobility,  who,  for  many  years,  had  been  wishing  for  a  war, 
Hannibal  was  induced  to  enter  Italy ;  that  by  the  same  men 
the  war  was  treacherously  prolonged,  though  it  might  have 
been  brought  to  a  conclusion ;  further,  that  an  army,  con¬ 
sisting  of  four  entire  legioixs,  was  sufficiently  able  to  cope 
with  the  enemy,  was  evident  from  this,  that  Marcus  Minu- 
^ius,  in  the  absence  of  Fabius,  had  fought  with  success. 
That  two  legions  had  been  exposed  in  the  held,  with  intent 
that  they  should  be  defeated,  and  then  were  rescued  from 
the  brink  of  destruction,  in  order  that  the  man  should  be 
saluted  as  father  and  patron,  who  had  hindered  the  Romans 
from  qpnquering,  though  he  had  afterwards  prevented  their 
defeat.  That  the  consuls  had,  on  the  plan  of  Fabius,  pro¬ 
tracted-  the  war,  when  they  had  it  in  their  power  to  bring  it 
to  an  end.  That  a  confederacy  to  this  purpose  had  been  en¬ 
tered  into  by  all  the  nobles,  nor  would  the  people  know 
peace,  until  they  elected  to  the  consulship  a  real  plebeian,  a 
new  man :  for  as  to  the  plebeians,  who  had  attained  nobility, 
th^  were  now  initiated  into  the  mysteries  of  their  order ; 
and,  from  the  moment  when  they  ceased  to  be  despised  by 
the  patricians,  looked  with  contempt  on  the  commons.  Who 
did  not  see,  that  the  end  and  intention  of  appointing  an  in¬ 
terregnum  was  to  put  the  election  into  the  power  of  the  pa¬ 
tricians  ?  It  was  with  a  view  to  this  that  both  the  consuls 
had  remained  with  the  army;  with  the  same  view  after¬ 
wards,  when,  contrary  to  their  wishes,  a  dictator  had  been 
nominated  to  hold  the  election,  they  arbitrarily  carried  the 
point,  that  the  appointment  should  be  pronounced  defectiv^e 
by  the  augurs*  They  had  in  their  hands,  therefore,  the 
office  of  interrex ;  but  certainly  one  consul’s  place  was  the 
right  of  the  Roman  commons,  which  the  people  would  dis¬ 
pose  of  with  impartiality,  and  would  bestow  on  such  a  per- 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.536. 
son  as  rather  wished  to  conquer  effectually,  dian  to  continue 
long  in  command  ” 
XXXV.  These  inflammatory  speeches  had  such  an  effect 
on  the  commons,  that  though  there  stood  candidates  three 
patricians,  Publius  Cornelius  Merenda,  Lucius  Manlius 
Volso,  and  Marcus  iEmilius  Lepidus,  and  two  of  plebeian 
extraction,  whose  families  were  now  ennobled,  Cams  Ati- 
lius  Serranus,  and  Quintus  ^lius  Paetus,  one  of  whom  was 
pontiff,  the  other  augur;  yet  Caius  Terentius  Varro,  alone^, 
was  elected  consul,  in  order  that  he  might  have  the  direction 
of  the  assembly  for  choosing  his  colleague.  On  which  the 
nobles,  having  found  that  his  competitors  possessed  not  suf¬ 
ficient  strength,  prevailed,  by  violent  importunity,  on  a  new 
candidate  to  stand  forth,  after  he  had  long  and  earnestly  re¬ 
fused;  this  was  Lucius  iEmilius  Paullus,  a  determined 
enemy  of  the  commons,  who  had  been  consul  before  with 
Marcus  Livius,  and  had  very  narrowly  escaped  being  sen¬ 
tenced  to  punishment,  as  was  his  colleague.  On  the  next 
day  of  assembly,  all  those  who  had  opposed  Varre,  having 
declined  the  contest,  he  was  appointed  rather  as  an  antago¬ 
nist  than  as  a  colleague*  The  election  of  praetors*  was  then 
*  At  first  the  name  of  prsetor,  derived  from  pneire,  to  preside,  was  ap¬ 
plied  to  any  magistrate  who  was  the  chief  in  any  line,  whether  civil,  mili- 
tar\,  or  religiousi  as  dictator,  consul,  commander  of  aai  army,  But  it 
was  afterwards  appropriated  to  a  magistrate,  appointed  to  relieve  the  con¬ 
suls  from  the  burthen  of  superintending  the  administration  of  justice.  His 
proper  office,  therefore,  was  the  direction  of  judicial  proceedings;  but,  in 
the  absence  of  the  consuls,  he  acted  in  their  stead,  with  power  nearly 
equal  to  theirs.  The  great  influx  of  foreigners  soon  made  it  necessary  to 
create  a  second  praetor,  who  was  called  prator  pereffrinu$^  the  foreign  prae¬ 
tor,  because  his  business  was  to  decide  controversies  between  citizens  and 
fhreigners,  while  the  city  praetor,  prteior  urbanus,  who  was  superior  in  dig¬ 
nity,  took  cognizance  of  suits  between  citizens.  When  the  Romans  gained 
possession  of  foreign  provinces,  tliey  appointed  a  praetor  to  the  govern¬ 
ment  of  each,  and  his  power  within  his  province  was  almost  unlimited,  for 
he  was  accountable  to  none  but  the  people  of  Rome. 

BOOK  XXII. 

53 

B.C.  216.] 
held,  and  Manias  Pcmiponius  Matho,  and  Publius  Furius 
Philus  were  chosen.  The  lot  of  administering  justice  to  the 
citizens  of  Home  fell  to  Pomponius,  that  of  deciding  causes 
between  Roman  citizens  and  foreigners,  to  Publius  Furius 
Philus*  Two  additional  praetors  were  appointed,  Marcus 
Claudius  Marcellus  for  Sicily,  Lucius  Postumius  Albinus 
for  Gaul.  All  these  were  appointed  in  their  absence ;  nor, 
excepting  the  consul  Terentius,  was  any  of  them  invested 
with  an  office  which  he  had  not  administered  before ;  se¬ 
veral  men  of  bravery  and  activity  being  passed  by,  because, 
at  such  a  juncture,  it  was  not  judged  expedient  to  intrust 
any  person  with  a  new  employment. 
XXXVI.  Augmentations  were  also  made  to  the  armies ; 
but  as  to  the  number  of  additional  forces  of  foot  and  horse 
which  were  raised,  writers  vary  so  much,  as  well  as  in  the 
kind  of  troops,  that  I  can  scarcely  venture  to  affirm  any  thing 
certain  on  that  head.  Some  authors  assert,  that  ten  thousand 
new  soldiers  were  levied;  others  four  new  legions;  so  that 
there  were  eight  legions  employed:  and  that  the  legions  were 
also  augmented,  both  horse  and  foot;  one  thousand  foot  and 
one  hundred  horse  being  added  to  each,  so  as  to  make  it 
contain  five  thousand  foot,  and  four  hundred  horse;  and 
that  the  allies  furnished  an  equal  number  of  foot,  and  double 
the  number  of  horse.  Some  writers  affirm,  that,  at  the  time 
of  the  battle  at  Cannae,  there  were  iri  the  Roman  camp 
eighty-seven  thousand  two  hundred  soldiers.  All  agree  in 
this,  that  greater  force,  and  more  vigorous  efforts,  were  now 
employed  than  in  former  years,  in  consequence  of  the  dic¬ 
tator  having  afforded  them  room  to  hope  that  the  enemy 
might  be  vanquished.  However,  before  the  new  legions  be¬ 
gan  their  march  from  the  city,  the  decemvirs  were  ordered 
to  go  and  inspect  the  books,  because  people  in  general  were 
terrified  by  prodigies  of  extraordinary^  kinds:  for  accounts 
were  received,  that,  at  Rome,  on  the  Aventine,  and,  at  the 
same  time,  at  Aricia,  a  shower  of  stones  had  fallen;  that,  in 

54 

HISTORY  OF  M)ME. 

[Y.R.  5S6. 

the  country  of  the  Sabines,  smtues  had  sweated  abundance 
of  blood,  and  that  the  warm  waters  at  Caere  had  flowed 
biqpdy  from  the  spring;  and  this  circumstance,  having  hap¬ 
pened  frequently,  excited  therefore  the  greater  terror.  In  a 
street,  near  the  field  of  Mars,  several  persons  had  been 
struck  with  lightning,  and  killed.  These  portents  were  ex¬ 
piated  according  to  the  directions  of  the  books.  Ambassa¬ 
dors  from  Paestum  brought  some  golden  vessels  to  Rome, 
and  to  these,  as  to  the  Neapolitans,  thanks  were  returned,  but 
the  gold  was  not  accepted. 
XXXVII.  About  the  same  time  arrived  at  Ostia  a  fleet, 
sent  by  Hiero,  with  a  large  supply  of  provisions.  The  Sy¬ 
racusan  ambassadors,  being  introduced  to  the  senate,  ac¬ 
quainted  them,  that  King  Hiero  had  been  as  sincerely  af¬ 
flicted,  on  hearing  of  the  loss  of  the  consul  Caius  Flaminius, 
and  his  army,  as  be  could  have  been  by  any  disaster  hap¬ 
pening  to  himself,  or  his  own  kingdom.  Wherefore,  though 
he  was  fully  sensible  that  the  grandeur  of  the  Roman  people 
had  shone  forth,  in  times  of  adversity,  with  a  still  more  ad¬ 
mirable  degree  of  lustre.than  even  in  prosperity,  yet  he  had 
sent  such  supplies  of  every  sort,  for  the  support  of  the  war, 
as  are  usually  furnished  by  good  and  faithful  allies^  and  he 
earnestly  besought  the  conscript  Fathers  not  to  refuse  them. 
That,  in  the  first  place,  for  the  sake  of  the  omen,  they  had 
brought  a  golden  statue  of  Victory",  of  diree  hundred  and 
twenty  pounds  weight,  which  they  prayed  them  to  accept, 
hold,  and  possess,  as  appropriated  to  them  for  ever.  That 
they  had  likewise,  in  order  to  ^ard  against  any  want  of 
provisions,  brought  three  hundred  thousand  pecks  of  wheat, 
and  two  hundred  thousand  of  barley;  and  that  whatever  fur¬ 
ther  supplies  might  be  necessary,  should  be  conveyed  to 
such  places  as  the  senate  should  order.  That  he  knew  that 
the  Roman  people  employed  not  in  the  main  body  of  their 
army,  or  in  the  cavalry,  any  other  than  Roman  citizens,  or 
I^atine  confederates;  yet  as  he  had  seen,  in  a  Roman  camp. 

BOOK  xxri.  ' 

55 

B.C.  216.] 

foreign  of  li^t>-armed  auxiliaries,  he  had  therefore 
sent  a  thousand  archers  ^d  slingers,  a  body  well  qualified 
to  oppose  the  Balearians,  Moors,  and  other  nations  remarka¬ 
ble  for  fighting  with  missile  weapons,”  To  these  presents  he 
added  likewise  advice:  that  the  prsetor,  to  whose  lot  the 
province  of  Sicily  might  fall,  should  cross  over  with  a  fleet 
to  Africa,  in  order  to  give  the  enemy  employment  for  their 
arms  in  their  own  country,  and  to  allow  them  the  less  leisure 
to  supply  Hannibal  with  reinforcements.”  The  senate  re¬ 
turned  2m  answer  to  the  King  in  these  terms;  that  “  Hiero 
had  ever  acted  as  a  man  of  honour,  and  an  excellent  ally; 
that  from  the  time,  when  he  first  united  in  friendship  with 
the  Roman  people,  he  had,  through  the  whole  course  of  his 
conduct,  manifested  an  invariable  fidelity  in  his  attachment 
to  them;  and  in  all  times,  and  in  ail  places,  had,  with  great 
liberality,  supported  the  interest  of  Rome.  Of  this  the  Ro¬ 
man  people  entertained,  as  they  ought,  a  grateful  sense. 
That  gold  had  likewise  been  offered  by  jsome  other  states, 
which,  though  thankful  for  the  intention,  the  Roman  people 
had  not  accepted:  the  statue  of  Victory,  however,  and  the 
omen,  they  accepted,  and  had  offered,  and  dedicated  to  that 
divinity,  a  mansion  in  the  Capitol,  in  the  temple  of  Jupiter 
supremely  good  and  great;  hoping  that,  consecrated  in  that 
fortress  of  the  city  of  Rome,  she  would  be  pleased  to  remain 
firm  and  immoveable,  kind  and  propitious  to  the  Roman 
people.”  The  slingers,  archers,  and  the  com  were  delivered 
to  the  consuls.  To  the  fleet  of  ships,  already  in  Sicily  with 
the  praetor  Titus  Otacilius,  were  added  twenty-five  quinque- 
remes,and  he  received  permission,  if  he  judged  it  conducive 
to  the  public  good,  to  pass  over  to  Africa. 
KXXVIII.  After  the  levies  were  completed,  the  consuls 
waited  a  few  d^ys  for  the  arrival  of  the  confederates  from 
Latium.  At  thb  time  the  soldiers  were  obliged  to  take  an 
oath  dieted  by  the  tribunes,  which  had  jiever  before  been 
practised*  For,  until  now,  there  had  been  no  public  oath 

56 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R-  536. 

taken,  only  that  they  would  assemble  cm  the  orders  of  the 
consuls,  and,  without  their  orders,  would  not  depart;  and 
then,  when  they  joined  their  decury  or  century,  the  horse¬ 
men,  on  being  placed  in  their  decuries,  and  the  footmen  on 
being  placed  in  their  centuries,  used  to  swear  voluntarily, 
among  themselves,  that  they  would  not  depart  through  fear 
or  in  flight;  nor  quit  their  ranks,  except  for  the  purpose  of 
taking  up  or  bringing  a  weapon,  of  striking  an  enemy,  or 
saving  a  counm  man^^  This,  from  having  been  a  volun¬ 
tary  compact  between  themselves,  was  now  put  under 
the  jurisdiction  of  the  tribunes,  who  were  invested  with 
legal  authority  to  administer  this  oath.  Before  the  troops 
began  their  march  from  the  city,  the  harangues  of  the  con¬ 
sul  Varro  were  frequent  and  full  of  presumption;  in  these  he 
openly  asserted,  that  the  war  had  been  purposely  drawn  into 
Italy  by  the  nobles,  and  would  continue  flxed  in  the  veiy^ 
centre  of  the  commonwealth,  if  men  like  Fabius  were  to  have 
the  command;  but  that  he,  on  the  very  first  day,  wherein  he 
should  get  sight  of  the  enemy,  would  bring  it  to  a  conclusion. 
The  only  speech  made  by  his  colleague  Paullus,  on  the  day 
before  that  on  which  they  set  out  from  the  city,  contained 
more  truth  than  flattery,  addressed  to  the  people ;  neverthe¬ 
less  he  used  no  harsh  expressions  against  Varro,  excepting 
thus  much;  that  it  was  a  matter  of  surprise  to  him,  how 
any  man,  before  he  was  acquainted  with  either  his  own  or 
the  enemy’s  forces,  the  situation  of  posts,  or  the  nature  of 
the  country,  while  he  remained  in  the  city,  in  short,  and  in 
the  garb  of  peace,  could  yet  know  what  he  should  have  to  do 
when  he  came  to  take  the  field;  and  could  even  foretell  the 
day  on  which  he  was  to  come  to  a  general  engagement.  For 
his  part,  as  men’s  plans  must  be  regulated  by  circumstances, 
and  not  circumstances  by  their  plans,  he  would  not  be  in 
haste  to  adopt  prematurely  any  one,  before  the  season  show¬ 
ed  its  expediency.  He  wished  that  even  those  measures, 
which  had  been  taken  under  the  guidance  of  caution  and 

B,€.  ne.-]  mmm  xm*  sr 
^gudenc^f  ail^  be  at^Bded  witib  pms^ei^iis*  h»m;  mace 
rasbnesa,  ^sii^s  the  folly  which  it  mvalved,  had  heea  hi** 
foetta  canatandy  unsuccessful.”  Wifoout  any  fardier 
dechimtion,  it  was,  hence  apparent,  that  he  preferred  ^die 
W  hasty  counsel;  ai^l  to  induce  him  to  adhere  the.  more 
hrmly  lo  this  resolution,  Quintus  Fabkis  Maximus  is  said  to 
have  addressed  him,  just  before  h^  departure^  in  this  man^ 
uer:-—  ,  .  . 
X>  XIX.  If,  Lucius  jEmilius,  you  had  a  colleague  like 
37ourself,  (which  I  earnestly  wish,)  or,  if  yourself  were  like 
your  colleague,  smy  address  from  me  would  be  superfluous; 
because,  in  the  first  place,  two  gcwd  consuls  would,  without 
adrice  from  me,  out  of  their  own  honoumble  zeal,  act,  in 
every  particular,  to  the  advantage  of  the  public;  and,  in  the 
others  two  had  oi^s  would  neifoer  admit  my  words  into  their 
ears,  nor  my  counsels  into  their  breasts.  At  present,  when  I 
consider,  qn  the  one  hand,  your  colleague,  and,  on  the  other, . 
yourself  and  your  character,  I  address  myself  solely  to  you, 
whose  endeavours,  as  a  worthy  man  and  citizen,  I  perceive, 
will  be  widiout  effect,  if  the  administration  be  defective  on 
the  other  side.  Evil  coim^s  will  have*  equal  privilege  and 
authority  widi  good*  For,  Lucius  Paullus,  you  are  much 
mistaken  if  you  suppose  that  you  will  have  a  less  difficult 
struggle  to  maintain  widt  Caius  Terentiua  than  witfr  Hanoi** 
bal.  I  know  not  whether  the  former  may  not  prove  more  dan¬ 
gerous  than  the  latter.  With  the  one,  you  will  contend  in  die  . 
field  only;  with  the  other,  in  all  places  and  times;  against 
H^nibai  and  his  legions,  you  will  be  supported  in  fight,  by 
your  troops  of  infantry  and  cavalry;  Varro  will  expose  you  at 
the  head  of  your  own  soldiers.  May  the  mention  of  Cmus 
Flaminius  not  prove  ominous  to  you!  But  he  became  mad, 
after  he  became  consul,  when  in  his  province',  and  at  the  head 
of  die  army:  in  a  word,  this  man,  before  he  professed  hijmself 
a  candidate  for  the  consulship,  afterwards,  while  he  canvas¬ 
sed  for  it,  and  now,  since  his  appointment,  before  he  has  seen 
VOL.  III. — H 

58 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y,R.  536, 

the  camp  or  the  cDemy,  has  proceeded,  all  along,  in  one  con¬ 
tinued  paroxysm  of  insanity.  And  when,  by  raving  of  Eghts 
and  folds  of£  batde,  he  now  excites  snch  storms  among  the 
peacehil  citizens  in  their  gowns,  what  do  you  suppose  he 
will  dp  among  the  young  men,  who  have  arms  in  their  hands, 
and  with  whom  acts  instantly  follow  words?  If  he  shall  im¬ 
mediately  fight  the  enemy,  as  he  boasts  diat  he  will,  either  I 
am  ignorant  of  military  affairs,  of  the  nature  of  the  present 
war,  and  of  the  enemy  with  whom  we  have  to  deal,  or  some 
other  place  will  be  rendered  still  more  remarkable  by  our 
disasters,  than  was  the  Trasimenus.  It  is  no  time  for  me  to 
boast,  talking  as  I  am  to  a  single  man;  and  if  I  have  gone 
too  far  on  either  side,  it  was  in  contemning,  not  in  seeking 
applause:  but  the  truth  is  this;  the  only  rational  method  of 
conducting  the  war  against  Hannibal,  is  that  in  which  I  con¬ 
ducted  it;  nor  does  the  event  alone  confirm  this,  (for  fools 
only  judge  by  events,)  but  the  reasems  which  di^  and  must 
subsist,  as  long  as  circumstances  shall  remain  die  s^e  and 
unchangeable.  We  are  carr}dng  on  war  in  Italy,  in  our  own 
country,  and  on  our  own  soi4  where  all  the  places  round  are 
full  of  our  countrymen  and  allies,  who  do,  and  will  assist  us 
with  men,  arms,  horses,  and  provisions.  That  we  may  so 
far  rely  on  their  faithful  attachment,  they  have  given  suffici¬ 
ent  proofs  in  the  times  of  our  distress.  Time  will  daily  im¬ 
prove  us,  will  render  us  more  prudent,  more  steady#  Hanni¬ 
bal,  on  die  contrary,  is  in  a  foreign,  an  hostile  territory,  sur¬ 
rounded  on  all  sides  by  enemies  and  dangers,  far  from  home, 
far  from  his  native  country;  both  land  and  sea  are  possessed 
by  his  foes;  no  cities  receive  him  within  their  wsdls;  he  no¬ 
where  sees  aught  which  he  can  call  his  own;  he  lives  on  the 
plunder  of  the  day;  he  has  scarcely  a  third  part  of  that  army 
which  he  brought  over  the  river  Iberus;  nor  has  he  a  supply 
of  food  for  the  few  who  remain.  Do  you  doubt  then,  that  by 
avoiding  action  we  sh^l  overcome  him,  whose  strength  is 
of  itself  declining  every  day,  who  has  no  resource  of  provi- 

BOOK  XXIL 

B.C.  316.] 

sioBs,  no  remforcemcnts,  no  money?  How  long  under  the 
walls  of  Geronium,  a  wretched  fort  of  Apulia,  as  if  utnier 
those  of  Carthage^  did  I— But  I  will  not  vaunt  even  befoi^ 
you.  See  how  the  last  cemsub,  Cneius  Servilius  and  Marcua 
Atilius,  baffled  him.  Believe  me,  Lucius  Paullus,  this  is  die 
only  way  of  safety;  yet  this  will  be  thwarted  by  your  country¬ 
men,  rather  than  by  the  enemy.  For  die  same  thing  will  be 
desired  by  both  parties;  the  wish  of  Varro,  the  Roman  c<hi- 
sui,  will  be  the  same  with  that  of  Hannibal,  the  Cardia^- 
nian.  You  akme  will  have  two  generals  to  withstand.  How¬ 
ever  you  will  withstand  them,  provided  you  maintain  a  pro¬ 
per  degree  of  firmness;  so  as  not  to  be  shaken  by  common 
fame,  or  by  the  rumours  which  will  be  Spread  among  the 
people;  by  neither  the  empty  applause  bestowed  on  your  col¬ 
league,  nor  the  false  imputations  thrown  on  yourself.  It  is 
commonly  said  that  truth  is  often  eclipsed,  but  never  extin¬ 
guished.  He  who  slights  fame,  shall  enjoy  it  in  its  purity. 
Let  them  call  you  timid,  instead  of  cautious;  dilatory  instead 
of  considerate;  an  unenterprising  instead  of  a  consummate 
commander.  I  rather  wish  that  a  wise  enemy  may  fear,  than 
that  the  foolish  part  of  your  own  countr5nnen  should  ap¬ 
plaud  you.  Attempting  every  thing,  you  will  be  despised  by 
Hannibal;  doing  nothing  rashly,  you  will  be  feared  by  him. 
Yet  I  by  no  means  recommend  diat  nothing  riiould  be  done, 
but  that  in  all  your  piweedings  you  be  guided  by  reason,  not 
by  fortune;  that  you  keep  every  matter  always  within  your 
own  power,  and  under  your  own  direction;  that  you  be  al¬ 
ways  armed  and  on  your  guard;  and  that  you  neither  fail  to 
improve  a  favourable  opportunity,  nor  afford  such  an  oppor¬ 
tunity  to  the  foe.  Acting  with  deliberati<Hi,  you  will  see 
every  thing  clearly  and  distinctly;  haste  is  improvident  and 
blind.’^ 
XL.  The  consul  answered  rather  in  a  desponding  style:  he 
acknowledged  the  truth  of  what  had  been  said,  but  showed 
little  hope  of  being  able  to  put  the  advice  into  execution.  If 

m 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[y.R.  536. 
Fabius,’^  he  satd^  when  dictator,  had  been  uai^e  to  with- 
^^zid  the  soTOgance  of  his  master  of  the  horse,  what  power 
or  itifttieace  Coidd  a  cousui  have;  to  oppose  a  seditious  and 
hot-headed  colleague?  As  to  himself,  he  had  in  his  former 
consulate,  escaped  the  flames  of  popular  rage,  not  without  be¬ 
ing  scorched.  He  wished  that  all  might  end  happily:  but 
should  any  misfentune  occur,  he  would  expose  his  life  to  the 
.  weapons  of  the  enemy,  ratl^r  tban  to  the  votes  of  his  incensed 
countrymen.”  Immediately  after  this  conversation,  as  we  are 
told,  Paullus  set  out,  escorted  by  the  prmci^  patricians, 
while  the  plebeians  attended  their  own  consul  in  a  crowd 
more  numerous  than  respectable.  When  they  came  into  the 
held,  and  the  old  and  new  troops  were  intermixed,  they 
formed  two  separate  camps;  the  new  one,  which  was  likewise 
the  smaller,  .was  nearer  to  Hannibal;  the  old  one  contained 
the  greater  number,  and  the  main  strength  of  the  army. 
Then  Marcus  Atilius,  one  of  the  consuls  of  the  former  year, 
wishing  to  he  dismissed,  on  account  of  the  state  of  his 
health  was  sent  to  Rome;  and  the  other,  Geminus  Serviiius, 
was  charged  with  the  command  cd"  a  Roman  legion,  and  two 
thousand  of  the  confederate  infantry  and  cavalry,  stationed 
in  the  smaUer  camp.  Hannibal,  though  he  saw  the  force  of 
the  enemy  doubled,  yet  rejoiced  exceedingly  at  the  arrival  of 
the  consuls.  For,  besides  that  he  had  no  part  remaining  of 
the  provisions  acquired  >by  plunder  from  day  to  day,  there 
was  nothing  now  left  within  his  reach,  erf  which  he  could 
make  prey:  sdl  the  corn  in  ever}^  quarter,  when  it  was  found 
unsafe  to  keep  k  in  the  country,  having  been  collected  toge¬ 
ther  into  the  fortified  towns;  so  that,  as  was  afterwards  dis¬ 
covered,  he  had  scarcely  a  quantity  sufficient  for  ten  days; 
and,  in  consequence  of  the  scarcity,  a  design  had  been  form¬ 
ed,  among  the  Spaniards,  of  going  over  to  the  enemy,  had 
time  been  allowed  diem  to  bring  it  to  maturity. 
XLI.  But  fortune  her^lf  concurred  in  administering  fuel 
to  the  impatient  ^mper  ^d  rashness  of  the  consul;  for,  an 

TOOK  XXIL 

61 

BJC.  216.] 
attack  having  been  made  on  their  plundering  parties,  and  a 
tumultuary  kind  of  engagement  ensuing,  occasioned  rather  by 
the  voluntary  exertions  of  the  soldiers  running  up  to  the 
spot,  than  by  any  preconcerted  design,  or  order,  of  the  com¬ 
manders,  the  Cartiiaginians  were  considerably  worsted,  losing 
a  thousand  seven  humired  fx^n,  while  there  fell,  of  the  Ro¬ 
mans  and  their  confederates,  not  more  than  an  hundred. 
However,  while  the  victors  pursued  with  eagerness,  the  con¬ 
sul  Pauilus,  who  held  the  command  on  that  day,  (for  they 
commanded  alternately,)  dreading  an  ambuscade,  obliged 
them  to  halt,  tiiough  Varro  expressed  great  indignation  at  it, 
exclaiming,  that  the  enemy  had  been  allowed  to  slip  out  of 
their  hands;  and  that  the  war  might  have  been  finished,  had 
not  a  stop  been  put  to  the  action.  Hannibal  grieved  not  much 
for  this  losa;  on  the  contrary,  he  lather  believed  that  it 
would  serve  as  a  bait  to  ensnare  the  more  presumptuous 
consul,  and  the  soldiers,  particularly  the  raw  onesy^All  the 
circumstances  of  the  enemy  were  as  well  known  to  him  as 
his  own;  that  the  commanders  were  of  dissimilar  characters, 
and  disunited  in  opinion;  and  that  almost  two-thirds  of  their 
army  were  raw  recruits Thinking,  therefore,  that  he  had 
now  found  both  time  and  place  convenient  for  a  stratagem, 
on  the  following  night,  he  led  away  his  men,  with  no  otiier 
encumbrance  than  their  arms,  the  camp  being  full  of  their  ef¬ 
fects  of  all  kinds,  public  and  private:  then,  making  them  halt 
out  of  sight,  behind  the  nearest  mountains,  he  formed  tiie 
foot  in  order  of  battle  on  the  left,  and  the  cavalry  on  the 
rig^t,  and  conducted  the  baggage,  as  a  centre  line,  through 
the  interjacent  valley;  intending,  while  the  enemy  should  be 
busy  and  encumbered  in  the  pillaging  of  the  camp,  as  if  desert¬ 
ed  by  the  owners,  to  fall  upon  them  by  surprise.  Numerous 
fires  were  left  In  the  camp,  to  create  a  belief  that  his  inten¬ 
tion  was,  by  such  appearances,,  to  detain  the  consuls  in  their 
posts,  while  he  should  gain  the  advantage  of  time,  to  retreat 

62 

HISTORY  OF  SOME.  [Y.R.  566. 
to  tlie  greater  distance,  in  like  manner  as  he  had  deceived 
Fabius  the  year  before.  ’ 
XLII.  When  day  arrived,  the  Romans,  on  observing,  first, 
that  the  advanced  guards  bad  been  withdrawn,  and  after¬ 
wards,  on  a  nearer  approach,  the  extraordinary  silence,  were 
filled  with  surprise.  Then,  when  they  discovered  plainly  that 
the  camp  was  deserted,  they  ran  together  in  crowds  to  die 
pavilions  of  the  consuls,  informing  them  that  the  enemy  had 
fled  in  such  haste,  as  to  leave  the  tents  standing;  and  in  order 
to  conceal  their  fli^t,  had  left  also  a  number  of  fires.  Tliey 
dien,  with  loud  clamours  demanded,  that  orders  should  be 
given  for  the  troops  to  march  in  pursuit;  and,  that  they 
should  plunder  the  camp  in  their  way.  Varro  acted  the 
same  part  as  the  common  soldiers.  Paullus  repeatedly  repre¬ 
sented,  that  they  ought  to  proceed  with  care  and  circumspec¬ 
tion;  and,  at  last,  when  he  could  no  otherwise  restrain  their 
mutinous  proceedings,  or  the  leader  of  them,  be  despatched 
Marius  Statilius,  a  praefect  of  the  allies,  with  a  troop  of  Lu- 
canian  horse,  to  procure  intelligence.  He  rode  up  to  the 
gates,  and,  ordering  the  rest  to  halt  at  the  outside  of  the 
trenches,  he  went  himself  with  two  horsemen  into  the  camp; 
and,  having  carefully  examined  every  circumstance,  returned 
and  reported  that  there  was  without  doubt  an  ambush  in¬ 
tended;  for  the  fires  were  left  in  that  quarter  which  faced  the 
enemy,  the  tents  were  open,  and  every  thing  of  value  left  in 
view;  and  that  he  had  seen  silver  thrown  at  random  in  the 
passages,  as  if  to  invite  a  pillage.  The  very  circumstances, 
mentioned  with  the  intent  of  repressing  their  ardour  for 
booty,  served  to  inflame  it;  and  the  soldiers,  shouting  aloud, 
that  if  the  signal  were  not  given,  they  would  proceed  with¬ 
out  their  leaders;  they  did  tiot  long  want  one,  for  Varro  in¬ 
stantly  gave  the  signal  for  marching^'  Paullus  was  desirous 
of  checking  this  precipitancy,  and  being  informed  that  the 
chickens  had  not  given  a  favourable  auspice,  ordered  that 
the  ill  omen  should  be  reported  to  his  colleague  when  he 

BOOK  XXII. 

63 

^.C.  216.] 
was  just  Icadiag  the  troops  out  of  the  gate;  whereupon  Varro, 
though  heartily  vexed  at  this,  yet  from  the  recollection  of 
the  recent  disaster  of  Flaminius,  and  of  the  memorable  over¬ 
throw  of  the  consul  Claudius  at  sea,  in  the  first  Punic  war, 
was  sensibly  struck  with  religious  scruplesy^he  gods  them¬ 
selves  on  that  day  postponed,  in  a  manner,  rather  than 
averted  the  calamity  which  hung  over  the  Romans:  for  it 
luckily  happened,  that,  while  the  troops  refused  to  obey  the 
consul’s  orders  to  return  into  the  camp,  two  slaves,  one  be¬ 
longing  to  a  horseman  of  Formiae,  the  other  to  one  of  Sidi- 
cinum,  who  had  been  taken  prisoners  by  the  Numidians, 
among  a  party  of  foragers,  in  the  consulate  of  Servilius  and 
Atilius,  made  their  escape  on  that  very  day  to  their  owners; 
and,  being  brought  before  the  consuls,  informed  them,  that 
Hannibal’s  whole  army  lay  in  ambush  behind  the  nearest 
mountains.  The  seasonable  arrival  of  these  men  procured 
obedience  to  the  authority  of  the  consuls,  when  one  of  them, 
by  his  immoderate  pursuit  of  popular  applause,  had,  through 
improper  indulgence,  forfeited  people’s  respect  for  their  dig¬ 
nity,  particularly  with  regard  to  himself. 
XLIII.  When  Hannibal  perceived  that  the  Romans^ 
though  they  took  some  inconsiderate  steps,  had  not  carried 
their  rashness  to  the  full  extent,  the  stratagem  being  now 
discovered,  he  returned  with  disappointment  to  his  camp. 
In  this  place  he  could  not  remain,  many  days,  by  reason  of 
the  scarcity  of  corn,  and  new  measures  were  daily  in  contem¬ 
plation,  not  only  among  the  soldiery,  a  multitude  com¬ 
pounded  of  the  refuse  of  all  nations,  but  even  in  the  mind 
of  the  general  himself ;  for  the  men  begun  to  murmur,  and 
afterwards  proceeded  with  open  clamours  to  demand  the  ar¬ 
rears  of  their  pay,  and  to  complain  at  first  of  the  dearness  of 
provisions,  at  last  of  famine.  A  report  too  prevailed,  that  the 
mercenary  soldiers,  particularly  those  from  Spain,  had 
formed  a  scheme  of  going  over  to  the  enemy,  so  that  Hanni¬ 
bal  himself  is  said  to  have  sometimes  entertained  thoughts 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.a.  506* 

of  flying  mto  Gaul ;  ii^adisig  to  have  left  all  Ae 
behind,  and^  wiA  Ae  cavaliy,  to  have  made  a  retreat. 
While  these  matters  were  in  agitation,  and  this  the  disposi¬ 
tion  in  Ae  camp,  he  formed  a  resolution  of  removmg  into 
Apulia,  where  Ae  weaAer  was  warmer,  apd  consequently 
more  favourable  to  the  ripening  of  the  harvest ;  and  where, 
in  proportion  as  he  was  placed  at  a  greater  distance  from  the 
enemy,  Ae  discontented  would  find  desertion  Ae  more  diffi¬ 
cult.  AccorAngly  he  set  out  by  night,  after  kindling  fires  as 
before,  and  leaving  a  few  tents  to  keep  up  Ae  appearance  of 
a  camp,  in  Ae  expectation  that  fears  of  an  ambush,  as  on  Ae 
former  occasion,  would  keep  the  Romans  within  their  works. 
But  Statilius,  Ae  Lucanian,  having  examined  all  the  ground 
beyond  the  camp,  and  on  Ae  other  side  of  the  mountains,  and 
bringing  back  an  account  Aat  he  had  seen  Ae  enemy  march¬ 
ing  at  a  great  distance,  a  consultation  was  held  about  pur¬ 
suing  him.  Here  each  consul  maintained  the  same  opinion 
■which  he  had  ever  held ;  but  almost  all  the  officers  siding 
wiA  Varro,  and  no  cme  except  Servilius,  the  consul  of  the 
former  year,  with  Paulius,  they,  pursuant  to  the  determina¬ 
tion  of  the  majority,  set  forward,  under  the  impulse  of  un¬ 
happy  fate,  to  render  Cannae  for  ever  memorable,  as  a  scene 
of  disaster  to  Ae  Romans.  Npar  Aat  town  Hannibal  had 
pitched  his  camp,  tiuning  the  rear  towards  the  wind  called 
Vulturnus,  which,  in  those  plains,  parched  with  heat,  carries 
along  with  it  clouds  of  dust.  As  this  choice  of  situation  was 
highly  commodius  to  the  men,  while  in  camp,  so  was  it  par¬ 
ticularly  advantageous,  when  they  were  drawn  up  for  battle ; 
because,  while  the  wind  only  blew  on  their  backs,  it  would 
nearly  blind  Ae  enemy  with  whom  they  were  to  fight,  by 
carrying  great  quantities  of  d^ist  into  their  faces. 
XLIV.  The  consuls  pursued  the  CarAaginians,  taking 
proper  care  to  examine  Ae  roads;  when  they  arrived  near 
Cannae,  and  had  the  foe  in  sight,  they  divided  Aeir  forces, 
as  before,  and  fortified  two  camps  at  nearly  the  same  dis- 

BOOK  XXII. 

65 

B.C.  216.] 

tance  from  each  other  as  they  had  been  at  Geronium.  As 
the  river  Aufidus  ran  by  the  camps  of  both,  the  watering 
parties  of  both  had  access  to  it,  as  opportunity  served,  but 
not  without  encountering  opposition.  The  Romans,  how¬ 
ever,  in  the  smaller  camp,  which  was  pitched  on  the  other 
side  of  the  Aufidus,  had  greater  liberty  of  supplying  them¬ 
selves  with  water,  because  there  were  none  of  the  enemy 
posted  on  the  farther  bank.  Hannibal,  now,  conceiving 
hopes  that  the  consuls  might  be  brought  to  an  engagement 
in  this  tract,  where  the  nature  of  the  ground  was  advantage¬ 
ous  to  cavalry,  in  which  kind  of  forces  he  had  a  manifest 
superiority,  drew  out  his  army  in  order  of  battle,  and  endea¬ 
voured  to  provoke  them  by  skirmishes  of  the  Numidians. 
On  this  the  Roman  camp  was  again  thrown  into  disturb¬ 
ance,  by  mutinous  behabiour  in  the  soldiers,  and  dissen¬ 
sion  between  the  consuls j  Paullus  representing  to  Varro 
the  fatal  rashness  of  Sempronius  and  Flaminius;  and  Varro 
to  him  the  example  of  Fabius,  as  a  specious  precedent 
for  timid  and  inactive  commanders.  The  one  calling  gods 
and  men  to  witness,  that  none  of  the  blame  was  to  be  im¬ 
puted  to  him,  of  Hannibal’s  now  holding  Italy  as  if  by  pre¬ 
scriptive  right  of  possession;  for  that  he  was  chained  down 
by  his  colleague,  while  the  soldiers,  full  of  rage  and  ardour 
for  the  fight,  were  kept  unarmed.  To  which  the  other  replied, 
that,  if  any  misfortune  should  happen  to  the  legions,  from 
their  being  hurried  into  an  inconsiderate  and  rash  engage¬ 
ment,  he  himself,  although  entirely  free  from  all  reproach, 
must  yet  bear  a  share  of  the  consequences,  be  they  what  they 
might.  Let  him  take  care,  that  those,  whose  tongues  were 
now  so  ready  and  impetuous,  showed  ‘  the  same  alertness 
during  the  fight. 
XL  V.  While,  instead  of  deliberating  on  proper  measures, 
they  thus  wasted  time  in  altercation,  Hannibal,  who  had 
kept  his  forces  drawn  up  in  order  of  battle  during  a  great 
part  of  the  day,  led  back  the  rest  towards  the  camp,  and  des- 
VOL,  III.— I 

66 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  5S6. 

patched  the  Numidian  horse  to  the  other  side  of  the  river, 
to  attack  a  watering  party,  which  had  come  from  the  smaller 
camp  of  the  Romans.  They  had  scarcely  reached  the  oppo-» 
site  bank,  when,  merely  by  their  shout,  and  the  rapidity  of 
their  motions,  they  dispersed  this  disorderly  crowd;  and 
then  pushed  forward  against  an  advanced  guard,  stationed 
before  the  rampart,  and  almost  up  to  the  very  gates.  The 
Romans,  in  having  their  camp  threatened  by  a  band  of  ir¬ 
regular  auxiliaries,  felt  an  intolerable  affront,  so  that  nothing 
could  have  restrained  them  from  drawing  out  their  forces 
and  passing  the  river,  but  from  the  chief  command  being  then 
in  the  hands  of  Paullus.  On  the  next  day,  therefore,  Varro, 
whose  turn  it  was  to  coinmand,  without  conferring  with  his 
colleague,  displayed  the  signal  for  battle"*",  and  marshalling 
his  forces,  led  them  over  the  river,  while  Paullus  followed; 
because,  though  he  did  not  approve  of  his  design,  yet  he 
could  not  avoid  giving  him  his  support.  Having  crossed  the 
river,  they  were  joined  by  the  troops  from  the  smaller  camp, 
and  formed  their  line  in  this  manner :  in  the  right  wing, 
next  the  river,  they  placed  the  Roman  cavalry,  and  adjoin¬ 
ing  them  the  Roman  infantry ;  the  extremity  of  the  left 
wing  was  composed  of  the  confederate  cavalry;  and,  in¬ 
closed  by  these,  the  confederate  infantry  stretched  to  the 
centre,  so  as  to  unite  with  the  Roman  legions.  The  archers, 
and  other  light-armed  auxiliaries  formed  the  van.  The  consuls 
commanded  the  wings,  TerentiuS  the  left,  iEmilius  the 
right;  the  charge  of  the  centre  was  committed  to  Geminus 
Servilius. 
XLVI.  Hannibal,  at  the  first  light,  sending  before  him  the 
Balearians,  and  other  light-armed  troops,  crossed  the  river, 
and  posted  each  company  in  his  line  of  battle,  in  the  same 
order  in  which  he  had  led  them  over*  The  Gallic  and  Span¬ 
ish  cavalry  occupied  the  left  wing,  near  the  bank,  opposite 
the  Roman  cavalry,  and  the  Numidian  horse  the  right;  the 
*  A  purple  cloak  raised  on  a  spear  over  the  Prsetoriuin. 

BOOK  XXIL 

6!r 

BX.  2!6.T 
infantry  forming  the  centre,  in  such  a  manner,  that  botia 
ends  of  their  line  were  composed  of  Africans,  and  between 
these  were  placed  the  Gauls  and  Spaniards.  The  Africans, 
for  the  most  part,  resembled  a  body  of  Roman  troops,  being 
furnished,  in  great  abundance,  with  the  arms  taken  partly  at 
the  Trebia,  but  the  greater  part  at  the  Trasimenus.  The  • 
shields  of  the  Gauls  and  Spaniards  were  nearly  of  the  same 
make;  their  stvords  were  different,  both  in  length  and  form; 
those  of  the  Gauls  being  ver}^  long,  and  without  points , 
those  of  the  Spaniards,  whose  practice  was  rather  to  thrust 
at  their  enemy,  than  to  strike,  light  and  handy,  and  sharp  at 
the  point.  The  troops  of  these  nations  made  a  more  terrible 
appearance  than  any  of  the  rest,  on  account  of  the  size  of 
their  bodies,  and  also  of  their  figure.  The  Gauls  were  naked 
from  their  middle  upw^ard;  the  Spaniards  clad  in  linen  vests, 
of  a  surprising  and  dazzling  whiteness,  and  bordered  with 
purple.  The  whole  number  of  infantry,  drawn  up  in  the 
field  on  this  occasion,  was  forty  thousand,  of  cavalry  ten 
thousand.  The  generals,  who  commanded  the  wings,  tvere,  t 
Hasdrubal  on  the  left,  and  Maharbal  on  the  right.  Hannibal 
himself,  wdth  his  brother  Mago,  took  the  command  of  the 
centre.  The  sun,  very  conveniently  for  both  parties,  shone 
on  their  flanks,  whether  this  position  w^as  chosen  designedly, 
or  that  it  fell  out  by  accident;  for  llVe  Romans  faced  the 
south,  the  Carthaginians  the  north.  The  wind,  which  the 
natives  of  the  country  call  Vulturnus,  blew  briskly  against 
the  Romans,  and,  by  driving  great  quantities  of  sand  into 
their  faces,  prevented  them  from  seeing  clearly. 
XLVII.  The  shout  being  raised,  the  auxiliaries  adt  anced, 
and  the  fight  commenced,  first,  between  the  lighi-armed 
troops;  then  the  left  wing,  consisting  of  Gallic  and  Spanish 
cavalry,  engaged  with  the  right  wdng  of  the  ^Romans  ;  but 
not  in  the  usual  method  of  fighting  between  horsemen,  for 
they  were  obliged  to  engage  front  to  front,  no  room  having 
been  left  for  any  evolutions,  the  river  on  one  side,  and  the 

68 

HISTORY  OF  ROME,  [Y.R.  536. 
line  of  infantry  on  the  other,  confining  them,  so  that  they 
could  only  push  directly  forwardj  at  last,  the  horses  being 
pressed  together  in  a  crowd,  and  stopped  from  advancing, 
the  riders,  grappling  man  to  man,  dragged  each  other  to  the 
ground.  The  contest  was  now  maintained  chiefly  on  foot, 
but  was  more  furious  than  lasting;  for  the  Roman  horse¬ 
men,  unable  to  keep  their  stand,  turned  their  backs.  When 
the  fight  between  the  cavalry  was  almost  decided,  the  in- 
fantr  began  to  engage.  At  first,  the  Gauls  and  Spaniards 
maintained  their  r.mks,  without  betraying  any  inferiority 
either  in  strength  or  courage.  At  length  the  Romans,  by 
frequent  and  persevering  efforts,  with  their  front  regular 
and  in  compact  order,  drove  back  a  body  which  projected 
before  the  rest  of  their  line  in  form  of  a  wedge,  and  which, 
being  too  thin,  consequently  wanted  strength:  as  these  gave 
ground,  and  retreated  hastily  and  in  disorder,  they  pursued, 
and  without  slackening  their  charge,  broke  throu^  their 
dismayed  and  flying  battalions;  at  first,  to  their  centre  line; 
and,  at  length,  meeting  with  no  resistance,  they  arrived  at 
the  reserved  troops  of  the  Africans,  which  latter  had  been 
posted  on  both  flanks  of  the  others,  inclining  backward  to¬ 
wards  the  rear,  while  the  centre,  composed  of  the  Gauls  and 
Spaniards,  jutted  considerably  forwaid-  By  the  retreat  of 
this  prominent  part,  the  front  was  thus  rendered  even;  then, 
by  their  proceeding  still  in  the  same  direction,  a  bending  in¬ 
ward  %vas  at  length  formed  in  the  middle,  on  each  side  of 
which  the  Africans  now  formed  wings;  and  the  Romans, 
incautiously  rushing  into  the  centre,  these  flanked  them  on 
each  side,  and,  by  extending  themselves  from  the  extremi¬ 
ties,  surrounded  them  on  the  rear  also.  In  consequence  of 
this,  the  Romans,  who  had  already  finished  one  battle,  quit¬ 
ting  the  Gauljs  and  Spaniards,  whom  they  had  pursued  with 
much  slaughter,  entered  now  on  a  new  one  against  the  Afri¬ 
cans,  in  which  they  had  not  only  the  disadvantage  of  being 
hemmed  in,  airf,  in  that  position,  obliged  to  fight,  but,  also. 

B.C,  216  ]  BOOK  XXIL  69 
that  of  being  fatigued,  while  their  antagonists  were  fresh  and 
vigorous, 
XLVIII.  By  this  time,  the  battle  had  begun  on  the  left 
wing  also  of  the  Romans,  where  the  confederate  cavalry  had 
been  posted  against  the  Numidians:  it  was  languid  at  first, 
and  commenced  with  a  piece  of  Carthaginian  treacher}’'. 
About  five  hundred  Numidians,  carrying,  besides  their 
usual  armour  and  weapons,  swords  concealed  under  their 
coats  of  mail,  rode  up  under  the  appearance  of  deserters, 
with  their  bucklers  behind  their  backs,  and  having  hastily 
alighted  from  their  horses,  and  thrown  their  bucklers  and 
javelins  at  the  feet  of  their  enemies,  were  received  into  the 
centre  line,  and  conducted  thence  to  the  hindmost  ranks, 
where  they  were  ordered  to  sit  down  in  the  rear.  There 
they  remained  quiet,  until  the  fight  was  begun  in  every 
quarter:  when,  however,  the  thoughts  and  eyes  of  all  **  ere 
deeply  intent  on  the  dispute,  snatching  up  the  shields  which 
lay  in  great  numbers  among  the  heaps  of  the  slain,  they  fell 
on  the  rear  of  the  Romans,  and  stabbing  the  men  in  the 
backs,  and  cutting  their  hams,  made  great  slaughter,  and 
caused  still  greater  terror  and  confusion.  While,  in  one  part, 
prevailed  dismay  and  flight,  in  another,  obstinate  fighting  in 
spite  of  despair,  Hasdrubal^  who  commanded  on  the  left  xvtng^ 
after  entirely  routing  the  Roman  cavalry^  went  o£  to  the 
rights  and^  joining  the  Numidians^  put  to  flight  the  cavalry  of 
the  allies.  Then.^  leaving  the  Numidians  to  pursue  them^  with 
his  Gallic  and  Spanish  horse ^  he  made  a  charge  on  the  rear 
of  the  Roman  infantry^  while  they  were  busily  engaged  with 
the  Africans.^ 
XLIX.  On  the  other  side  of  the  field,  Paullus  had,  in  the 
very  beginning  of  the  action,  received  a  grievous  wound 
from  a  sling;  nevertheless,  at  the  head  of  a  compact  band,  he 
*  Here  the  text  of  the  orignal  is  so  corrupted,  as  to  be  absolutely  un- 
intelligble.  The  fact,  as  represented  in  the  supplemental  lines,  is  so  re¬ 
lated  by  Polybius. 

TO 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.536. 

frequently  opposed  himself  in  Hannibal’s  way;  and,  in  seve¬ 
ral  places,  he  restored  the  fight,  being  protected  by  the  Ro¬ 
man  horsemen,  who,  in  the  end,  dismounted,  because  the 
consuFs  strength  declined  so  far.  that  he  was  not  able  even 
to  manage  his  horse.  Some  person,  on  this,  telling  Hannibal 
that  the  consul  had  ordered  the  cavalry  to  dismount,'  he 
answered,  as  we  are  told,  ‘‘  I  should  have  been  much  better 
pleased  if  he  delivered  them  to  me  in  chains.”  The  fight 
maintained  by  the  dismounted  cavalry  was  such  as  might  be 
expected,  when  the  enemy  had  gained  undoubted  possession 
of  the  victory:  and  as  the  vanquished  chose  to  die  on  the 
spot,  rather  than  fly,  the  victors,  enraged  at  them  for  regard¬ 
ing  their  success,  put  to  death  those  whom  they  could  not 
drive  from  their  ground  ^  They  did,  however,  at  length 
oblige  them  to  quit  the  field,  their  numbers  being  reduced  to 
a  few,  and  those  quite  spent  with  toil  and  wounds.  I’hey 
were  all  entirely  dispersed,  and  such  as  were  able  repaired 
to  their  horses,  in  order  to  make  their  escape.  Cneius  Len- 
tulus,  a  military  tribune,  seeing,  as  he  rode  by,  the  consul 
sitting  on  a  stone,  and  covered  with  blood,  said  to  him, 
Lucius  iEmilius,  whom  the  gods  ought  to  favour,  as  the 
onlv  person  free  from  the  blame  of  this  day’s  disaster,  take 
this  horse,  while  you  have  any  i^mains  of  strength;  I  will 
accompany  you,  and  am  able  to  raise  you  up  and  protect 
you.  Add  not  to  the  fatality  of  the  fight  the  death  of  a  con¬ 
sul:  without  that,  there  will  be  abundanf  cause  of  tears  and 
mourning.”  The  consul  replied,  Your  spirit,  Cneius  Cor¬ 
nelius,  I  commend;  but  do  not  waste,  in  unavailing  commis- 
seration,  the  short  time  allowed  you  for  escaping  out  of  the 
hands  of  the  enemy.  Go,  carry  a  public  message  from  me 
to  the  senate,  that  they  fortify  the  city  of  Rome;  and,  before 
the  victorious  Carthaginian  arrives,  secure  it  with  a  power¬ 
ful  garrison.  Carry  also  a  private  message  to  Quintus  Fa- 
bias;  tell  him  that  Lucius  .£milius  has  lived,  and  now  dies, 
in  a  careful  observance  of  his  directions.  As  to  myself,  lei 

BOOK  XXIL 

n 

B.C.216.] 
me  expire  here^  in  the  midst  of  my  slaughtered  soldiers, 
that  I  may  hot  either  be  brought,  a  second  time,  to  a  trial, 
on  the  expiration  of  my  consulship,  or  stand  forth  an  accu¬ 
ser  of  my  colleague;  or  as  if  my  own  innocence  were  to  be 
proved  by  the  impeachment  of  another.’’  While  they  were 
thus  discoursing,  first,  a  crowd  of  their  flying  countrt’men, 
and  afterwards  the  enemy,  came  upon  them;  and  these,  not 
knowing  the  consul,  overwhelmed  him  with  their  weapons. 
Lentulus,  during  the  confusion,  escaped  through  the  swift¬ 
ness  of  his  horse.  A  general  route  now  took  place;  seven 
thousand  men  fled  into  the  smaller  camp,  ten  thousand 
into  the  greater,  and  about  two  thousand  into  the  vil¬ 
lage  of  Cannse;  but  the  town  not  being  defended  by  anv 
fortifications,  these  were  instantly  surrounded  by  Car- 
thalo  and  the  cavalr\^  The  other  consul,  without  joining 
any  party  of  his  routed  troops,  gained  Venusia,  with  about 
seventy  horsemen.  The  number  of  the  slain  is  computed  at 
forty  thousand  foot,  and  tw^o  thousand  seven  hundred 
horse:  the  loss  of  natives  and  of  the  confederates  being 
nearly  equal.  Among  these  were  the  quaestors  belonging  to 
both  consuls,  Lucius  Atilius,  and  Lucius  Furius  Bibaculus; 
twenty-one  military"  tribunes;  several  who  had  passed 
through  the  offices  of  consul,  praetor,  or  sedile,  among  whom 
are  reckoned  Cneius  Servilius  Geminus,  and  Marcus  Minu- 
cius,  who  had  been  master  of  the  horse  in  the  preceding 
year,  and  consul  some  before;  likewise  eighty  who 
were  members  of  the  senate,  or  had  borne  those  offices  which 
qualified  them  to  be  chosen  into  that  body,  and  who  had  vo~ 
luntarily  enlisted  as  soldiers  in  the  legions.  'I'he  prisoners 
taken  in  this  battle  are  reckoned  at  three  thousand  foot,  and 
three  hundred  horse. 
L.  Such  was  the  battle  of  Cannae;  equally  memorable  with 
the  defeat  at  the  Allia:  but  as  it  was  less  fatal  in  its  conse¬ 
quences,  because  the  eiiemy  were  remiss  in  pursuing  the 
blow,  so,  with  respect  to  the  destruction  of  the  troops, 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

r2 

[Y.R.  536. 

was  more  grievous  and  lamentable.  For  the  flight  at  the 
Allia,  while  it  proved  the  ruin  of  die  city,  preserved  the 
men;  but  at  Cannae,  scarcely  seventy  accompanied  the  con¬ 
sul  who  fled;  almost  the  whole  army  perished  with  the  other. 
Those  who  had  collected  together  in  the  two  camps,  were  a 
half-armed  multitude,  without  leaders:  from  the  larger  was 
sent  a  message  to  the  others,  that  while  the  enemy  were 
sunk,  during  the  night,  in  profound  sleep,  in  consequence  of 
their  fatigue  in  the  battle,  and  of  their  feasting  for  joy,  they 
should  come  over  to  them,  and  they  would  go  off*  in  one  body 
to  Canusium.  This  advice  some  totally  rejected;  for  they 
said,  ‘‘  Why  did  not  these  men  come  to  them,  when  a  junc¬ 
tion  might  as  well  have  been  effected  by  that  means?  Why, 
but  because  the  ground  between  them  was  full  of  the  ene¬ 
my’s  troops,  and  that  they  chose  to  expose  to  such  danger 
the  persons  of  others,  rather  than  their  own?”  The  re¬ 
mainder,  though  they  did  not  disapprove  of  the  advice,  were 
yet  afraid  to  follow  it.  On  this,  Publius  Sempronius  Tudi- 
tanus,  a  military  tribune,  addressed  them  thus:  Do  yc 
choose,  then,  to  be  taken  prisoners  by  a  most  rapacious  and 
cruel  enemy,  to  have  a  price  set  upon  your  heads,  by  men  who 
will  examine,  whether  you  are  a  citizen  of  Rome,  or  a  La- 
tine  confederate,  in  order  to  pay  a  compliment  to  others,  by 
heaping  indignity  and  misery  upon  yourselves?  Surely  not, 
if  ye  be  really  fellow-citizens  of  the  consul  iEmilius,  who 
preferred  an  honourable  death  to  a  life  of  dishonour,  and 
of  such  a  number  of  brave  men,  who  lie  in  heaps  around 
him.  But,  before  the  light  overtakes  us,  and  more  numerous 
bodies  of  the  enemy  stop  up  the  way,  let  us  sally  forth 
through  those,  who,  without  any  order  or  regularity,  make 
this  noise  before  our  gates;  courage  and  the  sword  find  a 
passage  through  the  closest  battalion;  this  open  and  loose 
band  we  will  penetrate  in  the  £6rm  of  a  wedge.  Come  on, 
then,  ye  who  wish  the  presentation  of  yourselves  and  the 
'  ommonwealth,  follow  So  saying,  he  drew  his  sword, 

BOOK  XXIL 

73 

B.C.  216.] 
and,  with  the  troops  who  chose  to  follow  him,  formed  as  he 
had  proposed,  made  his  way  through  the  midst  of  the  enemy. 
Here  the  Numidian  javelins  being  thrown  against  their  right 
sides,  which  were  uncovered,  they  removed  their  shields  to 
their  right  hands,  and  thus,  to  the  number  of  six  hundred, 
effected  a  passage  into  the  larger  camp;  proceeding  thence, 
in  conjunction  with  the  other  greater  body,  they  arrived  safe 
at  Canusium.  Such  were  the  proceedings  of  the  vanquish¬ 
ed,  dictated  rather  by  accident,  or  each  man’s  particular 
feeling,  than  by  deliberation  among  themselves,  or  the  orders 
of  any. 
LI.  When  the  Carthaginians,  flocking  round  Hannibal,  con¬ 
gratulated  him  on  the  victory,  and  recommended,  that,  after 
going  through  the  fatiguing  business  of  so  great  a  battle,  he 
should  take  himself,  and  allow  the  wearied  soldiers,  repose 
during  the  remainder  of  that  day  and  the  ensuing  night;  Ma- 
harbal,  general  of  cavalry,  who  was  of  opinion  that  no  time 
should  be  lost,  said  to  him,  that  you  may  be  convinced  how 
much  has  been  accomplished  by  this  engagement,  on  the 
fifth  day  following  you  shall  feast,  victorious,  in  the  Capitol.  ^ 
Follow  me:  I  will  advance  with  the  horse,  that  the  enemy 
may  sec  me  arrived,  before  they  are  apprised  of  my  being  on 
the  way.”  To  Hannibal  these  hopes  appeared  too  sanguine, 
and  the  prospect  too  vast  for  his  mind  to  comprehend  at  first 
view.  He  therefore  replied,  that  ‘‘  he  applauded  Maharbal’s 
zeal;  but  the  affair  required  time  for  consideration.”  On 
which  Maharbal  observed,  I  perceive  that  the  gods  do  not 
bestow  on  the  same  person  all  kinds  of  talents*  Y ou,  Hanni¬ 
bal,  know  how  to  acquire  victory,  but  you  know  not  how  to 
use  it/’  There  is  good  reason  to  believe  that  the  delay  of  thatj^^ 
day  proved  the  preservation  of  the  city,  and  of  the  empire. 
On  the  day  following,  as  soon  as  light  appeared,  his  troops 
applied  themselves  to  the  collecting  of  the  spoils,  and  in  view¬ 
ing  the  carnage  made,  which  was  such  as  shocked  even  ene¬ 
mies;  so  many  thousand  Romans,  horsemen  and  footmen, 
VOL.  III. — K 

74 

HISTORY  OF  ROME^ 

[Y.R:  5S6 

lay  promiscuously  on  the  field,  as  chance  had  thrown  them 
together,  either  in  the  battle,  or  flight.  Some,  whom  their 
wounds,  being  pinched  by  the  morning  cold,  had  roused  from 
their  posture,  were  put  to  death,  by  the  enemy,  as  they  were 
rising  up,  covered  with  blood,  from  the  midst  of  the  heaps 
of  carcases*  Some  they  found  lying  alive,  with  their  thighs 
and  hams  cut,  who,  stripping  their  necks  and  throats,  desired 
them  to  spill  what  remained  of  their  blood.  Some  were 
found,  with  their  heads  buried  in  the  earth,  in  holes  which 
it  appeared  they  had  made  for  themselves,  and  covering  their 
faces  with  earth  thrown  over  them,  had  thus  been  suffocated. 
The  attention  of  all  was  particularly  attracted  by  a  living 
Numidian  with  his  nose  and  ears  strangely  mangled, 
stretched  under  a  dead  Roman;  and  w'ho,  when  his  hands  had 
been  rendered  unable  to  hold  a  weapon,  being  exasperated 
to  madness,  had  expired  in  the  act  of  tearing  his  antagonist 
with  his  teeth, 
LI  I.  After  a  great  part  of  the  day  had  been  spent  in  ga¬ 
thering  the  spoils,  Hannibal  led  his  troops  to  attack  the 
smaller  camp;  and  first,  by  drawing  a  trench  across,  ex¬ 
cluded  the  garrison  from  the  river:  but  the  men,  being  spent 
with  labour,  watching,  and  wounds,  capitulated  sooner  than  he 
had  expected.  It  was  agreed,  that,  besides  surrendering  their 
arms  and  horses,  there  should  be  paid  for  each  Roman  citi¬ 
zen  three  hundred  denarii,^  for  an  ally  two  hundred,!  for  a 
slave  an  hundred;!  and  that,  on  laying  down  this  ransom, 
they  should  depart  with  single  garments.  On  this,  they  re¬ 
ceived  the  enemy  into  the  camp,  and  were  all  put  into  cus¬ 
tody,  but  separately;  that  is,  the  citizens  and  allies,  each  by 
themselves.  During  the  time  spent  here,  such  part  of  the 
troops,  in  the  greater  camp,  as  had  sufficient  strength  and 
courage,  amounting  to  four  thousand  footmen,  and  two  hun¬ 
dred  horse,  had  made  their  escape  to  Canusium;  some  inbo- 

*  9L  7s.  Id, 

^6U5s,2d. 

#  SL  29,  7d 

BOOK  XXIL 

75 

B.C.  216.] 
dies,  others  straggling  dilFerent  ways  through  the  country,  a 
method  equally  safe.  The  camp  was  surrendered  to  the  ene¬ 
my  by  the  wounded,  and  those  who  had  staid  through  want 
of  courage,  and  on  the  same  terms  as  for  the  others.  Abun¬ 
dance  of  spoil  was  found;  and  the  whole,  (except  the  men 
and  horses,  and  whatever  silver  there  was,  most  of  which 
was  on  the  trappings  of  the  latter,  for  there  was  then  very 
little  used  at  the  table,  particularly  in  the  field,)  was  given 
up  to  be  plundered.  Hannibal  then  ordered  the  bodies  of 
his  men  to  be  collected  and  buried:  they  are  said  to  have 
amounted  to  eight  thousand  of  the  bravest  of  his  troops. 
Some  writers  say,  that  he  also  searched  for,  and  interred  the 
Roman  consul.  Those  who  escaped  to  Canusium,  and  who 
received  from  the  inhabitants  no  farther  relief  than  admit¬ 
tance  within  their  walls  and  houses,  were  supplied  with  com, 
clothes,  and  subsistence,  by  a  woman  of  Apulia,  named  Bu- 
sa,  eminent  for  her  birth  and  riches;  in  requital  of  which 
munificence,  high  honours  were  afterwards  paid  to  her,  by 
the  senate,  at  the  conclusion  of  the  war. 
LIII.  Now,  although  there  were  four  military  tribunes 
present  at  Canusium;  of  jhe  first  legion,  Fabius  Maximus, 
whose  father  had  been  dictator  the  year  before;  of  the  se¬ 
cond,  Lucius  Publicius  Bibulus,  and  Publius  Cornelius  Sci- 
pio;  and  of  the  third,  Appius  Claudius  Pulcher,  who  had 
been  aedile  the  last  year;  yet  the  command  in  chief  was,  with 
\iniversal  consent,  conferred  on  Publius  Scipio;  then  very 
young,  in  conjunction  with  Appius  Claudius.  While  these, 
with  a  few  others,  were  consulting  on  the  measures  requisite 
in  this  emergency,  they  were  told  by  Publius  Furius  Philus, 
son  to  a  man  of  consular  dignity,  that  it  was  vain  for  them 
to  cherish  hopes  in  a  case  past  retrieving;  for  the  common¬ 
wealth  was  despaired  of,  and  lamented  as  lost.  That  several 
young  men  of  the  nobility,  at  whose  head  was  Lucius  Cseci- 
lius  Metellus,  were  meditating  a  scheme  of  putting  to  sea, 
with  intent  to  abandon  Italy,  and  go  over  to  the  king  of  some 

76 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  536. 

other  country.”  This  distressing  incident,  besides  having  in 
itself  the  most  fatal  tendency,  coming  unexpectedly,  and 
immediately  after  so  many  disasters,  surprised  and  astonish¬ 
ed  them  to  such  a  degree,  that  they  lost  for  a  time  all  thought 
and  motion;  those  who  were  present  then,  advising  that  a 
council  should  be  called  on  the  subject;  Scipio,  a  youth 
destined  by  fate  to  conduct  the  war  to  a  conclusion,  said, 
that  this  was  not  a  subject  for  council;  the  business  re¬ 
quired  not  deliberation,  but  fortitude  and  action.  He  bade 
those  come  with  him,  that  moment,  in  arms,  who  wished  the 
preservation  of  the  commonwealth;  for  no  place,”  said  he, 
“  can  you  more  truly  call  an  enemy’s  camp,  than  that  where¬ 
in  such  designs  are  agitated.”  Immediately  he  proceeded, 
attended  by  a  few,  to  the  lodging  of  Metellus;  and  finding 
there  the  youths,  who  had  been  mentioned,  assembled  in 
consultation,  he  held  his  drawn  sword  over  their  heads  as 
they  sat,  and  said,  with  sincerity  of  heart  I  swear,  that  I 
will  not  desert  the  commonwealth  of  the  Roman  people; 
neither  will  I  suffer  any  other  Roman  citizen  to  desert  it- 
If,  knowingly,  I  break  this  oath,  then  do  thou,  Jupiter,  su¬ 
premely  good  and  great,  overwh^m,  in  the  severest  ruin, 
myself,  my  house,  my  family,  and  my  fortunCi^  Lucius  Cse- 
cilius,  and  the  rest  of  you,  here  present,  I  insist  upon  your 
taking  the  same  oath:  he  that  will  not  swear,  be  it  known, 
that  against  him  this  sword  is  drawn.”  Terrified  no  less  than 
if  they  had  seen  the  victorious  Hannibal,  they  all  took  the  oath, 
and  surrendered  themselves  to  Scipio,  to  be  kept  in  custody. 
LIV.  While  these  things  passed  at  Canusium,  about  four 
thousand  horse  and  foot,  who,  in  the  flight,  had  been  dis¬ 
persed  through  the  countr}^,  came  to  the  consul  at  Venusia. 
These  were  all  distributed  by  the  Venus ians  through  their 
several  families,  where  they  were  received  and  treated  with 
kindness.  They  also  gave  to  each  horseman  a  gown  and  tunic, 
and  twenty-five  denarii'^;  and  to  each  footman  ten  denarii^, 

"  16«.  1^/. 

t  Ss,  5  Ad. 

BOOK  XXII. 

77 

B,C.  216.] 
and  such  arms  as  were  wanted;  and  every  other  hos¬ 
pitable  attention  was  shown  them,  both  by  the  public  and  by 
private  persons;  all  exerting  themselves,  that  the  Venusian 
state  might  not  be  out-done,  in  kindness,  by  a  woman  of  Ca- 
nusium.  However,  the  great  number  of  her  guests,  which 
amounted  now  to  ten  thousand,  made  the  burthen  heavier  on 
Busa.  Appius  and  Scipio,  as  soon  as  they  learned  that  one 
of  the  consuls  was  alive,  instantly  despatched  to  him  an  ac¬ 
count  of  the  number  of  horse  and  foot  which  were  with 
them;  at  the  same  time  desiring  his  orders,  whether  the 
troops  should  be  brought  to  him  in  Venusia,  or  remain  at 
Canusium.  Varro  led  over  his  forces  to  Canusium.  And 
now,  there  was  some  appearance  of  a  consular  army,  and 
they  seemed  capable  of  defending  themselves,  though  not 
with  their  arms  alone,  yet  certainly  with  the  help  of  walls. 
At  Rome  accounts  were  received,  that  not  even  these  relics  of 
the  citizens  and  allies  had  survived,  but  that  both  armies, 
with  the  consuls,  were  utterly  cut  off.  Never,  while  the  city 
itself  was  in  safety,  did  such  a  degree  of  dismay  and  confu¬ 
sion  prevail  within  the  walls  of  Rome.  I  therefore  shrink 
from  the  task;  and  will  not  undertake  to  describe  a  scene, 
of  which  any  representation  that  1  could  give,  would  fall 
short  of  the  reality.  The  report  was;  not  of  such  another 
wound  being  received,  as  when  .a  consul  and  an  army  were 
lost,  the  year  before,  at  the  Trasimenus,  but  of  a  multiplicity 
of  disasters;  of  both  armies,  together  with  both  consuls, 
being  lost;  that  the  Romans  had  now  neither  camp,  nor  ge¬ 
neral,  nor  soldier  existing;  that  Hannibal  was  in  possession 
of  Apulia,  Samnium,  and  of  almost  all  Italy.  Certainly  we 
know  no  other  nation  whose  spirit  would  not  have  been 
wholly  crushed  under  such  an  immense  load  of  misfortunes. 
Can  I  compare  with  it  the  disaster,  suffered  by  the  Cartha¬ 
ginians,  in  the  sea-fight  at  the  iEgatian  islands,  by  which 
they  were  so  dispirited  that  they  gave  up  Sicilv  and  Sardi¬ 
nia,  and  were  content  thenceforth  to  pay  tribute  and  taxes? 

rs 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

[Y.R.  536. 

Or,  the  loss  of  the  battle  in  Africa,  under  which  this  same 
Hannibal  afterwards  sunk?  In  no  particular  are  they  to  be 
compared,  except  in  this,  that  the  latter,  under  tljeir  cala¬ 
mities,  displayed  nothing  like  an  equal  degree  of  magna¬ 
nimity.  ^ 
LV.  The  praetors,  Publius  Furius  Philus,  and  Marcus 
Pomponius,  convened  the  senate  in  the  Curia  Hostilia,  to 
consult  on  the  means  of  providing  for  the  security  of  the 
dty.  They  took  it  for  granted  that,  the  armies  being  de¬ 
stroyed,  the  enemy  would  come  directly  to  attack  Rome, 
the  only  object  which  remained  to  be  accomplished  in  order 
to'  finish  the  war.  As,  in  a  case  of  such  extreme  danger,  the 
extent  of  which  was  not  thoroughly  known,  they  found  it 
difficult  to  resolve  on  any  plan,  and  were,  at  the  same  time, 
stunned  with  the  cries  and  lamentations  of  the  women;  for 
no  positive  information  being  yet  received,  the  living  and 
dead  were,  all  together,  lamented  as  lost.  In  almost  every 
house.  Quintus  Fabius  Maximus  gave  his  opinion,  that 
“  swift  horsemen  should  be  sent  along  the  Appian  and  La- 
tine  roads,  who,  inquiring  from  any  whom  they  should  meet, 
straggling  in  their  flight  from  the  held,  might  perhaps  bring 
back  information  as  to  the  real  situation  of  the  consuls  and 
the  armies;  and,  if  the  immortal  gods,  in  compassion  to  the 
empire,  had  left  any  remnant  of  the  Roman  name;  where 
these  forces  were;  to  what  quarter  Hannibal  directed  his 
route,  after  the  battle;  what  were  his  intentions;  what  he 
was  doing  and  preparing  to  do.  These  particulars  ought  to 
be  inquired  into,  and  ascertained,  by  active  young  men;  and 
the  senators  themselves,  as  there  was  not  a  sufficient  num¬ 
ber  of  magistrates,  ought  to  undertake  the  part  of  quieting 
the  tumult  and  disorder  of  the  city;  to  remove  the  women 
from  the  public  places,  and  oblige  them  to  confine  them¬ 
selves  within  their  own  doors;  to  restrain  the  lamentations 
of  the  several  families;  to  cause  silence  in  the  citjr;  to  take 
rare  that  expresses  arriving  with  any  intelligence,  be  con- 

BOOK  XXII. 

79 

B.C.  216.] 
ducted  to  the  praetors;  and  to  make  every  person  wait.^  m 
his  own  house,  for  information  respecting  his  own  concerns, 
lliat  they  should  moreover  place  guards  at  the  gates,  to 
hinder  any  from  going  out,  and  force  men  to  place  their 
only  hope  of  preservation  in  the  strength  of  their  walls  and 
works.  That  when  the  tumult  should  be  appeased,  then  the 
senators  might  properly  be  called  back  into  the  house  to  de¬ 
liberate  on  measures  for  the  defence  of  the  city.’’ 
LVI.  This  opinion  being  unanimously  appproved,  and 
the  crowd  being  removed  out  of  the  Forum  by  the  magis¬ 
trates,  the  senators  dispersed  themselves  on  all  sides  to  quiet 
the  commotions;  and  then,  at  length,  a  ^letter  was  brought 
from  the  consul  Terentius,  informing  them,  that  ‘‘  the  con¬ 
sul  Lucius  iEmilius,  and  the  army,  were  cut  off;  that  he 
himself  was  at  Canusium,  collecting,  as  from  a  shipwreck, 
the  relics  of  such  a  dreadful  misfortune;  that  there  were, 
with  him,  about  ten  thousand  men,  belonging  to  many  dif¬ 
ferent  corps,  and  not  yet  formed  into  regular  bodies.  That 
the  Carthaginian,  showing  neither  the  spirit  of  a  conqueror, 
nor  the  conduct  of  a  great  general,  lay  still  at  Cannae,  bar¬ 
gaining  about  the  prisoners  and  other  booty.”  Then  the 
losses  of  private  families  also  were  made  known  through 
their  several  houses;  and  so  entirely  was  the  whole  c\t\ 
filled  with  grief,  that  the  anniversary  festival  of  Ceres  was 
omitted,  because  it  is  not  allowable  for  persons  in  mourning 
to  celebrate  it,  and  there  was  not,  at  the  time,  one  matron 
who  was  not  so  habited.  Lest,  therefore,  for  the  same  rea¬ 
son,  other  festivals,  public  or  private,  might  be  left  uncele¬ 
brated,  the  wearing  of  that  dress  was,  by  a  decree  of  senate, 
limited  to  thirty  days.  Now,  when  the  tumult  in  the  citv 
was  composed,  and  the  senators  re-assembled  in  their  house, 
another  letter  w^as  brought  from  Sicily,  from  the  pro-praetor  Ti¬ 
tus  Otacilius,  stating,  that  a  Carthaginian  fleet  was  ravaging 
the  dominions  of  Hiero;  and  that,  when  he  was  preparing 
to  carry  assistance  to  him,  in  compliance  with  his  earnest  re- 

80 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  536. 

quest,  he  had  received  intelligence  that  another  fleet  lay  at 
the  ^Egatian  islands,  prepared  for  battle,  and  intending,  as 
soon  as  they  learned  that  he  had  gone  away  to  guard  the 
coast  of  Sjn-aciise,  to  fall  immediately  on  Lilybaeum,  and 
other  parts  of  the  Roman  province.  If,  therefore,  they  wish¬ 
ed  to  protect  Sicily,  and  the  king  their  ally,  a  re-inforcement 
of  ships  must  be  sent.’’ 
EVIL  When  the  letters  of  the  consul  and  pro-praetor 
were  read,  it  was  resolved  that  Marcus  Claudius,  who  com¬ 
manded  the  fleet  lying  at  Ostia,  should  be  sent  to  take  the 
command  of  the  forces  at  Canusium;  and  that  a  letter 
should  be  written  to  the  consul,  directing,  that  as  soon  as 
he  had  delivered  the  army  to  the  prjEtor,  he  should,  with  all 
the  e>:]) edition  consisting  with  the  public  good,  come  to 
Rome.  In  addition  to  all  tlieir  misfortunes,  people  ^erc 
also  tenified  by  several  prodigies;  and,  particularly,  by  two 
vestals,  Opimia  and  Floronia,  being,  in  that  year,  convicted 
of  incontinence;  one  of  them  was,  according  to  custom,  bu¬ 
ried  alive,  near  the  Colline  gate;  the  other  voluntarily  put  an 
end  to  her  own  life.  Lucius  Cantilius,  secretary  to  one  of 
those,  whom  we  now  call  the  lesser  pontiffs,  who  had  de¬ 
bauched  Floronia,  was,  by  order  of  the  chief  pontiff,  scourged 
in  the  Forum,  with  such  severity,  that  he  expired  under  the 
punishment.  This  enormity,  happening  in  the  midst  of  so 
many  calamities,  as  usual  in  such  cases,  converted  into  a  pro¬ 
digy,  and  the  decemvirs  were  ordered  to  consult  the  books. 
Quintus  Fabius  Pictor  was  sent  also  to  Delphi,  to  consult 
the  oracle,  and  discover  by  what  supplications,  and  worship, 
they  might  be  able  to  appease  the  gods;  and  by  what  means 
a  stop  might  be  put  to  such  a  heavy  train  of  misfortunes. 
Meanwhile,  according  to  the  directions  of  the  books  of  the 
fates,  several  extraordinary  sacrifices  were  performed;  among 
which  a  male  and  female  Gaul,  and  a  male  and  female  Greek. 
were  buried  alive  in  the  cattle  market,  in  a  vault  built  round 
with  stone;  a  place  which  had  already,  by  a  practice  abhor- 

BOOK  XXII, 

B.C.  216.] 

rent  from  the  temper  of  the  religion  of  Rome,  been  polluted 
with  human  victims.  When  it  was  thought  that  sufficient 
atonement  had  been  made  to  the  wrath  of  the  gods,  Marcus 
Claudius  Marcellus  despatched  from  Ostia  to  Rome,  for  the 
security  of  the  city,  one  thousand  five  hundred  men,  whom 
he  had  there,  and  who  had  been  raised  for  the  service  of  the 
fleet.  He  also  sent  on  before  him  the  marine  legion,  which 
was  the  third,  under  command  of  the  military  tribunes,  to 
Teanum,  in  the  territoiy  of  Sidicinum;  and  then,  having  de¬ 
livered  the  command  of  the  fleet  to  his  colleague,  PubUus 
Furius  Philus,  he  repaired  himself,  in  a  few  days,  by  forc^ 
marches  to  Canusium.  Pursuant  to  directions  of  the  senate, 
Marcus  Junius  was  nominated  dictator,  and  Tiberius  Sem*  > 
pronius  master  of  the  horse»/They  proclaimed  a  levy,  and 
enlisted  all  the  youth  of  seventeen  years  and  upwards,  and 
even  some  under  that  age,  of  whom  they  completed  four  le¬ 
gions,  and  a  thousand  horsed  Envoys  were  also  sent  to  the 
allies,  and  Latine  confederates,  with  a  requisition  of  their 
contingents  of  troops,  as  specified  by  treaty.  Orders  were 
issued  for  preparing  armour,  weapons,  and  other  necessa¬ 
ries;  and  they  even  took  down  from  the  temples  and  porti¬ 
coes  the  old  spoils  taken  from  enemies.  The  urgent  neces¬ 
sity,  and  the  scarcity  of  men  of  free  condition,  occasioned 
their  adopting  a  new  mode  of  raising  soldiers,  and  in 
an  extraordinary  manner.  They  purchased,  with  the  public 
money,  eight  thousand  stout  young  slaves;  asking  each, 
whether  he  was  willing  to  serve  in  the  wars;  and  then  gave 
them  arms.  They  preferred  employing  this  kind  of  soldiers, 
though  they  had  it  in  their  power  to  have  ransomed  the 
prisoners  at  a  less  expense. 
LVIIL  Hannibal,  intoxicated  with  his  great  success  at  ♦ 
Cannae,  conducted  himself  as  if,  instead  of  having  a  war  to 
prosecute,  he  had  already  brought  it  to  a  conclusion.  Order¬ 
ing  the  prisoners  to  be  brought  forth,  he  separated  the  allies 
from  the  rest;  and,  with  expressions  of  kindness,  dismissed 
voi.  III.— L 

82 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  536. 
them  without  ransom,  as  he  had  done  formerly  at  the  Tre- 
bia,  and  the  lake  Trasiraenus.  Even  the  Romans  he  called 
before  him;  and,  contrary"  to  his  former  practice,  addressed 
them  in  very  mild  terms,  telling  them,  that  ‘‘  he  meant  not 
to  carry  the  war  to  the  extinction  of  the  Romans,  but  fought 
for  glory  and  empire.  That,  as  his  predecessors  had  yielded 
to  the  Roman  braven%  so  he,  on  his  part,  was  now  endea¬ 
vouring  to  make  others  yield,  in  turn,  to  his  valour  and 
good  fortune.  Wherefore  he  would  give  them  permission  to 
ransom  themselves;  and  the  terms  should  be,  five  hundred 
denarii*  for  each  horseman,  three  hundredf  for  a  footman, 
and  a  hundred  for  a  slave:]:.’’  Though  the  ransom  of  the 
horseman  was  hereby  raised  beyond  the  rate  stipulated  on 
their  surrendering,  yet  they  joyfully  embraced  any  terms.  It 
was  determined,  that  they  should  choose,  by  their  own  suf¬ 
frages,  ten  of  their  number,  who  should  go  to  Rome  to  the 
senate;  and  of  their  faith,  no  other  security  was  required 
than  their  oath,  that  they  would  return.  With  these  was  sent 
Carthalo,  a  noble  Carthaginian,  who,  if  he  perceived  an  in¬ 
clination  towards  peace,  was  to  propose  the  terms.  After 
they  had  set  out  from  the  camp,  one  of  them,  a  man  devoid 
of  Roman  principles,  pretending  to  have  forgotten  some¬ 
thing,  with  a  view  of  evading  his  oath,  returned  into  the 
camp,  and  afterwards,  before  night,  overtook  his  companions. 
When  it  was  reported  at  Rome,  that  they  were  coming,  a 
lictor  was  sent  to  meet  Carthalo,  with  orders,  in  the  name  of 
the  dictator,  that  he  should  quit  the  Roman  territories  before 
night. 
LIX.  The  deputies  of  the  prisoners,  being  by  the  dictator 
admitted  to  an  audience  of  the  senate,  the  principal  of  them, 
Marcus  Junius,  spoke  to  this  eftect;  ‘"Conscript  Fathers, 
none  of  us  is  ignorant,  that  no  other  state  ever  considers  pri¬ 
soners  in  a  lower  light  than  ours  does.  However,  unless  we 

T  4&.  7d, 

*  16/.  2^.  \\d. 

f  9/.  13j.  9d, 

BOOK  XXIL 

83 

B.C.  216.] 
are  too  partial  to  our  own  cause,  none,  whomever  fell  into  the 
power  of  an  enemy,  less  deserved  to  be  neglected  than  we. 
do.  For  we  did  not,  through  cowardice,  surrender  our  arms 
in  the  field;  but,  after  having  protracted  the  battle  until 
near  night,  standing  on  the  heaped  bodies  of  the  slain,  we 
retreated  within  our  works.  During  the  remainder  of  that 
day,  and  the  ensuing  night,  spent  as  we  were  with  toll  and 
wounds,  we  yet  defended  our  camp.  Next  day,  being  entirely 
surrounded  by  the  army  of  the  conquerors,  and  debarred 
from  access  p  water,  having  no  hope  of  forcing  a  way 
through  their  numerous  bands,  and  not  conceiving  it  crimi¬ 
nal,  that,  after  the  slaughter  of  fifty  thousand  of  our  army, 
any  Roman  soldier  should  survive  the  battle  of  Cannse,  we,  at 
length,  .agreed  to  terms  of  ransom,  on  which  our  liberty 
should  be  purchased;  and  we  delivered  to  the  enemy  our 
weapons,  when  they  could  no  longer  serve  to  defend  us.  We 
had  heard  that  our  ancestors  ransomed  themselves  with  gold 
from  the  Gauls;  and  that  our  fathers,  notwithstanding  their 
utter  dislike  to  the  acceptance  of  the  terms  of  peace,  yet 
sent  ambassadors  to  Tarentum,  for  the  purpose  of  ransom¬ 
ing  prisoners.  Yet,  both  the  fight  at  the  Allia  with  the  Gauls, 
and  that  at  Heraclea  with  Pyrrhus,  may  be  called  disgrace¬ 
ful,  on  account  of  the  panic  and  flight.  Whereas  the  plains 
of  C^nae  are  overspread  with  heaps  of  slaughtered  Romans; 
and,  that  we  survive,  is  owing  to  no  other  cause,  than  from 
the  enemy  having,  in  killing,  exhausted  their  strength. 
There  are,  besides,  some  of  our  number  who  are  not  even 
chargeable  with  flying  the  field:  having  been  left  to  guard 
the  camp,  when  that  was  surrendered,  the^^  fell  into  the 
hands  of  the  enemy.  I  envy  not  the  good  fortune,  or  the 
situation,  of  any  fellow  citizen  or  fellow  soldier,  nor  do  I 
wish,  by  depressing  another,  to  exalt  myself;  but  surely,  un¬ 
less  there  is  some  prize  due  to  swiftness  of  foot,  those  men 
who  fled,  leaving  most  of  their  arms  behind,  and  never  halted 
until  they  came  to  Venusia,  or  Canusium,  cannot  justly 

84 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

claim  a  pr^ercacc  before  us,  or  boast  of  themselves  as  more 
capable  of  affording  defence  to  the  commonwt  aith.  Howev^, 
ye  will  find  them  on  trial  good  and  valiant  soldiers,  and  wBl 
find  us  also  the  more  heartily  zealous  in  our  country’s  cause, 
from  the  consideration  of  having  been,  in  kindness,  redeem¬ 
ed  and  reinstated  by  you.  Ye  are  enlistin|^  men  of  every  age 
and  condition.  I  hear  that  eight  thousand  slaves  are  to  be 
armed.  Our  number  is  not  inferior  to  that,  and  we  may  be 
ransomed  at  less  expense  than  they  are  purchased.  A  com¬ 
parison  between  ourselves  and  them  would  be,  an  insult  on 
the  name  of  Roman.  I  think,  Conscript  Fathers,  that,  in 
such  a  case,  this  circumstance  also  deserves  consideration, 
(if  ye  choose  to  act  toward  us  with  a  degree  of  rigour, 
which  we  have,  by  no  means,  merited,)  the  nature  of  the 
enemy,  in  whose  hands  ye  would  leave  us,  whether  he  is 
such  as  Pyrrhus,  who  treated  us,  when  his  prisoners,  as  if 
we  were  his  guests;  or  a  barbarian,  and  a  Carthaginian;  of 
whom  it  can  scarcely  be  determined,  whether  bis  avarice  or 
cruelty  be  greater.  If  ye  were  to  behold  the  chains,  the  squa¬ 
lid  dress,  and  the  misetable  looks  of  your  countrymen,  the 
sight,  I  am  convinced,  would  affect  you  not  less  deefdy, 
than  if  ye  saw  your  legions  prostrate  on  the  plains  of  Cannae. 
Ye  can  here  observe  the  solitude,  and  the  tears  of  our  rela* 
tions,  who  stand  in  the  porch  of  your  senate  house,  wiring 
fior  your  determination:  when  they  suffer  such  suspence  and 
anxiety  for  us,  and  for  those  who  are  absent,  what  do  ye 
suppose  must  be  the  state  of  those  men’s  minds  whose  liberty 
and  life  are  at  stake?  Beliet^e  me,  that,  even  should  Hanm- 
contiary  to  his  nature,  behave  with  lenity  towards  us,  yet 
Hfe  would  be  no  gratificatJon,  after  having  been  adjudged  by 
you,  unworthy  of  being  ransomed.  Formerly,  prisoners,  dis¬ 
missed  by  P3nrrhus  without  nmsom,  returned  home  to  Rome. 
But  they  letiimed  with  ambassadors,  the  principal  men  in 
the  state,  who  had  been  sent  for  the  purpose  of  ransoming 
them.  Should  1  return  to  my  country,  whom  my  fellow  citi- 

BOOK  XXIL 

85 

RC, 
z/ms  hav^  not  valued,  as  worth  three  hundred  denarii;  C(hi* 
script  Fathers,  every  man  has  his  own  way  of  thinking;  I 
know  that  my  person  and  life  are  in  hazard:  but  I  am  more 
deeply  affected  by  the  danger  to  our  reputation,  lest  we 
should  appear  to  be  rejected  and  condemned  by  you.  For 
die  world  will  never  believe  that  ye  were  actuated  by  the 
motive  of  saving  money.’* 
LX.  When  he  cc^ed  speaking,  the  multitude,  who  stood 
in  the  Comiuum,  instantly  raised  a  lamentable  cry, 
stretching  their  hands  towards  the  senate  house,  besought 
the  members  to  restore  to  them  their  children,  their  brethren, 
and  relations.  Their  fears,  and  the  urgency  of  the  case,  had 
brought  a  number  of  women  also  among  the  crowd  of  men 
in  the  Forum.  The  senate,  as  soon  as  the  house  was  cleared, 
took  the  matter  into  consideration.  Opinions  were  different; 
some  recommended  that  the  prisoners  should  be  ransomed 
at  the  expense  of  the  public;  others,  that  the  public  money 
should  not  be  expended,  but  that  they  should  not  be  hinder¬ 
ed  from  ransoming  themselves,  with  their  own  private  pro¬ 
perty;  and  that,  to  such  as  wanted  money  at  present,  it 
should  be  lent  out  of  the  treasury,  on  their  indemnifying  the 
nation  by  sureties  and  mortgages.  Titus  Manlius  Torqua- 
tus,  a  man  who  carried  primitive  strictness,  as  many  thought, 
to  too  great  a  degree  of  rigour,  on  being  asked  his  opinion, 
^oke  to  this  effect:  Had  the  demands  of  the  deputies,  in 
favour  of  those  who  are  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  gone  no 
farther  than  to  their  being  ransomed,  I  should,  without  of¬ 
fering  censure  on  any  of  them,  have  delivered  my  judgment 
in  few  words;  for  what  else  would  be  requisite  than  to  admo¬ 
nish  you,  to  maintain  the  practice  transmitted  from  your 
forefathers,  and  to  adhere  to  a  precedent  essential  to  militaiy 
discipline?  But  now,  since  they  have,  in  a  maimer,  made  a 
merit  of  having  surrendered  themselves  to  the  foe,  and 
claimed  a  preference,  not  only  over  those  who  were  made 
prisoners  in  the  field,  but  even  over  those  who  made  their 

86 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  SB6. 

way  to  Venusia  and  Canusium,  and  over  the  consul  Gains 
Tcrentius  himself,  I  will  not  let  you  remain  ignorant,  Con¬ 
script  Fathers,  of  any  of  the  circumstances  which  occurred 
on  the  occasion.  And  I  wish  that  the  representations,  which 
I  am  going  to  lay  before  you,  were  made  in  the  presence  of 
the  troops  themselves  at  Canusium,  the  most  competent 
witnesses  of  every  man’s  cowardice  and  bravery;  or,  at 
least,  that  one  particular  person  were  present  here,  Publius 
Sempronius,  the  counsel  and  example  of  which  officer,  had 
those  soldiers  thought  proper  to  follow,  they  would  to-day 
be  Romans  in.  their  own  camp,  not  prisoners  in  that  of  the 
enemy.  But  as  the  Carthaginians  were  fatigued  with  fight¬ 
ing,  or  totally  occupied  in  rejoicing  for  their  success,  in 
which  state  indeed  most  of  them  had  even  retired  into  their 
camp,— -they  had  it  in  their  power  during  the  whole  night  to 
extricate  themselves  by  sallying  forth;  and  though  seven 
diousand  soldiers  had  been  able  to  force  their  way,  even 
through  close  battalions,  yet  they,  neither  of  themselv^,  of¬ 
fered  to  attempt  the  same,  nor  were  willing  to  follow  the 
lead  of  another.  Publius  Sempronius  Tuditanus  never  ceased 
advising  and  exhorting  them,  that  while  the  numbers  of  the 
enemy  round  the  camp  were  few,  while  quiet  and  silence 
prevailed,  while  the  night  covered  their  design,  they  would 
follow  where  he  should  lead;  assuring  them  that,  before  day 
light,  they  might  arrive  in  places  of  safety  in  the  cities  of 
thek  allies*  If  he  had  said  in  like  manner,  as  in  the  time  of 
our  grand-fathers,  Publius  Decius,  military  tribune  in  Sam- 
nium,  spoke,  or,  as  in  our  own  time,  and  in  the  former  Pu¬ 
nic  war,  Calphumius  Flamma  said  to  the  three  hundred  vo¬ 
lunteers,  when  he  was  leading  them  to  sieze  on  an  eminence 
situated  in  the  midst  of  the  enemy,  Soldiers,  let  us  die, 
AND  BY  OUR  DEATHS  EXTRICATE  THE  SURROUNDED  LE¬ 
GIONS  FROM  THE  AMBUSCADE. — If  Publius  Sempronius  had 
spoken  thus,  I  say,  he  could  not  surely  deem  you  either  Ro¬ 
mans  or  men,  if  no  one  appeared  ready  to  accompai^  him 

BOOK  XXIL 

B.C.  216.] 

sr 

in  so  brave  an  enterprise.  But  still  he  points  ouf  the  way 
which  leads  not  to  glory  only  but  to  safety.  He  shows  how 
ye  may  return  to  your  country,  your  parents,  wives,  and 
children.  Do  ye  want  spirit  for  your  own  preservation? 
What  would  ye  do  if  the  cause  of  your  country  required 
your  death?  Fifty  thousand  of  your  countrymen  and  allies 
lie  around  you  slain  on  that  same  day.  If  so  many  examples 
of  bravery  do  not  rouse  you,  nothing  will  ever  rouse  you;  if 
such  a  carnage  has  not  inspired  contempt  of  life,  no  other 
will.  hile  in  freedotn  and  safety,  wish  for  your  country: 
do  this  as  long  as  it  is  your  country.  It  is  now  too  late  for 
you  to  wish  for  it,  when  ye  are  divested  of  its  privileges, 
disfranchised  of  the  rights  of  citizens,  and  become  slaves  of 
the  Carthaginians.  Will  ye  return,  on  terms  of  purchase,  to 
that  condition,  which  ye  relinquished  through  pusillanimity 
and  cowardice?  To  Publius  Sempronius,  your  countiyman, 
ordering  you  to  take  arms  and  follow  him,  ye  would  not 
listen;  ye  listened  soon  after  to  Hannibal,  ordering  you  to 
betray  your  camp  to  him,  and  surrender  your  arms.  Why  do 
I  charge  them  with  cowardice,  when  I  may  charge  them  with 
actions  highly  criminal?  for  they  not  only  refused  to  follow 
the  person  who  gave  them  the  best  advice,  but  attempted  to 
hinder  and  to  stop  him,  had  not  his  gallant  companions  with 
their  drawn  swords  cleared  the  way  of  those  dastards.  I  af- 
firm,  that  Publius  Sempronius  was  obliged  to  force  his  pas¬ 
sage  through  a  body  of  his  countiy^men,  before  he  broke 
through  that  of  the  enemy.  Has  our  country  any  reason  to 
wish  for  such  citizens  as  these;  to  whom,  if  the  rest  had 
been  like,  we  should  not  have  had  this  day  one  citizen  of 
those  who  fought  at  Cannae.  Out  of  seven  thousand  men,  six 
hundred  were  found,  who  had  spirit  to  force  their  way,  who 
returned  home  with  freedom  and  their  anus,  forty  thousand 
of  the  enemy  not  being  able  to  stop  them.  How  safely  then 
do  ye  suppose  might  a  band  of  near  two  legions  have  passed? 
In  that  case,  Conscript  Fatheis,  ye  would  have  had  this  day. 

8B  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  5S6. 
at  Canuslum,  twenty  thousand  soldiers,  brave  and  faithful. 
But  how  can  these  men  be  good  and  faithful  citizens,  (for  to 
bravery  they  do  not  themselves  lay  claim,)  after  having  at¬ 
tempted  to  stop  the  sally  of  those  that  wished  to  trust  all  to 
their  swords?  Or  who  can  suppose,  that  they  do  not  look 
with  envy  on  the  safety  and  glory,  which  the  others  have 
acquired  by  their  valour,  while  they  see  themselves  reduced 
by  their  fear  and  cowardice,  to  ignominious  slavery.  The 
entire  band  chose  to  remain  in  their  tents,  and  wait  the  ap¬ 
proach  of  day,  and  of  the  enemy,  at  the  same  time;  though 
during  the  silence  of  the  night  they  had  a  fair  opportunity  of 
effecting  their  escape.  But  though  they  wanted  confidence  to 
sally  out  of  the  camp,  they  had  courage  valiantly  to  defend 
it.  Being  besieged  for  several  days  and  nights,  they  protect¬ 
ed  their  rampart  by  arms:  at  length,  after  the  utmost  efforts 
and  sufferings,  when  every  support  of  life  failed,  when  their 
strength  was  wasted  through  hunger,  and  they  could  no 
longer  bear  up  under  their  arms,  they  were  overcome  by 
necessities  too  powerful  for  human  nature  to  sustain,  and  a 
part  with  Sempronius  gained  the  greater  camp.  Now,  at 
sun  rise,  the  enemy  approached  the  rampart,  and  before  the 
second  hour  these  men  who  had  refused  to  accompany  him, 
without  trying  the  issue  of  any  dispute,  surrendered  their 
arms  and  themselves.  Here,  then,  is  the  amount  of  their 
martial  performances  during  two  days;  when  they  ought  to 
have  stood  in  their  posts  in  the  battle,  and  fought,  they  then 
fled  to  their  camp;  which,  instead  of  defending,  they  sur¬ 
rendered;  showing  themselves  equally  useless  there,  and  in 
the  held.  Shall  I  then  ransom  such  as  you?  When  ye  ought 
to  sally  forth  from  your  camp,  ye  hesitate  and  stay  there; 
and  when  staying,  there  is  a  necessity  for  defending  it,  yc 
make  surrender  of  your  arms,  and  yourselves.  Conscript 
Fathers,  I  would  no  more  vote  for  ransoming  those  men, 
than  I  would  for  delivering  up  to  Hannibal  the  others,  who 
forced  their  way  oitt  of  the  camp,  through  the  midst  of  the 

BOOK  XXIL 

89 

B.C.  216,] 
enemy^  and  by  the  highest  exertions  of  valour  restored  them¬ 
selves  to  their  country.’^ 
LX  I.  After  this  discourse  of  Manlihs,  notwithstanding 
that  most  of  the  senators  had  relations  among  the  prisoners, 
yet,  besides  the  maxim  generally  observed  by  the  state,  which, 
from  the  earliest  times,  had  ever  showed  very  little  tender¬ 
ness  towards  such,  the  consideration  of  the  money  requisite 
for  the  mnsom  operated  with  them  as  a  powerful  argument ; 
indeed  they  were  unwilling  either  that  the  treasury  should  be 
exhausted,  from  which  a  great  sum  had  already  been  issued 
for  purchasing  and  arming  the  slaves  for  service^  or  that  Han¬ 
nibal  should  receive  so  considerable  a  supply,  and  of  iprhich 
•he  was  said  to  stand  in  the  greatest  need,  A  harsh  answer 
then  being  given,  that  the  prisoners  should  not  be  ransomed, 
and  this  new  cause  of  grief,  in  the  loss  of  so  many  citizens, 
being  added  to  the  former,  the  people  escorted  die  deputies 
to  the  gate  with  abundance  of  tears  and  lamentations.  One 
the  deputies  left  the  rest,  and  went  home,  as  if  he  had 
fulfilled  his  oath,  by  fallaciously  returning  into  the  camp. 
But,  as  soon  as  this  became  known,  and  was  reported  to  the 
senate,  they  unanimously  voted,  that  he  should  be  seized, 
and  conveyed  to  Hannibal,  under  a  guard  appointed  by  the 
government.  This  affair  of  the  prisoners  is  related  in  another 
manner :  that  ten  deputies  came  at  first  j  and  that  the  senate 
were  for  some  time  in  doubt  whether  they  should  be  admitted 
into  the  city  or  not ;  but  that  at  length  permission  was  grant¬ 
ed  them  to  enter  it :  but  still  they  were  refused  an  audience 
of  the  senate :  and  that  afterwards,  on  their  staying?  longer 
than  the  rest  expected,  three  others  were  sent,  Lucius  Scri- 
bonius,  Caius  Calpurnius,  and  Lucius  ManUus,  Then,  at 
last,  the  business  of  ransoming  the  prisoners  was  proposed 
to  the  senate  by  a  plebian  tribune,  a  relation  of  Scribonius, 
and  their  determination  was,  that  they  should  not  be  ran¬ 
somed.  On  this  the  three  deputies,  who  came  last,  returned 
to  Hannibal,  but  the  ten  former  remained  at  Rome  j  as  if,  by 
VOL.  III. — 

90 

HISTORY  OF  ROME- 

[Y.R.  536. 

having  returned  to  Hannibal,  after  setting  out  on  their*  jour¬ 
ney,  under  pretext  of  getting  a  complete  list  of  the  prisoners, 
they  had  fulfilled  their  oath.  The  question,  whether  they 
should  be  delivered  up  to  the  enemy,  was  warmly  debated  in 
the  senate,  and  the  party  who  voted  in-the  affirmative  were 
overcome  by  a  small  majority.  However,  they  were  by  the 
next  censors  so  severely^  branded  with  every  mark  of  igno¬ 
miny,  that  some  of  them  laid  violent  hands  on  themselves, 
and  the  rest,  during  all  the  remainder  of  their  lives,  shunned 
not  only  the  Forum,  but  almost  the  public  street,  and  the  light. 
While  such  difference,  in  the  representations  given  by  his- 
toriant,  may  be  wondered  at,  still  there  are  no  means  of  dis¬ 
tinguishing  the  truth.  The  greatness  of  the  present  misfor¬ 
tune,  beyond  any  hitl^rto  sustained,  is  demonstrated  by  this 
circumstance  :  that  the  allies,  who,  until  this  time,  had  stood 
firm  in  their  attachment,  now  began  to  waver ;  for  no  other 
reason,  certainly,  than  that  they  despaired  of  the  common¬ 
wealth.  The  following  state  ^actually  revolted  to  the  Cai- 
thaginians,  during  the  war :  the  Atellans,  the  Galatians,  the 
Hirpinians,  a  part  of  the  Apulians,  the  Samnites,  excepting 
the  Pentrians,  all  the  Brutti^ns,  the  Lucanians,  and,  besides 
these,  the  Surrentinians ;  almost  the  whole  coast  possessed 
by  the  Greeks,  the  Tarentines,  Metapontines,  Crotonians, 
Locrians,  and  all  the  Cisalpine  Gauls/xet  did  not  all  these 
losses  and  revolts  of  their  allies  shake  the  fnmness  of  the 
Romans  so  far  as  to  induce  them  ever  once  to  make  mention 
of  peace,  either  before  the  consul’s  return  to  Rome,  or  when 
his  arrival  renewed  the  memory  of  their  misfortune^^ut  at 
that  very  time,  such  magnanimity  %vas  shown  by  the  state, 
that,  on  the  consul’s  approaching  the  city,  after  such  a  heavy 
disaster,  of  which  he,  in  particular,  had  been  the  principle 
cause,  all  ranks  of  people  not  only  w^ent  out  in  crowds  to 
meet  him,  but  even  returned  him  thanks  for  not  having  des¬ 
paired  of  the  commonwealth  ;  whereas,  had  he  been  a  gene¬ 
ral  of  the  Carthaginians,  there  is  no  degree  of  punishment 
beyond  what  he  must  have  suffered 

THE 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

BOOK  XXIII. 
The  Campankins  revolt  to  Hannibak  Hanno  moves  in  the  senate  of  Car¬ 
thage  to  propose  terms  of  peace  to  tlie  Homans  ;  his  proposition  sirenu- 
ously  opposed,  and  over  ruled  by  ihe  Barcine  faction.  Marcellus  defeats 
Hannihal,  in  a  battle  at  Nola.  Hannibal’s  army  enervated  by  luxurious 
living  at  Capua.  CassUinum  besieged  by  the  Cartlmginians,  is  reduced  to 
such  extremity  by  famine,  that  the  people  eat  tlie  leathern  covers  of 
their  shields,  and  even  mice.  One  hundred  and  ninety-seven  new  mem¬ 
bers,  from  the  equestrian  order,  added  to  the  senate.  Lucius  Postumius* 
praetor,  with  his  army,  defeated  by  the  Gauls,  and  slain,  Cneius  Scipio, 
and  Publius,  overcome  Ha'^drubal  in  Spain,  and  conquer  that  country. 
Tlie  remaining  troops  of  the  army  vanquished  at  Cannae,  sent  to  Sicily, 
there  to  remain  during  the  continuance  of  the  war.  An  alliance  formed 
between  Philip,  king  of  Macedonia,  and  Hannibal.  Semprouius  Grac¬ 
chus,  consul,  defeats  the  Campanians.  Successes  of  Titus  Manlius  in  Sar¬ 
dinia  ;  he  takes  prisoners,  Hasdrubal,  tlie  general,  Mago,  and  Hanno. 
Claudius  Marcellus  gives  Hannibal’s  army  a  second  defeat  at  Nola ;  and, 
at  length,  gives  the  Romans  hopes  of  a  favourable  termination  of  the  war. 
I.  AFTER  the  battle  of  Cannae,  Hannibal,  as  soon  as  he 
had  taken  and  sacked  the  Roman  camps,  removed  y  r  536 
hastily  from  Apulia  into  Samnium,  being  invited 
into  the  territory  of  Arpi  by  Statius  Trebius,  who' promised 
to  deliver  the  city  of  Compsa  into  his  hands.  Trebius  was  a 
native  of  Compsa,  of  considerable  note  among  his  country¬ 
men,  but  thwarted  in  his  ambitious  views  by  a  faction  of  the 
Mopsian  family,  which,  through  the  favour  of  the  Romans, 

92 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  536. 

had  acquired  the  principal  direction  of  affairs.  When  an  ac¬ 
count  was  received  of  the  battle  of  Canns&j  and  Trebius 
openly  announced  the  approach  of  Hannibal,  the  Mopsian 
party  withdrew  from  the  city ;  on  which  it  was,  without  a 
contest,  surrendered  to  the  Carthaginian,  and  a  garrison  of 
his  troops  received  into  it.  Hannibal,  leaving  here  all  the 
bpoty,  together  with  his  baggage,  and  dividing  his  army  into 
two  parts,  ordered  Mago,  with  one  division,  to  receive  such 
cities  of  that  country  as  were  willing  to  revolt  from  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  and  if  any  should  refuse,  to  compel  them  by  force  ; 
while  he  himself,  at  the  head  of  the  other,  marched  through  4 
the  country  of  Campania,  towards  the  lower  sea,  intending 
to  lay  siege  to  Neapolis,  in  order  to  gain  possession  of  a  sea¬ 
port  town.  On  entering  the  frontiers  of  the  Neapolitans,  he 
placed  one  half  of  his  N  umidians  in  ambush,  in  places  suited 
to  the  purpose  ;  and,  in  general,  the  roads  run  through  deep 
vallies,  and  form  windings  commodious  for  concealment : 
the  rest  he  ordered  to  drive  belore  them,  in  open  view  of  the 
enemy,  the  prey  collected  in  the  country  ;  and  to  ride  up,  in 
a  menacing  manner,  to  the  gates.  Against  this  party,  which 
appeared  to  be  neither  regular  nor  numerous,  a  sally  was 
made  by  a  squadron  of  horse,  which,  by  the  others  retreating 
on  purpose,  was  drawn  into  the  ambuscade,  surrounded,  and 
cut  to  pieces.  Nor  would  one  of  them  have  escaped,  had  not 
the  sea  been  so  near,  and  some  vessels,  mostly  fishing  smacks, 
which  were  in  view  at  a  small  distance  from  shore,  afforded 
shelter  to  such  as  were  able  to  swim.  Several  young  men  of 
distinction,  however,  were  slain  and  taken  in  this  action, 
among  whom  fell  Hegeas,  the  general  of  the  cavalry,  too 
eagerly  pursuing  the  enemy  in  their  retreat.  The  Cartha¬ 
ginian  was  deterred  from  undertaking  the  siege  of  the  city, 
by  the  sight  of  the  fortifications,  which  showed  that  the  en¬ 
terprise  would  be  attended  with  considerable  difficulty. 
II.  From  nence  he  marched  to  Capua ;  where,  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  a  long  course  of  prosperity,  and  the  kind  indul- 

BOOK  XXIII. 

93 

B,C.  216.] 
gence  of  fortune^  the  manners  of  the  people  were  become 
extremely  dissolute  and  licentious ;  and  amidst  the  universal 
corruption,  the  commons  particularly  distinguished  them¬ 
selves,  by  the  extravagancy  of  their  conduct,  carrying  their 
notions  of  liberty  to  the  most  unbounded  excess.  A  person, 
named  Pacuvius  Calavitts,  of  noble  birth,  and,  at  the  same 
time,  a  great  favourite  of  the  plebeians,  but  indebted  for  his 
popularity  to  intrigues  of  no  very  honourable  kind,  had  ren¬ 
dered  the  senate  dependent  on  his  will,  and  that  of  the  com¬ 
mons.  He  happened  to  be  invested  with  the  chief  magistracy 
during  that  year,  wherein  the  Romans  were  defeated  at  the 
Trasimenus;  and  suspected  that,  on  an  opportunity  so  fa¬ 
vourable,  for  effecting  a  revolution,  the  commons,  who  had 
so  long  harboured  a  bitter  animosity  against  the  senate, 
would  attempt  some  important  enterprise  ;  and  that,  if  Han¬ 
nibal  should  come  into  those  parts  with  his  victorious  army, 
they  would  even  go  so  far  as  to  murder  the  senate,  and  de¬ 
liver  Capua  into  the  hands  of  the  Carthaginians.  Though  a 
man  of  profligate  manners,  yet,  not  being  utterly  abandoned, 
he  preferred  ruling  the  commonwealth  in  its  present  settled 
state  to  any  power  which  he  could  hope  for,  in  case  of  its 
subversion  ;  and  knowing  the  impossibility  of  any  state  re¬ 
maining  settled,  if  destitute  of  counsel  to  direct  its  affairs, 
he  set  about  the  execution  of  a  plan  whereby  he  might  pre¬ 
serve  the  senate,  and,  at  the  same  time,  keep  it  in  awe  of 
himself  and  his  party.  Having  convened  that  body,  he  began, 
by  telling  them,  “  that  the  design  of  revolting  from  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  unless  such  a  measure  should  be  found  absolutely  ne¬ 
cessary,  could  not  by  any  means  be  agreeable  to  him,  who 
had  children  by  the  daughter  of  Appius  Claudius,  and  had 
disposed  of  a  daughter  of  his  own  in  marriage,  at  Rome,  to 
Livius ;  but  that,  however,  an  affair  of  much  greater  moment, 
and  more  alarming  tendency,  required  their  attention  :  for, 
the  purpose  of  the  commons  was  not,  by'  changing  sides,  to 
abolish  the  authority  of  the  senate  ;  but,  by  massacreing  the 

94 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[y.R.536. 

members  to  leave  the  commonwealth  without  a  head^  and  in 
that  state  to  deliver  it  up  to  Hannibal  and  the  Carthaginians, 
From  this  imminent  danger,  it  was  in  his  power,  (he  said,) 
to  deliver  them,  if  they  would  entrust  themselves  to  his  man¬ 
agement,  and,  forgetting  party  animosities,  place  entire  confi¬ 
dence  in  him.”  Overcome  by  the  violence  of  their  fears,  they 
all  consented  to  be  directed  by  him  ;  on  which  he  said,  1 
will  shut  you  up  in  the  senate  house,  appearing  as  an  accom¬ 
plice  in  their  wicked  plot,  and  while  I  seem  to  approve  oi 
designs  which  I  should  in  vain  oppose,  I  will  find  out  a  way 
for  your  safety.  For  the  performance  of  this  I  am  willing  to 
give  you  any  security  which  you  may  demand.’*  Having 
solemnly  pledged  his  faith,  he  went  out,  and  ordered  the 
sen  ate -house  to  be  shut,  leaving  a  guard  in  the  porch,  with 
orders;  that  no  one  should  go  in  or  out  without  his  direc¬ 
tions. 
III.  He  then  convened  the  people,  to  whom,  he  said, 
Campanians,  the  opportunity  for  which  you  have  so  often 
prayed,  of  taking  vengeance  on  a  wicked  and  detestable 
senate,  now  presents  itself  in  such  a  manner,  that  you  may 
accomplish  your  wishes,  without  any  hazard  of  danger  to 
yourselves,  in  storming,  by  force  of  arms,  their  several  houses 
which  they  keep  secured  by  garrisons  of  their  dependents  and 
slaves.  I  am  ready  to  deliver  into  your  hands,  the  whole 
body  of  them  shut  up  together  in  the  senate-house,  unattended, 
unarmed.  Nor  need  you  do  any  thing  in  a  hurry,  or  without 
consideration.  I  will  take  care  that  you  shall  have  full  power 
of  passing  sentence  of  life  or  death  on  every  one  of  them:  so 
that  each  may  suffer  the  punishment  which  he  has  deserved. 
Above  all  things,  however,  it  behoves  you,  while  you  indulge 
the  gratification  of  your  resentment,  to  make  even  that  give 
place  to  the  care  of  your  own  interest  and  welfare*  For,  the 
object  of  your  hatred  is,  as  I  apprehend,  the  present  body  of 
senators;  you  do  not  wish  that  the  commonwealth  should  be 
entirely  without  a  senate;  for  you  must  have  either  a  king,  an 

BOOK  xxin. 

95 

B.C.  216.] 
office  universally  detested;  or  a  senate,  the  only  kind  of  go¬ 
vernment  compatible  with  freedom  in  a  state.  You  must 
therefore  do  two  things  at  the  same  time^  remove  the  old 
senate,  and  elect  a  new  one.  I  will  order  each  of  the  senators 
to  be  summoned  before  you;  concerning  whose  life  or  death  I 
will  require  your  judgment:  whatever  your  sentence  is,  it  shall 
be  executed.  But  first,  before  punishment  is  inflicted  on  the 
guilty,  you  will  elect,  into  his  place,  as  a  new  senator,  some 
person  of  ability  and  spirit.’'  He  then  took  his  seat;  and  the 
names  of  the  senators  being  thrown  together  into  an  urn,  he 
ordered  the  first  that  happened  to  come  out,  on  shaking  the 
lots,  to  be  proclaimed,  and  the  person  himself  to  be  brought 
out  from  the  senate-house.  On  hearing  the  name,  every  one 
eagerly  cried  out,  that  he  was  a  ^worthless  character,  and  a 
wicked  man;  and  that  he  deserved  punishment.  Pacuvius 
then  said,  “  I  perceive  what  judgment  has  been  passed  on 
this  man.  He  is  expelled.  In  the  room  of  this  worthless  and 
wicked  senator,  elect  one  endowed  with  probity  and  justice.” 
A  general  silence  at  first  took  place,  from  the  difficulty  of 
finding  a  better  substitute  in  his  room;  and  afterwards,  some 
one  breaking  through  reserve,  and  proposing  a  certain  person, 
a  clamour  was  instautly  raised  louder  than  against  the  other; 
some  declaring,  that  they  did  not  know  him;  others  exclaim¬ 
ing,  at  one  time,  against  his  scandalous  behaviour,  at  another, 
against  his  meanness,  his  sordid  poverty,  and  the  disreputa¬ 
ble  trade  or  occupation  which  he  followed.  The  same  conse¬ 
quences  ensued,  and  the  difficulty  still  increased,  on  the  se¬ 
cond  and  third  senator  being  summoned;  .all  which  clearly 
proved  that  the  people  disliked  the  men  in  question,  but  were 
totally  at  a  loss  for  one  whom  they  could  set  in  his  place;  for 
it  would  answer  no  purpose  to  propose  the  same  persons  a 
second  time,  whose  nomination  had  produced  nothing  but  a 
recital  of  their  disgraces,  and  the  rest  were  still  more  mean 
and  obscure  than  those  who  first  occurred  to  people’s 
thoughts.  The  consequence  was,  that  the  people  withdrew 

96 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y^.  536. 

from  the  assembly,  affirming,  that  the  evil  with  which  men 
were  best  acquainted  was  the  most  tolerable,  and  ordering 
the  senate  to  be  discharged  from  custody. 
IV.  Pacuvius,  by  this  obligation  conferred  on  the  senate, 
in  thus  preserving  their  lives,  so  effectually  gained  their  affec¬ 
tions,  that  they  were  much  more  earnestly  disposed  to  support 
his  interest,  than  that  of  the  commons;  and  now,  all  ranks 
yielding  a  ready  compliance  with  his  designs,  without  having 
recourse  to  force  of  arms,  he  ruled  with  unlimited  authority. 
Henceforward  the  senators,  casting  off  all  regard  to  their  in¬ 
dependence  and  their  dignity,  paid  court  to  the  commons,  and 
saluted  them  in  courteous  terms;  invited  them,  with  every 
expression  of  kindness,  to  their  houses,  and  then  entertained 
them  sumptuously;  always  undertook  that  side  of  a  contro¬ 
versy,  supported  that  cause,  and  appointed  judges  agreeable 
to  that  party,  which  was  most  popular,  and  seemed  best  cal¬ 
culated  to  conciliate  the  favour  of  the  populace.  No  business 
was  transacted  in  the  senate  in  any  other  manner,  than  just 
as  if  it  had  consisted  of  a  set  of  plebeians.  The  people  had 
ever  been  prone  to  luxurious  extravagance;  not  only  from  an 
evil  propensity  in  their  nature,  but  likewise  through  the  pro¬ 
fusion  of  voluptuous  enjoyments  that  lay  within  their  reach, 
and  the  temptations  to  which  they  were  exposed  in  the  midst 
of  every  means  of  gratification  which  land  or  sea  could  afford. 
But  now,  in  consequence  of  the  condescension  and  in¬ 
dulgence  shown  by  persons  of  the  first  consequence,  they 
ran  into  such  exorbitant  excess  as  set  no  limits  either  to  their 
desires  or  expenses.  They  had  long  cast  off  ail  respect  for 
their  own  magistrates,  senate,  and  laws;  and  now,  since  the 
unfortunate  battle  of  Cannse,  they  began  to  look  with  con¬ 
tempt  on  the  government  of  Rome  also,  which  alone  they 
had,  until  then,  regarded  with  some  degree  of  awe.  The  only 
considerations  that  withheld  them  from  an  immediate  revolt, 
were,  that  by  means  of  intermarriages  contracted  in  a  long 
t  nurse  of  time,  many  of  their  most  illustrious  and  powerful 

BOOK  XXIII. 

97 

BX.  216.] 
families  were  connected  with  the  Romans;  and,  besides  that 
many  of  their  countrymen  served  in  the  Roman  armies,  their 
strongest  motive  for  restraining  their  inclination,  was,  con- 
cem  for  three  hundred  horsemen  of  the  noblest  families  in 
Campania,  who  had  beeri  selected  by  the  Romans,  and  sent 
into  several  garrisons  in  the  cities  of  Sicily. 
V .  The  parents  and  relations  of  these,  with  great  difficulty, 
prevailed  on  the  people  to  send  ambassadors  to  the  Roman 
consul.  They  found  him  at  Venusia,  attended  by  a  very  small 
number  of  half- armed  troops,  and  in  such  a  condition  as  could 
not  fail  to  excite  compassion  in  good  and  faithful  allies,  and 
contempt  in  the  faithless  and  proud,  such  as  were  the  Cam¬ 
panians.  And  this  contempt  of  himself,  and  of  his  situation, 
the  consul  also  increased  by  too  unguardedly  exposing  and 
displaying  the  disastrous  state  of  his  affairs.  For,  on  the  am¬ 
bassador’s  telling  him  that  the  senate  sind  people  of  Campania 
were  much  grieved  that  any  misfortune  should  have  hap¬ 
pened  to  the  Romans,  and  promising  supplies  of  every  kind, 
towards  carrying  on  the  war,  he  answered,  Campanians,  in 
desiring  us  to  call  on  you  for  supplies  towards  maintaining 
the  war,  you  have  observed  the  usual  manner  of  speaking 
practised  between  allies,  rather  than  accommodated  your  dis¬ 
course  to  the  present  state  of  our  fortune.  For  what  has  been 
left  us  at  Cannae,  that,  as  if  we  had  something  of  our  own, 
we  should  wish  to  have  its  deficiencies  made  up  by  our  allies? 
Should  we  call  on  you  for  infantry,  as  if  we  had  cavalry? 
Should  we  tell  you  that  we  want  money,  as  if  that  were  the 
only  thing  wanted?  Fortune  has  left  us  nothing;  not  so  much 
as  a  remnant  to  which  additions  might  be  made.  Our  legions,, 
our  cavalry,  arms,  standards,  men  and  horses,  money,  pro¬ 
visions,  have  all  perished,  either  in  the  field,  or  in  the  loss  of 
the  two  camps,  on  the  following  day.  Wherefore,  Campa¬ 
nians,  your  part  is,  not  to  aid  us  in  the  war,  but,  in  a  manner, 
to  undertake  the  war  in  our  stead.  Call  to  mind  how,  former¬ 
ly,  when  your  forefathers  were  driven,  in  dismay,  within  the 
VOL. 

98 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  536. 

walls,  terrified  at  the  approach  of  the  armies  of  their  ene¬ 
mies,  both  Samnites  and  Sidicinians,  we  took  them  under  our 
protection,  stood  up  in  their  defeftce  at  Saticula;  and  this  war 
against  the  Samnites,  undertaken  on  your  account,  we  main¬ 
tained,  through  various  vicissitudes  of  fortune,  during  a 
space  of  near  one  hundred  years.  Add  to  this  that,  though  we 
possessed  the  right  of  sovereignty  over  you,  we  granted  you 
an  alliance  on  terms  of  equality;  allowed  you  your  own  laws, 
and,  in  fine,  what  was  to  be  considered  (at  least  before  the 
defeat  at  Cannae)  as  the  highest  honour  in  our  power  to  con¬ 
fer,  we  admitted  a  great  number  among  you  to  the  freedom 
of  our  city,  and  shared  its  privileges  with  you.  For  these 
reasons,  Campanians,  you  ought  to  consider  our  late  defeat 
as  a  common  misfortune,  and  to  deem  it  y^our  duty  to  defend 
our  common  country.  The  dispute  is  not  with  the  Etrurian, 
or  the  Samnite;  in  whi«h  case  the  sovereignty,  though  taken 
from  us,  would  still  remain  in  Italy;  a  Carthaginian  foe  draws 
after  him,  from  the  remotest  limits  of  the  world,  from  the 
streights  of  the  ocean  and  the  pillars  of  Hercules,  an  host  of 
men  who  are  not  even  natives  of  Africa,  and  who  are  utter 
strangers  to  all  laws,  to  all  the  rules  and  rights  of  society,  and 
almost  to  the  language  of  men.  This  horde,  cruel  and  savage 
from  nature  and  habit,  their  leader  has  taken  pains  to  render 
still  more  savage;  making  them  form  bridges  and  ramparts 
of  human  bodies  heaped  together,  and,  what  is  shocking  even 
to  mention,  teaching  them  to  feed  on  human  flesh.  Who, 
that  was  but  born  in  any  part  of  Italy,  could  think,  without 
horror  and  detestation,  of  seeing,  and  acknowledging  as  sove¬ 
reigns,  such  creatures  as  these,  who  live  on  such  abominable 
food,  whose  verv^  touch  would  convey  pollution;  of  receiving 
.  laws  from  Africa  and  Carthage,  and  of  suffering  Italy  to  be¬ 
come  a  province  to  Moors  and  Numidians?  It  will  be  highly 
honourable  to  you,  Campanians,  that  the  Roman  empire, 
tottering  under  so  severe  a  blow,  should  be  upheld  and  re¬ 
stored  by  your  faithful  zeal  and  strength.  I  suppose  that 

BOOK  XXIir. 

99 

B.C.  216.] 
there  -may  be  raked  in  Campania  thirty  thousand  foot,  and 
four  thousand  horse.  Of  money  and  corn  you  already  have 
abundance.  If  your  zeal  in  our  favour  be  but  equal  to  your 
abilities,  neither  shall  Hannibal  perceive  that  he  has  been 
victorious,  nor  the  Romans  jthat  they  have  been  defeated.” 
VI.  After  the  consul  had  spoken  thus,  the  ambassadors 
were  dismissed;  and,  as  they  were  returning  home,  one  of 
them,  whose  name  was  Vibius  Virlus,  observ^ed  to  the  rest, 
that  ‘‘  the  time  had  now  arrived  when  the  Campanians  might 
not  only  recover  from  the  Romans  the  lands  of  which  they 
had  been  unjustly  deprived,  but  also  gain  possession  of  the 
sovereignty  of  Italy.  For  they  might  form  an  alliance  with 
Hannibal,  on  whatever  terms  they  themselves  should  choose; 
and  when  Hannibal,  after  completing  his  success,  and  putting 
an  end  to  the  war,  should  depart  into  Africa,  and  withd.^aw 
his  army,  the  sovereign  power  over  Italy,  without  any  dis¬ 
pute,  would  be  left  in  the  possession  of  the  Campanians.”  In 
these  sentiments  of  Vibius  all  the  rest  concurred,  and  they 
accordingly  made  such  a  report  of  the  issue  of  their  embassy, 
as  persuaded  every  one  that  the  Roman  power  was  utterly 
annihilated.  The  plebeians,  and  the  greater  part  of  the  senate, 
began  instantly  to  take  measures  for  a  revolt.  However,  by 
the  earnest  persuasions  of  the  elder  citizens,  their  proceedings 
were  deferred  for  a  few  days;  but,  at  last,  the  opinion  of  the 
majority  prevailed,  that  the  same  ambassadors,  who  had  gone 
to  the  Roman  consul,  should  be  sent  to  Hannibal.  In  some* 
histories,  I  have  read,  that,  before  this  embassy  was  des¬ 
patched,  or  the  design  of  revolting  finally  determined  upon, 
ambassadors  were  sent  by  the  Campanians  to  Rome,  re¬ 
quiring  that,  if  the  Roman  people  expected  succours  from 
them,  they  should  elect  one  of  the  consuls  out  of  Campania; 
that  this  excited  so  great  indignation,  that  they  were  ordered 
to  be  turned  out  of  the  senate-house;  and  that  a  lictor  was 
,  sent  to  conduct  them  out  of  the  city,  and  to  warn  them  to 
retire,  before  night,  out  of  the  Roman  territor}^  But  this, 

100 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  536. 
bearing  too  great  a  similarity  to  the  demand  formerly  made 
by  the  Latines,  and  Ccelius  and  other  writers  having,  not 
without  reason,  omitted  the  mention  of  it,  I  cannot  take  upon 
me  to  affirm  the  truth  of  the  account. 
VII.  The  ambassadors  camejto  Hannibal,  and  concluded 
with  him  an  alliance,  on  conditions,  that  no  general,  or 
magistrate  of  the  Carthaginians,  should  have  any  authority 
over  a  citiz  n  of  Campania;  nor  should  any  native  of  Cam¬ 
pania  be  compelled  to  serve  in  the  army,  or  to  act  in  any 
other  employment.  That  Capua  should  retain  its  own  laws 
and  magistrates.  That  the  Carthaginian  should  deliver  into 
the  hands  of  the  Campanians,  three  hundred  of  the  Roman 
prisoners,  whom  they  should  pitch  on,  in  order  that  they 
might  make  an  exchange  of  these  for  the  Campanian  horse¬ 
men  serving  in  Sicily.’’  Such  were  the  articles  stipulated;  but, 
to  the  performances  to  which  they  were  bound  by  treaty,  the 
Campanians  added  deeds  of  a  heinous  nature;  for  the  praefects 
of  the  allies,^  and  other  Roman  citizens,  part  engaged  in 
some  military  employment,  others  busied  in  their  priyate 
concerns,  the  plebeians  suddenly  seized,  and  ordered  them  to 
be  shut  up  in  the  baths,  as  if  with  intent  to  keep  them  there 
in  custody;  instead  of  which,  suffocated  with  heat  and  vapour, 
they  died  in  a  shocking  manner.  These  proceedings,  and 
likewise  the  sending  of  an  embassy  to  the  Carthaginian,  had 
been  most  strenuously  opposed  by  Decius  Magius;  a  man 
who  wanted  no  qualifications  that  could  entitle  him  to  the 
chief  direction  of  affairs,  which,  had  not  his  countrymen 
wanted  sound  judgment,  would  certainly  have  been  placed 
in  his  hands.  When  he  heard  that  a  body  of  troops  was  sent 
by  Hannibal  to  garrison  the  city,  he,  at  first,  openly  and 
loudly  protested  against  giving  them  admittance,  urging  as  a 
caution,  the  haughty  tyranny  of  Pyrrhus,  and  the  wretched 
*  Roman  officers  appointed  to  command  tlie  troops  furnished  by  the  allies, 
witli  the  same  rank  and  authority  which  the  tribunes  held  in  the  Roman 
legions. 

BOOK  XXIIL 

101 

B.C.  216.] 
slavery  of  the  Tarentmes;  and  afterwards,  when  they  had 
been  admitted,  laboured  to  persuade  the  people  either  to  ex¬ 
pel  them;  or,  if  they  wished  to  atone,  by  a  brave  and  memora¬ 
ble  act,  for  the  baseness  of  their  behaviour,  in  revolting  from 
their  oldest  confederates  and  near  relations,  to  put  to  death 
the  Carthaginian  garrison,  and  re-unite  themselves  to  the 
Romans.  These  his  proceedings  being  reported  to  Hannibal, 
(for  all  passed  in  public,^  he  first  sent  to  summon  Magius  to 
attend  him  in  his  camp;  then,  on  his  positively  refusing  to 
come,  and  insisting  that  Hannibal  had  no  authority  over  a 
citizen  of  Campania,  the  Carthaginian,  provoked  to  a  high 
degree  of  passion,  ordered  his  person  to  be  seized  and  dragged 
to  him  into  the  camp  in  chains;  but  afterwards,  apprehending 
le&l:,  in  case  of  force  being  used,  some  tumult,  and  then, 
people’s  minds  being  irritated,  some  imprudent  scuffle  might 
ensue,  he  sent  forward  a  message  to  Marius  Blosius,  praetor 
of  Capua,  that  he  would  come  himself  to  that  city  on  the  next 
day;  and  accordingly,  he  set  out,  with  a  small  body  of  troops. 
Marius,  calling  the  people  together,  published  orders  that 
they  should  all,  in  a  body,  with  their  wives  and  children,  go 
out  to  meet  Hannibal:  these  orders  were  universally  obeyed, 
not  only  without  reluctance,  but  with  cheerful  readiness; 
being  agreeable  to  the  inclinations  of  the  populace,  whq  were 
impatient  to  behold  a  general  who  was  now  renowned  for  so 
many  victories.  Decius  Magius  neither  went  out  to  meet 
him,  nor  did  he  confine  himself  within  doors,  lest  he  should 
betray  some  apprehension  from  consciousness  of  misbeha¬ 
viour;  but,  while  the  whole  city  was  in  hurry  and  confusion, 
through  an  eagerness  to  see  and  to  compliment  the  Carthagi¬ 
nian,  he  walked  carelessly  in  the  Forum  with  his  son, and  a  few 
of  his  attendants.  Hannibal,  immediately  on  entering  the  city, 
demanded  an  audience  of  the  senate;  but  the  principal  Cam¬ 
panians  then  besought  him  not,  at  that  time,  to  attend  to  any 
serious  business,  but,  with  chearfulness  and  freedom,  to  cele¬ 
brate  a  day  which  his  arrival  had  consecrated  to  festivin . 

102 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  536. 

Although  furiously  passionate,  yet,  unwilling  to  refuse  them 
any  thing  on  the  commencement  of  their  connexion,  he  spent 
a  great  part  of  that  day  in  taking  a  view  of  the  city.  He  was 
lodged  at  the  house  of  the  two  Minii  Celeres,  Stenius  and 
Pacuvius,  men  highly  distinguished  by  the  nobility  of  their 
birth,  and  the  greatness  of  their  wealth.  Hither  Pacuvius 
Calavius,  whom  we  mentioned  before,  the  leader  of  that 
faction,  whose  violence  had  effected  the  present  union, 
brought  his  son,  a  young  man,  after  having,  with  difficulty, 
drawn  him.  away  from  the  side  of  Decius  Magius;  for  the 
youth  had  joined  him,  with  the  warmest  zeal,  in  supporting 
the  Roman  alliance,  and  opposing  the  treaty  with  the  Cartha¬ 
ginians;  nor  had  the  public  determination,  on  the  other  side, 
or  his  respect  for  his  father,  been  able  to  produce  a  change 
in  his  sentiments.  Calavius,  by  entreaties  rather  than  excuses, 
procured  a  pardon  for  him,  from  Hannibal,  who,  overcome 
by  the  father’s  prayers  and  tears,  even  desired  that  he  should 
be  invited,  togetlier  with  his  father,  to  supper,  though  he  had 
intended  to  admit  no  Campanian  to  the  entertainment,  except 
his  hosts,  and  Jubellius  Taurea,  a  man  celebrated  for  his  abili¬ 
ties  in  war.  The  entertainment  began  early  in  the  day,  and  the 
feast,  as  might  be  expected  in  a  city  remarkable  for  luxury, 
and  in  a  house  particularly  so,  was  not  conformable  to  the 
Carthaginian  customs,  or  to  military  discipline,  but  furnished 
with  every  inc-entive  to  convivial  enjoyment.  Calavius’s  son, 
Perolla,  alone  maintained  a  degree  of  reserve,  which  neither 
the  attentions  of  the  masters  of  the  house,  nor  those  some¬ 
times  added  by  Hannibal  himself  could  overcome.  For  this 
he  apologized  by  imputing  it  to  indisposition,  and  his  father 
alleged  also  the  disturbed  state  of  his  mind,  which  could  not 
then  be  wondered  at.  About  sun-set,  the  elder  Calavius,  going 
out  of  the  room,  was  followed  by  his  son,  who,  when  they 
came  into  a  private  place  (a  garden  at  the  rear  of  the  house), 
said  to  him;  ‘‘  Father,  I  fiave  a  plan  to  mention  to  you,  by 
which  we  mav  not  only  procure  from  the  Romans  pardon  oi 

BOOK  XXIII. 

103 

B.C.  216.] 
our  misconduct,  m  going  over  to  Hannibal,  but  also  acquire 
to  the  people  of  Campania  a  much  larger  share  of  their 
esteem  and  favour  than  we  have  ever  yet  enjoyed.^’  'fhe  fa¬ 
ther,  with  surprise,  inquiring  what  sorrof  a  plan  this  was,  he 
threw  back  his  gotvn  frona  his  shoulder,  and  showed  him  a 
sword  girt  to  his  side;  then  said,  I  will  presently,  with 
HamnibaPs  blood,  ratify  our  alliance  with  Rome,  Of  this  I 
thought  it  proper  to  apprize  you,  because  you  may,  perhaps, 
wish  to  be  absent,  when  the  deed  is  performed.’^ 
IX.  On  this  sight,  and  hearing  these  words,  the  old  man, 
distracted  with  apprehension,  as  if  he  were  then  present  at 
the  perpetrating  of  the  act  which  had  been  mentioned,  ex¬ 
claimed;  ‘‘  By  all  the  ties,  my  son,  which  unite  children  to 
their  parents,  I  entreat,  I  beseech  you,  do  not,  before  the 
eyes  of  your  father,  commit  a  deed  of  such  transcendant 
horror,  and  draw  on  yourself  extremity  of  ruin.  But  few 
hours  have  elapsed,  since,  swearing  by  all  the  gods  existing, 
and  joining  our  right  hands  to  his,  we  bound  ourselves  to 
be  faithful  to  him;  was  it  that  immediately.,  on  quitting  the 
conference,  we  should  arm  against  him  those  veiy^'  hands, 
which  we  had  given  as  sacred  pledges  of  our  faith?  You  are 
just  risen  from  a  hospitable  table,  to  which,  of  only  three  Cam¬ 
panians  favoured  with  an  invitation  by  Hannibal,  you  were 
one;  was  it  that  you  should  stain  that  very  table  with  the 
blood  of  your  host?  My  entreaties,  as  a  father,  hav^e  pre¬ 
vailed  over  HannibaPs  resentntent  in  favour  of  my  son;  shall 
they  bave  less  power  with  my  son  in  favour  of  Hannibal? 
But  suppose  there  were  no  sacred  obligations  in  the  case,  no 
faith,  no  religion,  no  filial  duty,  let  the  most  abominable 
deeds  be  perpetrated,  if  they  do  not,  along  with  the  guilt, 
bring  ruin  on  ourselves.  Do  you  mean  to  assault  Hannibal 
with  your  single  arm?  What  will  that  numerous  crowd, 
both  of  freemen  and  slaves,  be  doing?  What  the  eyes  of  all, 
intent  on  him  alone?  What  so  many  right  hands?  Will 
they  all  be  benumbed,  during  such  a  mad  attempt?  How 

i04 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.536. 

^11  you  be  able  to  support  th&  look«  of  Hannibal  himself, 
which  armed  hosts  are  unable  to  withstand;  which  the  Ro¬ 
man  people  behold  with  horror?  Besides,  will  you  be  hardy 
enough  to  strike  me^wrhen,  should  other  assistance  be  want¬ 
ing,  I  shall  oppose  my  person  to  the  danger  in  defence  of 
Hannibal’s?  Now,  be  assured,  that,  if  you  strike  and  pierce 
his  body,  it  must  be  through  my  breast.  Suffer  yourself, 
then,  to  be  dissuaded  here,  rather  than  overpowered  there: 
Let  my  prayers  have  as  much  weight  with  you,  as  they  had 
to-day  with  hkh  in  your  behalf.”  Observing  the  youth  now 
softened  into  tears,  he  threw  his  arms  round  him,  and,  em¬ 
bracing  him,  with  kisses,  persevered  in  his  entreaties,  until 
he  prevailed  on  him  to  lay  aside  the  sword,  and  give  him  his 
honour  that  he  would  make  no  such  attempt.  The  son  then 
said,  ‘‘  I,  for  my  part,  will  pay  to  my  fadier  the  debt  of  duty 
which  I  owe  to  my  country.  But  I  am  grieved  at  the  cir¬ 
cumstances  in  which  you  stand,  who  have  to  answer  for  the 
crime  of  having  thrice  betrayed  your  country;  once,  when 
you  advised  the  revolt  from  the  Romans;  a  second  time, 
when  you  promoted  an  alliance  with  Hannibal;  and  a  third 
time,  this  day,  when  you  obstruct  and  prevent  the  re¬ 
union  of  Capua  with  Rome.  Do  thou,  my  country,  receive 
this  weapon,  which  I  wished  to  use  with  effect,  in  defence 
of  this  thy  capital;  and  which  I  resign,  not  through  any  ten¬ 
derness  to  the  enemy,  but  because  my  father  extorts  it  from 
me.”  So  saying,  he  threw  the  sword  over  the  garden^wall 
into  the  street,  and,  to  avoid  suspicion,  returned  to  the 
company. 
X.  Next  day,  Hannibal  had  audience  in  a  full  meeting  of 
the  senate,  where  the  first  part  of  his  discourse  contained 
nothing  but  expressions  of  affection  and  kindness;  thanking 
the  Campanians  for  having  preferred  bis  friendship  to  their 
former  alliance;  and,  among  other  magnificent  promises, 
assuring  them,  that  Capua  should,  in  a  short  time,  be  the 
metropolis  of  Italy;  and  that"  the  Romans,  as  well  as  the 

BOOK  XXIII. 

105 

B.C.  2I6.3 
other  nations,  should  receive  laws  from  it.  He  then  took  no¬ 
tice,  that  there  was  one  person  who  had  no  title  to  a  share 
in  the  friendship  of  the  Carthaginians,  and  in  the  terms  of 
the  treaty  now  concluded;  who  ought  not  to  be  considered, 
or  even  named,  as  a  Campanian:  this  was  Decius  Magius. 
Him  he  demanded  to  be  delivered  into  his  custocUs  ^nd  re-* 
quired  that  the  §enate  should,  in  his  presence,  take  Magius’s 
conduct  into  consideration,  and  determine  concerning  him.” 
This  proposition  was  unanimously  assented  to,  notwithstand* 
ing  that  a  great  part  of  the  senate  thought  that  he  had  not  de¬ 
served  such  severe  treatment;  and,  likewise,  that  this  first  step 
was  no  small  encroachment  on  their  independence.  He  then, 
leaving  the  senate-house,  placed  himself  on  the  judgment- 
seat  of  the  chief  magistrate,  and  gave  orders  that  Decius 
Magius  should  be  seized,  brought  to  his  feet,  and  there,  un¬ 
supported,  stand  his  trial.  The  other,  retaining  his  undaunt¬ 
ed  spirit,  insisted  that,  according  to  the  terms  of  the  treaty, 
he  was  not  liable  to  such  compulsion;  on  which  he  was  loaded 
with  chains,  and  ordered  to  be  led  by  a  lictor  into  the  camp. 
As  long  as  he  was  conducted  with  his  head  uncovered,  he 
continually  harangued  the  multitude,  which  every  where  ga¬ 
thered  round  him,  calling  out  to  them — You  have  now, 
Campanians,  the  independence  that  you  aimed  at.  In  the 
middle  of  your  Forum,  in  the  light  of  day,  before  your  eyes, 
I,  who  am  inferior  to  no  one  of  the  Campanians,  am  chain¬ 
ed  and  dragged  to  execution.  What  more  violent  outrage 
could  have  happened,  were  Capua  taken  by  storm?  Go  out, 
then,  to  meet  Hannibal,  decorate  the  city,  consecrate  the 
day  of  his  arrival,  that  you  may  behold  such  a  triumph  as 
this,  over  one  of  your  own  countrymen.”  While  he  was  ex¬ 
claiming  in  this  manner,  the  populace  appearing  to  be  moved 
by  his  remonstrances,  his  head  was  covered,  and  an  order 
given,  that  he  should  be  dragged  more  speedily  out  of  the 
gate.  Being  brought  in  this  manner  to  the  camp,  he  was  in¬ 
stantly  put  on  board  a  ship,  and  sent  away  for  Cai*thage;  for 
VOL.  III. — O 

106 

HISTORY  OF  ROfME. 

[Y,R.  536. 

Hannibal  was  apprehensive  lest,  in  consequence  of  the  harsh 
treatment  shown  him,  some  commotion  might  arise  in  the 
city,  that  even  the  senate  might  repent  of  having  given  up 
one  of  their  principal  members,  and  that,  should  an  embassy 
be  sent  to  reclaim  him,  he  must  either,  by  refusing  their  first 
request,  give  offence  to  his  new  allies,  or,  if  he  complied, 
must  expect  to  find  him  a  constant  fomented  of  sedition  and 
disturbance  in  Capua.  A  storm  drove  the  ship  to  Gyrene, 
which  was  at  that  time  under  the  dominion  of  the  Egyptian 
kings.  Here  Magius,  having  fled  to  the  statue  of  King  Pto¬ 
lemy  as  a  sanctuary,  was  carried  under  a  guard  to  Alexan¬ 
dria,  to  Ptolemy;  and  having  represented  to  him,  that  he  had 
been  put  in  chains  by  Hannibal,  contrary  to  the  terms  of  the 
treaty,  he  was  set  at  liberty,  and  received  permission  to  re¬ 
turn  either  to  Rome  or  Capua,  whichever  he  pleased.  Ma¬ 
gius  answered,  that  ‘‘  at  Capua  he  could  not  expect  safety; 
that  his  residence  at  Rome,  at  that  time,  when  war  subsisted 
between  the  Romans  and  Campanians,  would  give  him  the 
appearance  of  a  deserter,  rather  than  of  a  guest;  and  that 
there  was  no  place  where  he  so  much  wished  to  live,  as  in 
the  territory  of  the  king,  in  whom  he  had  found  a  protector, 
and  deliverer  from  bondage. 
XI.  During  these  transactions,  Quintus  Fabius  Pictor, 
who  had  been  sent  ambassador  to  Delphi,  returned  to  Rome, 
and  read,  from  a  written  copy,  the  answer  which  he  bad  re¬ 
ceived.  This  contained  instructions  to  what  deities,  and  in 
what  manner,  supplications  should  be  made;  and  then  pro¬ 
ceeded  thus:  Romans,  if  you  follow  these  direclionb,  voiir 
affairs  will  improve  and  prosper;  the  business  of  your  state 
will  advance  more  agreeably  to  your  wishes,  and  the  Roman 
people  will  be  finally  victorious  in  the  war:  when  your  com¬ 
monwealth  shall  be  settled  in  safety  and  prosperit} ,  then,  out 
of  the  acquisitions  made  by  your  arms,  send  an  offering  to 
the  Pythian  Apollo,  and  dedicate  to  his  honour  a  part  of  the 
booty,  of  the  captives,  and  of  the  spoils.  Banish  licentious- 

B.C.  216  ] 

BOOK  XXIIL 

lor 
ness  from  among  you.”  After  repeating  these  words,  trans¬ 
lated  from  the  Greek  verses,  he  added,  that  when  he  retired 
from  the  oracle,  he  immediately  performed  worship  to  all 
these  divinities^  with  offerings  of  wine  and  incense;  and  was 
ordered  by  the  chief  priest  of  the  temple,  that  as  he  had  ap¬ 
proached  the  oracle,  and  had  performed  worship  with  a  crown 
of  laurel  on  his  head,  so  he  should  go  on  board  his  ship, 
wearing  the  same  crown,  and  not  lay  it  aside  until  he  should 
arrive  at  Rome.  That  he  had,  with  the  utmost  diligence  and 
reverence,  executed  all  the  commands  given  him,  and  had 
deposited  the  crown  on  the  altar  of  Apollo  at  Rome.”  The 
senate  then  decreed  that  those  supplications,  and  other  acts 
of  worship,  should  be  performed  as  soon  as  possible. 
XII.  While  these  things  were  passing  in  Rome  and  Italy, 
Mago,  son  of  Hamilcar,  had  arrived  at  Carthage  with  the 
news  of  the  victor}^  at  Cannae.  He  had  not  been  despatched 
by  his  brother  immediately  after  the  battle,  but  delayed  for 
several  days,  in  receiving  the  submissions  of  the  cities  of 
Bruttium  which  revolted.  Being  introduced  to  an  audience 
of  the  senate,  he  gave  a  full  account  of  his  brother’s  exploits 
in  Italy;  that  “  he  had  fought  pitched  battles  with  six  consu¬ 
lar  armies,  and  six  several  commanders;  of  whom  four  were 
consuls,  one  dictator,  and  the  other  master  of  the  horse;  had 
slain  above  two  hundred  thousand  of  the  enemy,  and  had 
taken  above  fifty  thousand.  Of  the  four  consuls,  he  had  slain 
two;  one  had  escaped  wounded;  and  the  other,  with  scarce 
fifty  of  his  men,  after  having  lost  the  rest  of  his  army.  The 
master  of  the  horse,  an  officer  of  equal  power  with  a  consul, 
had  been  defeated  and  driven  off  the  field;  and  the  dictator, 
because  he  always  cautiously  avoided  an  engagement,  was 
esteemed  as  a  commander  of  singular  abilities.  The  Brut- 
tians  and  Apulians,  with  part  of  the  Samnites  and  Lucanians, 
had  come  over  to  the  Carthaginians.  Capua,  which  was  the 
metropolis  not  only  of  Campania,  but  since  the  ruin  of  the 
Roman  power  in  the  battle  of  Cann^,  of  Italy,  had  been 

108 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y,R.  536. 

surrendered  to  him.  For  these  so  great  and  so  numerous 
successes,  it  was  proper  that  the  public  should  be  grateful, 
and  should  offer  thanksgivings  to  the  immortal  gods,”  He 
then,  in  confirmation  of  this  joyful  intelligence,  ordered  the 
gold  rings  taken  from  the  Romans  to  be  poured  down  in  the 
porch  of  the  senate-house;  and  of  these  there  was  so  great  a 
heap,  that,  according  to  some  writers,  on  being  measured, 
they  filled  three  pecks  and  a  half;  but  the  more  general  ac¬ 
count,  and  likewise  the  more  probable  is,  that  they  amounted 
to  no  more  than  one  peck.  He  also  explained  to  them,  in  order 
to  show  the  greater  extent  of  the  slaughter,  that  none  but 
those  of  equestrian  rank,  and  of  these  only  the  principal,  wore 
this  ornament.  The  main  purport  of  his  discourse  was,  that 
“  the  nearer  their  prospect  was  of  finishing  the  war,  the  more 
vigorous  support,  of  every  kind,  ought  to  be  afforded  to 
Hannibal;  for  that  it  was  carried  on  at  a  great  distance  from 
home,  in  the  heart  of  the  enemy's  country.  The  consumption 
of  money  and  corn  was  great;  and  so  many  engagements, 
while  they  ruined  the  Roman  armies,  had  diminished,  in  some 
degree,  those  of  the  conqueror.  It  was  therefore  necessary  to 
send  a  reinforcement,  and  likewise  to  send  money  for  the  pay, 
and  corn  for  the  maintenance  of  the  troops,  who  had  merited 
so  highly  of  the  Carthaginian  nation.” 
XIII.  At  the  conclusion  of  Mago’s  discourse,  while  all 
were  filled  with  joy,  Himilco,  one  of  the  Barcine  faction, 
thinking  this  a  favourable  opportunity  for  sarcastic  reflections 
on  Hanno,  said  to  him,  “  Hanno,  what  is  your  opinion  now? 
Are  you  still  sorry  for  our  entering  into  the  war  against  the 
Romans?  Advise  now  the  delivering  up  Hannibal,  oppose  the 
offering  thanks  to  the  immortal  gods,  on  occasion  of  these 
happy  events.  Let  us  hear  a  Roman  senator  in  the  senate- 
house  of  the  Carthaginians.”  To  this  Hanno  replied;  Con¬ 
script  Fathers,  I  should  have  remained  silent  this  day,  lest, 
in  a  time  of  general  joy,  I  might  utter  some  expression 
tending  to  damp  it.  But  now,  called  upon,  as  I  am,  by  a 

BOOK  XXIIL 

109 

B.C.  216.] 
member  of  this  body,  to  declare  whether  I  am  still  sorry  for 
our  having  entered  into  the  war  against  the  Romans,  if  I  re¬ 
fuse  to  answer,  I  may  incur  the  imputation  either  of  super¬ 
ciliousness  or  servilin^;  the  former  indicating  a  want  of  due 
regard  to  the  independent  rights  of  others,  the  latter  to  a 
man’s  own.  Let  me,  therefore,  answer  Himilco,  that  I  have 
not  ceased  to  lament  the  war;  nor  will  I  cease  to  censure  that 
invincible  commander  of  yours,  until  I  shall  see  the  war  con¬ 
cluded  on  some  tolerable  terms;  nor  wdll  any  thing,  except  a 
new  treaty  of  peace,  put  an  end  to  my  regret  for  the  loss  of 
the  old.  Those  matters,  then,  which  Mago  just  now  so  pomp¬ 
ously  blazoned  out,  afford  present  joy  to  Himilco,  and  the 
other  partisans  of  Hannibal.  To  me,  too,  the}^  mav  eventually 
prove  matter  of  joy;  because  successes  in  war,  if  we  arc 
willing  to  make  the  proper  use  of  fortune’s  favours,  will  gain 
us  a  peace  on  the  more  honourable  terms.  For  should  we 
neglect  to  improve  the  present  season,  when  we  can  possibly 
dictate,  instead  of  receiving  propositions  for  the  same,  even 
now  our  exultation  may  lead  us  into  delusive  expectations, 
and  prove,  in  the  end,  destitute  of  solid  advantage.  For,  let 
us  see  on  what  footing  it  stands  at  this  moment.  I  have  cut 
off  the  armies  of  the  enemy:  send  me  soldiers.  What  else 
would  you  ask,  if  you  had  been  defeated?  I  have  taken  two 
camps,  full,  doubtless,  of  booty  and  provisions:  give  me 
money  and  corn.  What  other  demand  could  you  make,  if  your 
stores  had  been  plundered,  if  you  were  beaten  out  of  your 
camp?  But  that  I  may  not  be  the  only  person  to  perceive  the 
unaccountableness  of  those  proceedings,  I  wish  that  either 
Himilco  or  Mago  would  inform  me  (for  since  I  have  an¬ 
swered  Himilco,  it  is  but  reasonable  and  fair  that  I  likewise, 
in  turn,  shoLild  ask  a  question),  as  the  fight  at  Cannae  has 
completed  the  ruin  of  the  Roman  empire,  and  all  Italy  is 
evidently  coming  over  to  our  side;  in  the  first  place,  has  any 
state  of  the  Latine  nation  revolted  to  us?  And  next,  has  any 
one  man,  out  of  the  thirty-five  tribes,  deserted?”  To  both 

110 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y,R.  536. 

these  questions,  Mago  answering  in  the  negative;  ‘‘We  have 
stilh  then,”  said  he,  “  more  than  enough  of  enemies  remain¬ 
ing.  But,  be  their  number  what  it  may,  I  should  be  glad  to 
know  what  degree  of  spirit  or  of  hope  they  possess?”  The 
other  declaring  that  he  knew  not  that:  “  Nothing,”  said  he, 
“  is  easier  to  be  known.  Have  the  Romans  sent  any  am¬ 
bassadors  to  Hannibal  to  treat  of  peace?  Have  you  even  re- 
c^ved  any  intelligence  of  any  mention  of  it  being  made  at 
Rome?”  Both  being  denied,  he  proceeded:  “  Since  that  is  the 
case,  we  have  not  brought  the  war  any  nearer  to  a  conclusion 
than  it  was  on  the  day  when  Hannibal  first  entered  Italy. 
Most  of  us  are  old  enough  to  remember  how  often  victory 
changed  sides  in  the  former  Punic  war.  At  no  time  did  our 
affairs  wear  a  more  prosperous  aspect,  both  by  land  and  sea, 
than  just  before  the  consulship  of  Caius  Lutatius  and  Aulus 
Postumius.  In  the  consulship  of  Lutatius  and  Postumius,  we 
suffered  a  total  overthrow  at  the  iEgatian  islands.  Now,  if, 
in  the  course  of  fortune,  our  affairs  should  undergo  any  such 
alteration,  (may  the  gods  avert  the  omen!)  do  you  hope,  that, 
after  we  shall  be  vanquished,  we  may  obtain  peace;  whereas 
now,  when  we  are  victorious,  there  is  no  one  disposed  to 
offer  it?  For  my  part,  were  it  proposed,  either  to  offer  terms 
of  peace  to  the  enemy,  or  to  receive  overtures  from  them,  I 
know  what  vote  I  should  give.  But  if  the  question  before  you 
be  concerning  the  supplies  demanded  by  Mago,  I  do  not  see 
3Xky  necessity  of  sending  them  to  troops  already  victorious: 
much  less  can  I  vote  for  their  being  sent  to  men  who  delude 
us  with  false  and  groundless  hopes.”  But  few  were  affected 
by  this  discourse  of  Hanno;  for  his  known  enmity  to  the  Bar- 
cine  family  detracted  from  the  weight  of  his  arguments;  and 
besides,  men’s  minds  were  so  fully  occupied  by  joy  for  the 
present  success,  that  they  were  unwilling  to  listen  to  any 
thing  which  tended  to  invalidate  the  grounds  of  their  triumph; 
and  firmly  believed,  that,  by  a  little  farther  exertion,  the  war 
would  be  speedily  terminated.  A  decree  of  the  senate  was 

B,C.  216.] 

BOOK  XXIII. 

Ill 

therefore  passed,  by  a  very  great  majority,  that  a  reinforce¬ 
ment  should  be  sent  to  Hannibal  of  four  thousand  Numidi- 
ans,  and  forty  elephants,  with  many  talents  of  silver.  At  the 
same  time  the  dictator  was  sent  with  Mago  into  Spain,  to 
hire  twenty  thousand  foot  and  four  thousand  horse,  which 
were  to  complete  the  numbers  of  the  armies  both  in  Spain 
and  Italy.  However,  this  business,  as  is  often  the  case  in% 
a  time  of  prosperity,  was  not  executed  either  with  spirit  or 
despatch. 
»  ^IV.  The  Romans,  prompted  by  their  natural  activity  ofr 
spirit,  and  also  by  the  present  situation  of  tl\eir  affairs, 
omitted  no  kind  of  exertion.  The  consul  applied,  with  dili¬ 
gence,  to  every  business  which  lay  within  his  department; 
and  the  dictator,  Marcus  Junius  Pera,  after  finishing  all 
matters  respecting  religion,  demanded,  as  usual,  the  leave  oi 
the  people  to  mount  his  horse;  and  then,  in  addition  to  the 
two  city  legions,  levied  by  the  consuls  in  the  beginning  of 
the  year,  and  a  body  of  slaves  whom  he  had  enlisted,  and 
the  cohorts  collected  out  of  the  Picenian  and  Qallic  territo¬ 
ries,  he  had  recourse  to  an  expedient  used  only  in  times  of 
extreme  danger,  when  propriety  gives  place  to  utility:  he 
published  a  proclamation,  that  such  persons  as  had  been 
guilty  of  capital  crimes,  or  had  been  ordered*  into  confine¬ 
ment  on  account  of  debt,  should  be  discharged  from  prose¬ 
cution,  and  from  their  debts  provided  they  enlisted  with  him 
as  soldiers;”  these,  amounting  to  six  thousand  men,  he  arm¬ 
ed  with  the  spoils  of  the  Gauls,  which  had  been  carried  in 
triumph  by  Cains  Flaminius.  By  these  means  he  was  enabled 
to  set  out  from  the  city  at  the  head  of  twentt-five  thousand 
effective  men.  Hftnnibal,  after  gaining  possession  of  Capua, 
made  a  second  trial  of  the  temper  of  the  Neapolitans,  by  ap¬ 
plications  both  to  their  hopes  and  fears;  but,  being  disap- 
pointed  therein,  he  removed  his  army  into  the  territory  oi 
Nola:  w^here,  though  he  did  not  immediately  commence 
hostilities,  because  he  did  not  despair  of  the  people’s  volun- 

112 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  536, 

tary  submission,  yet  he  showed  a  determination,  in  case  of 
their  deifying  compliance  vvith  his  expectations,  to  make 
them  feel  every  kind  of  evil.  The  senate,  and  especially  the 
leading  members  of  it,  faithfully  adhered  to  the  alliance  with 
Rome;  while  the  commons  were,  as  usual,  universally  in* 
dined  to  the  party  of  Hannibal;  so  great  were  their  fears  of 
the  devastation  of  their  lands,  and  on  the  heavy  sufferings 
and  indignities  to  be  endured  in  a  siege;  nor  were  leaders 
wanting  to  urge  them  to  a  revolt.  The  senate,  dreading  lest, 
if  they  made  open  profession  of  their  intentions,  they  should 
find  it  impossible  to  withstand  the  violent  temper  of  the  popu¬ 
lace,  concealed  them  under  a  counterfeit  appearance,  and 
thereby  found  means  to  defer  the  evil.  They  pretended  that 
they  approved  the  design  of  revolting  to  Hannibal;  but  that 
they  could  not  immediately  determine  on  the  conditions,  on 
which  it  might  be  proper  to  contract  this  nev\^  alliance.  Hav¬ 
ing  thus  gained  time,  they  hastily  despatched  ambassadors  to 
Claudius  Marcellas,  the  Roman  praetor,  then  at  Casilinum 
with  his  army,  informing  him  of  the  precarious  situation  of 
the  state  of  Nola;  that  the  country  was  already  possessed  by 
Hannibal,  as  the  city  would  shortly  he,  unless  it  received 
succour:  that  the  senate,  by  pretending,  in  compliance  with 
the  humour  of  the  commons,  that  they  were  ready  to  change 
sides  w^henever  the  latter  chose,  had  hitherto  allayed  their 
violent  haste  to  revolt.  Marcelius,  after  applauding  the  con¬ 
duct  of  the  Nolans,  charged  them  to  protract  the  business 
under  the  same  pretexts,  until  he  should  arrive;  and  to  con¬ 
ceal  in  the  mean  time  what  had  passed  between  him  and 
them,  and  every  expectation  of  an  assistance  from  the  Ro¬ 
mans.  He  himself  advanced  from  Casilinum  to  Calatia;  and 
fromi  thence,  after  crossing  the  river  Viilturnus,  he  proceeded 
through  the  territories  of  Satie ula  and  Trebia,  and  passing 
above  Suessula,  came  through  the  mountains  to  Nola. 
XV.  On  the  approach  of  the  Roman  prsetor,  the  Cartha¬ 
ginian  retired  out  of  the  territory  of  Nola,  and  marched 

BOOK  XXIIL 

113 

B.C.3160 
down  to  the  sea-coast  adjacent  to  Neapolis,  being  earnestly 
desirous  to  get  possession  of  a  sea-port  town  to  which  ships 
might  come  over  with  safety  from  Africa.  But  having  learned 
that  Neapolis  was  held  by  a  Roman  general,  Marcus  Junius 
Silanus,  who  had  been  invited  thither  by  the  Neapolitans, 
he  gave  up  all  hopes  of  Neapolis,  as  well  as  of  Nola,  and 
directed  his  route  to  Nuceria.  After  carrying  on  the  siege  of 
this  town  for  a*  considerable  time,  and  making  frequent  at¬ 
tempts  to  reduce  it  by  force,  and  also  endeavouring  in  vain 
to  gain  over,  sometimes  the  commons,  at  others  the  nobility, 
he  at  length  starved  it  into  a  surrender;  when  he  allowed  the 
garrison  no  other  terms  than  to  retire  without  arms,  and  with 
single  garments.  Afterwards,  as  he  had,  from  the  beginning, 
wished  to  appear  inclined  to  act  with  clemency  towards  all 
the  Italians,  except  the  Romans,  he  offered  rewards  and  ho¬ 
nours  to  such  of  the  garrison  as  should  stay  and  enlist  with 
him;  but  he  did  not  by  these  prospects  prevail  on  one  man 
to  join  him.  They  all  departed,  by  different  roads,  to  the 
several  cities  of  Campania,  wherever  each  man’s  connexions, 
or  casual  impulse  of  inclination,  directed  him;  but  most  of 
them  to  Nola  and  Neapolis.  About  thirtv  of  the  principal 
senators,  having  directed  their  course  to  Capua,  and  being 
refused  admittance  there,  on  account  of  their  having  shut 
their  gates  against  Hannibal,  retired  to  Cunise.  The  plunder 
of  Nuceria  was  given  to  the  soldiers,  and  the  city,  after 
being  sacked,  was  burned.  Marcellus  held  posse^^sion  of 
Nola;  for  the  continuance  of  which  he  relied,  not  more  on 
his  own  troops,  than  on  the  favourable  disposition  of  the 
principal  inhabitants.  But  strong  apprehensions  were  enter¬ 
tained  of  the  commons,  and  above -all  of  Lacius  Ban  it 
being  conscious  of  having  fomented  the  design  of  a  revolt, 
and  dreading  the  resentment  of  the  Roman  praetor,  he  was 
stimulated,  first,  to  betray  his  native  city,  and  then,  should 
that  attempt  miscarry,  to  go  over  to  the  eneinv.  He  was  a 
young  man  of  an  active  spirit,  and  distinguished  among  the 
VOL.  III. — P 

Ii4  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  556* 
cavalry  of  the  allies  almost  beyond  every  other:  he  had  been 
found  at  Cannae,  half  dead,  among  a  heap  of  lifeless  bodies, 
and  Hannibal  had,  with  much  kindness,  taken  care  of  him, 
until  he  recovered,  and  even  sent  him  home,  loaded  with 
presents.  Out  of  gratitude  for  these  favours,  he  now  wished 
to  bring  the  state  of  Nola  under  the  power  and  dominion  of 
the  Carthaginians.  It  did  not  escape  the  observation  of  the 
praetor,  that  he  was  perplexed  in  mind,  and  anxiously  em¬ 
ployed  in  devising  the  means  of  effecting  a  revolution. 
However,  as  it  was  necessary  to  check  him  by  punishment, 
or  to  conciliate  his  good  will  by  kind  treatment,  he  judged  it 
more  prudent  to  attach  to  himself  a  brave  and  vigorous  as¬ 
sociate,  than  merely  to  deprive  the  enemy  of  him:  sending, 
therefore,  for  him,  he  observed,  in  a  kind  manner,  that,  he 
must  certainly  be  envied  by  many  of  his  countrymen,  as 
was  easily  known  from  this  circumstance,  that  no  citizen  of 
Nola  ever  informed  him  of  his  many  extraordinary  exploits 
in  war;  but  when  any  man  served  in  a  Roman  camp,  his 
merit  could  not  continue  in  obscurity.  That  many  of  those, 
who  had  acted  with  him,  however,  had  reported  well  of  his 
conduct;  how  often,  and  to  what  great  dangers,  he  had  ex¬ 
posed  himself,  in  defence  of  the  welfare  and  dignity  of  the 
Roman  people;  particularly  that,  in  the  battle  of  Cannae,  he 
had  not  ceased  fighting,  until,  being  almost  entirely  exhausted, 
he  was  buried  under  a  heap  of  men,  horses,  and  arms.  Pro¬ 
ceed,  therefore,”  said  he,  “  in  your  meritorious  course;  from 
me  you  shall  meet  with  every  distinction,  every  reward;  in 
fine,  and  that  you  may  give  me  your  company  the  oftener, 
you  shall  find  that  such  conduct,  as  it  will  redound  to  your 
honour,  so  shall  it  to  your  emolument  too.”  While  the  young 
man  was  overjoyed  at  such  promises,  he  presented  him  with 
a  horse  of  uncommon  beauty,  ordered  the  quaestor  to  give 
him  five  hundred  silver  denarii ^  and  commanded  his  lictors 
to  admit  him  to  his  presence,  whenever  he  chose  to  come.  By 

*  16/.  2#.  ltd. 

BOOK  XXIII. 

115 

B.C.  216.] 
this  courteous  behaviour  of  Marcellas,  the  violent  temper  of 
the  youth  was  soothed  to  such  a  degree,  that,  from  that  time 
forward,  no  one  among  the  allies  exerted  more  bravery  and 
zeal  in  support  of  the  Roman  cause. 
XVI.  As  Hannibal  was  now  at  the  gates,  (for  he  had  led 
his  forces  back  from  Nuceria  to  Nola,)  and  as  the  commons 
of  the  latter  began  anew  to  meditate  a  revolt,  Marcellus  re¬ 
tired  within  the  walls;  not  that  he  was  under  an)^  appre¬ 
hension  for  the  safety  of  his  camp,  but  that  he  might  not  allow 
an  opportunity  of  betraying  the  city,  for  which  too  many  im¬ 
patiently  wished.  From  this  time,  it  was  the  practice  to  draw 
up  the  forces  on  both  sides  in  order  of  battle;  the  Romans, 
under  the  walls  of  Nola,  the  Carthaginians,  before  their  own 
camp;  in  consequence  of  which,  many  skirmishes  happened 
between  the  xamp  and  the  dity,  with  various  success;  the 
generals  being  unwilling  either  to  restrain  the  small  parties, 
who,  inconsiderately  challenged  the  foe,  or  to  give  the  signal 
for  a  general  enga^ment.  While  the  two  armies  continued  to 
post  themseltjjKif  this  manner,  the  men  of  the  first  rank  in 
Nola  gave  inf^mation  daily  to  Marcellus,  that  conferences 
were  held  by  night  between  the  commons  and  the  Cartha¬ 
ginians;  wherein  it  had  been  determined,  that,  when  the 
Roman  army  went  out  of  the  gates  on  its  march.,  the  populace 
should  make  plunder  of  their  baggage  and  packages;  then 
shut  the  gates,  and  possess  themselves  of  the  walls;  with  in¬ 
tent,  that,  having  thus  taken  into  their  own  hands  the  dispo¬ 
sal  of  their  own  affairs,  and  of  the  city,  they  should  give  ad¬ 
mittance  to  the  Carthaginians  instead  of  the  Romans.”  On 
receiving  this  intelligence,  Marcellus,  highly  commending  the 
Nolan  senators,  resolved  to  try  the  fortune  of  a  battle  before 
any  commotion  should  arise  within.  He  then  formed  his 
forces  in  three  divisions,  at  the  three  gates  which  faced  the 
enemy,  ordering  the  baggage  to  follow  in  the  rear,  and  the 
invalids,  servants,  and  sutler’s  boys  to  carry  palisades.  At 
the  gate  in  the  centre,  he  placed  the  chief  strength  of  the 

116 

HISTOEY  OF  ROME. 

[y.R.  536* 

legions  and  the  Roman  cavalry;  at  the  other  two  gates,  aa 
the  right  and  left,  the  new-raised  soldiers,  light  infantry,  and 
the  cavalry  of  the  allies.  The  Nolans  were  forbidden  to  come 
near  the  walls  or  gates;  and  the  troops,  intended  as  a  reserve, 
were  appointed  to  guard  the  baggage,  lest  any  attack  might 
be  made  on  it,  while  the  legions  should  be  engaged.  Mar¬ 
shalled  in  this  manner,  they  stood  within  the  gates.  Hanni¬ 
bal,  after  standing  as  he  had  done  for  several  days  past,  with 
his  troops  under  arms  and  in  order  of  battle,  until  the  day 
was  far  advanced,  began  to  w'onder,  that  neither  the  Roman 
army  came  out  of  the  gates,  nor  one  of  their  soldiers  was  t<^ 
be  seen  on  the  walls.  Concluding  that  the  conferences  had 
been  discovered,  and  that  fear  had  rendered  the  Romans  un¬ 
willing  to  stir,  he  sent  back  part  of  his  soldiers  to  the  camp, 
with  orders  to  bring  up  to  the  front  with  haste,  every  thing 
requisite  for  assaulting  the  cit) ;  for  he  was  persuaded,  that  if 
he  pressed  them  vigorously,  while  they  declined  action,  the 
populace  would  rise  in  his  favour.  While  his  men  in  the  van 
ran  up  and  down,  each  intent  upon  the  %d|||||ess  assigned 
him,  and  the  line  drew  nigh  to  the  walls,  Marcellus,  on  a 
sudden,  throwing  open  the  gate,  ordered  the  charge  to  be 
funded,  the  shout  to  be  raised,  and  the  infantry  first,  then 
the  cavalry,  to  rush  forth  with  all  possible  fury.  These  had 
now  spread  abundance  of  terror  and  confusion  through  the 
centre  of  the  enemy’s  line,  when  from  the  two  gates,  on  the 
right  and  left,  the  lieutenant-general  Publius  Valerius  Flaccus, 
and  Caius  Aurelius,  burst  out  against  the  wings.  The  ser¬ 
vants,  sutler’s  boys,  and  the  whole  of  those  who  were  left  to 
guard  the  baggage,  joined  to  increase  the  shout;  so  that  to  the 
Carthaginians,  who  had  been  led  to  despise  them,  chiefly  by 
an  opinion  of  the  smallness  of  dieir  numbers,  they  suddenly 
exhibited  an  appearance  of  a  very  considerable  army.  I  can 
scarcely  indeed  take  upon  me  to  assert,  as  some  writers  have 
done,  that  two  thousand  three  hundred  of  the  enemy  were 
slain,  and  that  die  loss  of  the  Romans  was  no  more  than  five 

BOOK  XXIII- 

117 

B.C.  216.] 
hundred:  but,  whether  the  advantage  was  so  great  or  not,  the 
success  of  that  day  was  highly  important;  I  know  not,  whether 
it  was  not  the  most  so  of  any  obtained  during  that  war:  for, 
to  avoid  being  conquered  by  Hannibal  was,  to  the  troops  who 
were  victorious  on  that  day,  a  matter  of  greater  difficulty  than 
\o  conquer  him  afterwards. 
XVII.  Hannibal,  thus  precluded  from  all  hope  of  getting 
possession  of  Nola,  marched  away  to  Acerrae;  and  then  Mar- 
cellus,  immediately  shutting  the  gates,  and  posting  guards  to 
prevent  any  person  from  going  out  of  the  city,  held  a  judicial 
inquiry  in  the  Forum  concerning  those  who  had  entered  into 
a  private  correspondence  with  the  enemy.  Above  seventy 
were  convicted  of  treasonable  practices.  These  he  beheaded, 
and  adjudged  their  effects  to  be  confiscated  to  the  use  of  the 
Roman  people;  and  then,  having  lodged  the  government  in 
the  hands  of  the  senate,  he  marched  thence  with  all  his  forces, 
and  taking  post  above  Suessula,  pitched  his  camp  there.  The 
Carthaginian  first  endeavoured  to  entice  the  people  of  Acerrse 
to  a  voluntary  surrender,  and  afterwards,  on  finding  them 
obstinate,  prepared  to  invest  and  assault  the  town.  However, 
the  Acerrans  possessed  more  courage  than  strength.  When, 
therefore,  they  perceived  the  enemy  drawing  lines  of  circum« 
vallation  round  their  walls,  despairing  of  being  able  to  defend 
the  city,  they  seized  the  opportunity,  before  the  works  were 
drawn  completely  round,  and  stealing  away  in  the  dead  of 
night,  through  the  space  unoccupied  by  the  lines,  which  was 
negligently  guarded,  effected  their  escape,  some  through  the 
roads,  others  through  pathless  ways,  as  each  was  led  by  de¬ 
sign  or  mistake,  into  those  cities  of  Campania,  which  they 
knew  had  not  deserted  the  alliance  with  Rome.  Hannibal, 
having  sacked  and  burned  Acerrse,  and  hearing  that  the 
Roman  dictator,  with  his  legions,  were  seen  from  Casilinum 
at  some  distance,  began  to  apprehend,  lest,  in  consequence  of 
the  enemy  being  encamped  in  the  neighbourhoot^i,  some  dis¬ 
turbance  might  arise  even  at  Capua,  and  therefore  led  his 

118 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  536. 

forces  to  Casilinum.  That  town  was  held  at  this  time  by 
five  hundred  Praenestines,  with  a  small  number  of  Romans 
and  Latines,  whom  the  news  of  the  disaster  at  Cannae  had 
brought  thither.  The  former,  because  the  levies  at  Praeneste 
were  not  completed  at  the  appointed  day,  had  set  out  from 
home  too  late;  and,  having  arrived  at  Casilinum  before  the 
account  of  the  defeat,  and  being  there  joined  by  several 
others,  both  Romans  and  allies,  were  marching  forwards  in 
a  very  considerable  body,  when  the  news  of  the  fight  at 
Cannae  induced  them  to  turn  back.  Here  being  feared  by,  and 
fearing  the  Campanians,  they  spent  several  days  in  guarding 
against  plots,  and  forming  them  in  turn;  when,  receiving 
certain  information  of  the  revolt  intended  at  Capua,  and  of 
Hannibal’s  being  received  into  the  town,  they  put  to  death 
the  obnoxious  inhabitants  b\  night,  and  seized  on  that  part 
of  the  <ity  which  stands  on  this  side  of  the  Vultumus,  for 
it  is  divided  by  that  river.  And  this  was  all  the  garrison  the 
Romans  had  at  Casilinum.  To  these  was  added  a  cohort  of 
Perusians,  consisting  of  four  hundred  and  sixty  men,  driven 
hither  by  the  same  bad  news  which  had  brought  the  Prsenes- 
tincs  a  few  days  before.  The  number  of  soldiers  \vas  now 
nearh'  sufficient  for  the  defence  of  a  place  of  such  small  ex¬ 
tent,  and  which  had  one  side  inclosed  by  the  river.  A  scarcity 
of  corn  made  them  even  think  the  number  of  men  too  great. 
XVlIl.  When  Hannibal  came  within  a  small  distance  of 
the  place,  he  sent  forward  a  body  of  Gaetulians,  under  an 
officer  named  Isalca,  with  orders,  that  if  an  opportunity  could 
be  found  of  conferring  with  the  garrison,  he  should  first  en¬ 
deavour  to  allure  them,  by  expressions  of  kindness,  to  open 
the  gates  and  receive  his  troops;  but,  if  they  persisted  in  ob¬ 
stinate  opposition,  that  he  should  then  put  his  forces  in  action, 
and  try  if  he  could  on  any  side  break  into  the  city.  W’hen 
they  came  near  the  walls,  all  being  silent,  it  was  believed  that 
the  town  was  evacuated,  and  the  barbarian,  supposing  that 
tlie  garrison  had  retired  through  fear,  was  preparing  to  break 

B.C.  216.] 

BOOK  XXIII. 

119 

down  the  gates;  but  these  flying  suddenly  open,  two  cohorts, 
drawn  up  within  for  the  purpose,  rushed  out  with  great  im¬ 
petuosity,  and  made  a  considerable  slaughter.  The  first  body 
of  assailants  being  thus  repulsed,  Maharbal  was  sent  up  with 
a  more  powerful  force;  but  neither  could  he  withstand  the 
sally  of  the  cohorts.  At  last,  Hannibal,  pitching  his  camp 
close  under  the  walls,  prepared  to  assault  this  small  town  and 
garrison  with,  the  whole  of  his  troops;  completely  encompas¬ 
sing  it,  and  while  urging  on  the  attack  with  briskness  in 
every  part  at  once,  he  lost  a  great  number  of  his  soldiers, 
particularly  of  those  who  were  most  for\v^ard  in  action,  by 
weapons  thrown  from  the  walls  and  towers.  At  one  time, 
the  besieged  having  had  the  courage  to  sally  out,  Hannibal, 
by  placing  a  line  of  elephants  in  their  way,  was  very  near 
cutting  off  their  retreat.  He  drove  them,  however,  in  con¬ 
fusion  into  the  town,  after  they  had  lost  a  great  many  men  in 
proportion  to  the  smallness  of  their  number;  and  more  would 
have  fallen,  had  not  night  put  an  end  to  the  engagement.  On 
the  following  day,  the  besiegers  were  Animated  with  extra¬ 
ordinary  ardour  to  carry  on  the  assault,  especially  as  a  mural 
crown  of  gold  was  proposed  as  a  prize,  and  as  the  general  him¬ 
self  upbraided  the  conquerors  of  Saguntum  with  their  tardy 
advances  in  the  siege  of  a  trifling  fortress,  situate  on  a  level 
ground;  reminding  each  in  particular,  as  well  as  the  w^hole 
army  in  general,  of  Trebia,  Trasimenus,  and  Cannaj.  They^ 
then  began  to  work  their  machines,  and  to  sink  mines;  nor 
were  those  allies  of  the  Romans  deficient  either  in  vigour  or 
skill,  to  counteract  the  attempts  of  the  enemy-.  Against  the 
machines  they-  erected  bulw-arks,  by  countermines  intercepted 
the  mines,  baffling  all  the  efforts  of  the  Carthaginian  both 
open  and  concealed,  until  even  shame  compelled  him  to 
abandon  the  enterprise;  but,  lest  he  should  appear  to  have 
entirely  given  up  the  design,  he  fortified  a  camp,  where  he 
posted  a  small  body  of  troops,  and  then,  withdrew  into  winter- 
quarters  at  Capua,  Here,  diu'ing  the  greater  part  of  the  win- 

120 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  536. 

ter,  he  kept  his  forces  lodged  in  houses,  men  who  had  fre¬ 
quently  and  long  endured  with  firmness  every  hardship  to 
which  human  nature  is  liable;  and  had  never  been  accustomed 
to,  nor  ever  had  experienced  the  comforts  of  prosperity.  These 
men,  therefore,  whom  no  power  of  adversity  had  been  able 
to  subdue,  were  ruined  by  an  excess  of  good  fortune  and  by 
immoderate  pleasures.  These  produced  effects  the  more  per¬ 
nicious;  because,  being  hitherto  unaccustomed,  as  I  have  said, 
to  such  indulgences,  they  plunged  into  them  with  the  greater 
avidity.  Sleep,  and  wine,  and  feasting,  and  harlots,  and  baths, 
and  idleness,  with  which,  through  habit,  they  became  daily 
more  and  more  delighted,  enervated  both  their  minds  and 
bodies  to  such  a  degree,  that  they  owed  their  preservation, 
rather  to  the  name  they  had  acquired  by  their  past  victories, 
than  to  their  present  strength.  In  the  opinion  of  persons 
skilled  in  the  art  of  war,  the  general  was  guilty  of  a  greater 
fault  in  this  instance,  than  in  not  leading  forward  his  army 
directly  to  the  city  of  Rome,  after  the  battle  of  Cannae:  for 
that  dilatory  conducfmight  be  supposed  only  to  have  deferred 
the  conquest  for  a  time,  whereas  this  latter  error  left  him 
destitute  of  the  strength  to  effect  it.  Accordingly  he  marched 
out  of  Capua  as  if  with  a  different  army,  for  it  retained  not, 
in  any  particular,  the  least  remains  of  the  former  discipline. 
Most  of  the  men  returned  to  the  field  encumbered  with 
harlots;  and,  as  soon  as  they  began  to  live  in  tents,  and  were 
obliged  to  undergo  the  fatigue  of  marches,  and  other  military 
labours;  like  raw  recruits,  their  strength  both  of  body  and 
mind  failed  them:  and  from  that  time,  during  the  whole 
course  of  the  summer  campaign,  great  numbers  used  to  steal 
away  from  their  standards,  without  leave,  and  the  only  lurk¬ 
ing  place  of  all  these  deserters  was  Capua. 
XIX.  However,  when  the  rigour  of  the  season  bc^n  to 
abate,  he  drew  his  troops  out  of  their  winter-quarters,  and 
returned  to  Casilinum;  where,  notwithstanding  there  had 
been  a  cessation  from  attacks,  yet  the  continued  blockade  had 

B.C.  216.] 

BOOK  XXIIL 

121 

reduced  the  townsmen  and  garrison  to  the  extremity  of  want. 
The  Roman  camp  was  commanded  by  Titus  Sempronius^  the 
dictator  having  gone  to  Rome  to  take  the  auspices  anew. 
Marcellus,  who,  on  his  part,  earnestly  wished  to  bring  relief 
to  the  besieged,  was  prevented  by  the  overflowing  of  the  river 
Vulturnus,  and  by  the  earnest  entreaties  of  the  people  of  Nola 
and  Acerrae,  who  dreaded  the  Campanians,  in  case  of  the 
departure  ol  the  Roman  troops.  Gracchus,  having  received 
injunctions  from  the  dictator  not  to  engage  in  any  enterprize 
during  his  absence,  but  to  maintain  his  post  near  Casilinum, 
did  not  venture  to  stir,  although  he  received  such  accounts 
from  that  town,  as  were  sufficient  to  overcome  every  degree 
of  patience.  It  appeared  that  several,  unable  longer  to  endure 
hunger,  had  thrown  themselves  down  precipices,  and  that 
others  stood  unarmed  on  the  wails,  exposing  their  naked 
bodies  to  the  blows  of  the  missive  weapons.  Gracchus  felt 
gpeat  concern  for  their  distresses;  but  he  neither  dared  to  en¬ 
gage  in  fight,  contrary  to  the  dictator’s  order,  (and  fight  he 
plainly  must,  if  he  attempted  openly  to  throw  in  provisions,) 
nor  had  he  any  hope  of  getting  them  conveyed  in  clandes¬ 
tinely  by  his  men.  He  therefore  collected  corn  from  all  parts 
of  the  country  round;  and  having  filled  therewith  a  great 
number  of  casks,  sent  a  messenger  to  Casilinum  to  the  ma- 
gistrate,  desiring  that  the  people  should  catch  the  casks  which 
the  river  w  ould  bring  down.  The  following  night  was  passed 
xn  attentively  watching  for  the  completion  of  the  hopes  raised 
by  the  Roman  messenger,  when  the  casks,  being  sent  along 
the  middle  of  the  stream,  floated  down  to  the  town,  and  the 
corn  was  divided  equally  among  them  all.  The  same  stratagem 
was  practised  with  success  on  the  following  night,  and  on  the 
third.  The  ca^ks  were  put  into  the  riv’er,  and  conve3"ed  to 
the  place  of  their  destination  in  the  course  of  the  same  night, 
by  which  means  they  escaped  the  notice  of  the  enemy’s 
guards;  but  the  river  being  afterwards  rendered  more  rapid 
by  continued  rains,  a  whirling  eddy  drove  them  across  to  the 
yoL.  III.— Q 

122 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R,  536. 

side  where  the  enemy’s  guards  were  posted,  and  there  they 
were  discovered  sticking  among  osiers  which  grew  on  the 
banks.  This  being  reported  to  Hannibal,  care  was  taken  for 
the  future  to  guard  the  Vultumus  with  greater  vigilance,  so 
that  no  supply,  sent  down  by  it  to  the  city,  should  pass  with¬ 
out  discover}^  Notwithstanding  which,  quantities  of  nuts 
being  poured  into  the  river  at  the  Roman  camp,  and  floating 
down  in  the  middle  of  the  stream  to  Casilinum,  were  stopped 
there  with  hurdles.  The  scarcity,  however,  at  last  became  so 
excessive,  that  tearing  off  the  straps  and  the  leathern  covers 
of  their  shields,  and  softening  them  in  boiling  water,  they 
endeavoured  to  chew  them,  nor  did  they  abstain  from  mice 
or  any  other  kind  of  animal.  They  even  dug  up  every  sort  of 
herb  and  root  that  grew  at  the  foot  of  the  ramparts  of  the 
town,  and  when  the  enemy  had  ploughed  up  all  the  ground 
round  the  wall,  that  produced  any  herbs,  they  sowed  it  with 
turnip  seed,  which  made  Hannibal  exclaim,  Am  I  to  %it 
here  before  Casilinum  until  these  grow  Although  he  had 
hitherto  refused  to  listen  to  any  terms  of  capitulation,  yet  he 
now  allowed  overtures  to  be  made  to  him,  respecting  the  re¬ 
deeming  of  the  men  of  free  condition.  An  agreement  was 
made,  that  for  each  of  these  a  ransom  should  be  paid  of  seven 
ounces  of  gold;  and  then,  having  received  the  ratification  of 
the  same,  the  garrison  surrendered.  They  were  detained  in 
custody  until  all  the  gold  was  paid,  and  afterwards  honoura¬ 
bly  escorted  to  Cumse.  This  is  a  more  probable  account  than 
that  which  relates  that  they  were  slain  by  a  body  of  cavalry, 
ordered  to  attack  them  on  their  departure.  The  greatest  part 
of  them  were  Prsenestines;  out  of  five  hundred  and  seventy 
of  these,  (the  number  who  wrere  in  the  garrison,)  almost  one 
half  perished  by  the  sword  or  by  famine,  the  rest  returned  in 
safety  to  Prseneste  with  their  commander  Manicius,  who  had 
formerly  been  a  notary  there.  The  truth  of  this  relation  is 
attested  by  a  statue  of  him  erected  in  the  Forum  at  Prseneste, 
clad  in  a  coat  of  mail,  and  dressed  in  a  gown,  with  the  head 

BOOK  XXIII. 

123 

B.C.  216.] 

covered;  and  by  three  images,  with  an  inscription  engraved 
on  a  plate  of  brass,  importing  that  Manicius  vowed  these 
in  behalf  of  the  soldiers,  who  were  in  the  garrison  at  Casili- 
num,”  The  same  inscription  was  placed  under  the  three 
images  in  the  temple  of  Fortune. 
XX.  The  town  of  Casilinum  was  restored  to  the  Campani¬ 
ans,  and  strengthened  by  a  reinforcement  of  sev^en  hundred 
men  from  Hannibal’s  army,  lest,  on  the  departure  of  the 
Carthaginian,  the  Romans  should  attack  it.  To  the  Praenestine 
soldiers,  the  Roman  senate  decreed  two  years'  pay,  and  im¬ 
munity  from  military"  service  for  five  years.  Being  olfered^he 
rights  of  Roman  citizens,  in  consideration  of  their  braveiy-, 
they  chose  to  remain  in  their  own  community.  With  regard 
to  the  fate  of  the  Perusians,  our  information  is  not  so  clear; 
for  we  receive  no  light  either  from  any  monument  of  their 
own,  or  any  decree  of  the  Romans.  About  the  same  time,  the 
Pete] bans,  who  alone  of  all  the  Bruttians  had  persevered  in 
maintaining  friendship  with  Rome,  were  attacked  not  only  by 
the  Carthaginians,  who  were  in  possession  of  the  adjacent 
country,  but  also  by  the  other  Bruttians,  who  resented  their 
following  separate  counsels.  Unable  to  withstand  such  a 
multitude  of  foes,  the  Petellians  sent  ambassadors  to  Rome 
to  solicit  succour.  The  utmost  compassion  was  excited  in  the 
breasts  both  of  the  senate  and  people  by  these  men’s  prayers 
and  tears;  for  on  being  told  that  they  must  depend  on  them¬ 
selves  for  safety,  they  burst  out  into  piteous  lamentations  in 
the  porch  of  the  senate-house.  The  affair  being  proposed  a 
second  time  to  the  consideration  of  the  senators,  by  Manius 
Pomponius  the  praetor,  after  examining  into  the  resources  of 
the  commonwealth  in  every  quarter,  they  were  obliged  to 
acknowledge  that  they  were  not  now  in  a  capacity  of  assisting 
their  distant  allies;  they  therefore  desired  the  ambassadors  to 
return  home,  and  after  doing  their  utmost  to  fulfil  the  duty 
of  faithful  confederates,  to  provide  for  their  own  safety  in  the 
best  manner  the  present  circumstances  would  permit.  When 

124 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  536. 

the  result  of  this  embassy  was  reported  to  the  Petellians, 
their  senate  was  suddenly  seized  with  such  grief  and  terror, 
that  many  of  them  advised  to  abandon  the  city,  and  seek 
refuge  wherever  each  could  find  it;  others,  that  since  they 
were  forsaken  by  their  old  connexions,  they  should  unite 
with  the  rest  of  the  Bruttians,  and  through  their  mediation 
surrender  themselves  to  Hannibal.  However,  the  majority 
were  of  opinion  that  no  step  should  be  taken  rashly,  or  in  a 
hurry;  but  that  the  matter  should  be  considered  anew.  Ac¬ 
cordingly  it  was  taken  under  deliberation  on  the  following 
day,  when  their  fears  had  in  some  measure  subsided,  the 
more  considerable  persons  prevailing  on  them  to  bring  in  all 
their  effects  from  the  countr}-,  and  to  fortify  the  wails  and 
the  city. 
XXL  About  this  time  letters  were  brought  to  Rome  from 
Sicily  and  Sardinia.  Those  written  from  Sicily  by  Titus 
Otacilius,  pro-praetor,  were  first  read  in  the  senate;  the  con¬ 
tents  were,  that  Publius  Furius,  the  praetor,  had  come  from 
Africa  to  Lilybaeum  with  his  fleet,  and  that  he  himself  was 
grievously  wounded,  so  that  his  life  was  in  imminent  danger, 
that  neither  pay  nor  corn  was  furnished  to  the  soldiers  and 
marines  at  the  regular  times,  nor  were  there  any  funds  from 
which  they  could  be  obtained;  that  he  earnestly  recommended 
that  supplies  of  these  articles  might  be  sent  as  soon  as  possi¬ 
ble,  and  also,  that,  if  it  seemed  proper,  one  of  the  new  praetors 
might  be  appointed  to  succeed  him  in  his  employment.”  The 
letters  of  Aulus  Cornelius  Mammula,  pro-praetor,  from  Sar¬ 
dinia,  were  nearly  of  the  same  purport  respecting  hay  and 
corn.  To  both  the  same  answer  was  given,  that  there  were 
no  means  of  forwarding  supplies,  and  that  they  themselves 
must  take  measures  for  providing  for  their  fleets  and  armies. 
Titus  Otacilius,  however,  sending  ambassadors  to  Hiero,  the 
only  resource  of  the  Roman  people  in  that  quarter,  received 
from  him  as  much  money  as  was  necessary  for  the  pay  ol 
the  troops,  and  corn  sufficient  for  six  months.  In  Sardinia, 

BOOK  XXIII. 

125 

B.C.  216.] 
the  allied  states  gave  a  liberal  contribution  to  Cornelius.  At 
Rome  there  was  such  a  scarcity  of  money,  that  it  was  judged 
requisite,  on  a  proposal  made  to  that  purpose,  by  Marcus 
Minucius,  plebeian  tribune,  to  constitute  three  public  bank¬ 
ers;  these  were  Lucius  ^milius  Papus,  who  had  been  consul 
and  censor,  Marcus  Atilius  Regulus,  who  had  been  twice 
consul,  and  Lucius  Scribonius  Libo,  who  was  then  plebeian 
tribune.  Two  Atilii,  Marcus  and  Caius,  being  appointed 
commissioners  for  the  purpose,  dedicated  the  temple  of  Con¬ 
cord,  which  Lucius  Manlius  had  vowed  in  his  prastorship. 
Three  pontiffs  were  also  elected,  Quintus  Csecelius  Metelius, 
Quintus  Fabius  Maximus,  and  Quintus  Fulvius  Fiaccus,  in 
the  room  of  Publius  Scantinius,  deceased,  and  of  Lucias 
iEmilius  Paullus,  the  consul,  and  Quintus  iLlius  Paetus,  who 
had  fallen  in  the  battle  of  Cannse. 
XXI L  When  the  senate  had  repaired,  as  far  as  could  be 
effected  by  human  wisdom,  the  losses  sustained  b\  other 
parts  of  the  state,  through  the  uninterrupted  course  of  disas¬ 
ters  in  which  fortune  had  involved  them,  they  at  length 
turned  their  thoughts  on  themselves,  on  the  solitude  that  ap¬ 
peared  in  the  senate  house,  and  the  small  number  of  those 
who  assembled  in  the  great  council  of  the  nation:  for  the 
council  had  not  been  filled  up  since  the  censorship  of  Lucius 
iLmilius,  and  Caius  Flaminius,  although,  during  these  five 
years,  the  unfortunate  battles,  besides  the  casualties  to  which 
every  man  is  subject,  had  swept  off  such  a  number  of  its 
members.  As  the  dictator  was  now  gone,  after  the  loss  of 
Casilinum,  to  join  the  army,  this  business  was,  at  the  earnest 
request  of  all,  proposed  to  the  consideration  of  the  senate  by 
Manius  Pomponius,  a  praetor.  On  which  Spu'rius  Carviluis, 
after  having,  in  a  long  speech,  lamented  not  oniv  the  few¬ 
ness,  but  even  the  total  want  of  citizens,  who  might  he  cho¬ 
sen  into  their  body,  said,  that  for  the  purpose  ol  filling  up 
the  senate,  and  of  forming  a  closer  connexion  v  iin  the  La- 
tine  nation,  he  recommended,  with  all  the  earnestness  which 

J26 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  536. 

a  matter  of  that  importance  demanded,  that,  If  the  Roman 
fathers  thought  proper  so  to  order,  two  senators  out  of  each 
of  the  Latine  states  should  be  invented  with  the  rights  of  ci¬ 
tizens,  and  adopted  in  the  room  of  the  members  deceased  ” 
This  prop6sition  the  senators  heard  with  no  less  disgust  than 
had  been  excited  by  a  demand  of  the  same  purport,  formerly 
made  by  the  Latines  themselv^es.  A  murmur  of  indignation, 
indeed,  spread  through  every  part  of  the  assembly,  Titus 
Manlius  in  particular,  saying,  that  there  still  existed  one 
of  the  same  race  with  that  consul,  who  formerly  declared 
in  the  Capitol,  that  he  would  with  his  own  hand  put  to  death 
any  Latine  whom  he  should  see  in  the  senate-house.” 
Quintus  Fabius  Maximus  said,  that  “never  was  the  men¬ 
tion  of  any  business  in  that  house  more  perfectly  unseason¬ 
able  than  was  (when  the  minds  of  the  allies  were  in  suspense, 
and  their  fidelity  doubtful,)  the  touching  on  a  subject  which 
might  create  farther  disquiet  among  them.  That  all  present  were 
bound  to  bury  in  universal  forgetfulness  those  inconsiderate 
ivords  of  one  individual;  for  that  if  ever  any  matter  occurred 
In  that  house  that  demanded  secrecy,  and  induced  a  solemn 
obligation  to  silence,  it  was  this  proposition,  which,  beyond 
every  other,  ought  to  be  covered,  concealed,  and  consigned 
to  oblivion,  and  to  pass  as  if  it  never  had  been  uttered.” 
This  prevented  any  farther  discussion.  They  then  came  to  a 
resolution,  that  a  dictator  should  be  created,  to  elect  mem¬ 
bers  into  the  senate;  and  that  he  should  be  a  person  who 
had  formerly  been  censor,  and  was  the  first  in  seniority  liv¬ 
ing,  of  those  who  had  held  that  office.  They  likewise  ordered, 
that  the  consul  Caius  Terentlus  should  be  sent  for,  in  order 
to  nominate  the  dictator.  Leaving  his  troops  in  Apulia,  he 
came  thence  by  long  journies  to  Rome,  and  pursuant  to  the 
decree  of  the  senate,  on  the  following  night,  according  to  the 
custom,  nominated  Marcus  Fabius  Buteo  dictator,  for  six 
months,  without  a  master  of  the  horse. 
XXIII.  Buteo  mounted  the  rostrum,  attended  by  his  lie- 

BOOK  XXIIL 

127 

B.C.2I6.3 
tors,  and  declared,  that  **  he  did  not  approve  of  two  dictators 
at  one  time,  of  which  there  had  hitherto  been  no  precedent; 
neither  was  he  content  with  his  own  appointment  to  the  dic¬ 
tatorship,  without  a  master  of  the  horse;  nor  of  the  censorial 
power  being  entrusted  to  a  single  person,  and  to  that  person 
a  second  time:  nor  yet  of  authority  being  granted  to  a  dicta¬ 
tor  for  six  months,  unless  he  were  to  command  in  war.  But 
those  particulars,  in  which  accident,  the  exigencies  of  the 
times,  and  necessity,  had  caused  such  irregularities,  he  would 
reduce  into  regular  order.  For,  in  the  first  place,  he  would 
not  displace  any  of  those  senators  whom  Caius  Flaminius 
and  Lucius  iEmilius  had  elected,  in  their  censorship;  he 
would  only  order  the  list  of  them  to  be  transcribed,  and  read 
over;  for  no  single  person  ought  to  have  authority  to  judge 
and  determine  on  the  character  and  morals  of  a  senator; 
and  that,  in  substituting  others  in  the  room  of  those  deceased, 
he  would  regulate  his  choice  in  such  a  manner,  that  the  pre¬ 
ference  should  be  seen  to  lie  between  one  rank  and  another, 
not  between  one  man  and  another.”  When  the  list  of  the 
old  senate  had  been  read,  he  then  elected,  first,  in  room  of 
the  deceased  members,  those  who,  since  the  censorship  of 
Lucius  iEmilius  and  Caius  Flaminius,  had  obtained  any  curuie 
magistracy,,  and  had  not  yet  been  elected  senators,  and  these 
in  order,  according  to  the  priority  of  their  appointments  to 
office.  Next,  he  made  choice  of  those  who  had  been  sediles^ 
plebeian  tribunes,  or  quaestors.  Then,  out  of  such  as  had  never 
held  a  public  office,  he  selected  those  who  had  spoils  taken 
from  an  enemy  hanging  in  their  houses,  or  had  received  the 
prize  of  a  civic  crown.  Having,  in  this  manner,  and  with  the  ? 
entire  approbation  of  all  ranks  of  men,  elected  into  the  senate 
one  hundred  and  seventy-seven  members,  he  instantly  abdi¬ 
cated  his  office,  ordered  the  iictors  to  depart,  and  came  down 
from  the  rostrum  a  private  citizen.  He  then  mixed  with  the 
crowd  employed  in  their  priv’^ate  concerns,  or  who  were  loi¬ 
tering  in  the  Forum,  and  this  he  did  to  prevent  them  from 

128 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.536. 

quitHnjy  the  place  to  escort  him.  However,  the  warmth  of 
tbci*  al  was  not  cooled  by  that  delay,  and  they  conducted 
him  in  vast  numbers. 
'  Xi  Y.  On  the  following  night,  the  consul  set  out  on  his 
return  to  the  army,  without  acquainting  the  senate,  lest  he 
should  be  detained  in  the  city  on  account  of  the  elections : 
who  next  day,  on  the  business  being  proposed  by  the  praetor 
Manias  Pnmponiiis,  decreed  that  a  letter  should  be  w'ritten 
to  the  dictator,  with  directions  that,  if  he  judged  it  consistent 
wiih  the  public  good,  he  should  come  home  to  hold  the  elec¬ 
tion  of  consuls,  and  should  bring  the  master  of  the  horse,  and 
the  prsetor  Marcus  Marcellus,  in  order  that  government  might 
learn  from  them  in  person,  the  state  of  the  public  affairs,  and 
adept  such  measures  as  circumstances  required.  All  those 
came  whose  prchcnce  was  desired,  leaving  lieutenant-gene¬ 
rals  to  command  the  legions.  The  dictator,  speaking  briefly 
and  modestly  of  his  own  services,  attributed  a  great  share 
of  the  honour  acquired  to  the  master  of  the  horse,  Tiberius 
Sempronius  Gracchus.  He  then  published  a  proclamation  for 
an  asseuihly  of  election,  in  which  were  created  consuls,  Lu¬ 
cius  Pobtumius,  the  third  time,  being  absent,  employed  in 
the  government  of  the  province  of  Gaul ;  and  Tiberius  Sem- 
proums  Gracchus,  then  master  of  the  horse,  and  curule  aedile. 
Then  followed  the  choosing  of  praetors :  these  were  Marcus 
Valerius  Laevinus,  Appius  Claudius  Pulcher,  Quintus  Ful- 
vius  Fiaccus,  and  Quintus  Mucius  Scaevola.  As  soon  as  the 
appointment  of  magistrates  was  finished,  the  dictator  returned 
to  Teanum,  the  winter-quarters  of  his  army,  leaving  the 
master  of  the  horse  at  Rome  ;  in  order  that,  as  he  was  to 
enter  into  office  in  a  few  days,  he  might  take  the  judgment 
of  the  senate  concerning  the  levying  and  procuring  troops 
for  the  service  of  the  year.  While  the  public  attention  was 
employed  principally  on  this  business,  an  account  was 
brought  of  a  new  disaster,  fortune  crowding  into  this  year 
events  of  that  nature  in  constant  succession  ^  this  was,  that 

B.C.  216. 

BOOK  XXIII. 

129 

Lucius  Postumius,  consul  elect,  together  with  his  army,  had 
been  cut  off  in  Gaul.  On  the  road  through  which  he  was  to  ^ 
lead  his  army,  there  was  a  wood  of  vast  extent,  the  Gauls  call¬ 
ed  it  Latina:  the  trees  of  this  wood,  adjoining  the  road  on  the 
right  and  left,  ’  the  Gauls  had  cut  in  such  a  manner,  that  as 
long  as  they  were  untouched  they  stood,  but  on  being  push¬ 
ed,  even  with  the  slightest  force,  they  fell.  Postumius  had 
with  him  two  Roman  legions,  and  had  enlisted  such  numbers 
from  among  the  allies  on  the  coast  of  the  upper  sea,  that  he 
led  an  army  of  tw’enty-five  thousand  men  into  the  enemy’s 
country.  The  Gauls  posted  themselves  round  the  outer 
skirts  of  the  w^ood,  and,  when  the  army  on  its  march  entered 
the  pass,  they  then  pushed  the  outermost  trees  of  those  which 
they  had  cut ;  these  fell  against  the  next,  and  those  likewise 
against  others  unsteady  before,  until,  overwhelming  the  Ro¬ 
mans  on  all  sides,  they  crushed  in  one  universal  ruin,  men, 
horses,  and  arms  ;  so  that  scarcely  ten  of  them  made  their 
escape;  the  greater  part  were  bruised  to  death  by  the'  trunks 
of  the  trees,  or  entangled  in  the  fragments  of  branches,  while 
the  remainder,  dismayed  by  this  sudden  and  strange  disaste?', 
were  slain  by  the  Gauls,  who,  in  arms,  enclosed  every  part 
of  the  wood.  Out  of  so  great  a  number,  a  ven^  few  were 
taken  prisoners ;  these  pushing  for  a  bridge  which  lay  over 
a  river,  were  intercepted  by  the  enemy,  who  had  taken  pos¬ 
session  of  it  before.  Here  Postumius  fell,  fighting  with  the 
utmost  bravery  to  avoid  being  taken.  This  general’s  head 
the  Boians  cut  off,  and,  together  with  the  spoils  taken  from 
his  bodv,  carried  it  in  triumph  into  a  temple,  which  they 
held  in  the  highest  reverence.  Afterwards  emptying  the 
head,  as  their  custom  is,  they  enchased  the  skull  with  gold, 
and  this  they  used  as  a  consecrated  vessel,  out  of  which  they 
made  libations  on  high  festivals  ;  and  as  a  cup  to  be  drank 
out  of  by  the  officiating  priest,  and  the  other  priests  of  the 
place.  The  booty  •also,  which  fell  into  the  hands  of  the 
Gauls,  was  as  abundant,  as  their  victory  was  complete  :  for 
VOL,  in. — R 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[y.R.  536 

although  hardly  any  escaped  destruction  from  Ae  falling  of 
the  wood,  yet  every  thing  else  was  found  spread  regularly 
along  Ae  line  of  the  lifeless  troops  ;  because  there  had  been 
no  flight,  and  consequently  no  removal  of  any  thing. 
XXV.  On  the  news  of  this  calamity,  such  dismay  posses¬ 
sed  the  public  during  several  days,  that  Ae  shops  were  shut, 
and  solitude,  like  that  of  midnight,  prevailed  through  Ae 
whole  city,  until  the  government  charged  the  ®diles  to  go 
round  through  all  Ae  streets,  to  order  the  shops  to  be  opened, 
and  this  appearance  of  public  mourning  to  be  laid  aside. 
Then  Tiberius  Sempronius,  assembling  Ae  senate,  endea¬ 
voured  to  console  them  by  saying,  that  they  who  had  not 
sunk  under  Ae  ruinous  disaster  at  Cannae,  should  not  let  Aeir 
courage  be  depressed  by  misfortunes  of  less  moment.”  He 
observed,  that  provided  their  operations  against  Hannibal, 
and  their  Carthaginian  enemies,  were  attended  wiA  success, 
{as  he  hoped  they  would,)  the  prosecution  of  Ae  war  against 
the  Gauls  might,  without  danger,  be  suspended;  and  Aat  it 
would  be  always  in  the  power  of  the  gods  and  of  Ae  Roman 
people  to  take  ample  vengeance  for  their  treachery.  It  was 
their  business,  therefore,  to  consult  and  deliberate  on  the 
measures  to  be  taken  against  the  Carthaginian,  and  on  Ae 
strength  with  which  that  \var  was  to  be  conducted.”  He  gave 
them  a  detail  of  the  numbers  of  infantry  and  cavalry,  of  Ro¬ 
mans,  and  of  allies,  in  the  dictator's  army:  then  Marcellus  laid 
before  them  Ae  amount  of  his  own  troops,  while  inquiry  was 
made  as  t©  the  force  in  Apulia,  with  the  consul  Caius  Teren- 
tius.  But  no  plan  could  be  devised,  of  forming  consular 
armies  sufficiently  powerful  to  cope  with  such  formidable 
enemies.  Wherefore,  though  strongly  stimulated  by  just  re¬ 
sentment,  they  determined  to  suspend  all  proceedings  against 
Gaul  for  that  year.  The  dictator’s  army  was  decreed  to  the 
consul.  It  was  resolved  that  those  soldiers  in  Marcellus’s 
army,  who  had  fled  from  Cannae,  should  be  transported  into 
Sicily,  and  serve  there  as  long  as  the  war  should  continue  in 

BOOK  XXIiL 

B.C.  216.] 

ISl 

Italy;  and  ths^  to  the  same  place  should  be  sent  the  least  able 
in  the  dictator’s  legions^  but  there  was  no  order  that  these 
should  be  detained  during  any  particular  term,  but  only  for 
the  number  of  campai^s  directed  by  law.  The  two  city  » 
legions  were  assigned  to  the  other  consul,  who  should  be 
substituted  in  the  room  of  Lucius  Postumius;  who,  it  was 
determined,  should  be  elected  as  soon  as  it  could  be  done 
with  permission  of  the  auspices:  that  two  legions  should  be 
brought  home,  with  all  expedition,  from  Sicily;  out  of  which, 
the  consul  appointed  to  the  charge  of  those  of  the  city,  should 
take  as  many  soldiers  as  should  be  necessaiy’^;  that  the  consul 
Caius  Terentius  should  be  continued  in  command  for  a  year, 
and  that  no  diminution  should  be  made  in  the  force  employed 
under  him  for  the  defence  of  Apulia. 
XXVI.  During  the  period  in  which  those  events  took  place, 
and  these  preparations  were  making  in  Italy,  the  war  was  pro¬ 
secuted  with  no  less  vigour  in  Spain,  but  success  had  hitherto 
inclined  to  the  Romans.  The  two  Scipios,  Publius  and 
Cneius,  divided  the  forces  between  them,  that  Cneius  might 
conduct  the  operations  on  land,  and  Publius  those  at  sea; 
while  Hasdrubal,  who  commanded  the  Carthaginians,  having 
little  confidence  in  any  strength  that  he  could  muster  against 
either,  Jeept  aloof,  relying  for  safety  on  the  distance  and  on 
the  nature  of  the  ground,  until,  after  long  and  frequent  solici¬ 
tations,  a  reinforcement  was  sent  him  from  Africa,  of  four 
thousand  foot  and  five  hundred  horse.  At  length  resuming 
hopes,  he  removed  his  camp  nearer  to  the  enemy,  and  gave 
orders,  in  person,  for  preparing  and  fitting  out  a  fleet,  for  the 
protection  of  the  islands,  and  the  sea-coast.  In  the  midst  of 
the  hurry  of  his  preparations  for  recommencing  the  war  anew, 
he  was  greatly  alarmed  by  the  desertion  of  the  commanders 
of  his  ships,  who,  having  been  severely  reprimanded  for 
abandoning  the  fleet  at  the  Iberus,  in  a  cowardly  manner, 
had  never  since  been  very  faithfully  disposed,  either  to  the 
general,  or  the  interest  of  the  Carthaginians.  These  deserters 

132 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  536. 

had  excited  an  insurrection  in  the  country  of  the  Tartessians, 
where,  at  their  instigation,  several  cities  had  revolted,  and 
one  they  had  even  taken  by  storm.  Instead,  therefore,  of  di¬ 
recting  his  operations  against  the  Romans,  he  turned  them 
against  his  own  nation;  and,  having  entered  their  territory  in 
an  hostile  manner,  resolved  fo  attack  Galbus,  a  general  of 
high  reputation,  edmmander  of  that  people,  who,  with  a 
powerful  force,  kept  close  within  his  camp,  under  the  walls 
of  the  city,  which  had  been  taken  a  few  days  before.  Ac¬ 
cordingly,  sending  forward  his  light-armed  troops  to  draw 
out  the  revolters  to  battle,  he  despatced  part  of  his  infantry 
to  ravage  the  lands,  on  all  sides,  and  pick  up  stragglers:  thus, 
at  the  same  time,  the  camp  was  alarmed,  and  the  country 
hlled  with  flight  and  slaughter.  At  length,  when  by  different 
roads,  the  fugitives  had  escaped  within  their  works,  they  so 
entirely  got  rid  of  their  panic,  that  they  had  courage  suffi¬ 
cient,  not  only  to  defend  them,  but  even  to  challenge  Hasdru- 
bal  to  battR.  They  sallied  out  therefore  in  a  body  from  the 
camp,  dancing  according  to  their  custom;  and  their  unex¬ 
pected  boldness  struck  terror  into  those  who,  a  little  before, 
took  pains  to  provoke  them.  Hasdrubal,  therefore,  drew  back 
his  forces  to  an  eminence  of  considerable  height,  and  farther 
secured  by  a  river  running  at  the  foot  of  it,  ordering  the  ad¬ 
vanced  party  of  light  troops,  and  the  scattered  horsemen,  to 
retreat  to  the  same  place;  but  still  not  thinking  himself  suffi¬ 
ciently  «ecured  by  the  hill  or  the  river,  he  fortified  his  camp 
completely  with  a  rampart.  While  they  thus  terrified  each 
other  alternately,  several  skirmishes  took  place,  in  which  the 
Numidian  cavalry  proved  not  a  match  for  the  Spanish,  nor 
the  Mauritanian  javelin  bearer  for  the  targe teer;  the  latter 
possessing,  together  with  equal  activity,  much  greater  strength 
and  much  more  courage. 
XXVII.  .  The  Tartessians,  finding,  that  they  could  not,  by 
advancing  to  his  camp,  entice  the  Carthaginian  to  an  engage¬ 
ment;  and  that,  on  the  other  hand,  an  assault  on  it  would  be 

BOOK  XXIIL 

133 

B.C.  216.] 
attended  with  much  difficulty,  stormed  the  city  of  Asena, 
where  Hasdrubal,  on  entering  their  territory,  had  stored  up 
his  com  and  other  provisions:  and  this  gave  them  the  com-^ 
mand  of  all  the  adjacent  country.  And  now  they  could  no  long¬ 
er,  either  on  a  inarch,  or  in  a  camp,  be  kept  in  order  by  any 
command.  As  soon,  therefore,  as  Hasdrubal  perceived  that 
success  had,  as  usual,  begotten  such  disorder,  he  exhorted 
his  men  to  attack  them  while  they  straggled  without  their 
standards;  and  descending  from  the  hill,  proceeded,  in  order 
of  battle,  towards  their  camp.  His  approach  being  announced 
by  messengers,  flying  back  in  consternation  from  the  watch 
posts  and  advanced  guards,  the  general  alarm  was  given;  on 
which,  as  fast  as  each  could  take  up  his  arms,  without  com¬ 
mand,  without  signal,  without  regard  to  any  regular  dispo¬ 
sition,  or  even  to  ranks,  they  rushed  out  to  battle.  The  fore¬ 
most  had  already  engaged  in  light,  while  some  ran  up,  in 
small  parties,  and  others  had  not  yet  come  out  of  the  camp. 
However,  at  the  beginning,  merely  through  their  daring  bold¬ 
ness,  they  struck  terror  into  the  Carthaginians;  but  after¬ 
wards,  as  their  thin  ranks  closed  with  the  compact  bands  of 
these,  the  danger,  from  the  smallness  of  their  numbers,  be¬ 
coming  apparent,  each  began  to  look  about  for  support,  and, 
being  repulsed  in  all  parts,  they  collected  themselves  in  a 
circle.  Here,  crowding  together,  they  were  driven  into  such 
a  narrow  compass,  that  they  had  scarcely  room  to  move  their 
arms,  and,  in  this  situation,  were  entirely  surrounded,  so  that 
the  slaughter  of  them  continued  through  the  greater  part  of 
the  dky.  A  small  number,  having  forced  a  passage,  made  off 
to  the  woods  and  mountains;  with  like  consternation,  the 
camp  was  abandoned,  and  the  whole  nation,  the  day  follow¬ 
ing,  submitted  to  the  conqueror.  But  it  did  not  continue  lon^ 
in  a  state  of  peace:  for  orders  were  brought  at  several  times 
from  Carthage  that  Hasdrubal  should,  with  all  speed,  lead 
his  army  into  Italy.  The  report  of  this  intended  procedure, 
spreading  through  Spain,  wrought  a  change  in  the  disposition 

134  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [YJl.  536. 
of  almost  every  state,  in  favour  of  the  Romans.  Hasdrubalf 
therefore,  immediately  despatched  a  letter  to  Carthage,  repjie- 
senting  what  mischief  the  said  report  of  his  departure  had 
occasioned.  That  if  he  were  really  to  remove  thence,  the 
Romans  would  be  masters  of  Spain,  before  he  should  cross 
the  Iberus.  For,  besides  that  he  had  neither  forces,  nor  com¬ 
mander,  whom  he  could  leave  in  his  place,  the  Roman  gene¬ 
rals  were  such,  that,  with  strength  equal  to  theirs,  it  was 
scarcely  possible  to  withstand  them;  wherefore,  if  they  had 
any  regard  for  the  country  in  question,  they  ought  to  send  a 
successor  in  his  room,  with  a  powerful  army;  who,  though 
all  events  should  prove  prosperous,  would  find  in  the  pro¬ 
vince  but  little  time  for  repose.” 
XXVIII.  Although  this  letter  made  a  considerable  im¬ 
pression  on  the  senate,  yet  deeming  Italy  of  superior  im¬ 
portance,  and  entitled  to  the  first  attention,  they  made  no 
change  in  the  orders  respecting  Hasdrubal  and  his  forces. 
Himilco  was  sent  Avith  a  complete  army  and  an  extraordinary 
number  of  ships,  in  order  to  maintain  a  superiority  in  Spain, 
both  by  land  and  sea,  and  to  defend  it  from  all  attacks. 
After  transporting  his  land  and  sea  forces,  he  fortified  a 
camp,  drew  up  the  ships  on  land,  and  surrounded  them  with 
a  rampart;  and  then,  attended  by  a  body  of  chosen  horse¬ 
men,  with  all  possible  expedition,  and  with  the  same  pre¬ 
cautions  in  passing  through  nations  whose  attachment  was 
doubtful,  as  through  those  who  were  professed  enemies,  he 
came  to  Hasdrubal.  As  soon  as  he  had  communicated  to 
him  the  decrees  and  orders  of  the  senate,  and  learned* from 
him,  in  turn,  the  method  in  which  the  war  inSpmn  was  to  be 
conducted,  he  returned  without  delay  to  his  own  camp, 
being  indebted  for  safety  to  the  celerity  of  his  motions;  for, 
before  a  plot  could  be  concerted,  any  where,  against  him,  he 
had  always  left  the  place.  .  Hasdrubal,  previously  to  his 
march,  imposed  contributions  on  all  the  states  under  his 
authority;  for  he  well  knew  that  Hannibal  had,  on  several 

BOOK  XXIIL 

135 

B.C,  216.] 
occasions,  purchased  a  passage;  that  no  consideration,  but 
that  of  pay,  mad^  his  Gallic  auxiliaries  remain  with  him; 
and  that,  if  he  had  undertaken  iHich  an  expedition,  unpro¬ 
vided  with  money,  he  could  scarcely  have  penetrated  so  far 
as  to  the  Alps.  ‘Having  therefore,  with  violent  haste,  exact¬ 
ed  the  same,  he  marched  down  to  the  Iberus.  When  the  Ro¬ 
mans  were  informed  of  the  decrees  of  the  Carthaginians, 
and  of  Hasdrubal’s  movement,  the  two  commanders,  re¬ 
nouncing  every  other  business,  determined  with  their  united 
forces  to  obstruct  and  put  a  stop  to  his  enterprise.  For  they 
considered,  that,  if  Hannibal,  whose  single  force  Italy  could 
hardly  withstand,  should  be  joined  by  the  Spanish  army  with 
Hasdrubal  at  its  head,  there  would  be  an  end  of  the  Roman 
empire.  Anxiously  intent  on  effecting  this  purpose,  they 
made  a  junction  of  their  forces  on  the  bank  of  the  Iberus, 
and,  o'ossing  the  river,  held  a  long  consultation  whether 
they  should  directly  face  the  enemy,  or  be  content  with  de¬ 
taining  him,  by  attacking  his  allies.  The  result  was,  that 
they  determined  to  lay  siege  to  the  city  called  Ibera,  from 
the  river  near  which  it  stood,  at  that  time  the  most  opulent 
in  aU  that  part  of  the  country.  When  Hasdrubal  understood 
this,  instead  of  bringing  succour  to  his  allies,  he  likewise 
proceeded  to  besiege  a  town,  lately  put  under  the  protection 
of  the  Romans:  in  consequence  of  which,  the  siege  already 
formed  by  the  latter  was  raised,  and  their  force  directed 
against  Hasdrubal  himself. 
XXIX.  For  a  few  days,  they  remained  encamped  at  the 
distance,  from  each  other,  of  five  miles,  not  without  skir¬ 
mishes,  but  neither  party  offering  battle.  At  length,  on  one 
and  the  same  day,  both,  as  if  by  concert,  displayed  the  sig¬ 
nal  for  fighting,  and  brought  their  whole  force  into  the  field. 
The  Romans  were  formed  in  three  lines;  one  half  of  the 
light  troops  were  posted  among  the  battalions  in  the  front, 
the  other  half  were  sent  back  to  the  rear;  the  cavaliy^  covered 
the  wings.  Hasdrubal  composed  the  centre  of  his  line  of 

im 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  536. 

S|>an5afds;  on  the  right  wing,  he  posted  his  Carthaginians; 
on  the  left,  the  Africans  and  hired  auxiliaries;  his  cavalry  he 
placed  on  the  wings,  annexing  the  Numidians  to  the  Cardia- 
ginian  infantry,  the  others  to  the  Africans.  However,  all  the 
Numidians  were  not  placed  on  the  right  wing,  but  those 
only,  whose  practice  it  was,  to  bring  two  horses  each  into 
the  field,  and  often  in  the  very  hottest  of  the  fight  to  spring, 
notwithstanding  the  weight  of  their  armour,  from  the  wea¬ 
ried  horse  upon  the  fresh  one,  like  those  who  exhibit  feats  of 
activity  as  a  show;  so  great  is  the  agility  of  the  men,  and  so 
docile  their  breed  of  horses.  While  they  stood,  ranged  in 
this  manner,  the  hopes  entertained  by  the  commanders  were 
pretty  nearly  equal  on  both  sides:  for  neither  one  party  nor 
the  other  had  any  very  great  advantage,  either  in  the  num¬ 
ber,  or  qualifications  of  their  men.  But  the  sentiments  of  the 
soldiery^  were  widely  different:  for  the  Romans  had  been 
easily  brought  by  their  commanders  to  believe,  that  though 
they  fought  at  a  great  distance  from  their  country,  yet  their 
efforts  were  to  decide  the  fate  of  Italy,  and  of  the  city  of 
Rome,  Therefore^  as  their  return  to  their  native  soil  depend¬ 
ed  on  the  issue  of  that  battle,  they  had  come  to  a  determined 
resolution,  either  to  conquer  or  die.  The  men  who  composed 
the  opposite  army  were  not  possessed  of  such  inflexible 
firmness;  for  the  greatest  part  of  them  were  Spaniards,  who 
wished  rather  to  he  defeated  in  Spain,  than,  after  gainingthe 
victory^  to  be  dragged  into  Italy.  No  sooner  therefore  was 
the  first  onset  made,  than  almost,  before  the  javelins  were 
thrown,  the  centre  of  their  line  began  to  give  way;  and,  on 
being  vigorously  pressed  by  the  Romans,  turned  their  backs. 
On  the  wings,  however,  the  fight  was  maintained  with  spirit; 
the  Carthaginians  on  the  one,  and  the  Africans  on  the  other, 
charging  with  briskness,  and,  as  they  had  their  enemy  in  a 
manner  inclosed  between  them,  attacking  them  on  both  sides. 
But  as  soon  as  the  whole  of  the  Roman  troops  had  once  come 
together  into  the  centre,  its  strength  was  sufficient  to  compel 

mmK  XXIH. 

137 

BX.  216.] 
the  wings  to  retire  la  opposite  diree^ons.  Thus  th#ie  were 
two  distinct  battles^  and^  miioth^  the  Romans,  who»  after  the 
defeat  of  the  enemy’s  centre,  had  the  superiority  bodt  in  Ae 
number  and  strength  of  A^ir  men,,  were  completely  victp* 
rious.  In  Ais  a:igagenumt,  vast  nunAcrrs  of  A©  tmemy  were 
slain;  and,  had  not  Ae  Spaniards  fled  so  precipitately  before 
Ae  battle  was  well  tegun,  very  few  of  their,  whole  army 
would  have  survive<L  The  cavalry  had  no  shaie  in  Ae  en¬ 
gagement:  for,  as  soon  as  the.  Moors  and  Numidiaiis  saw 
Ac  centre  giving  way,  they  instantty  betook  themselves  to  a 
precipitate  flight,  leaving  the  wings  uncovered,  and  driving 
Ae  elephants  before  them.  Ha^rubal,  after  staying  until  Ae 
fortune  of  the  day  was  finally  decided,  made  his  escape  from 
Ae  midst  of  the  carnage,  accompanied  by  a  few.  His  camp 
was  taken^nd  plundered  by  the  Romans.  If  the  inclinations 
of  any  pei^le  in  Spain  were  hitherto  doubtful,  Ais  batde 
fixed  Aem  in  the  interest  of  the  Romans,  mid  deprived  Has- 
drubal  of  every  hope,  not  only  of  leading  an  army  into 
hut  even  of  remaining  m  Spain  with  any  degree  of  safety. 
These  events  being  made  known  at  Rome,  by  leUex%  from 
the  Scipios,  caused  universal  rejoicing,  not  so  muA  m  cmi-^ 
sideration  of  the  victory  itself,  as  of  Hasdrubal’s  being 
thereby  prevented  from  bringing  his  army  into  Italy. 
XXX.  While  affairs  in  Spain  proceeded  in  A^  manner, 
the  city  of  PetelUa  in  Bruttium  was,  after  a  siege  of  several 
months,  taken  by  Himilco,  an  officer  of  Hannibal’s.  This 
conquest  cost  the  CarAaginians  abundance  of  blood;  but  it 
was  not  force,  so  much  as  famine,  Aat  overcame  the  be¬ 
sieged:  for,  after  having  consumed  ail  kinds  of  eatable  fruits, 
and  the  flesh  of  every  kind  of  four-footed  beast,  Aey  lived 
at  last  on  the  leaAer  of  Aeir  shields,  on  herbs  and  roots,  and 
Ae  tender  bark  of  trees,  with  berries  gathered  from  Ae 
brambles.  Nor  were  Aey  prevsdled  on  to  surrender,  until 
their  strengA  was  so  entirely  eAausted,  that  they  were  un¬ 
able  to  stand  on  the  walls?  or  to  carry  their  arms.  -Aftei* 
voi..  III. — 

13S 

HISTORir  OF  ROME- 

[Y*R.  536. 

getting  posae^en  oi  Pietdyyu^  the  Cartteginian  led  hia  farces 
against  Ctmsentia^  which  was  defended  widi  ^ual  obsti¬ 
nacy,  bm  capUnkt^  in  a  few  <feys-  About  the  same  time, 
an  aiwiy  irf*RrmtiaBa  in  vested  Qtoton,  a  Greek  city,  formerly 
powcrfal  in  men  and  arms,  but  now  redm:^  so  low,  by  many 
mid  heavy  misfortunes,  that  the  number  of  its  ciuzens  of 
every  age  amounted  to  not  quite  twenty  thousand.  The  place, 
therefore,  being  destitute  of  men  for  its  defence,  was  easily 
mastered.  Th«  citadel  alone  held  out,  into  which,  during  the 
confusiem  consequmtto  the  storming  of  the  city,  and  whik 
the  odier  inhs&itants  were  put  to  the  sword,  some  had  made 
escape.  The  Locrians  too  revolted  to  the  Brutdans  and 
Carthaginians,  through  the  trcmdiery  of  the  nobles,  who  be¬ 
trayed  the  pc^lace.  The  Rhegpans  alone,  in  all  diat  tract, 
maintsdned  to  the  last  their  alliance  with  Rome^and  their 
independence.  The  same  dbposition  to  change  spread 
also  into^^aly,  and  even  the  family  of  Hiero  was  not  en- 
uidnfocted  with  the  spirit  of  revolt;  for  Gefo,  his  eldest 
sem,  iuiving  conceive  a  contempt  of  his  fsuherb  declining 
age,  and  also,  since  the  defeat  at  Cannee,  of  the  Roman  con- 
nmdon,  joined  the  Cmrthaginians,  and  would  have  caused 
much  disturbance  in  Sicily,  had  not  a  death  so  seasonable, 
diat  it  dmew  some  sta’m  of  suspicion  even  on  his  father, 
carried  him  off,  while  he  was  busy  in  arming  the  populace, 
mid  oouiting  alliances.  Such  were  the  transactions  of  this 
year,  prosperous  and  otherwise  in  Italy,  Africa,  Sicily,  and 
Spain.  Towai^s  the  clos®  of  the  year,  Quintus  Fabius  Maxi- 
xmis  den^mded  of  the  senate,  that  he  might  be  allowed  to 
dedicate  the  temple  Venus  Erycina,  which  he  had  vowed 
in  his  dictatorship;  and  tiae  senate  decreed,  tiiat  Tiberius 
Sempronius,  consul  elect,  should,  as  soon  as  he  entered  mto 
ofiiee,  propose  to  the  people  the  creation  of  Quintus  Fabius, 
duumvir,  for  performmg  the  dedication  of  that  temple.  In 
honour  of  Marcus  j^^ilius  Lepidus,  who  had  been  twice 
consul,  and  an  augur,  his  three  sons,  Lucius,  Marcus,  and 

BOOK  XXIII. 

139 

BX.  SI6.3 
Quintus,  cekbrated  funerad  games,  which  lasted  three  days; 
in  the  course  of  whidb,  they  exhibited,  in  the  Forum,  twenty- 
two  pairs  of  ^adiatm-s.  The  curule  osdiles,  Caius  I^snmus 
and  Tiberius  Sempronius  Gracchus,  consid  elect,  who,  during 
his  aedileship,  had  likewise  been  master  of  the  horse,  per¬ 
formed  the  Roman  games,  which  were  also  repeated  during 
Aree  days.  The  plebeian  games  of  the  sediles,  Maitnis  Aure¬ 
lius  Cotta  and  Marcus  Claudius  Marcellus,  were  dirice  repeat¬ 
ed.  At  the  conckision  of  this  third  year  of  the  Punic  y  535^^ 
war,  Tiberius  Sempronius,  consul,  assumed  the  ad- 
ministration*  of  his  office  on  the  ides  of  March.  Of  the  praetors, 
Quintus  Fulvius  Flaccus,  who  had  formerly  been  twice  con¬ 
sul,  and  likewise  censor,  held  the  city  jurisdiction,  and  Mar¬ 
cus  Valerius  Laevinus  that  respecting  foreigners.  The  lots 
gave  to  Appius  Claudius  Pulcher  the  province  of  Sicity;  to 
Quintus  Mucius  Scaevola  that  of  Sardinia.  The  people  or¬ 
dained,  that  Marcus  Marcellus  should  have  authcM*ity  as  pro- 
consul,  in  consideration  of  his  being  the  only  one  of  the 
Roman  commanders,  who,  since  the  disaster  at  Cannae,  had 
fought  with  success. 
XXXI.  The  senate,  on  the  first  day  of  their  meeting  upon 
business  in  die  Capitol,  passed  a  decree,  that  double  taxes 
should  be  imposed  for  that  year,  of  which,  one  half  should 
be  levied  without  delay,  for  the  purpose  of  giving  immediate 
•pay  to  all  the  troops,  excepting  those  who  had  been  at  Cannae. 
With  respect  to  the  several  armies  they  ordered,  that  the 
consul  Tiberius  Sempronius  shpuld  appoint  a  day  for  the  two 
city  legions  to  repair  to  Cale,  from  whence  these  legions 
should  be  conducted  to  the  Claudian  camp,  above  Suessula. 
As  to  the  legions  which  were  there,  consisting  mostly  of  die 
troops  who  had  been  at  Cannse,  it  was  ordered,  that  Appius 
Claudius  Puldier,  the  praetor,  should  transport  them  into 
Sicily,  and  that  those  then  in  Sicily  should  be  brou^t  home 
to  Rome.  To  die  flU'my  appointed  to  assemble  at  Cadb,  Mar¬ 
cus  Claudius  Mswcellus  yms  sent  with  imicrs,  to  lesul  off  those 

140  HISTC®Y  OP  ROME.  [Y.R.  SBf. 
J 
city  legions  to  Ctendian  camp,  Appaus  Claiidius  seat 
Titus  Metellius  Croto,  lieutenant  geneial,  to  take  the  com¬ 
mand  of  the  <dd  army,  and  transport  it  into  Sicily*  People 
had  at  first  expected  in  silence,  that  the  consul  would  call  an 
assembly  for  the  election  of  a  colleague  in  his  office;  after¬ 
wards,  when  they  saw  that  Marcus  Marcellus,  whom  above 
all  others  thev  wished  to  be  appointed  consul  for  that  year, 
on  account  of  his  extraordinary  successful  conduct  in  his 
praetorship,  was,  as  it  were  purposely,  sent  out  of  the  way,  a 
murmur  arose  in  the  senate-house;  on  observing  which,  the 
consul  said,  “  Conscript  Fathers,  the  public  service  required, 
that  Marcus  Claudius  should  go  into  Campania,  to  make  the 
exchange  of  thearmie^  and  that  a  day  of  election  should  not 
be  proclaimed  until  his  return,  after  finishing  the  business 
given  him  in  charge,  that  you  may  have  the  consul  whom  the 
exigencies  of  the  state  require,  and  who  is  most  agreeable  to 
your  wishes.”  After  this,  there  was  no  mention  of  an  election 
until  Marcellus  returned.  In  the  mean  time,  Quintus  Fabius 
Maximus,  and  Titus  Otacilius  Crassus,  were  created  duum¬ 
virs  for  the  dedication  of  temples,  the  latter  to  dedicate  one 
to  Mens,  the  former,  that  to  Venus  Erycina.  Both  stand  in 
the  Capitol,  separated  by  a  channel  running  between  them. 
A  proposition  was  then  offered  to  the  people  respecting  the 
three  hundred  Campanian  horsemen,  who,  after  faithfully 
serving  out  their  legal  term  in  Sicily,  had  returned  to  Rome.> 
that  tiiey  should  be  admitted  Roman  citizens;  and  moreov^, 
that  diey  should  be  deemed  to  have  been  citizens  of  Cumae, 
from  the  day  preceding  that  on  which. the  people  of  Campa¬ 
nia  revolted  from  the  Romans.  The  passing  of  this  law  was 
expedited  by  the  representation  of  the  men  themselves,  that 
they  knew  not  to  what  people  they  belonged,  having  re¬ 
nounced  their  original  country,  and  being  not  yet  adopted 
into  that  to  which  they  had  returned  from  abroad.  As  soon 
as  Marcellus  czmt  home  from  the  army,  an  assembly  was 
summoned  for  the  choice  of  a  consul,  in  the  room  of  Lucius 

wool:  xxHi. 

141 

B.c.  ns.} 

PostuBiius.  was  uiaattimously  elected,  and  order¬ 
ed  to  enter  immediacy  into  oUce;  but  just  as  he  was  about 
to  assume  ,the  ^ministration^  thunder  was  heard,  and  the 
mrgurs  being  called,  pronounced,  that  there  must  have  been 
a  defect  in  the  election;  wl^reupon  the  patricians  openly  as¬ 
serted  that  the  appointment  of  two  plebeians  to  the  consul¬ 
ship,  of  which  there  had  never  before  been  an  instance,  was 
what  gave  displeasure  to  the  gods.  On  this,  Marcellos  abdi¬ 
cated  the  office,  in  the  place  of  whom  was  substituted  Fabius 
Maximus,  who  had  twice  before  been  honoured  with  it. 
This  year  the  sea  appeared  on  fire;  a  cow  at  Sinuessa  brought 
forth  a  foal;  the  statues  in  the  temple  of  Juno  Sospita  at  La- 
nuvium  sweated  blood;  and  a  shower  of  stones  fell  round 
the  same  temple.  On  account  of  this  shower  the  nine  days^ 
worship,  usual  on  like  occasions,  was  performed,  and  the 
prodigies  were  carefully  expiated. 
X  sXII.  The  consuls  then  made  division  of  the  forces  as¬ 
signed  them.  The  army  which  had  been  with  Marcus  Ju¬ 
nius,  the  dictator,  fell  to  the  share  of  Fabius;  and  that  which 
had  been  composed  of  volunteer^^  slaves,  together  with 
twenty-five  thousand  of  the  allies,  was  given  to  Sempronius. 
The  legions,  to  be  brought  home  from  Sicily,  were  decreed 
to  Marcus  Valerius,  the  praetor;  and  Marcus  Claudius,  pro- 
consul,  was  sent  to  command  the  army,  encamped  above 
Suessula,  for  the  protection  of  Nola.  The  praetors  set  out  for 
Sicily  and  Sardinia.  The  consuls  gave  public  orders,  that 
whenever  they  should  summon  a  njeeting  of  the  senate,  the 
senators  and  persons  entitled  to  the  privilege  of  speaking  in 
council,!  should  assemble  at  the  Capuan  gate.  The  pi^ors, 
presiding  in  the  courts  of  justice,  fixed  their  tribunals  in  the 
*  Called  volones,  from  voloy  I  am  willing,  tlie  answer  given  by  each  when 
he  was  asked  whether  he  was, willing  to  enlist. 
!  those  who  had  held  curule  offices  had  a  right  to  a  seat  in  the  se¬ 
nate,  and  to  give  their  opinions,  but  thej  could  not  vote  until  they  were 
regularly  admitted  by  the  censors,  and  i?^stered. 

142 

HISTORY  OF  mOME. 

[y*R.  537. 

where  they  ordm^i  all  psartie^e^mcera^ 
to  attend^  asai^^e  ju^ice  was  admiBistared  during 
In  the  mean  time,  wh^  Mago,  Hannibal^s  brother^  was  just 
ready  at  Carthage  to  carry  over  into  Italy  twelve  thousajod 
foot,  and  one  thousand  five  hundred  horse,  tmtnty  elephants, 
and  <me  thousand  talents  of  silverf,  under  theo^voy  of  sixty 
ships  of  war,  news  arrived,  that  the  army  in  Spain  had  been 
defeated,  and  that  almost  every  state  of  that  province  had 
gone  over  to  the  Romans.  Several  were  now  of  <^inion  that 
they  ought,  for  the  present,  to  lay  aside  all  concern  for  Italy, 
and  send  Mago,  with  the  fleet  and  army  under  his  command, 
into  Spain.  And  at  this  very  juncture,  a  flattering  prospect 
suddenly  presented  itself,  of  recovering  the  possession  of 
Sardinia:  for  they  were  told,  that  ‘‘  the  Roman  army  there 
was  small,  and  that  A  ulus  Cornelius,  the  present  praetor, 
who  was  well  acquainted  with  the  province,  was  preparing  to 
leave  it,  and  that  a  new  one  was  expected.  They  were  in¬ 
formed  also  that  the  minds  of  the  Sardinians  were  become 
dissatisfied,  under  the  burden  of  a  foreign  government  of  so 
long  continuance;  which  had,  during  the  last  year,  been 
marked  with  cruelty  and  avarice;  that  the  people  were  op¬ 
pressed  with  grievous  taxes,  and  an  unreasonable  contribu¬ 
tion  of  corn,  and  that  nothing  was  wanting,  but  a  head  to 
whom  they  might  transfer  tlieir  allegiance,’^  This  intelligence 
was  conveyed  by  a  secret  embassy  from  the  principal  inha¬ 
bitants,  at  the  instigation  chiefly  of  Hampsicora,  who  at  that 
time  possessed  a  share  pf  interest  and  influence,  far  exceed¬ 
ing  that  of  any  other  man  in  the  island.  These  accounts  ar¬ 
riving  together  almost  at  the  same  mcmaent,  stunned  and  re- 
%  vlved  them.  They  sent  Mago  with  bis  fleet  and  amy  into 
Spain,  and  appointed  Hasdrubal,  sumamed  the  Bald,  their 
general  for  Sardinia,  assigmng  him  a  number  of  forces,  nearl}' 
equal  to  what  they  had  given  Mago.  At  Rome,  the  consuls, 

^^193,750^, 

BOOK  XXIII 

143 

B.C.  215.3 
after  fiaii^iag  e^ry  busisM&ss  tlM  to  be  parfoimed  m  the 
city,  were  taow  aetiv^  &mpl0^ed  ia  preparaftoc^  for  the 
campatgBfo  Tfoerms  Semproaius  publisbtd  a  proclanu^oa, 
that  his  soldiers  ^K>tdd  asseml^  ^  Siauessa  on  an  appoim* 
cd  dayj  and  Quintus  Fdbius,  widi  the  appr<^ticm  of  the 
senate,  issued  another,  that  aQ  persons  should  carry  in  their 
com,  of  all  kinds,  from  foe  fields  to  foe  fortified  towns,  be¬ 
fore  the  calends  of  June  next  ensuing;  and  that  if  mty  dis¬ 
obeyed  this  ordo!’,  his  farm  foouki  be  laid  was^,  his  slaves 
sold  by  auction,  and  his  farm-houses  burnt.  Even  foe  pi^ 
tors  appointed  to  preside  in  the  courts  of  justice  were  not 
allowed  an  exemptiem  from  mihtary  employments:  it  was  de¬ 
termined  foat  the  factor  Valerius  should  go  into  Apulia,  to 
receive  fo«  command  of  the  army  from  Terentius,  and  foat 
when  the  legions  from  Sicily  shmiWi  arrive,  he  should  em¬ 
ploy  them  principally  in  the  defence  of  foe  country,  smd  send 
in  their  stead  Terentius’s  army  under  some  lieutenant-gene¬ 
ral.  Twenty-five  ships  were  sdso  put  under  the  command  of 
Publius  V^derius,  the  city  prsetw,  that  with  them  he  might 
protect  the  sea-coast  between  Brundusium  and  Tarentum. 
An  equal  number  were  assigned  to  Quintus  Fulvius,  far  se¬ 
curing  the  coasts  nearest  to  the  city.  Caius  Terentius,  pro- 
ccmsul,  was  ordered  to  press  soldiers  in  the  territory  of  Pi- 
cenum,  and  to  provide  for  the  security  of  foat  part  of  foe 
country;  and  Titus  Otacilius  Crassus,  when  he  had  dedi¬ 
cated  the  temple  of  Mens,  was  sent  into  Sicily,  and  invested 
with  the  command  of  foe  fleet, 
XXXIII.  On  this  contest,  between  foe  two  m<^t  powerful 
nations  in  foe  world,  all  kings  and  nations  kept  their  atten¬ 
tion  earnestly  fixed;  but  more  particularly,  Philip,  king  of 
Macedonia,  because  he  was  nearer  to  Italy  than  any  other, 
being  separated  from  it  only  by  the  Ionian  sea.  When  he 
first  received  information  of  Hannibal  having  passed  the 
Alps,  as  he  wsts  overjoyed  at  the  breaking  out  of  war  be¬ 
tween  the  Romans  and  Carfoaginians,  so,  as  long  as  there 

144 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.S3r. 

was  no  impmant  iTial  cS*  Aeir  strength,  his  judgment  re* 
mained  equally  tekinced^  hetween  the  parties,  uncertain  to 
which  he  should  wish  success.  But,  when  he  saw  that  the 
Canha^nians  had  fought  three  battles,  and  in  each  of  the 
three  had  proved  victorious,  the  scale  turned  to  the  side  fa¬ 
voured  by  fortune,  and  he  despatched  ambassadors  to  Han¬ 
nibal.  These,  shunmng  die  harbours  of  Brundusium  and 
Tarentuin,  because  they  were  guarded  by  the  Roman  squa¬ 
drons,  landed  at  the  temple  of  Juno  Lacinia;  taking  their 
way  thence  through  Apulia,  towards  Capua,  they  fell  in  with 
the  Roman  posts,  and  were  by  them  conducted  to  the  prse- 
ttsr,  Marcus  Valerius  Lsevinus,  then  encamped  near  Luceria. 
Here  Xenophanes,  who  was  at  the  head  of  die  embassy,  with 
perfect  composure  declared,  that  he  had  been  sent  by  king 
Philip  to  conclude  a  treaty  of  alliance  and  friendship  widi 
the  Roman  people,  and  was  charged  with  despatches  for  the 
consuls,  and  for  the  senate  and  people  of  Rome.  Valerius, 
highly  delighted  with  the  prospect  of  a  new  alliance  with  a 
king  of  such  distinguished  reputation,  at  a  time  when  the  de¬ 
fection  of  the  old  allies  had  become  so  general,  received 
these  enemies  with  every  degree  of  courtesy  as  guests,  and 
gave  them  an  escort,  who  were  ordered  to  point  out  c^e- 
fully  the  roads,  and  what  places,  and  what  passes,  were  held 
by  the  Romans,  or  by  the  enemy.  Xenophanes,  after  passing 
through  the  Roman  posts  into  Campania,  came  thence,  by 
the  shortest  road,  into  the  camp  of  Hannibal,  smd  concluded 
a  treaty  of  alliance  and  friendship  with  him  on  these  terms: 
that  ‘‘  king  Philip,  with  the  largest  fleet  that  he  could  fit  out, 
(and  it  was  supposed  that  he  would  be  able  to  make  up  the 
number  of  two  hundred  ships,)  should  come  over  into  Italy, 
lay  waste  the  sea-coast,  and  annoy  the  enemy  by  sea  and 
land,  as  far  as  lay  in  his  power.  On  the  conclusion  of  the 
war,  all  Italy,  with  the  city  of  Rome  itself,  should  be  tba 
property  of  Hannibal  and  the  Carthaginians,  aUd  aU  the  booty 
should  be  at  the  disposal  of  Hannibal.  As  soon  as  the  con- 

BOdK  XXIII. 

145 

B.C.  St5.] 
quest  of  Italy  shmiM  be  coinipleted,  die  Cardtagiidaiis  should 
sail  iato  Greece,  a^d  wage  ^ar  against  such  nations  as  tl« 
king  should  direct,  and  conquests  to  be  made  on  the  ccnt- 
tkient,  and  all  Ae  islands  on  the  comt  of  Macedonia, 
should  Be  die  property  of  Philij^  and  united  to  his  do- 
XXXIV.  On  these  conditions,  principally,  was  a  treaty 
concluded  between  the  CarAaginian  genera!  and  the  Mace¬ 
donian  ambassadors;  arid  with  the  latter  were  sent  Gisco^ 
Bostar,  and  Mago,  in  quality  of  ambassadors  to  receive  Ae 
ratification  of  it  from  the  king  in  person.  They  arrived  at  the 
same  spot  near  the  temple  of  Juno  Lacinia,  where  a  ship  lay 
waiting  for  them  m  a  secret  creek.  Having  set  sail  from 
thence,  and  got  mto  the  open  sea,  they  were  descried  by  the 
Roman  fleet  which  guarded  Ae  coasts  of  Calabria:  and  Pub¬ 
lius  Valerius  Flaccus  despatched  some  Corcyran  fly^boats 
to  pursue  and  bring  back  the  ship.  On  which  Ae  king^s 
party  endeavoured,  at  first,  to  escape;  but,  afterwards,  find¬ 
ing  Aat  they  were  inferior  in  swiftness  of  sail,  ihey  surren¬ 
dered  Aemselvcs  to  Ae  Romans,  and  were  brought  to  Ae 
COTimander  of  the  fleet.  When  he  inquired  who  they  were, 
whence,  and  whither  they  were  bound,  Xenophanes,  at  first, 
repeated  Ae  feigned  story,  which  had  once  already  succeeded 
very  well,  that  he  had  been  sent  by  Philip  to  the  Romans, 
and  had  proceeded  as  far  as  the  quarters  of  Marcus  Valerius, 
but  could  go  no  farther  with  safety,  as  it  was  not  in  his 
power  to  make  his  way  through  Campania,  every  pass  Acre 
being  guarded  by  Ae  enemy.’’  Afterwards,  Ae  Carthagi¬ 
nian  dress  and  msuiners  raised  some  suspicion  of  Hannibal’s 
ambassadors;  and,  some  questions  being  put  to  Aem,  Acir 
language  betrayed  Aem;  on  which,  Aeir  attendants  were  re¬ 
moved  into  separate  places,  and  terrified  with  menaces,  by 
which  means  Hannibal’s  letter  to  Philip  was  discovered,  and 
also  Ae  articles  of  Ae  convention  between  the  Macedemian 
king  and  the  Carthaginian  general.  Their  designs  being  Aus 
VOL.  III.— T 

146 

HISTOEY  OF  HOME. 

[Y.R.  5an 

fiifly  detected^  it  judged  most  adviseaybk,  that  the  pri- 
souers,  and  their  accompaniers,  should  with  all  speed  1^  con¬ 
veyed  to  die  senate  at  Rome,  or  to  the  consuls,  wherever 
they  were.  For  this  service  five  of  the  quickest  sailing  ves¬ 
sels  wo-e  chosen,  and  thev  command  of  them  given  to  Lucius 
Valerius  Antias,  who  reteived  orders  to  dismbute  the  am¬ 
bassadors  through  all  the  ships,  to  be  kept  separate  under 
guards,  and  to  take  care  that  there  should  be  no  conversa¬ 
tion  or  communication  between  them.  About  this  time,  Au- 
lus  Cornelius  Mammula,  returning  from  the  province  of  Sar¬ 
dinia  to  Rome,  gave  a  representation  of  the  state  of  affairs  in 
that  island;  that  all  the  people  were  inclined  to  revolt;  that 
Quintus  Mucius,  his  successor  in  the  government,  had  on 
his  coming  been  so  affected  by  the  grossness  and  moisture  of 
the  air,  that  he  fell  into  a  disorder,  not  so  dangerous,  as  te¬ 
dious,  and  consequently  would,  for  a  long  time,  be  incapable 
of  military  service;  and  that  the  army  there,  though  strong 
enough  for  the  maintenance  of  order  in  the  province,  during 
a  time  of  peace,  was  yet  very  unequal  to  the  suppcat  of  the 
war,  which  appeared  ready  to  break  out.  On  this  the  senate 
decreed,  that  Quintus  Fulvius  Flaccus  should  enlist  five 
thousand  foot,  and  four  hundred  horse;  that  he  should  take 
care  to  have  this  legion  conveyed  to  Sardinia  without  any 
delay;  and  that  he  should  send  some  proper  person,  commis¬ 
sioned  to  conduct  the  business  of  the  war,  until  Mucius’s 
health  should  be  re-established.  In  this  employment  was 
sent  Titus  Manlius  Torquatus,  who  had  been  twice  consul, 
and  likewise  consor,  and  wha  had,  in  one  of  his  consuktes, 
subdued  Sardinia.  About  the  same  time  the  fleet  from  Car¬ 
thage  for  Sardinia,  under  Hasdrubal,  sumamed  the  Bald, 
after  suffering  severely  in  a  violent  storm,  was  driven  out  of 
its  course  to  the  Balcarick  isles,  where  a  great  deal  of  time 
was  lost  jin  docking  and  repairing  the  ships,  for  not  oniy  their 
rigging,  but  even  their  huUs,  had  been  damaged. 
XXXV*  On  the  side  of  Italy,  the  prosecution  of  the  war, 

Boot:  xxrn. 

147 

B,C.  215.] 
sbce  the  battle  of  Cannae,  had  been  less  vigorous  tJism  tisual, 
the  stiength  of  one  party  being  broken,  and  the  courage  of 
.  die  other  enervated.  The  Campanians,  dierefore,  undertotdt 
to  bring  the  state  of  Cumse  into  subjection  to  themselves. 
At  first,  they  tried  to  prevail  on  that  people  to  renounce  the 
sdliance  of  Rome;  but  not  succeeding  in  that  method,  con¬ 
trived  a  stratagem  to  circumvent  them.  There  was  a  stated 
festival  at  Hamse,  at  which  all  the  Campanians  used  to  at¬ 
tend.  They  told  the  Cumans,  that  the  Campanian  senate 
would  come  thidier,  and  requested  that  the  senate  of  Cuma 
might  likewise  come,  in  order  that  they  might  consult  toge¬ 
ther,  and,  with  common  consent,  adopt  such  measures  as 
that  both  states  might  have  the  same  friends  and  the  same 
foes;  they  themsleves,  they  said,  would  bring  an  armed  force 
for  their  protection,  so  that  there  would  be  no  danger  either 
from .  the  Romans  or  Carthaginians.  The  Cumans,  though 
diey  suspected  treachery,  yet  offered  no  objection,  thinking 
this  the  best  way  to  cover  the  deception,  which  they  medi¬ 
tated.  In  the  mean-time  Tiberius  Sempronius,  the  Roman 
consul,  after  performing  the  purification  of  his  army  at  Sinu- 
essa,  where  he  had  appointed  them  to  assemble,  crossed  the 
river  Vuhumus,  and  encamped  at  Liternum.  As  he  had  in 
this  post  no  employment  for  his  arms,  he  obliged  the  sol¬ 
diers  frequently  to  go  through  their  exercise,  that  the  re¬ 
cruits,  of  whom  the  greatest  part  were  volunteer- slaves, 
might  learn  from  practice* to  follow  the  standards,  and  to 
know  their  own  centuries  in  the  field.  In  the  midst  of  these 
employments,  die  general’s  principal  care  was,  and  he  ac¬ 
cordingly  gave  charges  to  die  lieutenants-generaland  tribunes, 
that  no  reproach,  cast  on  any  one  on  account  of  his  former 
condition,  should  sow  discord  among  the  troops;  that  the 
veteran  soldier  should  be  satisfied  at  being  put  on  a  level 
with  the  recruit,  the  freeman  with  the  volunteer-slave;  that 
they  should  account  every  one  sufficiendy  honourable  and 
well-bom,  to  whom  the  Roman  people  entrusted  their  m:ms 

148  HISTIMIY  OF  EOMt.  [T.R.58r. 
aod  standdU'ds;  observing  whatever  measures  fortune 
made  it  iiecessau;^  to  adopt,  it  was  equsdly  necessary  to  sup¬ 
port  these  when  adopted.”  These  directions  were  not  more 
carefuQy  kiculca^  by  the  officers  than  observed  by  the  sol¬ 
diers;  insomuch  that,  in  a  short  time,  they  all  became  united 
in  such  a  perfect  harmonv  of  sentiment,  that  it  was  almost 
forgotten  what  each  man  had  been  before  he  became  a  sol¬ 
dier.  While  Gracchus  was  thus  employed,  ambassadors  from 
Cumae  brought  him  information  of  the  embassy  which  had 
come  to  them,  a  few  days  bef<M*e,  from  the  Campanians,  and 
the  answer  which  they  had  returned,  and  told  him,  that  the 
festival  would  begin  on  the  third  day  following,  and  that  not 
only  the  whole  senate,  but  the  camp  and  army  of  the  Cam¬ 
panians  would  be  present.  Having  ordered  the  Cumans  to 
convey  all  their  effects  out  of  the  fields  into  the  city,  and  to 
keep  close  within  the  walls,  Gracchus  himself  removed  to 
Cumae,  on  the  day  previous  to  that  which  the  Campanians 
had  fixcdi  for  the  commencement  of  their  sacrifices.  From 
hence  Hamae  was  three  miles  distant.  The  Campanians,  as 
had  been  concerted,  had  assembled  here  in  great  numbers, 
and  at  a  small  distance,  Marius  Alfius,  who  was  Medixtuti- 
cus,  that  is,  the  chief  magistrate  of  the  Campanians,  with 
fourteen  thousand  soldiers,  was  secretly  encamped,  and  was 
much  more  busily  employed  in  preparations  for  the  festival, 
and  in  the  measures  requisite  for  the  execution  of  the  trea¬ 
cherous  project,  than  in  fortifying  his  camp,  or  any  other  mi¬ 
litary  work.  The  festival  at  Hamse  was  to  last  three  days, 
and  tile  rites  began  after  night-fiall,  so  as  to  be  finished  at 
midnight.  This  hour  Gracchus  judged  tiie  most  pre^r  for 
a  surprise,  and  accordingly,  ptMsting  guards  at  the  gates  to 
prevent  any  one  carrying  intelligence  of  his  design,  he 
obliged  the  soldiers  to  spend  the  time  from  the  tenth  hror  in 
taking  refreshment  and  getting  some  sleep,  that  they  mi^^ 
assemble  on  a  signal  as  soon  as  it  grew  dark;  then,  about  the 
first  watx:h,  he  ordered  the  standards  to  be  raised,  and  maixh- 

M>OK  XXlIi. 

140 

BX*  215.] 
iag  out  in  mkuce  airived  at  Haa^  at  midnight  Here,  Ending 
the  Campanian  camp  in  a  neglected  smte,  as  might  be  e^t** 
pected  from  the  soldiers  having  spent  the  night  without  sleep, 
he  assaulted  it  through  all  die  gates  at  once,  and  put  the  men 
to  the  sword,  some  as  they  lay  stretched  on  the  ground, 
odbers  as  they  returned  unarmed  after  finidiing  the  sacrifices. 
In  die  tumultuous  action  of  this  night,  there  were  more  than 
two  thousand  men  slain^  together  with  their  general  Manus 
Ain  us,  and  thirty-four  military  standards  taken. 
XXXVI.  Gracchus,  after  m^ing  himself  master  of  the 
enemy^s  camp  with  the  loss  of  less  than  one  hundred  men, 
returned  quickly  to  Cumse,  being  afraid  of  Hannibal,  who  had 
his  camp  on  the  Tifata  over  Capua.  Nor  was  his  judgment 
mistaken  in  dictating  this  provident  step;  for  no  sooner  had 
the  news  of  the  overthrow  reached  Hannibal,  than  he  march¬ 
ed  by  Capua  with  the  utmost  rapidity,  expecting  to  find  at 
Ham«  an  army,  which  consisted  for  die  most  part  of  raw  re¬ 
cruits  and  slaves,  indulging  extravagant  Joy  in  ccmsequence 
of  success,  and  employed  in  gathering  the  spoils  of  Ae  van¬ 
quished,  and  driving  off  their  booty.  He  ordered  such  of  the 
Campanians  as  he  met  in  their  flight,  to  be  conducted  to 
Capua,  under  an  escort,  and  the  wounded  to  be  conveyed  in 
emriages.  At  Hamse  he  found  nothing  but  the  traces  of  the 
recent  carnage,  and  the  ground  covered  with  die  bodies  of 
his  allies.  Several  now  advised  him  to  proceed  directly  to 
Cmn»,  and  attack  that  city:  but,  though  it  accorded  with  his 
smxious  wishes  to  have  Cumse  at  least  as  a  sea  port,  since  he 
could  not  get  possession  of  Neapolis,  nevertheless,  as  his 
soldiers,  on  dieir  hasty  march,  had  bn>ught  no|thing  but  their 
arms,  he  retired  back  to  his  camp  on  the  Tifata.  Being  after¬ 
wards  earnestly  urged  to  the  attack  by  the  Campanians,  he 
returned  next  day  to  Cumae  with  every  thing  requisite  for  a 
siege,  and  after  utterly  wasting  the  country,  pitched  his  camp 
at  the  distance  of  a  mile  from  the  city,  in  which  Gracchus 
had  detemined  to  stay,  rather  through  die  shsune  of  aban- 

IMO 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.H.  5sr. 

at  %uch  a  perilous  juncture,  allies  imploring  prot^- 
lion  from  him  and  the  Roman  people,  dian  from  any  great 
confidenee  in  his  troops*  Neither  could  the  other  consul, 
Fabian,  who  had  his  camp  at  Cales,  venture  to  cross  the  river 
Vuhumus,  being  engaged  at  first  in  taking  new  auspices, 
afterwards  in  attending  to  prodigies,  which  were  reported  one 
after  another j  beside,  while  expiating  these,  he  was  told  by 
the  aruspices,  that  it  would  not  be  easy  to  obtain  favour  of 
the  gods. 
XXXVII.  While  Fabius  was  prevented  from  stirring  by 
these  causes,  Semproni^s  was  held  besieged,  and  now  was 
even  exposed  to  the  attacks  of  machines.  Against  a  huge 
wooden  tower,  which  was  brought  up  near  to  the  town,  the 
Roman  consul  raised  another  tower,  much  more  elevated,  by 
fixing  strong  piles  contiguous  to  the  wall,  which  in  itself  was 
very  high.  This  the  besieged  formed  into  a  platform,  whence, 
throwing  stones,  javelins,  and  other  missile  weapons,  they 
maintatned  the  defence  of  their  works  and  city.  At  last, 
whra  the  machine  had  appn>ached  close  to  the  wall,  and  with 
Mazing  firebrands,  they  threw  on  it  all  at  once  an  immense 
quantity  of  combustibles;  while  the  soldiers  within,  terrified 
by  the  flames,  cast  themselves  down  headlong  from  the  same. 
The  garrison,  sallying  put  from  two  gates  at  die  very  time, 
overthrew  die  enemy’s  advanced  guards,  and  drove  them 
back  to  their  camp;  so  that  the  Carthaginian  was,  on  that 
day,  more  like  a  person  besieged  than  besieging.  One  diou- 
sand  three  hundred  of  the  Carthaginians  were  slain,  and 
fifty-nine  taken  prisoners,  who,  standing  careless  and  negli* 
gendy  near  tl|e  waUs,  and  on  the  advanced  posts,  and  fearing 
nothing  less  than  a  sally,  were  surprised  unawares.  Gracchus 
sounded  a  retreat  before  the  enemy  should  recover  from 
dieir  sudden  fright,  and  drew  back  his  men  within  the  walls. 
Next  day  Hannibal,  supposing  that  the  consul,  elated  with 
success,  would  be  willing  to  try  the  issue  of  a  regular  en¬ 
gagement,  drew  up  his  forces  in  order  of  batde  between  his 

XXIIL 

B.C.  215-3 

151 

camp  and  the  city;  but  when  be  saw  that  not  a  man  sttrred, 
except  in  the  custtmiary  guard  of  the  town^  and  that  nc^ing 
would  be  hazarded  on  inccmsiderate  hc^e%  he  returned  with 
disappointment  to  the  Tifata*  At  the  very  time  of  the  raising 
the  siege  of  Cumse,  Tiberius  Sempronius^  summed  Longus, 
fought  witii  success  against  Hanno  at  Gnimentum  in  Luca- 
nia,  killed  above  two  thousand  of  the  enemy,  and  took  foity^ 
one  military  standards,  losing  two  hundred  and  eighty  of  his 
own  men.  Hanno,  expelled  from  the  Lucanian  territories, 
retreated  backward  into  Bruttium.  In  another  quarter,  three 
towns  of  the  Hirpinians,  which  had  revolted  from  the  Roman 
p^ple,  were  attacked  and  retaken  by  the  praetor,  Marcus 
Valerius.  Vercellius  and  SiciUus,  the  instigators  of  the  re¬ 
volt,  were  beheaded,  and  above  one  thousand  of  the  prisoners 
exposed  to  sale:  the  rest  of  the  booty  was  bestowed  on  the 
soldiers,  and  then  the  troops  were  led  back  to  Luceria. 
XXXVII L  While  affairs  proceeded  thus  in  Lucania  and 
Hirpinia,  the  five  ships  carrying  the  captive  ambassadors  of 
the  Macedonians  and  Carthaginians  to  Rome,  after  making 
a  circuit  from  the  upper  sea  to  the  lower,  round  the  greater 
part  of  the  coast  of  Italy,  were  sailing  by  Cumae,  when  they 
were  observed  by  Gracchus,  who,  not  knowing  whether  they 
belonged  to  friends  or  enemies,  sent  a  part  of  his  fleet  to 
meet  them.  Here  mutual  inquiries  discovering  that  the  con¬ 
sul  was  at  Cumae,  the  ships  put  into  that  harbour,  the  prisoners 
%vere  conducted  to  the  consul,  and  the  packet  they  had  in 
charge  delivered  to  him.  Having  read  the  letters  of  Philip 
and  Hannibal,  he  inclosed,  and  sent  them  to  the  senate  by 
land,  ordering  the  ambassadors  to  be  conveyed  thither  by  sea. 
These,  with  the  inclosures,  arrived  at  Rome  on  the  same  day, 
or  nearly;  and  the  answers  of  the  former  on  their  examina¬ 
tion  being  confonscud^le  to  the  contents  of  the  letters,  the 
senate  were  at  first  grievously  perplexed  at  the  prospect  of 
such  a  formidsdde  war  impending  from  Macedonia,  when  the)’^ 
wero  scarcely  able  to  support  that  with  the  Carthaginians. 

HISTORY  OF  mkmE. 

[YM,  SSf. 

Yet,  so  hx  ware  Aey  from  s^ering  their  coixrage  to  be  4c- 
pressed,  thstt  they  instantly  began  to  delibo'ate  henr  they 
might,  hy  offensive  operations,  divert  the  enemy  from 
After  cmiering  the  prisoners  to  be  kept  in  close  cemfinement, 
and  their  attendmits  to  be  exposed  to  puUic  ^le,  they 
creed,  that,  besides  the  twenty  ships,  under  the  command  of 
Publius  Valerius  Flaccus,  twenty-five  otters  should  te  got 
ready  for  sea.  These  being  equipped  and  launched,  and  joined 
by  the  five  which  had  brought  the  captive  ambassadors,  set 
sail  from  Ostia  few  Tarentum,  and  orders  were  sent  to  PubHus 
Valerius  to  take  on  board  them  the  sdidiers,  formerly  com¬ 
manded  by  Varro,  and  who  were  then  at  Tarentum  under 
Lucius  Apustius,  lieutenant-general;  and,  with  his  fleet,  which 
would  then  consist  of  fifty  ships,  not  only  to  protect  die  coast 
of  Italy,  but  to  procure  intelligence  concerning  the  hostile  de¬ 
signs  of  the  Macedonians.  If  Philip’s  intentions  were  found 
to  correspond  with  the  letters,  and  the  infomations  of  the 
ambassadors,  he  was  then  to  forward  intelligence  of  this  to 
the  praetor,  Marcus  Valerius,  who,  leaving  die  commsmd  of 
the  army  to  his  lieutenant-general,  Lucius  Apustius,  and 
hastening  to  Tarentum  to  die  fleet,  was  to  cross  over  into 
Macedonia  with  all  expedition,  and  use  his  best  endeavours 
to  detain  Philip  in  his  own  dominions.  For  the  maintenance 
of  the  fleet,  and  the  support  of  the  war  with  Macedonia,  that 
money  was  ordered  to  be  applied,  which  had  been  sent  into 
Sicily  to  Appius  Claudius  to  be  returned  to  King  Hiero,  and 
this  was  conveyed  to  Tarentum  by  the  lieutenant-general, 
Lucius  Apustius.  Together  with  it,  were  sent  by  Hiero  tw^ 
hundred  thousand  pecks  of  wheat,  and  one  hundred  thousand 
of  barley. 
XXXIX.  While  the  Romans  were  employed  in  this  man¬ 
ner,  and  making  such  preparations,  the  captured  ship,  which 
had  been  sent  with  the  others  to  Rome,  made  its  escape  on 
the  voyage,  and  returned  to  Philip;  by  which  means  he  learn¬ 
ed^  that  his  ambassadors,  with  the  letters,  had  fallen  into  the 

^  iCSHr. 

B4:.  115.] 

tisi 

no^wha^  iSi$tff  ^i^«r%{!oiig^  !iiis»,  ht  4iS^ 
ps^iied  of&bsiS]^  #itb  1^  Itt^t^^tiotis.  l%e 
f&mmm  cmfloyeA  m  m  Wkamili^  were 
Bbr^linti,  aturwf^  Scmioi^  Crm  Bem^^igid^khetts 
Magi$e»:  iksem  ^fectei  Ae  Im^n^  wiA  wMck  lAmr  were 
cik»qg^  my  obi^ructioti,  etiiier  Is  g^^ng^or 
mmam  had  {^^eed  aumy  hefare  mMp 
c^ld  mt  «aodo%  iar  enter  tm  msy  entc^rpriB^iio 
tavipiHiwnw^^  w^  eo^mqtNctNres  attending  ^  capture 
daw  «ngle  vemS  wWh  Ae  as  to  defar  die  rw 
whidt  die  R<^(&aiis  wNsfi^  tiHU^i]^  Wkhre^irdtodie 
oMpi^gn  In  Am  smgbbom^^  of  Capra,  Fdidus,  after  ex* 
^  prw#g^  passed  Ae  Vultmwus,  and  Aedtbodi 
dte  cramdi  cMered  raadicm.  FaUra  took  araiult  Coes* 
bnterta,  IVebitIa,  rad  Simula,  ^e^ettdikh  had  revolted  to 
Ae  C«nrAia|^mrav)  rad  in  them  wm^  trade  prisons  Han* 
n4bd’a|puti9raa^radviu^rai&h<iMc€€ranpraiara.  AtNok, 
ra  was  Ae  case  dw;  belme,  Ae  being  inc^ned  n> 
the  Ae  Rmrara,  rad  ^  p^tukee  to  that  of  die 
Caithagttsiana,  Aei^er  held  mxt€t  rabak,  in  which  schemes 
wme  hnaoed  ftr  massam^k^  ^  nobdi^  rad  deUvering  up 
the  ci^  iHit  to  prevent  tlmr  dm%ns  wddng  FaKus, 
maitdrag  Ms  ramjr  sra^oss  Mi^era  Capra  mi  Hannibars 
cra»p  on  Ae  T^ta,  post  ovm^  &iessfik  m  die  Clradiati 
campt  rad  t^mce  detrahed  l^u^ra  Bitu^llra,  proctmral, 
imAk  Ammmfs.  tmder  Ms  eommand,  to  e^raeAeposrassios! 
erf  Noia«  * 
XI4*  In  &wdinta  die  Imsiness  of  die  campaign,  whkh  had 
been  su^nded  evor  since  Ae  ftme^  Quintus  Mraitis  had 
been  raked  mA  a  seveie  dbrn-ekr,  began  to  be  posecumd 
by^  Titus  Manhus^  who^Ainwmg  die  ships  <rf  war  into  dralb 
at  Casaie,  and  annkg  die  mwAmn  to  rat  cm  kuid,  irade 
with  Ae  9rmf  which  he  received  from  Mraiua,  die  number 
VOL.  Ill, — V 

[XJI.  *37. 

134  BQTOKr^^KDME. 
of  ftijti  i«il  4«fd#errtoid*'ed  Iwwe. 
Widiilas  fepee;Ae  into  Ae  ^ewaty’*  «»»Bl*y»«A 
]dAb«4  «MBp  14  »  A»U  ^^MHce  ft<eA  ^  <rf  Hae^pA* 
c^.  iktetfipeasl  A«t  at  Ai»  twe  A»1a««rl»4«t»citte 

paticiEre^a  tdrtfoareeBMBt  to  Ws  zrmy  .|»y«Bii*tt(|f.  yo^^ 
mou  hb  s<ai,«aiH^  Hiostua,  coowaumtedfia  Aa’icnapr ^ 
he,  wiA  Ac  partsumptioB  of  youth,  bt0iB»»ld«^At^ht»<ft«tw8 
aa  rtigagMogat,  mas  defiatsd,  and 
of  ti»;  l^urdinians  beaig^dma  in 
Imndnid  takoa.  The  Te^of  A*  troops,^ 
Ac  and  woode;  bu^  aftenrands,  aU  ^n^nd 
their  «i^t  to  Gceims,  tlie|ai»cipdiG«y 
tduA  Aey  Imrd  A«t  Adr  coBanawaderisadfi^ 
would  have  pat  m  tsad  A  the  wn' »  Saidi«da>  A*d  act*  Ae 
fleet  fflader  Hatdrubd,  wWkii  had  bom^^ 
<Hjt  of  ite  coa»e  to  the  J^doakk  hdes«  aerived  jaet  »  tt»e 
to  tevite  the  hof**  of  the  rev^dten#.  htarHtg  of 
the  arfival  trf  d»e  Carth^piaian  fleet*  punifhedYbMktoXbnle; 
Ais  affcurded  an  opporOinily  to  Hainpwce^<rf  elfecdag 
a  juncdoo  wiA  d«  Cwthag^nian,  HmdrtAid*  when, he  had 
disembarked  laa  troops,  sent  back  Ae  fleet  >to  .Carthage}  and 
using  Hampsicoia  as  a  gai A,  he  laarcfae A  wi A  Aeamad 
sword,  into  Ae  lanA  beloa^g  to  Ae  tdlies  of  Aw  fewaan 
and  would  have  ^;>roce«kd  ev«i.  to  C«At«  had  wot 
Matdias,  by  Arowing  his-army  ia  Ae  way,  checked  Ae  vi©- 
kMC  <rfhis  dc^«lations.  Fw  sob»c  dme,  Aeyby  ratan^wd 
Opposite  to  each  other,  at  a  smiA  dbtiuace;  Aen  fofiowed 
glyi^iiiAes  and  encounters  between  small  parties,  in  which 
mm  vmious.  At  bst  they  muehed  out  tob^e,  anA 
meeting  m  regular  «ray,  maii^fMood  a  geaeiA  en^^atent 
for  Ae  ^ace  of  ftmr  hours.  That  Ae  victory  remiAied  »o 
in  suspraise  was  owing  to  A^  CarthagpniaBs,  fmc  Ac 
Sardhuans  bad  now  l««ai  accusuaned  to  yield  an  easy  cma> 
quest.  At  tot,  wtea  i^Aing  was  to  be  seen  mi  any  siA  of 

US 

^  %mAnhmsiA^  viso 
laMi  ^Nwg  dF  fab  mUB^ 
urikkdt  Siegifa^fai^  t^ar^  loid 
^ea  foiloii^ar^sirtb^  WA^Sm^mms 
$mA  fd3^P»«dvt  dbont 
three  thoimidi  alx  li^suird!,  wi& 
statfahapAi, 
XLI.  Bat  lute  ecsa^g-UHOed^  ab&rt  aB,  ta  Tm&&t  tM&  mc-^ 
cess  bft^mt  la^  was,  the  taklsg  ct  ^  ges^l 
Rasdruhai,  two  Ciar&aglaiims  dP  Mgfa  distlaetios, 
fbtmio  tad  liagb;  Mago  bekig  i^  the  Bareme  &iiiiiy,  md 
nearly  rdbifa^  ta  Kinnibal,  Hanao  ^  person  who  in¬ 
stigated  the  &ir^ifam  a  levcdt,  aiai  map^stionaUy  die 
author  of  die  pre^st  WjM*-  Ror  was  d^  fortune  <rf  die  &u*- 
dinfaui  cdmaomders,^  on  ^^ocamiou,  less  mimfaifolej  for 
Hii^tus,  son  of  HampsWora,  fell  hi  die  figte;  and  die  fodw, 
after  haring  fled  widi  a  few  horsemen,  when,  in  addidm  to 
his  odier  mbfosi^naes,  he  heard  also  of  his  m&h  d^di,  put 
an  end  to  his  own  life  in  die  nt^it-time,  fost  mme  inter- 
nqition  mig^t  prevent  Us  design:  to  the  rm,  dae  city  of 
Ccmms,  as  on  die  fms^  occ^ion,  affinded  a  refuge;^  hut 
Mmsltus  attacking  it  wifo  hist^toritms  WO<^  tmAt  hhnself 
master  of  it  in  a  few  days«  Cht  this,  the  rest  of  du^  states, 
which  had  joined  Hsunpsicora  die  Cartfo^^in^s,  made 
tbeh*  submission,  and  gave  hosw^s*  Havmg  imposed  on 
dte8e,i&  proportion  to  the  power  ordehn^amtyof  ^cfa,  am- 
tribudmut  of  com,  and  pay  for  the  trtK^ps,  he  fed  biu^k  his 
army  to  Cs^afe;  and  them,  latmcluiig  die  sU|^  of  war,  and 
emfoirking  the  troops  which  he  hiui  farou^itto  dte  island,  he 
saifed  to  Rome,  and  inform^  the  senate  td  foe  total  re- 
ducdcm  of  Sardinia,  delivcied  die  money  raised  by  .  foe  con- 
tribudons  to  foe  qoiest^ra,  ih&  ccmi  to  foe  .rafales,  and  foe 
prismicrs  t6  the  pmtot  €|umu^  Fuivius.  About  foe  same 
time  Titus  Otacffius,  pr<^«tor,  iwdUng  over  fircma  Lilybssum 

mmrmimm  mome. 
Africa^  ft  sli^9  mva|^  Ac  CarA^i- 
ima  mxmtam.  lo  m  Itesmi^ 
Aat  I04  tei%  from  Ae  &i* 
loma#  lie  jnclijib  dm  tm  it»  w|^  fifosi  Africa;  jmd,  after  a 
Ae  epeemiy  ^kA  aevea  ctf  Ae  Aip^, 
wiA  Aril*  msra.  Tfeeft-  feara  disperacd  the^st  not  less  ef- 
fectuftMy  Atm  a  etc^  voiiki  haredo^  It  la^)pcned  Aattat 
Ae  same  ria^,  Bomilcar)  wiA  supplies  ctf  and  provi* 
sicm%  mid  fbn^  diefihmits  mit  fbam  Cmtbi^,  put  mto  Ae 
harbour  0(  l4oadi«  On  iryck  Apptus  Ofttudius^  intending  to 
surprise  ium^  drew  rii  \m  for^s  faasAy  to  Messana,  under 
a  pretei^^ef  nuking  a  circuit  round  Ac  island^  and  wiA  Ae 
&¥mnr  of  Ae  tide  crossed  over  to  Locri;  but  Bomilcar  had 
ah^eady  left  Ae  plmx^  and  gone  to  join  Hanno  in  Brutttum^ 
and  Ae  Loeriass  shut  thsir  gates  against  tl^  Romans.  With* 
mit  effecting  any  Aing  by  mtch  a  powerful  effort,  Appius  re¬ 
lumed  to  Messana. 
XL1I«  During  Ais  summer  Marcellus  made  frequent  ex¬ 
cursions  from  Nola,  where  he  was  stationed  in  garrison,  into 
Ae  lands  of  Ae  Hirpinians  and  Caudine  Samnites,  and  wiA 
fire  and  sword  cmised  such  utter  Avasmdon  Arough  every 
part  of  Ae  ecHmtxy^  as  renewed  in  Samnium  Ae  memory  of 
Ac^e  calanud^  which  they  Imd  suffered  of  old.  BoA  na* 
Ams  therefore  immediately  joined  in  scndmg  ambassadors 
to  Hannibal^  who  adAesaed  him  in  Ais  manner:  Hannibal, 
we,  by  ourselves,  wag^d  war  agamst  the  Roman  people,  as 
long  as  our  own  arms,  and  our  own  strengA,  were  sufficient 
for  our  defence:  when  we  found  that  we  could  no  longer  trust 
to  Aese,  we  united  ourselves  to  kmg  Pyrrhus;  by  whmn 
being  deserted,  we  submittod  to  a  peac^,  which  our  circum¬ 
stances  made  necessary,  and  which  we  continued  to  observe, 
Arough  a  space  of  almost  sixty  years,  to  the  time  when  you 
came  mto  Italy.  Your  kind  Ameanour  and  singular  genero¬ 
sity  to  our  cmmtrymen,  whom,  when  prisoners  in  your  hands, 
vou  reatcored  to  us,  as  well  as  yoiw  bravery  and  success,  in- 

BCK>K  xxm. 

ISf 

&.C.  ns.'] 
spired  m  widi  siicb  ie;^em  and  admiration^  that  luiving  you 
in  faealdi  and  aaiety  tahefinend  us^  we  feared  not  the  resent- 
meM  tddbe  Rtmaan  nor  (if  it  is  allowable  so  to  speak) 
even  diat  td  the  gods«  But  now,  indeed,  wlule  you  are  not 
only  in  safety,  and  possessed  of  victory,  but  while  you  are 
present,  and  cm,  in  a  maimer,  hear  the  lamentations  of  our 
wives  and  children,  and  see  our  houses  in  flames;  still,  we 
say,  we  have  experienced,  in  the  course  of  this  summer,  such 
depredations,  that  it  seems  as  if  Marcus  Marcellas,  not  Han¬ 
nibal,  were  the  conqueror  at  Cannae;  the  Romans  boasting, 
#  that  you  had  just  vigour  enough  for  that  one  stroke,  and  hav¬ 
ing  as  it  were  lost  your  sting,  are  now  become  a  droi^.  For 
near  one  hundbred  years,  we  maintained  a  war  against  the 
Roman  people,  without  the  assistance  of  any  foreign  leader 
or  army,  since  in  the  two  years  that  Pyrrhus  was  joined  with 
us,  he  rather  augmented  his  own  forces  with  our  strength^ 
than  defended  us  with  his,  I  shall  not  make  a  display  of  our^ 
successes,  except  in  sending  under  the  yoke  two  consuls  and 
two  consular  armies;  thou^  it  is  certain  that  other  events 
have  contributed  to  our  glory.  As  to  the  difliculties  and  mis¬ 
fortunes  which  we  then  underwent,  we  can  recount  them  with 
less  indignation,  than  those  which  fall  upon  us  this  day.  Re¬ 
nowned  dictators,  with  their  masters  of  horse;  two  consuls, 
with  two  consular  armies  at  a  time,  were  used  to  enter  our 
t^ritoriea;  and,  with  every  precaution  of  first  exploring  the 
cmmtry,  and  posting  rear  guards,  proceeded  in  order  of 
battle  to  comipit  depredations;  at  present  we  are  in  a  manner 
die  prey  of  one  little  garrison,  which  is  scswccly  sufficient 
to  man  the  waUs  Nola,  They  scour  every  quarter  of  our 
country;  not  in  companies,  but  like  common  robbers,  with 
less  precautioii  than  they  would  use  in  rambling  thremgh  the 
province  of  Rimie.  Now  the  cause  of  this  is,  that  you  do 
not  afibrd  ua  prt^ectiem,  and  that  at  the  same  time  our  youth, 
who,  if  at  home,  wemid  defend  us,  are  all  employed  undaK* 
your  standards.  As  we  are  not  unacquainted  with  you  or 

158 

HISTCmY  OF  aOME ,  VtM.  m. 
your  forces;  tepvr  Ant  you  fesve.dcfcatcd  and  cut  off 
so  tnaity  amics  of  Romtes;  surdy  we  must  judge  it  au 
matter  for  you  to  overpower  those  marauders  amoogst  us, 
wlio  straggle  about  without  order,  and  ramble  wherever  ai* 
limed  by  die  slightest  hope  of  gain.  They  may  be  instantly 
subdued  by  a  handful  of  Numidians;  mid  while  you  send 
supporters  to  us,  you  will,  by  the  same  means,  strip  the  No¬ 
lans  of  theirs.  In  fine,  it  is  hoped  that  after  having  taken  us 
under  your  protection,  and  darned  us  worthy  of  alliance, 
you  do  not  now  judge  us  undeserving  your  interference  in 
our  defence,” 
XLHI.  To  this  Hannibal  answet^d,  that  ‘‘  the  Hirpinians 
and  Samnites  did  too  many  things  at  once;  they  represented 
their  sufferings,  petitioned  for  protection,  and  at  the  same 
time  complained  of  being  undefended  and  neglected.  Where¬ 
as,  they  ought  first  to  make  the  representation;  then  to  re 
quest  protection;  and,  in  the  last  place,  if  their  request  were 
not  complied  with,  then,  and  not  before,  to  complain  of  hav¬ 
ing  implored  aid  in  vain^  That  he  would  lead  his  army  not 
into  the  territories  of  the  Hirpinians  or  Samnites,  lest  he 
should  prove  an  additional  burthen,  biit  into  the  nearest 
places  belonging  to  the  allies  of  the  Roman  people;  by  the 
plunder  of  which,  he  would  enrich  his  soldiers,  and,  at  the 
same  time,  by  the  terror  of  bis  arms,  drive  far  away  the 
enemy  from  them.  As  to  what  concerned  the  war  between 
him  and  Rome,  if  the  fight  at  the  Trasimenus  was  more  ho¬ 
nourable  than  that  at  the  Trebia,  and  the  one  ^t  Cannse  dian 
that  at  the  Trasimenus,  he  was  resolved,  by  a  still  more 
complete  and  more  splendid  victory,  to  cclij^e  the  lustre  of 
the  battle  of  Cannae.”  With  this  answer,  and  with  ample  pre¬ 
sents,  he  dismissed  the  ambassadors;  and  leaving  a  small 
body  of  troops  on  the  Tifata,  began  his  march  with  the  rest 
of  his  army,  and  proceeded  to  Nola.  Thither  also  came 
Hanno  from  Bruttium,  with  the  supplies  and  the  elephants 
brought  from  Carthage.  Having  encamped  at  no  great  dis- 

xxiu, : 

B.C.  Sll^} 

1S9 

be  found*.  «n  inquiry*  every  da-cum- 
stance  widely  difinreot  fisai  foe  xquresentittioBs  made  by  foe 
anfoassj^om  ed^.iiia'' attics.  For^no  part-of  Marcellus’s  cost' 
da^anw  4U6b*  .«»  ixudd  be^  said  to  leave  an  unguarded 
opmungeHImr  as  fortt^e  or  to  an  enemy..  When  going  to  a 
phatdering  exfedytra,^  his  practice  been  to  procure  a 
knoin^ge  of  .foe  county,  to  provide  stnmg  siq^orm  and  a 
s^  and  to  use  ;eve^  erne  smd  caution  just  as  if 
were  ^re^t.  aM  fois  drae,  wheahe  perceived  foe 
Oufos^hfoin  iq^acachu^  he  kept  his  troops  wifoin  foe 
watts, '^and^or&icd  foe  stators  of  Nola  to  walk  round  on 
foe  nMf«r^  md  Sfoo  awkw  on  every  aide  of  wtot  passed 
aa|pg  fop;«!»ia»y., .  From  foe  ofoer  side*  Hanno,  coining  up 
to  foe  iwvitod.|lteK3rfois  ftasais  ^d  Heaus  Fettius  to 
a  confereacej  .1^  yrh^  foe  permisskm  of  M^ceUus, 
they  caine  <mt,.im  a^resafol  foera  by  an  inteqireter,  extrflcd 
Hamaibal’s  c$ma^  xa4  mceess,  aifo  in  the  m<»t  contemp¬ 
tuous  teass-viifoed  ,foe  msjesty  of  foe  Roman  people,  as 
mouhkaing  iitto  decay,  togefoer  with  their  strei^.  “  But,” 
»ni/i  he,  suq^twing  all  matters  were  on.  the  same  footing  as 
beiinc,  yet  as  it  is  fouifo  1^  experience  how  hurdwnsome  foe 
govermnent  of  Rome  is  to  its  confodoates,  and  how  great 
the  generosi^'of  Hanmbal  has  been,  even  to  every  one 
his  prisoners,  who  bore  foe  mune  of  an  Italimi,  an  alliance  of 
friendship  with  foe  Carfos^^hms  was  surdly  to  be  wished  in 
preference  to  one  with  foe  Romans.,  If.  both  foe  consuls, 
with  their  armies,  were  at  Ncda,  they  would  uo  more  be  able 
to  cope  with  Hannibal,  than  they  had  been  at  Cannw}  much 
less  would  a  pngle  praetor,  with  a  handful  of  men,  and  foese 
raw  recruits,  be  equal  to  foe  defence  of  Nola.  W^hefoer  Han¬ 
nibal  was  to  gain  possession  of  that  town  by  storm,  or  by 
capitulation,  was  a  matter  which  concerned  foemselves  nl^e 
foam  him,  for  gain  it  he  would,  as  he  had  gained  Capua  and 
Nuceria;  and  how  different  the  fate  of  Capua  was  from  that 
of  Nuceria,  foe  Nolans  themselves,  situated  about  midway 

tao 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  5Sr. 

betireen  the  two  places,  could  not  but  know.  He  refrained 
ifrom  mentioning  tfre  consequences  which  necessarily  follow¬ 
ed  die  ^king  of  a  cit\^  by  assault;  and  with  more  pleasure 
took  vkp<m  him  to  engage,  that,  if  they  would  deliver  up 
Kola,  together  with  Marcdlus  and  the  garrison,  diey  should 
themselves  dictate  the  t^ms  on  which  they  were  ^  be  re¬ 
ceived  into  friend^ip  and  widi  Hranibal.” 
XLIV.  To  this  Heremiius  replied,  that  ^  for 
many  years  past,  a  friendship  hsd  subsisted  between  die 
sta^s  of  Rome  and  Noki,  Jwhh  which  neither  par^  had,  to 
that  day,  seen  reasm  to  be  dbsatished;  and  though 
peo[^’s  attachments  iime4o  die  chaii|^  of  fortune,  it 
was  now  400  kte  for  diem  to  cl^ge  theirs.  who  were 
afterwaids  to'surrei^r  to  Hannd^  ought  ac^  to  have  sent 
for  a  Roman  garrison.  Th^r  de^iny  was  now,  and  would 
continue  to  be,  to  the  last,  connected,^  in  every  particular,  with 
that  of  the  person  who  came  totheir  support.”  Tins  conference 
took  avmy  from  Hannibal  all  hope  erf  gaining  Nola  by  trea¬ 
chery;  he  therefore  invested  the*  cky  quite  round,  intending 
to  attack  the  walls  in  all  parts  at  once.  When  Marcellas  saw 
him  approach  the  wmks,  having  form^  his  troops  within  the 
gate,  he  sallied  fordi  with  great  impetuosrfy.  At  die  first 
push,  several  were  beaten  down  and  skmn;  then  others  run¬ 
ning  up  to  thme  who  were  engaged,  and  their  powca-  being 
brought  to  an  equality ,  die  battle  became  forimis,  and  would 
have  been  memorable  among  the  few  which  are  most  cele¬ 
brated,  fed  not  violent  rain,  attended  by  a  despera^  storm, 
separa^  the  combatants.  After  this  small  trial  of  strength, 
which  served  only  to  irrfete  their  passions,  they  retired  for 
that  day,  the  Romans  into  die  city,  the  Cartfeginians  into 
their  camp.  However,  on  the  first  irruption,  some  of  the  Car- 
t^%iftiaiis,  not  ^ve  thirty,  fell  under  the  shock,  and  not 
one  of  the  Romans.  The  rain  continued  without  in^rmission 
through  tte  whole  nigh^  and  las^  until  the  third  hour  of 
the  foMowis^  daj.  Wherefore,  notwithstanding  that  both 

BOOK  XXIII. 

16i 

B.C.  215.3 
parties  eagerly  longed  for  battle,  yet  they  remained  during 
that  day  within  their  works.  On  the  third  day,  Hannibal  sent 
a  part  of  his  forces  to  ravage  the  lands  of  the  Nolans;  which, 
when  M arcellus  observed,  he  instantly  drew  out  his  forces 
and  offered  battle,  nor  did  Hannibal  decline  the  challenge. 
The  distance  between  the  city  and  the  camp  was  about  a 
mile:  in  this  space,  which  was  level,  as  is  all  the  ground 
about  Nola,  the  armies  met.  The  shout  raised,  on  both 
sides,  called  back  the  nearest  of  those  cohorts  which  had 
gone  into  the  country  for  plunder,  to  the  battle,  which  had 
begun  when  they  arrived.  The  Nolans  joined  themselves  to 
the  Roman  forces;  and  Marcellas,  after  commending  their 
zeal,  ordered  them  to  take  post  in  reserve,  and  to  carry  off 
the  wounded  from  the  line;  but,  by  no  means  to  engage  in 
the  fight,  unless  they  received  a  signal  from  him. 
XLV.  The  battle  was  long  doubtful,  every  one  exerting 
himself  to  the  utmost,  the  officers  in  encouraging  the  men, 
and  the  men  in  fighting.  Marcellas  urged  his  soldiers  to 
press  briskly  on  those  whom  they  had  defeated  but  three  days 
before;  who  had  been  put  to  flight  from  Cumae  not  many 
days  since,  and  who,  in  the  last  year,  had  been  repulsed  from 
Nola  by  himself,  then  likewise  in  command,  though  with 
other  troops.  All  the  enemy’s  forces,’’  he  told  them, ‘‘were 
not  in  the  field;  some  of  them  were  rambling  through  the 
country  in  search  of  prey;  and  those  who  were  in  the  fight 
were  debilitated  by  Campanian  luxury,  having  exhausted 
their  vigour  in  the  practice  of  every  kind  of  intemperance 
and  debauchery,  through  the  whole  course  of  the  winter. 
Their  former  strength  was  gone,  they  were  no  longer  pos¬ 
sessed  of  that  firmness,  either  of  body  or  mind,  which  had 
enabled  them  to  surmount  the  Pyrenean  and  the  Alpine 
heights.  Those  they  had  now  to  engage  with,  might  be  called 
the  shadows  of  those  armies:  men  scarcely  able  to  support 
their  limbs  and  armour.  Capua  to  Hannibal  had  not  proved 
a  Cannae.  There,  warlike  courage;  there,  military  discipline; 
VOL. 

162 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  S3r. 

there,  the  glory  of  the  past,  and  the  hope  of  future  times, 
were  all  extinguished.*’  While  Marcellus  raised  the  cou¬ 
rage  of  his  men  by  such  contemptuous  representations  of 
the  enemy,  Hannibal  upbraided  his  in  terms  of  reproach  far 
more  bitto^:  He  knew  these,”  he  said,  to  be  the  same 
arms  and  standards,  which  he  had  seen  and  used  at  the  Tre- 
bia,  at  the  Trasimenus,  and  at  Cannse;  but  as  to  the  men,  he 
had  certainly  led  *  one  army  into  winter-quarters  to  Capua, 
and  brought  out  thence  another  of  a  diiferent  kind.|7Do 
you,  whom  two  consular  armies  united  have  never  with¬ 
stood,  find  it  difficult,  with  all  your  efforts,  to  stand  against 
a  Roman  lieutenant-general,  against  the  exertions  of  one 
legion,  and  a  band  of  auxiliaries?  Does  Marcellus,  with 
his  raw  recruits  and  Nolan  auxiliaries,  attack  us  a  se¬ 
cond  time  with  impunity?  Where  is  that  soldier  of  mine 
who  dragged  the  consul  Caius  Flaminius  from  his  horse, 
and  took  off  his  head  ?  Where  is  he  who  slew  Lucius 
Pauilus  at  Cannse?  Has  the  sword  lost  its  edge?  Are  your 
right  hands  benumbed;  or  what  other  prodigy  is  this?  You, 
who  used  to  conquer,  when  the  advantage  in  number  was 
against  you,  now,  when  that  advantage  is  in  your  favour, 
scarcely  maintain  your  ground.  With  great  bravery  in  your 
tongues,  you  were  used  to  declare,  that  you  would  take 
Rome  if  any  one  would  lead  you  to  it;  the  present  is  a 
much  less  difficult  business.  I  wish  to  have  a  trial  of  your 
strength  and  courage  here.  Take  Nola,  a  town  standing  in 
a  plain,  and  not  £enced  by  either  sea  or  river;  and  then, 
when  you  are  laden  with  the  plunder  and  spoils  of  that  opu¬ 
lent  city,  I  will  either  lead  or  follow  you  whithersoever  you 
choose/* 
XLVI.  Neither  soothing  nor  reproaches  wrought  any  effect 
towards  confirming  their  courage.  They  lost  ground  in  every 
quarter,  while  the  Romans  assumed  fresh  spirits,  not  only 
from  the  exhortations  of  their  commander,  but  from  the 
animating  shouts  raised  by  the  Nolans,  in  testimony  of  their 

BOOK  XXIIL 

163 

BX.  215.] 
good  wishes*  The  Carth^nians^  at  length,  gave  up  the  con¬ 
test,  and  were  driven  into  their  camp;  and  even  this  the 
Roman  soldiers  were  eager  to  attack;  but  Marcellus  drew 
them  hack  into  Nola,  where  they  were  received  with  great 
joy,  and  congratulations,  even  by  the  populace,  who  till  then 
had  been  more  inclined  to  the  Carthaginians.  On  that  day 
were  slain  more  than  five  thousand  of  the  enemy;  taken,  six 
hundred,  with  nineteen  military  standards,  and  two  elephants; 
four  of  the  latter  were  killed  in  the  battle.  Of  the  Romans 
there  fell  not  quite  one  thousand.  Both,  as  if  by  a  tacit  con¬ 
vention,  spent  the  next  day  in  burying  their  dead,  and  Mar¬ 
cellus,  in  pursuance  of  a  vow  to  Vulcan,  burned  the  spoils. 
On  the  third  day  after,  one  thousand  two  hundred  and 
seventy-two  horsemen,  partly  Numidians,  and  partly  Spani¬ 
ards,  through  some  resentment,*!  suppose,  or  hopes  of  better 
treatment,  deserted  to  Marcellus;  and  these,  during  the  re¬ 
mainder  of  the  war,  served  tke  Romans,  on  many  occasions, 
with  much  bravery  and  fidelity.  After  the  conclusion  of  it, 
ample  portions  of  land  wei*e  assigned  to  them  in  acknowledg¬ 
ment  of  their  valour;  to  the  Spaniards,  in  Spain,  and  to  the 
Numidians,  in  Africa.  Hannibal,  sending  back  Hannofrom 
Nola  to  Bruttium,  with  the  forces  which  he  had  brought 
thence,  went  himself  into  winter-quarters  in  Apulia,  and 
cantoned  his4:rQops  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Arpi^  When 
Quintus  Fabius  heard  that  the  foe  was  gone  into  Apulia,  he 
collected  stores  of  com  from  Nola,  and  Neapolis,  in  the  camp 
above  Suessula,  the  fortifications  of  which  he  strengthened; 
and,  leaving  there  a  garrison,  sufficient  for  the  security  of  the 
post,  during  the  winter,  removed  nearer  to  Capua,  laying 
waste  the  country  of  Campania,  with  fire  and  sword,  to  such 
a  degree,  that  the  people  were  compelled,  though  with  no 
great  confidence. in  their  own  strength,  to  go  out  of  their 
gates,  and  fortify  a  camp  near  the  city  in  the  open  plain. 
Their  force  amounted  to  six  thousand  men.  The  infantiy^ 
being  very  indifferent  soldiers,  their  principal  reliance  was 

HISTORY  0F  UOME. 

164 

[Y,R.5a7. 

on  the  cavalry:  these,  therefore,  they  employed  in  annoying 
the  enemy, 
XL VI I.  Among  a  great  number  of  Campanian  horsemen, 
of  high  reputation,  was  Cerrinus  Jubellius,  sumamed  Taurea. 
He  was  a  native  there,  and  celebrated  for  his  abilities  as  a 
horseman  far  beyond  all  the  others  of  that  country,  insomuch 
that  while  he  acted  in  the  service  of  Rome,  there  was  but 
one  Roman,  Claudius  Asellus,  who  had  an  equal  reputation 
in  that  line.  For  this  man,  Taurea  long  searched  as  he  rode 
before  the  squadrons  of  the  enemy.  At  last,  demanding  at¬ 
tention,  he  inquired  where  was  Claudius  Asellus,  and  why, 
since  he  had  been  accustomed  to  assert  himself  to  be  his 
equal,  did  he  not  decide  the  point  with  the  sword;  and  either 
by  suflFering  a  defeat  give  glorious  spoils,  or  by  victory  ac¬ 
quire  them?  When  this  was  reported,  in  the  camp,  to  Asel¬ 
lus,  he  only  waited  to  ask  the  consul’s  leave  to  engage, 
though  out  of  rule,  with  the  challenger.  Having  obtained 
permission,  he  instantly  armed  hiiAself,  and  riding  out  beyond 
the  advanced  guards,  called  on  Taurea  by'name,  and  dared 
him  to  the  field.  The  Romans  had  now  come  in  crowds  to 
behold  the  fight;  and  the  Campanians,  to  gain  a  view  of  it, 
had  filled  not  only  the  rampart  of  the  camp,  but  likewise  the 
walls  of  the  city.  After  a  prelude  of  furious  expressions,  to 
give  the  business  an  air  of  the  greater  consequence,  they 
spurred  on  their  horses,  with  their  spears  prepared  for  action. 
Having  free  space,  wherein  they  parried  each  other’s  assaults, 
the  fight  lasted  for  some  time  without  a  wound  on  either  side. 
At  length  the  Campanian  said  to  the  Roman,  this  will  be 
but  a  trial  of  skill  between  our  horses,  not  between  their 
riders,  unless  we  descend  into  yon  hollow  way.  There,  as 
there  will  be  no  room  for  wheeling  to  one  side  or  another, 
we  may  meet  hand  to  hand.”  Scarcely  were  the  words  utter¬ 
ed,  when  Claudius  leaped  his  horse  down  into  the  road,  on 
which  Taurea,  more  daring  in  words  than  in  action,  said. 
Never  be  an  ass  in  a  dyke,”  w^hich  expression  became 

BOOK  XXIIL 

165 

B.C.  215.] 

afterwards  proverbial  among  rustics.  Claudius,  riding  up 
again  into  the  plain,  traversed  the  ground  to  a  considerable 
distance  from  the  road,  without  meeting  any  antagonist;  and 
then,  exclaiming  against  the  cowardice  of  his  foe,  returned 
victorious  to  the  camp,  amidst  general  rejoicing  and  con¬ 
gratulations.  To  this  encoimter,  some  histories  add  2t  won¬ 
derful  circumstance,  (how  far  worthy  of  belief,  the  reader 
may  judge  for  himself,)  that  Claudius,  pursuing  Taurea,  as 
he  fled  back  to  the  city,  rode  in  at  one  of  the  enemy’s  gates 
which  stood  open,  and  escaped  unhurt  through  another, 
while  the  soldiers  stood  motionless  through  astonishment. 
XL  VIII.  From  this  time  the  troops  remained  without  em¬ 
ployment,  and  the  consul  even  drew  back  his  camp  to  a  dis¬ 
tance,  that  the  Campanians  might  till  their  grounds;  nor  did 
he  offer  any  injury  to  the  lands,  until  the  blades  in  the  com 
fields  were  sufficiently  grown  to  serve  as  forage.  He  then 
conveyed  the  com  in  this  state  into  the  Claudian  camp  over 
Suessuia,  where  he  erected  huts  against  the  winter.  He  gave 
orders  to  Marcus  Claudius,  pro-consul,  that,  retaining  at 
Nola  a  garrison  sufficient  for  the  defence  of  the  place,  he 
should  send  the  rest  of  his  force  to  Rome,  lest  they  should 
be  a  burden  to  the  allies,  and  an  expense  to  the  state.  In 
another  quarter,  Tiberius  Gracchus  having  led  his  legions 
from  Cumae  to  Luceria  in  Apulia,  detached  thence  the  prsetor, 
Marcus  Valerius,  to  Brand u slum,  with  the  troops  which  he 
had  commanded  at  Luceria,  ordering  him  to  guard  the  coast 
of  the  Sallentine  territory,  and  carefully  pursue  all  such  mea¬ 
sures  as  should  be  found  requisite  with  respect  to  Philip,  and 
the  Macedonian  war.  Towards  the  close  of  that  summer,  in 
which  happened  those  events  which  we  have  related,  letters 
arrived  from  the  Scipios,  Publius  and  Cneius,  setting  forth 
the  great  importance  and  successful  issue  of  their  operations 
in  Spain;  but  that  they  were  in  want  of  every  thing,  pay, 
clothing,  and  com  for  the  army,  and  the  crews  of  the  ships. 
With  regard  to  the  pay,  they  observed,  that,  if  the  treasury 

165 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  537. 

were  low,  tiiey  would  themselves  devise  some  method  o£ 
procuring  it  from  the  Spaniards;  but  that  the  other  articles 
must,  at  all  events,  be  sent  from  Rome,  otherwise,  neither  the 
army,  nor  the  province,  could  be  preserved.  When  the  letters 
were  read,  both  the, truth  of  the  facts  represented,  and  the 
reasoitableness  of  the  demands,  were  universally  acknowledg¬ 
ed;  but  they  were  struck  by  the  following  considerations: 
What  numerous  forces  on  land  and  sea  they  were  obliged 
to  maintain;  and,  what  a  large  additional  fleet  must  soon  be 
provided,  in  case  of  a  war  with  Macedonia  breaking  out. 
That  Sicily  and  Sardinia,  which,  before,  had  yielded  a  reve¬ 
nue,  now  scarcely  maintained  the  troops  employed  in  their 
own  defence.  That  the  public  expenses  were  supplied  by  a 
tax;  but  as  the  number  of  those  who  contributed  to  this  tax, 
had  been  diminished  by  the  great  slaughter  of  the  troops  at 
Trasimenus,  and  at  Cannae;  so  the  surviving  few,  if  loaded 
with  multiplied  impositions,  must  perish  likewise,  only  by 
a  different  malady.  It  was  therefore  concluded,  that,  if  the 
state  did  not  find  support  in  credit,  it  could  find  none  in 
money;  and  it  was  judged  proper,  that  the  praetor,  Fulvius, 
should  go  out  to  the  assembly  of  the  commons,  and  lay  be¬ 
fore  the  people  the  necessitous  situation  of  the  country;  ex¬ 
horting  them,  that  such  as  had  increased  their  estates  by 
farming  the  public  revenues,  should  now  assist  that  govern¬ 
ment,  to  which  they  owed  their  prosperity,  with  indulgence 
in  respect  of  time;  and  that  they  should  engage  to  furnish,  by 
contract,  the  supplies  necessary  for  the  army  in  Spain,  on  con¬ 
dition,  when  money  should  come  into  the  treasury,  of  being 
the  first  paid.”  These  matters  the  praetor  explained  in  the 
assembly,  and  gave  public  notice  of  the  day,  on  which  he 
would  contract  for  the  supplying  of  clothing,  and  com,  for 
the  army  in  Spain,  and  such  other  things  as  were  necessar}' 
for  the  men  on  board  the  fleet. 
XLIX.  When  the  time  came,  three  companies,  consisting 
of  nineteen  men,  attended,  in  order  to  engage  in  the  contract. 

BOOK  xxni. 

167 

BX.  215.] 
Their  demands  were  twofold :  first,  that  diey  should  be  ex¬ 
empted  from  military  service  as  long  as  they  might  be  con¬ 
cerned  in  this  business  of  the  state  ;  the  other,  that  when 
they  had  se^  goods  on  ship-board,  any  damage  after\?ards 
sustained  either  dirough  the  means  of  storms,  or  of  the 
enemy,  should  be  at  the  public  loss.  Both  being  complied 
with,  they  concluded  the  contract,  and  with  the  money  of 
private  persons :  such  were  the  habits  of  thinking,  such  the 
love  of  iheir  country,  which,  with  uniform  influence,  per¬ 
vaded  all  ranks  of  men.  As  all  engagements  were  entered 
into  with  great  spirit,  so  were  they  fulfilled  with  the  most 
faithful  punctuality,  and  exactly  in  tfie  same  manner,  as  if 
the  supplies  were  drawn,  as  formerly,  out  of  an  opulent  trea- 
sur}^.  At  this  time,  the  town  of  Illiturgi,  having  revolted  to 
the  Romans,  was  besieged  by  Hasdrubal,  Mago,  and  Ha- 
mikar  son  of  Bomilcar.  Between  these  three  camps,  the 
Scipios,  after  a  difficult  struggle,  and  a  great  slaughter  of 
their  opponents,  forced  their  way  into  the  place,  introducing 
a  quantity  of  corn,  of  which  there, had  been  a  scarcity.  Then, 
after  exhorting  the  townsmen  to  defend  their  walls,  with  the 
same  courage  with  which  they  had  seen  the  Roman  troops 
fight  in  their  behalf,  they  marched  to  attack  the  largest  of 
the  camps,  where  Hasdrubal  had  the  command.  Thither 
also  came  up  the  two  other  Carthaginian  generals,  with  their 
two  armies,  who  perceived  that  on  the  issue  of  that  attack 
the  fate  of  all  depended :  the  troops  in  camp  therefore  sallied 
out  to  the  fight.  There  were  in  the  engagement,  of  the  ene¬ 
my,  sixty  thousand  ;  of  the  Romans  about  sixteen  thousand  ; 
yet  so  far  was  the  victory  from  being  doubtful,  that  the  Ro¬ 
mans  slew  a  greater  number  of  the  Carthaginians  than  they 
themselves  had  in  the  field ;  took  above  three  thousand  pri¬ 
soners  ;  somewhat  less  than  one  thousand  horses  ;  fifty-nine 
military  standards  ;  killed  five  elephants  in  the  battle ;  and 
took  possession  of  the  three  camps  on  one  and  the  same  day. 
When  the  siege  of  Illiturgi  was  thus  raised,  the  Carthaginian 

168 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  537. 

armies  marched  to  hiy  siege  to  Intibili ;  recruitiiig  their 
forces  out  of  that  province,  which  was,  above  all  others,  fond 
of  war,  provided  either  plunder  or  hire  was  in  view,  and 
which,  at  that  time,  abounded  with  young  mens  A  second 
general  engagement  took  place,  attended  with  the  same  event 
on  both  sides  :  upwards  of  thirteen  thousand  of  the  enemy 
were  killed,  and  more  than  two  thousand  taken,  with  fortv^- 
two  standards  and  nine  elephants.  On  this,  almost  every 
state  in  Spain  joined  the  party  of  the  Romans ;  and,  during 
this  campaign,  the  events  of  the  war  there  were  much  more 
important  than  those  in  Italy, 

THE' 

msfORY  dr  bomb. 

BOOK  XXtV. 
MksronyiBsa^  kki^of  Syracuse,  takes  fiart  with  CM^^nians ;  is  putte 
death  by  la®  mibjects,  tm  account  of  his  i3?Tanny  and  <mielty,  Tiberius 
Sempronius  Gracchus,  pro-consul,  with  an  army  composed  mostly  of 
slaves,  the  Carthaginian  army  under  Hanno,  at  Beneventum ;  gives 
the  daves  tiberty*  "Most  of  the  States  in  Sidly  go  over  to  the  ade  of  Ae 
Carthaginians.  Claudius  Marcellos  coniffid:  besieges  Syracuse.  War  de* 
Clared  ^aiiutt  Bhihp  king  of  Macedonia,  who  is  suiprised  by  night,  and 
routed  at  ApoUonia.  Operatioii%of  the  Scipios,  against  the  Gartl^^pipans, 
in  Spain.  Treaty  of  friendship  with  Syptax  king  of  Numidia ;  he  is  de¬ 
feated  by  Mas^nissa  king  of  the  Massylians,  The  Celtiberians  join  the 
Roimms,  and  thea*  troops  are  taken  into  pay  :  the  first  instance  of  mcrce- 
luines  serving  in  a  Bosnia  army. 

I.  ON  his  r^tmi  from  ioto  Brutuum,  Httso, 
assisted  by  the  Brutdiim^  who  aeryed  him  also  as  y 
guides,  eiideavoured  to  gain  possession  of  the  Greek 
cities,  which  were  the  more  imiUned  to  adhere  to  dieir  sd* 
Uance  with  Rome,  fmr  the  very  reascm  diat  they  mw  Ae 
Brutdana,  whom  Aey  both  hated  «»£i  feared,  taking  ^rt 
wiA  the  Caithagimans.  The  first  attempt  was  madb  on 
Rbe^um,  and  several  days  were  spent  Acre  to  no  purpiOie, 
M^nwhile  the  Locrians  hastily  conveyed  from  Ae  country 
into  the  city,  com,  dntber,  and  other  necessaries,  for  which 
they  might  have  ^casicm,  wi  Aing  at  the  same  time  to  leave 
mAing  which  Ae  enemy  couhl  seize  ;  while  Ae 
VOL.  III.— Y 

HiSTORy  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  537. 

XfQ 
which  poured  out  of  the  gates,  became  every  day  more  aad 
more  uuii^rous.  At  last,  those  only  were  left  in  the  place, 
who  were  obliged  to  prepare  the  works,  and  to  cany  wea¬ 
pons  to  the  posts  of  defence.  Against  this  mixed  multitude, 
consisting  of  persons  of  all  ages  and  ranks,  and  straggling 
through  the  fields,  mostly  unarmed,  Hamilcar,  the  Cartha¬ 
ginian,  sent  out  his  cavalry,  who,  having  received  orders  not 
to  hurt  any  of  them,  only  threw  their  squadrons  in  the  way 
to  cut  off  their  retreat  to  the  city,  towards  which  they  direct¬ 
ed  their  scattered  flight.  The  general  himself,  having  taken 
his  station  on  an  eminence,  which  commanded  a  view  both 
of  that  and  the  adjacent  country,  ordered  a  cohort  of  Brut- 
tians  to  approach  the  walls,  and  invite  the  leaders  of  the  Lo- 
crians  to  a  conference,  and,  with  assurances  of  Hannibal’s 
friendship,  to  persuade  them  to  a  surrender.  At  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  the  conference,  the  Bruttians  had  no  credit  given  to 
any  of  their  representations.  Afterwards,  when  the  Cartha¬ 
ginians  appeared  on  the  hills,  and  the  few  citizens,  who  had 
effected  an  escape,  had  informed  the  townsmen  that  the  rest 
of  the  multitude  were  in  the  enemy’s  power,  then,  overcome 
by  fear,  ihey  answered,  that  they  would  consult  the  people. 
Accordingly,  they  instantly  summoned  an  assembly,  in  which 
appeared  all  of  the  most  unsettled  who  wished  for  a  change 
of  measures  and  of  allies,  with  those,  whose  relations  had 
been  intercepted  by  the  enemy,  and  who  had  their  judgments 
influenced  by  those  pledges,  as  if  so  many  hostages  had  been 
given  for  their  conduct ;  while  a  few  rather  approving  in  ai- 
lence,  than  venturing  openly  to  maintain  the  cause  which 
they  would  have  espoused,  it  was  concluded,  with  every  ap¬ 
pearance  of  perfect  unanimity,  to  surrender  to  the  Cartha¬ 
ginians.  Lucius  Atilius,  the  commander  of  the  garrison, 
and  the  Roman  soldiers  who  were  with  him,  were  privately 
tonveyed  to  the  harbour,  and  put  on  board  ships,  to  be  car¬ 
ried  off^  to  Rhegium,  and  then  the  townsmen  received  Has- 
drubal  and  his  Carthaginians  into  the  city,  on  the  condition 

moK  XXIV. 

in 

BX.  215.] 
of  an  hmng  immediately  entered  into  on  terms  ‘of 
equality.  Wtea  they  had  surrendered,  they  were  vety  near 
losing  die  l^efit  of  this  st^uiation  ;  for  the  Carthagiman 
general  accused  diem  of  having  covertly  ^nt  away  the  Ro¬ 
man  comm^der,  *  while  they  alleged  that  he  had  escaped 
without  their  privity.  A  body  of  cavalry  was  now  sent  in 
pursuit,  in  case,  by  any  accident,  the  current  might  detain 
him  in  the  streight,  or  drive  die  ships  to  land  :  these  did  not 
overtake  him;  hut  they  saw  other  ships  crossing  from  Mes- 
sana  to  Rhegiutn,  which  carried  Roman  soldiers,  sent  by  die 
praetor,  Claudius,  as  a  garrison  for  the  security  of  that  city  t 
in  coaisequence  of  this,  the  enemy  withdrew  immediately  from 
Rhegium.  In  pursuance  of  orders  from  Hannibal,  a  treaty 
of  peace  was  concluded  with  the  Locrians,  on  these  terms, 
that  they  should  live  in  freedom  under  their  own  laws  ;  that 
the  city  should  be  open  always  to  the  Carthaginians,  but  that 
the  harbour  should  remain  in  their  possession,  as  at  first ; 
and  that,  as  the  fundamental  principle  of  the  treaty,  the  Car¬ 
thaginians  should,  on  all  occasions,  assist  the  Locrians,  and 
the  Locrians  the  Carthaginians.’’ 
II.  The  Carthaginians,  after  this,  marched  back  from  the 
sti^ight,  while  the  Bruttsans  expre^ed  great  dissatisfaction 
at  their  having  left  Rhegium  and  Locri  in  safety,  for  they  had 
destined  to  themselves  the  plunder  of  diose  places.  Where¬ 
fore,  having  fmtned  into  bodies,  aiM  armed  fifteen  thousand 
of  their  own  young  men,  they  set  out  to  lay  siege  to  Croto, 
another  Grecian  city  and  a  sea-port;  thinking  diat  it  would 
prove  a  very  great  accession  to  their  power,  if  they  should 
gain  possession  of  an  harbour  on  the  coast,  and  of  a  strongly 
fortified  town.  They  were  embarrassed  by  the  considerations, 
that  they  could  not  well  venture  to  proceed  without  calling 
in  the  Carthaginians  to  their  assistance,  lest  they  should  ap¬ 
pear  to  conduct  themselves,  in  any  case,  inconsistently  with 
the  character  of  confederates;  and  that,  on  the  contrary, 
should  the  Carthaginian  ^neral  again  act  rather  sus  an  um- 

tn  HISTORY  Ol^  SOME.  fY*a.  5$r. 
fire  ei  iiksm  ^  aimfiaiy  m  vnar^  tlie  vnttaxk  em  m- 
^cpendoice  of  Croto,  like  tke  fom^  cme  o&  Locri)  would  be 
producdve,  to  tl^m^  <rf  so  advantage*  Fcm*  these  r^usous  it 
was  judged  most  advis<^le  to  send  ambassadors  to  Haimibdi, 
to  procure  from  him  l^forehaud  wbl  ^gageuieut,  that  Cre^, 
when  reduced,  shouhi  be  thepre^rty  of  the  Brotlians. 
nibal,  remaHcing  that  persom  on  ^  spot  w^e  the  fittest  to 
determine  in  such  a  ease,  r^rred  them  to  Hansm,  from 
whom  diey  could  ol^ain  no  decisive  answen  for  diese  corn* 
uumders  did  not  wish  that  a  City^  so  ceklnated  and  so  opulent, 
should  be  plumleFed;  and,  at  die  san^  frme,  they  entertained 
hope%  that,  as  the  Bmttums  were  to  be  the  assaihmts,  the 
Card^iaginians  not  appearing  either  to  countenance  or  aid  ike 
attack,  die  inhabitants  might,  the  mcme  readily,  come  over  to 
their  side.  But  the  Crotemians  were  not  united  in  their  de¬ 
igns,  or  in  their  wishes.  The  same  di^emper,  as  it  were, 
had  seized  every  one  of  the  states  of  Italy;  the  ndbility  and 
emnmons  embracing  opposite  pardes,  die  former  favouring 
dte  Homans,  the  latter  violently  end^vouring  to  bring  abmit 
an  union  with  the  Carthaginiams.  A  deserter  informed  the 
Bruttians,  that  a  dissension  of  this  son  prevailed  in  Croto, 
that  one  Aristomachus  ^headed  die  party  of  the  commons, 
and  pressed  them  to  surrender  to  the  Carthaginians;  that  the 
city,  being  very  extensive,  ascLdie  works  stretching  to  a  great 
extent  on  all  sides,  the  Watches  were  divided  separately  be- 
frireen  the  senators  and  commons;  and  dmt,  in  evmry  quarter, 
where  the  latter  had  the  guard,  the  assailants  woidd  find  w 
ready  enirance.  Under  the  direction  and  guidance  of  this 
deserter,  the  Bruttisms  encircled  the  town,  ami  being  re¬ 
ceived  into  it  by  die  plebeians,  carried,  at  the  fim  assault, 
every  post  except  the  citadel;  of  this  the  nobles  held  Ae 
possession,  having  beforehmid  secured  a  refuge  there,  in  case 
of  such  an  event  as  now  happened.  Aristomaurfaus  al^  fied 
thidter,  pretending  that  he  had  i^vised  suxrendering  thedty 
to  the  Cart^liniaus,  not  to  the  Brutdtps. 

WOOK  XXIV./ 

B*C. 

XII.  Be&m  ^  coming  of  Pyrrhus  mta  Itdy,  the  mil  eu*- 
comfms&iug  Croto  mm  twelve  miles  in  circumference;  since 
'  the  devastati<m»  cmrsed  hy  mm  which  then  took  i^ace, 
sourcely  one  half  the  inclo^d  sj^ce  was  inhabited;  tlm 
river  whidt  formerly  flowed  through  the  middle  of  the  town, 
now  ran  cm  the  outside  of  the  part  occupied  by  building,  and 
the  citadel  was  at  a  great  distance  from  the^.  Six  miles 
frcmi  the  city  stood  die  famous  tem^e  of  Juno  X^unnia,  more 
universally  celelhated  than  the  city  itself,  and  l^ld  in  high 
vexmration  by  dl  the  suzrounding  n^ons.  Here,  a  conse¬ 
crated  grove,  encompassed  on  die  extremities  by  close-tanged 
trees  smd  tall  firs,  compxehend^  in  the  middle  a  o^t  of 
rich  pasture  ground^  in  wiuch  cattle  of  every  kind«^  asa^  to 
die  p^Kldess,  fed,  wtdumt  any  keeper,  die  lu^rds  of  each  p«tr- 
dcidar  kind  going  out  ^paratdy,  and  retumit^  at  night  to 
their  stalls,  without  ever  receiving  injuiy ,  either  from  wild 
teasts,  or  men.  The  profits,  dierefore,  accruing  frcan  these 
catde  were  great,  out  of  whidi,  a  pi^  of  solid  gold  was 
erected  and  consecrated,  so  diat  the  same  fane  became  as  re- 
markadile  fen*  riches  as  for  sanedty.  Several  miracles  are  also 
attributed  to  it,  as  they  generally  are  to  such  remaxkable 
places:  it  is  said,  that  there  is  an  almr  in  the  porch  of  the 
temple,  the  ashes  \>n  which  are  never  moved  by  any  wind. 
Tli«  citadel  of  Croto,  Imn^ng  over  the  sea  on  one  side,  and 
on  the  other  facing  the  country,  had  originally  no  other  de¬ 
fence  than  its  natural  situaticmi  afterwards  a  wall  was  added* 
inclosing  a  place,  dirough  which  Dionysius,  tyrant  of  Sicily, 
effecting  a  passage  over  some  rocks,  at  the  back  part,  had 
taken  it  by  surprise.  The  fort  thus  situate,  and  deemed 
sufficiendy  secui^,  was  held  by  the  nobles,  while  the  plebeians 
of  Croto,  in  conjunedon  with  die  Bruttians,  carried  on  the 
siege  against  them.  After  a  considerable  time,  perceiving 
that  the  place  was  too  strong  to  be  reduced  by  their  own 
force,  they  yi^ed  to  necessity,  and  implored  the  assistance 
of  Hanno.  Hanno  endeavoured  to  prevail  on  the  Crotonians 

174 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[y.M.  537. 

^  surremler^  aliow^g  a  colony  of  Bruttians  to  be  settied 
among  themi  so  that  their  city,  wasted  and  depqptlated  by 
wars,  might  recover  its  former  popuh>u5  state;  but  not  one 
of  tbe  whoje  number,  excepting  Aristoma^^hus,  would  lislen 
to  die  proposal;  they  declared  wsa-mly,  diat  ‘‘diey  would 
rather  die,  than,  by  admitting  firuttkns  into  tbeir  society,  be 
obliged  to  adopt  foreign  rites,  manners,  laws,  and,  in  time, 
even  a  foreign  language.’’  Aiistomachus,  unable  by  per¬ 
suasions  to  bring  about  a  surrender,  and  finding  no  opportu¬ 
nity  of  betraying  the  citadel,  as  he  had  beteayed  the  town, 
left  the  place  wd  went  over  to  Hanno.  Soon  after  this,  am¬ 
bassadors  from  Locri  going,  widi  Hanno’s  permission,  into 
the  citadel,  used  many  arguments  to  prevail  on  them  to  suf¬ 
fer  themselves  to  be  removed  to  Locri,  and  not  to  resolve  on 
hazarding  the  last  extremities.  This  design  they  had  already 
got  leave  to  execute  from  Hannil^l  himself,  having  sent 
deputies  to  treat  with  him  in  pei^cm.  Accordingly  Croto  was 
evacuated,  and  the  inhabitants,  being  conducted  to  die  sea, 
went  on  boatd  ships*  The  whole  body  of  the  people  removed 
to  Locri.  In  Apulia,  even  the  winter  did  not  produce  a  sus¬ 
pension  of  hostilities  between  the  Romans  and  HannilmL 
The  consul  Sempronius  had  his  winte*-quarters  at  Luceria; 
Hannibal  his  near  Arpi.  Several  slight  engagements  passed 
between  their  troops,  in  consequence  of  opportunities  offer¬ 
ing,  or  of  one  or  the  other  party  gaining  an  occasional  ad¬ 
vantage;  and  by  these,  the  Roman  soldiery  were  improved, 
and  rendered  daily  more  cautious  and  gumrded  against  the 
enemy’s  stratagems. 
IV.  In  Sicily,  the  whole  course  of  affairs  took  a  turn  un¬ 
favourable  to  the  Romans,  in  consequence  of  the  death  of 
Hiero,  and  of  tbe  kingdom  devolving  on  his  grandson  Hiero¬ 
nymus,  a  boy  in  whom,  there  was  ori^naiiy  no  room  to  ex¬ 
pect  moderatiem  of  conduct,  much  less,  on  his  being  invested 
with  absolute  power*  His  guardians  and  friends  were  happy 
in  finding  him  of  such  a  disposition,  as  they  could  hurry,  at 

BOOK  XXIV. 

175 

B.C.  215.3 
once^  into  every  kbd  df  vice.  It  is  said  that  Hiero,  fora^eing 
that  this  would  be  the  case,  had,  in  the  last  stage  of  his  life, 
formed  an  intention  of  leaving  Syracuse  free,  lest  the  sove¬ 
reignty,  "which  had  been  acquired  and  established  by  honour¬ 
able  means^  should,  under  the  tyrannical  administration  of  a 
boy,  be  destroyed  dirough  folly  and  extravagance.  This  de¬ 
sign  his  daughters  opposed  strenuously,  because  they  ex¬ 
pected,  that,  while  Hieronymus  enjoyed  the  title  of  king,  the 
whole  administration  of  affairs  would  rest  in  them  and  their 
husbands,  Andranodorus  and  Zoippus,  for  these  were  left 
the  principal  among  bis  guardians.  It  was  no  easy  matter  for 
a  man,  now  in  his  ninetieth  year,  and  beset  night  and  day,  by 
the  insinuating  wiles  of  women,  to  keep  his  judgment  at 
liberty,  and  to  regulate  his  domestic  concerns  by  the  stand¬ 
ard  of  public  utility.  He,  therefore,  only  took  the  precaution 
of  setting  fifteen  guardians  over  his  grandson;  and  these  he 
entreated,  in  his  dying  moments,  to  maintain  inviolate  the 
alliance  with  the  Roman  people,  which  he  had  religiously 
observed  through  a  course  of  fifty  years;  to  direct  their  en¬ 
deavours  principally  to  the  making  the  boy  tread  in  his  steps, 
and  pursue  the  maxims  inculcated  in  his  education:  after 
giving  these  charges,  he  expired,  and  the  govemm-s  quitted 
him.  The  will  was  then  produced,  and  the  prince,  now  about 
fifteen  years  old,  was  brought  before  the  people  in  assembly, 
oxi  which  a  few,  who  had  been  placed  in  different  parts  of  the 
crowd  for  the  purpose  of  raising  acclamations,  signified  their 
approbation  of  the  will;  while  the  rest,  afiected  as  if  they  had 
lost  their  parent,  dreaded  all  things,  in  a  state  thus  bereft  of 
its  protector.  The  King’s  funeral  was  next  performed,  and, 
more  through  the  love  and  affection  of  his  subjects,  than  any 
care  of  his  relations,  was  numerously  attended.  In  a  little 
time  after,  Andranodorus  displaced  the  other  guardians, 
asserting  that  Hieronymus  had  attained  to  the  years  of  man¬ 
hood,  and  was  capable  of  holding  the  government;  and,  by 
thus  resigning  the  guardianship,  which  he  held  in  common 

HisTOEY  or  mmz. 

176 

[Y Jl.  537. 

wt#i  ma&jTy  fae  in  MmseH  power  of  item 
all. 
V.  &:arcefy  wcmld  cvoi  a  go^  aod  modern  iniiice,  soc- 
eeediog  one  bo  M^y  beloved  as  Htero^  have  found  it  ea^ 
t0'2u:quipe  tlie  of  the  Syracusans.  But  Hieitmyimw, 
as  hF  he  meant,  by  his  own  faults,  to  excite  grief  for  the  loss 
of  his  grai^father,  demonstrated,  immediately  on  his  first 
appearance,  how  great  an  alteration  had  taken  place  in  every 
particular.  For  the  people,  who  had  for  so  many  years  seen 
Hiero,  smd  his  son  Gikm,  no  way  differing  from  the  rest  of 
the  citizens,  cither  in  the  fashion  trf  tteir  dress  or  uny  other 
mark  of  distinction,  now  beheld  purple  and  a  diadem;  armed 
guards,  and  the  king  sometimes  issuing  fit>m  his  palace,  as 
the  tyrant  Dionysius  used  to  do,  in  a  chariot  drawn  by  four 
white  horses.  This  assuming  pride  in  equipage  and  show 
naturally  expend  Wm  to  universal  contempt;  besides  which, 
he  showed  a  disdainful  carriage  when  addressed,  and  rude* 
ness  in  answering^  generally  refused  m:cess,  not  only  to 
steangers,  but  even  to  his  guardians,  and  debased  himself  by 
lusts  of  uncommon  kinds,  and  inhuman  cruelty.  Such  great 
terror  therefore  possessed  all  men,  that,  of  his  household, 
some  had  recourse  to  flight,  others  to  a  voluntary  death,  to 
avoid  the  sufferings  which  they  apprehended.  Two  of  the 
former,  Andranodorus  and  Zoippus,  the  sons-in-law  of 
Hiero,  and  a  man  named  Thraso,  were  the  only  persons  per¬ 
mitted  to  enter  his  house  with  any  degree  of  familiarity;  and 
though  not  much  listened  to  on  other  subjects,  yet  when 
they  argued,  Andranodorus  and  Zoippus  for  taking  part  with 
the  Carthaginians,  and  Thraso  for  maintaining  the  alliance 
with  the  Romans,  they  sometimes,  by  the  warmth  and  ear- 
nestn^s  of  their  disputes,  attracted  the  young  man’s  atten¬ 
tion.  While  matters  were  in  this  situation,  a  servant  who  was 
of  the  same  age  with  Hieronymus,  and  had,  from  childhood, 
enjoyed  the  privileges  of  perfect  familiarity  with  him, 
brought  information  of  a  plot  formed  against  his  life.  The 

BOOK  XXIV. 

177 

B.C. 215J 
informer  could  name  only  one  of  the  conspirators,  Theodotus, 
by  whom  himself  had  been  sounded  on  the  subject.  This  man 
being  instantly  seized,  and  delivered  to  Andranodorus  to  be 
put  to  the  torture,  without  hesitation  confessed  himself  guilty, 
but  still  concealed  his  accomplices.  At  last,  being  racked,  be- 
yond  what  human  patience  could  endure,  he  pretended  to  be 
overcome  by  his  sufferings;  but,  instead  of  making  discovery 
of  the  plotters,  he  pointed  his  informations  against  persons 
who  had  no  concern  in  the  business,  telling  a  feigned  story, 
that  Thraso  was  the  author  of  the  conspiracy,  and  that  the 
others  would  never  have  entered  on  any  attempt  of  such 
importance,  had  they  not  been  induced  to  it  by  their  trust  in 
so  powerful  a  leader;  naming,  at  the  same  time,  those  who, 
while  he  framed  his  account  in  the  intervals  between  his 
agonies  and  groans,  occurred  to  him  as  the  most  worthless 
among  Hieronymus’s  intimated.  The  mention  of  Thraso, 
beyond  every  other  circumstance,  made  the  tyrant  think  the 
information  deserving  of  belief.  He  was  therefore  instantly 
consigned  to  punishment,  and  the  rest,  who  had  been  named 
equally  guiltless  of  the  crime,  underwent  the  like  fate.  Not 
one  of  the  conspirators,  though  their  associate  in  the  plot  was 
kept  for  a  long  time  under  the  torture,  either  concealed  him¬ 
self  or  fled:  so  great  was  their  confidence  in  the  fortitude  and 
fidelity  of  Theodotus;  and  which,  indeed,  were  fully  approved 
in  him. 
VI.  The  only  bond  which  preserved  the  connexion  with 
Rome  being  now  dissolved  by  the  removal  of  Thraso,  im¬ 
mediately  there  appeared  a  manifest  intention  of  siding  with 
the  opposite  party.  Ambassadors  were  despatched  to  Hanni¬ 
bal,  who  sent  hack  a  young  man  of  noble  birth,  called  Han¬ 
nibal,  and  with  him  Hippocrates  and  Epicydes,  who  were 
bom  at  Carthage,  but  derived  their  extraction  oM^ally 
from  Syracuse,  whence  their  grandfather  had  been  bamshed; 
by  the  mother’s  side, -they  were  Carthaginians.  By  their 
means,  a  treaty  was  formed  between  Hannibal  and  the  tyrant 
TOL.  III. — Z 

HISTOJRY  OF  ROME. 

irs 

[Y.R.53y. 

of  Syraciisc;  and,  with  the  approbation  C3ff  the  Carthaginian, 
they  remained  Mrith  the  latter.  The  prsetor,  Appius  Claudius, 
whose  province  SicUy  was,  on  being  acquainted  with  these 
transactions,  sent,  immediately,  ambassadors  to  Hieronymus, 
who,  ^tellmg  him  that  they  were  come  to  renew  the  alliance 
which  had  subsisted  with  his  granctfather,  were  heard  and 
dismissed  with  derision;  Hieronymus  asking  them,  with  a 
sneer,  what  had  been  the  evented*  the  battle  of  Cannae?  for 
Hannibal’s  ambassador’s  told  things  scarcely  credibk.  He 
wished,”  he  said,  to  know  Ae  truA,  Aat  he  might  Aereby 
determine  which  side  offered  the  fairest  prospect  to  his 
choice.”  The  Romans  told  him,  that,  when  he  began  to  listen 
to  embassies  with  seriousness,  they  would  return  to  Syra¬ 
cuse;  and,  after  admonishing,  raAer  Aan  requesting  him, 
not  to  violate  faiA  rashly,  they  departed.  ,Hieronymus  des¬ 
patched  commisBioners  to  CarAage,  to  conclude  an  alliance 
conformable  to  Ae  treaty  wiA  Hannibal;  and  it  was  finally 
agreed,  Aat  when  Aey  should  have  expelled  Ae  Romans 
from  Sicily,  which,  he  smd,  would  speedily  be  effected  if  Aey 
sent  ships  and  an  army,  the  river  Himera,  which  nearly  di¬ 
vides  the  island  into  two  parts,  should  be  Ae  boundary  be¬ 
tween  Ae  dominions  of  Syracuse,  and  those  of  Carthage. 
Afterwards,  puffed  up  by  Ae  flatteries  of  people  who  desired 
him  to  remember,  not  only  Hiero,  but  also  his  grandfather 
on  his  mother’s  side,  king  P\tAus,  he  sent  anoAer  embassy, 
representing  Aat  he  thought  it  reasonable  Aat  Sicily  should 
be  entirely  ceded^  to  him,  and  Aat  Ae  dominion  of  Italy 
should  be  acquired  for  the  people  of  Carthage,  as  an  empire 
of  their  own.  This  fickleness  and  unsteadiness  of  mind, 
they,  considering  him  as  a  hot-brained  youA,  did  not  won¬ 
der  at;  nor  did  Aey  enter  into  any  dispute  on  it,  content 
with  (inching  him  from  the  party  of  Ae  Romans. 
VIlfjBut,  on  his  side,  every  circum^nce  concurred  to 
precipitate  his  ruin;  for,  after  sending  before  him  Hippo¬ 
crates  and  Epicydes  with  two  thousand  soMiers,  to  endea- 

BOOK  XXIV. 

179 

B.C.  Mt] 
vour  to  get  possession  of  those  cities  which  were  held  by 
Roman  garrisons,  he  himself,  with  all  the  rest  of  his  forces, 
amonnfing  to  fifteen  thousand  horse  and  foot,  *marched  to 
Lemitim.  Here  the  conspirators,  every  one  of  whom  happen¬ 
ed  to  be  in  the  army,  posted  themselves  in  an  uninhabited 
house,  standing  in  a  narrow  lane,  through  which  Hieronymus 
used  to  pass  to  the  Forum.  While  the  rest  stood  here,  armed 
and  prepared  for  action,  waiting  for  his  coming  up,  one  of 
their  number,  whose  name  was  Dinomenes,  and  being  of  the 
body-guards^  had  it  in  charge,  that,  as  soon  as  the  king  drew 
near  the  door,  he  should,  on  some  pretence,  in  the  narrow 
pass,  stop  the  crowd  behind  from  advancing.  All  was  exe¬ 
cuted  as  had  been  concerted.  Dinomenes,  by  stretching  out 
his  foot,  as  if  to  loosen  a  knot  which  was?  too  tight,  arrested 
the  people,  and  occasioned  such  an  opening,  that  the  king, 
being  attacked  as  he  was  passing  by  without  his  armed  fol¬ 
lowers,  was  pierced  with  several  wounds,  before  assistance 
could  be  given  him.  Some,  on  hearing  the  shout  and  tumult, 
discharged  their  weapons  at  Dinotnencs,  who  now  openly 
opposed  their  passing;  notwithstanding  which,  he  escaped 
with  only  two  bounds.  However,  seeing  the  king  stretched 
on  the  ground,  they  betook  thetnselves  to  flight.  Of  the  con¬ 
spirators,  some  repaired  to  the  Forum  to  the  populace,  who 
were  overjoyed  at  the  recovery  of  liberty;  others  proceeded 
to  Syracuse,  to  take  the  requisite  precautions  against  the  pur¬ 
poses  of  Andranodorus  and  other  partisans  of  the  king.  Af¬ 
fairs  being  in  this  unsettled  state,  Appius  Claudius,  when  he 
observed  the  storm  gathering  in  his  neighbourhood,  inform¬ 
ed  the  senate  by  letter,  that  all  Sicily  favoured  the  people  of 
Carthage  and  Hannibal.  On  his  part,  in  order  to  counteract 
the  designs  of  the  Syracusans,  he  drew  all  his  troops  to  the 
frontiers  between  that  kingdom  and  his  own  province.  To¬ 
wards  the  close  of  this  year,  Quintus  Fabius,  by  direction  of 
the  senate,  fortified,  Puteoli,  which,  during  the  war,  began  to 
be  much  frequented  as  a  place  of  trade,  and  placed  a  garrison 

ISO 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[¥.R.  537. 

in  it,  Gc»ng  thezu^e  to  Rome  to  hold  the  elections^  he  issued 
a  proclamation  for  the  assembly,  on  the  first  day  on  which  it 
could  proj^rly  meet;  and,  passing  by  the  city  without  stop¬ 
ping,  went  down  to  the  field  of  Mars.  On  this  day,  die  lot  of 
giving  the  first  vote  fell  to  a  younger  century  of  the  Anien 
tribe,  and  this  having  nominated  Titus  Otacilius  and  Marcus 
iEmilius  Regillus  consuls,  Quintus  Fabius  commanded  si¬ 
lence,  and  spoke  to  this  effect; 
VIII.  If  either  we  had  peace  in  Italy,  or  had  to  deal 
with  such  an  enemy  as  would  allow  of  any  nemissness  on 
our  side,  I  should  deem  that  man  deficient  in  proper  respect 
to  your  independent  rights,  who  attempted  to  throw  any  ob¬ 
stacle^  in  the  way  of  those  inclinations,  which  you  bring  with 
you  into  the  field  of  election,  with  the  purpose  of  conferring 
the  high  offices  of  the  state  on  persops  of  your  own  choice. 
But  when  you  consider  that  the  present  war  is  of  such  a  na¬ 
ture,  and  the  conduct  of  our  present  enemy  such,  that  none  of 
our  commanders  has  ever  committed  an  error  which  has  not 
been  followed  by  most  disastrous  consequences,  it  behoves 
you  to  come  hither  to  give  your  suffrages  with  the  same 
careful  circumspection  with  which  you  go  out  in  arms  to  the 
field  of  battle;  and  every  one  ought  tlms  to  say  to  himself: 
‘  I  am  to  nominate  a  consul  qualified  to  vie  with  Hannibal  in 
the  m  of  war,^  In  the  present  year,  at  Capua,  on  the  chal¬ 
lenge  of  Jubellius  Taurea,  the  completest  horseman  among 
the  Campanians,  w  e  sent  against  him  Claudius  Asellus,  the 
completest  horseman  among  the  Homans.  Agaiqst  a  Gaul, 
who  at  a  former  time  pronounced  a  challenge  on  the  bridge 
of  the  Anio,  our  ancestors  sent  Titus  Manlius,  a  man  abun¬ 
dantly  furnished  both  with  strength  and  courage.  I  cannot 
deny  that  there  was  the  same  reason  for  placing  every  degree 
of  confidence  a  few  years  after,  in  Marcus  Valerius,  when  he 
took  arms  for  the  comtot  against  a  Gaul,  who  gave  a  similar 
defiance.  Now,  as,  in  selecting  foot  «>ldiers  and  horsemen, 
we  endeavour  to  find  such  as  are  superior,  or,  if  that  cannot 

BOOK  XXIV. 

B.C.  2isq 

lai 

be  effected,  equal  in  strength  to  their  antagonists^  kt^,  in 
like  manner,  look  out  for  a  commander  equal  to  the 
of  the  enemy.  When  we  shall  have  chosen  the  mmi  of  the 
most  consummate  abilities  in  the  nation,  yet  still,  l^ing  eiec^* 
ed  at  the  moment,  and  appointed  but  for  one  year,  he  will  be 
matched  against  another  invested  with  a  ccHmnand  of  long 
and  uninterrupted  continuance,  not  ctmfiaed  by  miy  amrrow 
limitations  either  of  time  or  of  mitborHy,  or  which  mi^^t 
hinder  him  to  conduct  and  execute  every  na^sure  according 
to  the  exigencies  of  the  war;  whereas  with  us,  before  we  have 
well  completed  our  preparatory  operations,  and  when  we  are 
just  entering  on  business,  our  year  expires.  I  need,  say  no 
more  concerning  tiie  qualifications  of  the  persons  whom  you 
ought  to  elect  consul;  I  shsdi  tiierefore  only  add  a  few  obser¬ 
vations  respecting  those  whom  the  prerogative  century  has 
made  the  objects  of  its  fovour.  Marcus  iEraiiius  Regilius  is 
flamen  of  Quhrinus,  cemseqUentiy  we  could  neither  send  him 
abroad  from  his  sacred  employment,  nor  keep  him  at  home, 
without  neglecting,  in  one  case,  the  business  cd*  the  war,  or 
in  die  other,  that  cf  religion.  Otacilius  is  married  to  a  daugh¬ 
ter  of  my  sister,  and  h^  children  by  her.  .  Nevertheless,  I 
am  too  sensible  of , the  chligations  which  I  and  my  ancestors 
owe  to  your  kiminess,  not  to  prefer  die  interest  of  the  pubik 
to  diat  ctf  any  privatecoanexitms*  In  a  calm  sea,  any  mariner, 
even  a  passenger,  can  steers  the  vessel;  but  when  a  furious 
storm  ari^,  pumng  ^e  sea  into  violent  agitation,  the 
ship  is  hurried  away  by  the  tempest,  then  a  pilol  of  skill  and 
resolution  becomes  neces^ry.  We  sail  not  in  a  calm,  but 
have  already  been  very  near  foundering  in  several  storms; 
you  must,  therefore,  be  careful  to  use  the  utmost  prudence 
and  icauriem  widi  respect  to  the  person  whom  you  place  at  the 
helm.  Titus  'Otacilius,  we  have  had  a  trial  of  you  in  a  less 
important  buriness:  you  gave  us  no  proof  that  we  ought  to 
confide  in  you  for  the  management  of  affairs  of  greater  mo¬ 
ment.  We  fitted  out,  this  year,  a  fleets  of  which  you  had  the 

182 

HISTORY  OP  ROME.  fyjl.  537 
command^  for  ihree  purposes;  to  ravage  the  coast  of  Africa, 
to  secure  our  own  coasts  of  Italy, ‘and,  principally,  to  prevent 
reinforcements  with  money  and  provisions  being  transmitted 
from  Carthage  to  Hannibal.  If  he  has  performed  for  the  pub- 
Kc,  I  do  not  say  all,  but  any  one  of  these  services,  create  Ti¬ 
tus  Otacilius  consul.  But  if,  on  the  contrary^  while  you  held 
»the  command  of  the  fleet,  every  thing  came  to  Hannibal  safe 
and  untouched,  as  if  he  had  no  enemy  on  the  sea;  if  the 
coast  of  Italy  has  been  more  infested  this  year  dian  that  of 
Africa,  what  reason  can  you  offer,  why  people  rfiould  pitch 
on  you  in  particular  to  oppose  su6h  a  commander  as  Hanni¬ 
bal?  If  you  were  consul,  we  should  judge  it  requisite  to 
have  a  dictator  nominated  according  to  the  practice  of  our 
forefathers.  Nor  could  you  take  offence  at  its  being  thought 
that  there  was,  in  the  Roman  nation,  some  one  superior  to 
you  in  the  art  of  war.  It  concerns  no  man’s  interest  more 
tlum  your  own,  Titus  Otacilius,  diat  there  be  not  laid  on 
your  shoulders  a  burthen,  under  i^ich  yOu  would  sink.  I 
earnestly  recommend,  then,  Romans,  that,  guided*by  the  same 
sentiments  which  would  influence  you,  if  while"  you  stood 
armed  for  battle  you  were  suddenly  called  on  to  choose  two 
commanders,  under  whose  conduct  and  auspices  you  were 
to  fight,  you  would  proceed  this  day  in  the  election  of  con¬ 
suls,  to  whom  your  children  are  to  swear  obedience,  at  whose 
order  they  are  to  join  the  colours,  and  under  who^  eare  and 
direction  they  are  to  wage  war.  Th«f  lake  Ttasimepuil  and 
Cannie,  examples  melancholy  in  tiie  reboilection,  aare,  never¬ 
theless,  useful  warnings  to  guard  against  the  like.  Crier, 
call  back  the  younger  Anien  century  to  vote.” 
IX.  Otacilius  now  exclaiming  with  great  heat^hat  th6  de¬ 
sign  of  Fabius  was  to  be  continued  in  the  consulship,  and 
becoming  very  obstreperous,  the  consul  ordered  his  lictors 
to  advance  to  him;  and,  as  he  had  not  entered  the  city,  but 
had  gone  directly,  without  halting,  into  the  field  of  Mars,  he 
put  him  in  mind  that  the  axes  were  carried  in  his  fasces.  The 

BOOK  xxnr. 

183 

B.C,  215.] 
prerogative  century  proceeded  a  second  time  to  vote,  ami 
chose  consuls,  Quintus  Fabius  Ma:&imus,  a  fourth  time,  and 
Marcus  Marcellus,  a  thnrd  time.  The  other  centuries,  with¬ 
out  any  vsuiation,  imnied  the  same.  One  prae^r  was  likewise 
re-elected,  Quintus.  Fulvius  Flaccus.  The  <^er  three  chosen 
were  new  ones,  Titus  Otiicilius  Crassus,  a  se^mKi  time, 
Quintus  Fabius,  the  conaul’a  son,  who  was  at  the  time  curule 
sedile,  and  PubHus  Cornelius  Lentullus.  The  election  of 
praetors  being  over,  a  decree  of  senate  ^was  passed,  that 
Rome  should,  out  of  course,  be  the  province  of  Quintas 
Fulvius;  and  that  be  in  p^ticular  should  hold  the  command 
in  the  city,  when  the  consuls  should  go  abroad  to  the  cam¬ 
paign.”  r  Twice  in  tide  j’car  happened  great  floods,  and  the 
Tiber -overflowed  the  <mntry,  with  great  demolition  of 
houses  and  desWitetion  ^  men  and  cattle.  In  the  y  i^  533 
fifth  year  of  the  second  Punic  waur/Quintus  Fabius 
Maatimus,  a  fourth,  Marcus  Marcellus,  a  third  time 
entering  -togethcET’ into  the  consulship,  attracted  the  notice 
of ..  the  pub]^  in  an  -  unusual  degree;  for,  during  many 
years,  there  had  not  been  two  such  consuls.  The  old  men 
observed,  Aat  thus  had  Maximus  Rullus  and  Publius  Decius 
been  declared  con^b,  in  the  time  of  the  Gallic  war;  and  thus, 
afterwards,  Papirins  and- Carvilius,  agsunst  tiie  Smnnites, 
Brujttians,  Lucanians,  and  T^ren tines.  Marcellus  was.chosen 
consul  in  his  absence,  beiag  at  the  time  witir  the  army,  and 
the  office,  was  continued  to  Fabius,  who  was  on  the  spot,  and 
presided  in  person  at  the  election.  The  of  the  times,  the 
exigencies  of  the  war^mid  tiie  dan^^^r;  thi^ening  the  very 
being  of  the  state,  hindered  the  pec^le  fircan  eu^mining  the 
precedent  sHrictly,  neither  did  they  suspect  the  consul  of  am¬ 
bition  for  command;  on  the  contrary,  they  rather  applauded 
his  greatness  of  soul,  becai»^  knowing  that  the  state  stood  in 
need  of  a  general  of  the  highest  abilities,  and  that  he  himself 
was  unquestionably  the  person  so  qualified,  be  had  made 
light  of  any  public  censure  which  he  might  incur  on  the 

HisTeanr  OF  home.  [y.r.  53». 
a 
in  cmnpmnon  with  the  interest  of  the  common- 
werith.  ^ 
X,  On  of  the  consuls  entering  cm  theit*  office,  at 
meeting  of  the  senaite  was  held  in  the  Capitol,  in  which  it  was 
decr^»  first,  that  the  cotssnls  should  cast  lots,  or  settle  be¬ 
tween  themselves^  which  of  them  should,  befcHe  his  setting 
out  for  the  ariny,  h<dd  the  assetnWy  for  the  appointment  of 
censors.  Then  all  tho^  who  wetci.at  the  heart  of  armies  were 
continued  in  authority,  and  ord^r^  to  "remain  in  the  pro¬ 
vinces:  Tiberius  Oracchus  at  Luedria,  where  he  was  with  an 
army  of  vdluhteer  slaves; -CaiusT^mitlus  Vatrorin  the  Pice- 
nian,  and  Manius  Pomponiiis  in  theOalfic  territori^.  Of  the 
prsetors  of  the  preceding  yean,  Qiiintus^jRfucius  was  ordered, 
in  quality  of  pr0*pr»tor,  to  hold  tlw  government  of  Sardinia, 
airt  Marcus  Valerias  to  comsmnd  on^  Ae  sea-coast  near 
Brundusium,  watching  ateenrively,  ^d  guarding  aj^instany 
nmrioa  which  might  be  niade  fey  Kiilip  Kkrg  of  Macedonia. 
To  Publius  Cornelius  XenABus,  Ae  |n*oviiM^  of  Sicily  was 
decreed,  and  to  Titus  Otacilius  Ae  saine  fleet  whidi  he  had 
commanded  Ae  year  before  against  Ae  Cardn^nians,  Nu¬ 
merous  prodigies  were  reported  to  have  happened  Ais  year; 
and  Ae  more  these  were  credtedfey  simple  and  superstitious 
people,  Ae  more  Such  stories  multiplied?  that  at  Xanuviam 
"croMTS  had  built  their  nest  in  Ae  inside  of  Ac  temple  of  "Juno 
Sospita;  in  Apulia,  a  green  palm^trCe  toc^'fire;  at  Mantua,  a 
stagnating  piece  of  water,  caused  by  Ae  overflowing  of  Ae 
river  Mincius,  appeared  as  of  blood;  at  Cales,  a  Aower  of 
chalk;  and,  in  Ae  cattle-market  at  RoAe,  one  of  Wood  fell  in 
the  Istrian  ^eet;  a  foun^n  under  ground  burst  out  in  such 
an  impetuous  sOream,  as  to  roll  and  carry  off  jari  and  casks 
which  were  in  Ae  place,  like  a  violaiit  flood;  lightning  fell  on 
Ae  public  court-house,  in  Ae  Capitol,  the  temple  of  Viifcan 
in  the  field  of  Mars,  a  nut-tree  in  Ae  country  of  Ae  Sabines, 
and  a  public  road,  a  wall  and  a  gate  at  Gabii.  OAer  stories 
of  miracles  were  already  spread  about;  Aat  Ae  spear  of 
Mars  at  Prseneste  moved  forward  of  its  own  accord;  that  an 

BOOK  XXIV. 

185 

B.C.  214] 
<Hc  spoke  in  Sicily;  that  aninfent  in  the  mother’s  womh^  in  the 
country  of  the  Manscinians^  had  called  out,  ‘Mo,  Triumphe!” 
at  ^^letum  a  woman  was  transformed  into  a  man,  and  at 
Adria  an  altar  was  semi  in  the  sky,  and  round  it  figures  of 
men  in  white  garments.  Nay,  even  in  the  city  of  Rome  itself, 
besides  a  swarm  of  bees  being  seen  in  the  Eomm,  several 
persons,  affirming  that  they  saw  armed  legions  on  tile  Janicu- 
lum,  roused  the  citizens  to  arms;  when  those  who  were  at  the 
time  on  the  Janiculum  asserted,  that  no  person  hadapj^red 
there  except  the  usual  inhabitants  of  that  hill.  These  prodi* 
gies  were  expiated,  conformably  to  the  answers  of  the  Arus- 
pices,  by  victims  of  the  greater  kinds,  and  supplication  was 
ordered  to  be  performed  to  all  tiie  deities  who  had  shrines  at 
Rome.  ^ 
XI.  Having  finished  the  ceremonies  enjoined  for  con¬ 
ciliating  the  favour  of  the  gods,  the  consuls  proposed  to  the 
senate,  to  take  into  consideration  the  state  of  the  nation,  the 
management  of  the  war,  the  number  of  forces  to  be  employed, 
and  the  pkces  where  the  several  divisions  were  to  act.  It  was 
resolved  that  eighteen  legions  should  be  employed  against 
the  enemy;  that  each  of  the  consuls  should  take  two  to  him* 
self ;  thit  two  slmuld  be  employed  in  the  defence  of  the  pro¬ 
vinces  of  Gaul,  Sicily,  and  Sardmia;  that  Quintus  Fabius, 
pr^tor,  should  have  two  under  his  command  in  ApuHa,  and 
Tiberius  Gracchus  two  of  volunteer  slaves  in  the  country 
about  Luceria;  that  one  shcmld  be  IdFt  to  Caius  Tcrentius, 
proconsul,  for  Picenum,  one  to  Marcus  Valerius  fmr  the  fleet 
at  Brundusium,  and  tlmt  two  should  gsunison  the  city.  In 
order  to  fill  up  this  number  of  legions,  it  was  necessaty  to 
levy  six  new  ones,  which  the  consuls  were  ordered  to  raise 
as  soon  lus  possible;  and,  at  the  same  time,  to  fit  out  an  ad* 
ditional  nmnber  of  sh^is;  so  that,  including  those  which  were 
st^ioned  on  the  coasts  of  Calabria,  the  fleet  should,  this 
year,  consist  of  an  hundred  and  fifty  ships  of  war.  The  levy 
being  finished,  «md  the  new  vessels  launched,  Quintus  Fabius 
voi.  iii,~ A  a 

186 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

[Y-R.  538. 

held  an  assembly  fexr  ^e  appomm^nt  of  censoxis^  when  Mar* 
ens  Adliiis  Regulus  at^  Publius  Furius  Philus  were  elected. 
A  rumdurapreading,  lhat  war  tod  broke  out  in  Sicily^  Titus 
OtaciMxis  was  ordered  to  piweed  thither  vnth  his  fleet;  aiui 
there  being  a  scm*city  of  seamen^  the  consuk^  in  pursuance 
of  a  decree  of  the  senate,  published  a  prcK^lamation,  that  every 
person,  who  in  the  censorship  <rf  Lucius  d&milius  and  Caius 
Flaminius  had  been  rated,  or  whose  father  had  been  rated  at 
fifty  thousand  asses  of  brass*,  or  from  dmt  sum,  up  to  one 
hundr^  thousandf,  or  bad^  since  acquired  such  a  property, 
should  fimiish  erne  seaman  witib  pay  for  six  months;  every 
one  rated  from  an  hundred  diousand,  up  to  three  hundred 
thousand:):,  three  seamen,  with  pay  for  a  year;  eveiy  one  rated 
from  three  hundred  thousand,  ^  to  one  million^,  five  sea¬ 
men;  every^  one  rated  higher,  seven;  and  foat  seimtors  should 
provide  eight  seamen  each,  with  pay  for  a  year.  The  sea¬ 
men  furnished  in  obedience  to  this  ordinance,  being  armed 
and  equipped  by  their  owners,  went  on  board  the  ships,  with 
provisions  ready  dressed  fewr  thirty  days.  This  was  the  first 
instance  of  a  Roman  fleet  being,  maimed  at  the  expense  of 
private  persons. 
XII.  These  preparations,  so  unusually  great,  raised  fears 
among  die  Campanians  in  particular,  lest  the  Romans  should 
begin  the  campaign  with  the  siege  of  Capua.  They  sent  am¬ 
bassadors,  therefore,  to  Hannibal,  entreating  him  to  maixh 
his  army  to  that  place:  acquainting  him,  that  tiie  Romans 
were  raising  new  armies  for  the  pi^rpose  of  kiying  siege  to  it, 
for  there  was  no  city  against  which  they  were  more  highly 
incensed,  for  having  deserted  their  party.^’  As  this  message, 
and  the  manner  in  which  it  was  delivered^  intimated  such 
strong  apprehensions,  Hannibsd  thought  it  advisable  to  pro¬ 
ceed  with  despatch,  lest  the  Romans  might  to  beforetomi 
with  him;  whereupon,  leaving  Arpi,  be  took  possession  of 

161/.  9«.  2d,  t  ^2i  4rf.  1 1,866/.  14r.  §5,229/.  3ff.4d 

BOOK  XXIV. 

B.C.  S14.] 

187 

his  old  csm^  on  die  Ttfata  o^er  Capua.  Then  the 
Numidians  and  Spaniards  for  die  defence  both  of  die  ca^p 
^id-the  city,  he  marched  away  with  the  rest  of  his  forces  to 
the  lake  of  Avemua,  imder  the  pretence  of  performing  sacri- 
fee-,  bu^n  reality  with  a  design  to  make  an  attempt  on  Pu- 
teoli  and  the  garrison  there.  As  soon  as  Maximus  received 
intelligence  that  Mannibal  had  departed  from  Arpl  md  was 
returning  into  Campania,  hastened  back  to  his  army,  with¬ 
out  baking  eidi^r  night  or  day,  sending  orders  to  Tiberius 
Gracchus,  to  bring  forward  his  fewrees  from  Luceria  to  Bene- 
ventum,  and  to  the  praetor  Quintus  Fabius,  son  to  the  consul, 
to  hasten  to  Luceria,  in  d^  place  of  Gracchus.  At  the  same 
time,  the  two  praetors  set  out  for  Sicily,  Publius  Cornelius  to 
command  the  army,  Otacilius  the  fleet  on  the  sea*coast.  The 
rest  also  departed  to  their  respective  provinces,  and  those 
who  were  continued  in  command  remained  in  the  same  dis¬ 
tricts  where  they  had  been  in  the  former  year. 
XIIL  While  Hannibal  was  at  the  lake  Avernus,  dierc 
came  to  him,  from  Tarentum,  five  young  men  of  quality,  who 
haul  been  made  prisoners,  some  at  the  lake  Trasimenus,  some 
at  Cannae,  amd  who  had  been  sent  home  with  that  generosity 
which  the  Carthaginian  showed  towards  all  the  allies  of  the 
Romans:  these  told  him,  that  out  of  gratitude  for  his  kind 
treatment,  they  had  persuaded  a  great  number  of  the  Taren- 
tine  youth  to  prefer  his  alliance  and  friendship  to  that  of  the 
Romans;  and  dmt  they  had  been  sent  as  deputies  by  their 
countrymen,  U)  request  that  Hannibal  would  draw  his  army 
nearer  to  Tarentum;  that  if  his  standards  and  his  camp  were 
once  seen  from  that  place,  the  city  would,  without  any  delay, 
*  be  delivered  into  his  hands;  for  the  commons  were  under  the 
influence  of  the  younger  men,  and  the  management  of  public 
allairs  was  with  the  commons/^  Hannibal,  after  highly  com¬ 
mending  wnd  loading  them  with  a  profusion  of  promises, 
desired  them  to  retiun  home  in  order  to  bring  the  scheme  to 
maturity,  saying,  diat  he  would  be  there  in  due  time.  With 

18^ 

HlSTOR¥  OP  HOME. 

[Y.H.  538v 

t^ese  T^o^etiti&es  w^e  dbmm^.  Hannib^  luidy 
before  dictr  ajsiplicaCHm, .  ccmceived  an  ardent  wish  to.  ^aki 
possession  of  Tarentom;  saw  that  it  was  a  city  not  only 
opulent  of  great  note,  but  likewise  a  seaport,  commodi- 
ousty  sinaated,  oppoaitei  Macedonia^  and  that  Philip, 
should  herpass  over  into  Italy,  w^ld  steer  his  com'se  to  diat 
harbouA^  because  the  Romans  were  in  Apossession  of  Brim- 
dusium*  Having  performed  the  sacrifice  which  he  had  pro¬ 
posed  at  his  coming,  apd  having,  during  his  stay,  utterly  laid 
waste  the  lands  of  Cpmse,  as  far  as  to  die  promontory  of  ^ 
Misenum,  he  changed  his  route  suddenly  to  PuteoU,  widi 
design  to  surprise  the  Roman  garrison.  This  consisted  of  six 
thousand  men,  and  the  place  was  secured,  not  only  by  the 
nature  of  its  situation,  but  by  strong  works.  Here  Hannibal 
delayed  three  days,  and  attempted  the  garrison  on  every 
quarter;  but,  finding  no  prospect  of  success,  he  marched 
forward  to  ravage  the  territory  of  Neapolis,  rather  for  the 
sake  of  grsuifying  his  resentment,  than  with  any  hope  of  be¬ 
coming  master  of  the  town.  By  his  arrival  in  the  neighbour¬ 
hood,  the  commons  of  Nola  were  encouraged  to  stir,  having 
for  a  long  time  been  disaffected  to  the  cause  of  the  Romans, 
and  harbouring,  at  the  same  time,  resentment  against  dieir 
own  senate*  Deputies,  therefore,  came  to  invite  Hannibal, 
with  a  positive  promise  to  deliver  the  city  into  his  hands:  but 
the  consul  Marcellus,  whom  the  nobles  solicited,  by  his  ex¬ 
peditious  measures  prevented  the  design  from  tsdeing  place. 
In  one  day  he  made  a  march  from  Caks  to  Suessula,  though 
he  met  with  some  delay  in  passing  the  river  Vultumus;  and 
from  thence,  on  the  ensuing  night,  introduced  into  Nok  six 
thousand  foot  and  three  hundred  horse,  to  support  the  senate. » 
While  every  precaution  requisite  for  securing  the  possession 
of  Nola  was  thus  used  by  the  consul  with  vigorous  despatch, 
Hannibal,  on  the  other  side,  was  dilatory  in  his  piw:eedings; 
for,  after  having  twke  before  been  baffled  in  a  project  of  the  . 

BO0K  XXIV- 

189 

B,C.214.] 
same  kind,  he  was  tkcm  die  less  inclined  to  credit  the  pro¬ 
fessions  of  the  Noians. 
:  XIV.  Meanwhile  the  consul,  Quintus  Fabius,  set  out  to 
att^pt  the  recovery  of  Casilinum,  which  was  held  by  a 
Cardiaginian  gantson;  and,  at  the  same  time,  as  if  by  con¬ 
cert,  dicre  arrived  at  Beneventum,  on  one  side,  Hanno  from 
Bruttium,  with  a  large  body  of  infantry  and  cavalry;  and, 
on  another,  Tiberius  Gracchus,  from  Luceria-  The  latter 
came  first  into  die  town;  then,  hearing  that  Hanno  was  en¬ 
camped  at  the  river  Calor,  about  three  miles  distant,  and 
that,  by  detachments  from  thence,  devastations  were  com¬ 
mitted  on  the  country,  he  marched  out  his  troops,  pitched  his 
camp  about  a  mile  from  the  enemy,  and  there  held  an  assem¬ 
bly  of  his  soldiers.  The  legions  which  he  had  with  him  con¬ 
sisted  mostly  of  volunteer  slaves,  who  had  chosen  rather  to 
merit  their  liberty  in  silence,  by  the  service  of  a  second  year, 
than  to  request  it  openly.  He  had  observed,  however,  as  he 
was  leaving  his  winter-quarters,  that  the  troops,  on  their 
march,  began  to  murmur,  asking,  whether  ‘‘  they  Wrere  ever 
to  serve  as  free  citizens?”  He  had,  however,  written  to  the 
senate,  insisting,  not  sO  much  on  their  wishes,  as'^n  their 
merits;  declaring  that  he  had  ever  found  them  faithful  and 
brave  in  the  service;  and  that,  excepting  a  free  condition, 
they  wanted  no  qualification  of  complete  soldiers.”  Audiori ty 
was  given  him  to  act  in  that  business,  as  he  himself  should 
judge  conducive  to  the  good  of  the  public.  Before  he  re¬ 
solved  upon  coming  to  an  engagement,  therefore,  he  gave 
public  notice,  that  ^  the  time  w^as  now  come,  when  they  might 
obtain  the  liberty  which  they  had  so  long  wished  for.  That 
he  intended,  next  day,  to  engage  the  enemy  in  regular  battle, 
in  a  clear  and  open  plain,  where,  without  any  fcar  of  stra¬ 
tagems,  the  business  might  be  decided  by  the  mere  dint  of 
valour.  Every  man  then,  who  should  bring  home  the  head  of 
an  enemy,  he  would,  instantly,  by  his  own  authority,  set  free; 
and  every  (me,  who  should  retreat  from  his  post,  he  would 

190 

HISTORY  OP  ROME.  [Y,R.  ms, 
punish  in  tite  sathe  manner  as  a  slave.  Every  man’s  lot  now 
depended  cm  his  own  exertidn;  arid,  as  security  for  dieir  ob¬ 
taining  dieir  freedom,  not  only  he  himself  stood  pledged, 
but  the  consul  Marcellus,  and  even  the  whole  senate,  who, 
having  been  consulted  by  him  on  the  subject  of  their  free¬ 
dom,  had  authorized  him  to  determine  in  the  cj^.”  He  then 
Tcad  the  consul’s  letter  shad  the  decree  of  the  senate,  on  which 
an  universal  shout  of  joy  was  raised.  They  eagerly  demand¬ 
ed  the  fight,  and  ardently  pressed  him  to  ^ve  die  signal  in¬ 
stantly.  Gracchus  gave  notice  that  they  should  be  gratified 
on  the  following  day,  and  then  dismissed  the  assembly.  The 
soldiers,  exulting  with  joy,  especialty  those  who  were  to  re¬ 
ceive  liberty  as  the  price  of  their  active  efforts  for  one  day, 
Spent  the  rest  of  their  time  until  ni^t  in  getting  their  arms 
inreadiness. 
XV.  Next  day,  as  soon  as  the  trumpets  bejgan  to  sound 
to  battle,  the  above-mentioned  men,  the  first  of  all,  assem¬ 
bled  round  the  general’s  quarters,  ready  and  marshalled  for 
the  fight. ♦  At  sun-rise  Gracchtis  led  out  his  troops  to  the  field, 
iiOT  did  the  enemy  hesitate  to  meet  him.  Their  force  con¬ 
sisted  of  seventeen  thousand  foot,  mostly  Bruttians  and  Lu- 
canians,  and  twelve  thousand  horse,  among  whom  were  very 
few  Italians,  almost  all  the  rest  were  Numidians  and  Moors. 
The  ccmflict  was  fierce  and  longj  during  four  hours  neither 
side  gained  any  advantage,  and  no  circumstance  proved  a 
greater  impediment  to  the  success  of  the  Romans,  than  from 
the  heads  of  the  enemy  being  made  the  price  of  liberty;  for 
when  any  had  valiantly  slain  an  opponent,  he  lost  time,  first, 
in  cutting  off  the  head,  which  could  not  be  readily  effected  in 
the  midst  of  the  crowd  and  tumult,  and  then  his  right  hand 
being  employed  in  securing  it,  the  bravest  ceased  to  take  a 
part  in  the  fight,  and  the  contest  devolved  on  the  inactive  and 
dastardly.  The  military  tribunes  now  represented  to  Grac¬ 
chus,  that  the  soldiers  were  not  employed  in  wounding  any 
of  the  enemy  who  stood  on  their  legs,  but  in  maiming  those 

BOOK  XXW. 

191 

B.C.  2ft4.] 
who  had  and  instoul  of  their  own  swords  hi  their 
right  hands,  they  carried  Ac  heads  of  Ae  shun.  On  which  he 
commanded  Am  to  give  orders  with  all  haste,  that  ‘‘  Aey 
should  throw  away  Ae  heads,  and  attack  the  enemy:  that 
their  courage  was  sufficiently  evident  and  conspicuous,  and 
Aat  suA  brave  men  need  not  4otibt  o£  liberty.”  The  hght 
was  then  revived,  and  Ae  cavahy  also  were  ordered  to 
charge:  Aese'  were  briskly  encountered  by  Ae  Numidians, 
and  Ae  battle  of  Ae  horse  was  maintained  wiA  no  less  vi¬ 
gour  than  that  of  Ae  foot;  so  Aat  Ae  event  of  Ae  day  ^tun 
became  doubtful,  while  the  commanders,  on  boA  sides,  vdi* 
fiad -their  adversaries  in  the  most  contemptuous  terms,  Ae 
Homan  speaking  to  his  soiAers  of  Ae  Lucanians  and  Brutr 
as  men  so  often  defeated  and  subdued  by  Aeir  ances¬ 
tors;  and  Ae  CarAaginian,  of  the  Romans,  as  slaves,  soldiers 
takmi  out  of  Ae  workhouse.  At  last  Gracchus  prockimed, 
that  his  men  had  no  room  to  hope  for  liberty,  unless  Ae  enemy 
were  routed  Aat  day,  and  driven  off  the  field. 
XVI.  These  words  so  effectually  inflamed  Aeir  courage, 
tlmt,  as  if  they  had^heen  suddenly  transformed  into  oAer 
men,  they  renewed  Ae  shout,  and  bore  down  on  Ae  >eneiiy 
wiA  an  imj^tuosily,  which  it  was  impossible  longer  to  wiA- 
stand*  First  Ae  CarAaginian  vanguard,  then  Ae  battalions 
wens  thrown  into  confusion;  at  last  Ae  whole  line  was  forced 
to  give  way;  Aey  then  plainly  turned  Aeir  imeks,  and  fled 
precipitately  into  their  camp,  in  suc^  terror  and  dismay,  Aat 
none  of  them  made  a  stand?  even  at  the  gates  or  on  Ae  r^n- 
part;  and  Ae  Homans  following  close,  so  as  to  form  almost 
one  bcMiy  wiA  them,  began  anew  a  sc^nd  battle  wiAin  their 
works.  Here,  as  Ae  fight  was  more  knpeded  by  the  narrow- 
i^ss  of  Ae  place,  so  was  Ae  skughter  mewre  Aeadful,  Ae 
prisoners  dso  lending  assistance,  who,  during  the  confusion, 
snatched  up  weapons,  and  formmg  in  a  body,  cut  off  num¬ 
bers  in  Ae  rear.  So  great,  Aerefore,  was  Ae  carna^,  that 
out  of  so  large  an  army^  scarcely  two  thousand  men,  most  of 

[y.R.538. 

im  nmmm  OP  «3ME, 
whom  with  ihcar  comm^dcr  j  all  ihe 
t^t  w^re  eidfeear  slato  ot  miuic  prisoiia^a  Atiiy-eight  sm®- 
dards  were  tidceii.  CM  the  victprious  paar^,  there  fell  about 
two  thousands  All.die4>ddty  was  g^ven  op  to  the  soldiers, 
eaceept  the  prisoners,  and  such  cattle  as  ^tould  be  claimed  hf 
d^;Owiiei^  within  thirty  days^  When  they  returned  into  the 
camp,  laden  with  spml,  about  four  thousand  of  the  volunteer 
soldiers,  who  hmi  fought  widi  less  spirit  than  the  rest,  .and 
had*  not  broken  into  the  Carthaginian  camp  along  wtth-them, 
dreading  punishment^  withdrew  to  an  emi^nce  at  a  ^fudl 
distance.  Next  day  Aey  were  brought  down  frotpa  ttence  by 
a  naiUtaty  tribune,  wd  just  as  Oracchus  was  holding 
m  M«embly,  which  he  had,^»minoncd.  Here  theproconsul, 
having,  in -the  first  place,  hcmoured  with  mUitary  pre^mtstte 
^usteran  soldiers,  according  to  the  degree  erf  courage  and  ac- 
dvity  shown  by  e^h  m  thehght^  said,dint^ns  to  what  con* 
c^ned  the  volunteers,  he  rather  wished  that”  all  in  general, 
worthy  and  unworthy,  should  receive -cemam^whuions  from 
him,  dran  that  any  should  be.  reprimanded  on  such  a  day  as 
Aati’^  andth^n,  |Mying  ^it  mi^prove  advantegeous, 
Iteppy,  and  fentunate  to  Ae  commonwealth  and  to  them¬ 
selves;”  he.pronoum:^  them  all  feee.  On  which  declaration, 
in  transports  of  Joy,  dtey  raised  a  general  shout,  and  while 
they  now  embraced  ami  congratelated  each  other,  rrising 
dieir  hands  towards  heaven,  and  praying  for  every  blessing 
on  the  Rcmm  people,  oo  Oracchus  in  particular,  the 
pmconsid  addressed  them  thusi  jfei^e  I  had  set  all  ou  an 
equal  footing  of  freedom,  I  was  unwiffing  to  distinguish  any 
by,  a  mark,  either  of  .bravely  or  of  cowardice.  But  imw,  since 
Lhave  acquitted  die  honotur^of  gov^fument,  lest  every  dis- 
diction  beVwesa  diem  be  lost,  I  will  order  the  names  of  those 
who,  conscious  of  being  remiss  in  tlte  action,  have  4ately 
made  a  secesrimij  to  be  laid  before  me;  and,  summoning 
each,  wUi  bind  them  by  an  oath,  that,  as  long  as  diey  shall 
seiw  Wi&  In  the  m^y,  they  will  never,^c3teept  ol^ged  by  sick- 

BOOK  XXIV. 

193 

B.C.  214.] 
ness,  take  food  or  drink  in  any  other  posture  than  standing. 
This  penalty  you  will  undergo  with  patience,  if  you  consider, 
that  your  cowardice  could  not  be  more  slightly  branded.^’ 
He  then  gave  the  signal  of  preparation  for  a  march,  and  the 
soldiers,  carrying  and  driving  on  their  booty,  returned  to  Be- 
neventum  so  cheerful  and  so  gay,  that  they  seemed  to  have 
come  home  from  a  feast,  given  on  some  remarkable  occasion, 
rather  than  from  a  field  of  battle.  All  the  Beneventans  pour¬ 
ed  out  in  crowds  to  meet  them  at  the  gates,  embraced  the 
soldiers,  congratulated  them,  and  pressed  them  to  come  to 
their  houses.  They  had  already  prepared  entertainments  in 
their  inner  courts,  and  entreated  Gracchus  to  permit  his  sol¬ 
diers  to  partake  of  the  same.  Gracchus  gave  them  leave,  on 
condition  that  they  should  ail  dine  in  the  public  street:  every 
thing  was  accordingly  brought  out  before  each  person’s  door, 
where  the  volunteers  dined  with  the  caps  of  liberty,  or  white* 
woollen  fillets  in  their  hands,  some  reclining,  others  stand¬ 
ing,  who,  at  the  same  time,  attended  the  rest.  This  afforded 
a  sight  so  pleasing,  that  Gracchus,  on  his  return  to  Rome, 
ordered  a  representation  of  that  day’s  festival  to  be  painted 
in  the  Tem^ple  of  Liberty,  which  his  father  caused  to  he  built 
on  the  Aventine,  out  of  money  accruing  from  fines,  and  which 
he  afterwards  dedicated. 
XVII.  While  these  transactions  passed  at  Beneventum, 
Hannibal,  after  ravaging  the  lands  of  Neapolis,  inarched  his 
army  to  Nola.  The  consul,  as  sooh  as  he  was  apprised  of  his 
approach,  sent  for  the  propraetor  Pomponius,  and  the  army 
which  lay  in  the  camp  over  Suessula;  being  determined  to 
go  out,  and  not  to  decline  an  engagement  with  him.  He  sent 
Caius  Claudius  Nero  with  the  main  strength  of  the  cavalry, 
in  the  dead  of  the  night,  through  the  gate  which  was  most 
distant  from  the  enemy,  ordering  him  to  ride  round  so  as 
not  to  he  observed,  until  he  came  behind  their  army,  to  follow 
them  leisurely  as  they  moved,  and  as  soon  as  he  should  per¬ 
ceive  that  the  battle  was  begun,  to  advance  on  their  rear. 
voi.,  ni.~B  b 

194 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  538. 
What  prevented  Nero  from  executing  these  orders,  whether 
mistake  of  the  road,  or  the  shortness  of  the  time,  is  uncertain. 
Although  the  battle  was  fought  while  he  was  absent,  yet  the 
Romans  had  evidently  the  advantage;  but  by  the  cavalry  not 
coming  up  in  time,  the  plan  of  operations  was  disconcerted. 
Marcellus^  not  daring  to  follow  the  retiring  foe,  gave  the 
signal  for  retreat,  while  his  men  were  pursuing  their  success. 
However,  more  than  two  thousand  of  the  enemy  are  said  to 
have  fallen  that  day;  of  the  Romans  less  than  four  hundred. 
About  sunset,  Nero  returned,  after  having  to  no  purpose  fa¬ 
tigued  the  men  and  horses  through  the  whole  day  and  night, 
without  even  getting  a  sight  of  the  Carthaginian;  he  was  \^Ty 
severely  reprimanded  by  the  consul,  who  went  so  far  as  to 
affirm,  that  he  was  the  cause  of  their  not  having  retorted  on 
the  enemy  the  disaster  suffered  at  Cannae.  Next  day  the  Ro¬ 
man  army  marched  out  to  the  field,  but  Hannibal,  tacitly  ac¬ 
knowledging  his  defeat,  kept  within  his  trenches.  In  the  dead 
of  the  night  of  the  third  day,  giving  up  all  hope  of  getting 
possession  of  Nola,  a  project  never  attempted  without  loss, 
he  marched  away  towards  Tarentum,  where  he  had  a  greater 
prospect  of  success. 
XVIII.  Nor  di&  less  spirit  appear  in  the  administration 
of  the  Roman  affairs  at  home,  than  in  the  field.  The  censors 
being,  by  the  emptiness  of  the  treasury,  discharged  from  the 
care  of  erecting  public  works,  turned  their  attention  to  the 
regulating  of  men's  morals,  and  checking  the  growth  of  vices, 
which,  like  distempered  bodies,  ever  apt  to  generate  other 
maladies,  had  sprung  up  during  the  war.  First,  they  sum¬ 
moned  before  them  those,  who,  after  the  battle  of  Cannae, 
were  said  to  have  formed  the  design  of  deserting  the  com¬ 
monwealth,  and  abandoning  Italy.  At  the  head  of  these  was 
Lucius  Caecilius  Metellus,  who  happened  to  be  quaestor  at 
the  time.  They  then  ordered  him,  and  the  others  accused  of 
the  same  criminal  conduct,  to  plead  to  the  charge;  and  as 
these  could  not  clear  themselves,  they  pronounced  judgment. 

B.C.  214.] 

BOOK  XXIV. 

195 

that  those  persons  had  made  use  of  words  and  discourses, 
tending  to  the  detriment  of  the  commonwealth,  inasmuch  as 
they  purported  the  forming  of  a  conspiracy  for  the  purpose 
of  abandoning  Italy.  Next  to  these  were  summoned  the  over 
ingenious  casuists,  with  respect  to  the  means  of  dissolving 
the  obligation  of  an  oath,  who  supposed,  that  by  returning 
privately  into  Hannibal’s  camp,  after  having  begun  their 
journey  with  the  rest  of  the  prisoners,  they  should  fulfil  the 
oath  which  they  had  taken.  Of  these,  and  the  others  above- 
mentioned,  such  as  had  horses  at  the  public  expense,  were 
deprived  of  them,  and  they  were  all  degraded  from  their 
tribes  and  disfranchised.  Nor  was  the  care  of  the  censors 
confined  merely  to  the  regulating  of  the  senate  and  the  eques¬ 
trian  order.  They  erased  from  the  lists  of  the  younger  cen¬ 
turies,  the  names  of  all  those  who  had  not  served  as  soldiers 
during  the  last  four  years,  not  having  been  regularly  exempt¬ 
ed  from  service,  or  prevented  by  sickness.  These,  in  num¬ 
ber  above  two  thousand,  were  disfranchised,  and  all  were 
degraded  from  their  tribes.  To  this  simple  censorial  sen¬ 
tence  was  added  a  severe  decree  of  the  senate,  that  all  chose 
whom  the  censors  had  degraded  should  serve  as  foot  soldiers, 
and  be  sent  into  Sicily,  to  join  the  remains  of  the  army  of 
Cannse;  the  time  limited  for  the  service  of  soldiers  of  this  de¬ 
scription  being,  until  the  enemy  should  be  driven  out  of  Italy. 
While  the  censors  now,  on  account  of  the  impoverished  trea¬ 
sury,  declined  contracting  for  the  repairs  of  the  sacred  edi¬ 
fices,  the  furnishing  of  horses  to  the  curule  magistrates,  and 
other  matters  of  like  nature,  a  great  number  of  those,  who 
had  been  accustomed  to  engage  in  contracts  of  the  kind, 
waited  on  them,  and  recommended  that  they  transact 
ever\^  kind  of  business,  and  engage  in  contracts,  in  the  same 
manner  as  if  there  were  money  in  the  colfers;  assuring  them, 
that  no  one  would  call  on  the  treasury  for  payment,  until  the 
conclusion  of  the  war.”  Afterwards  came  the  former  owners 
of  those  whom  Tiberius  Sempronius  had  made  free  at  Bene- 

196 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

[Y.R,  538, 

ventum;  who  said,  that  they  had  been  sent  for  by  the  public 
bankers,  in  order  that  they  might  receive  the  price  of  their 
slavesj  but  that  they  did  not  desire  it  until  the  war  should 
be  at  an  end.  When  this  disposition  to  support  the  credit  of 
the  treasur)^  appeared  among  the  plebeian  class,  the  property 
belonging  to  minors,  and  of  widows,  began  to  be  brought  inj 
the  people  believing  that  they  could  not  deposit  it  any  where 
in  greater  security,  or  with  more  religious  regard  to  their 
trust,  than  under  the  public  faith:  and  when  any  thing  was 
bought,  or  laid  in  for  the  use  of  the  said  minors  or  widows, 
a  bill  was  given  for  it  on  the  quaestor.  This  generous  zeal  of 
the  private  ranks  spread  from  the  citv  into  the  camp,  where 
no  horseman,  no  centurion,  would  take  his  pay;  and  should 
any  have  received  it,  the  others  would  have  censured  them  as 
mercenary. 
XIX.  The  consul,  Quintus  Fabius,  lay  encamped  before 
Casilinum,  which  was  defended  by  a  garrison  of  two  thou* 
sand  Campanians,  and  seven  hundred  of  Hannibal’s  soldiers* 
The  commander  was  Statius  Metius,  sent  thither  by  Cneius 
Magius  Atellanus,  who  was  chief  magistrate  that  year,  and 
was  now  employed  in  arming  the  populace  and  the  slaves 
promiscuously,  intending  to  attack  the  Roman  camp  while  the 
consul  was  laying  siege  to  the  place.  None  of  his  designs 
escaped  the  knowledge  of  Fabius,  who  therefore  sent  a  mes* 
sage  to  his  colleague  at  Nola,  that,  while  the  siege  of  Ca* 
silinum  was  carried  on,  there  was  a  necessity  for  another 
army  to  oppose  the  Campanians;  that  either  he  himself 
should  come,  leaving  a  moderate  garrison  at  Nola,  or,  if 
affairs  there  required  his  stay,  from  not  yet  being  in  a  state 
of  security  against  the  attempts  of  Hannibal,  he  should  in 
that  case  send  for  the  proconsul,  Tiberius  Gracchus,  from 
Beneventum.”  On  receiving  this  message,  Marcellus,  leaving 
two  thousand  men  to  garrison  Nola,  came  with  the  rest  of 
his  army  to  Casilinum,  and,  by  his  arrival,  the  Campanians, 
who  were  on  the  point  of  breaking  out  into  action,  were  kept 

BOOK  XXIV. 

197 

B.C.  214.] 
quiet.  And  now  the  two  consuls,  with  united  forces,  pushed 
on  the  siege.  But  the  Roman  soldiers,  in  their  rash  ap¬ 
proaches  to  the  walls,  receiving  many  wounds,  and  meeting 
little  success  in  any  of  their  attempts,  Quintus  Fabius  gave 
his  opinion,  that  they  ought  to  abandon  an  enterprise  which, 
though  of  slight  importance,  was  attended  with  as  much  dif¬ 
ficulty  as  one  of  great  consequence;  and  that  they  should  re¬ 
tire  from  the  place,  especially  as  more  momentous  business 
called  for  their  attention.  Marcellus  prevented  their  quitting 
the  siege  with  disappointment,  urging,  that  there  were  many 
enterprises  of  such  a  nature,  that,  as  they  ought  not  to  be  under¬ 
taken  by  great  generals,  so  when  once  engaged  in  they  ought 
not  to  be  relinquished,  because  the  reputation  either  of  success 
or  of  failure,  must  be  productive  of  weighty  consequences. 
All  kinds  of  works  were  then  constructed,  and  machines  of 
every  description  pushed  forward  to  the  walls.  On  this,  the 
Campanians  requested  of  Fabius  that  they  might  be  allowed 
to  retire  in  safety  to  Capua,  when,  a  few  having  come  out  of 
the  town,  Marcellus  seized  on  the  pass  by  which  they  came, 
and  immediately  a  promiscuous  slaughter  began  near  the 
gate,  and  soon  after,  on  the  troops  rushing  in,  it  spread 
through  the  city.  About  fifty  of  the  Campanians,  who  first 
left  the  place,  ran  for  refuge  to  Fabius,  aud  under  his  pro¬ 
tection  escaped  to  Capua.  Thus  was  Casilinum  taken  by 
surprise,  during  the  conferences  and  delays  of  those  who 
went  to  negociate  terms  of  capitulation.  The  prisoners,  both 
Campanians  and  HannibaPs  soldiers,  were  sent  to  Rome, 
and  there  shut  up  in  prison,  and  the  multitude  of  the  towns¬ 
people  were  dispersed  among  the  neighbouring  states,  to  be 
kept  in  custody. 
XX.  At  the  same  time,  when  the  army,  after  effecting 
their  purpose,  removed  from  Casilinum,  Gracchus,  who  was 
in  Lucania,  detached,  under  a  prsefect  of  the  allies,  several 
cohorts,  which  had  been  raised  in  that  counti*) ,  to  ravage  the 
lands  of  the  enemy.  These  Hanno  attacked  while  they  strag- 

198 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  538. 

gled  in  a  careless  manner,  and  retaliated  a  blow  almost  as 
severe  as  that  which  he  had  received  at  Beneventum;  then, 
to  avoid  being  overtaken  by  Grdcchus,  he  retired  with  the 
utmost  speed  into  Bruttiura.  As  to  the  consuls,  Marcellus 
returned  to  Nola,  whence  he  had  come;  Fabius  proceeded 
into  Samnium,  in  order  to  overrun  the  country,  and  recover, 
by  force,  the  cities  which  had  revolted.  The  Samnites  of 
Caudium  suffered  the  most  grievous  devastations;  their  terri¬ 
tory  was  laid  waste  with  fire  to  a  great  extent,  and  men  and 
cattle  were  carried  off  as  spoil.  The  following  towns  were 
taken  from  them  by  assault:  Combulteria,  Telesia,  Compsa, 
Melae,  Fulfulse,  and  Orbitanium;  from  the  Lucanians,  Blandae, 
belonging  to  the  Apulians,  was  taken  after  a  siege.  In 
these  towns  twenty-five  thousand  were  taken  or  slain,  and 
three  hundred  and  seventy  deserters  retaken;  these,  being 
sent  by  the  consul  to  Rome,  were  all  beaten  with  rods  in  the 
Comitium,  and  cast  down  from  the  rock.  All  this  was  per¬ 
formed  by  Fabius  in  the  course  of  a  few  days.  Bad  health 
confined  Marcellus  at  Nola,  and  prevented  his  taking  the 
field.  At  the  same  time  the  prsetor,  Quintus  Fabius,  whose 
province  was  the  country  round  Luceria,  took  by  storm  a 
town  called  Accua,  and  fortified  a  strong  camp  near  Ardonea. 
Wliile  the  Romans  were  thus  employed  in  various  places, 
Hannibal  had  arrived  at  Tarentum,  after  utterly  destroying 
ever}'  thing  in  his  way.  At  last,  when  he  entered  the  territory 
of  Tarentum,  his  troops  began  to  march  in  a  peaceable  man¬ 
ner:  nothing  was  injured  there,  nor  did  any  ever  go  out  of  the 
road;  this  proceeding  flowed  manifestly  not  from  the  mode¬ 
ration  eidier  of  the  soldiers  or  their  commander,  but  from  a 
wish  to  acquire  the  esteem  of  the  Taren tines.  However,  after 
he  had  advanced  almost  close  to  the  walls,  finding  no  com¬ 
motion  raised  in  his  favour,  an  event  which  he  expected  to 
happen  on  the  sight  of  his  van-guard,  he  encamped  about  the 
distance  of  a  mile  from  the  town.  Three  days  before  Hanni¬ 
bal’s  approach,  Marcus  Livius  being  sent  by  the  propraetor. 

BOOK  XXfV. 

199 

B.C.  214.] 

Marcus  Valerius,  commander  of  the  fleet  at  Brundusium, 
had  formed  the  young  nobility  of  Tarentum  into  bodies;  and, 
posting  guards  at  every  gate,  and  along  the  walls,  wherever 
there  was  occasion,  by  his  unremitting  vigilance  both  by  day, 
and  more  particularly  by  night,  left  no  room  for  any  attempt, 
either  of  the  enemy  or  of  the  wavering  allies.  Wherefore, 
after  many  days  were  spent  there  to  no  purpose,  Hannibal, 
finding  that  none  of  those  who  had  attended  him  at  the  lake 
Avernus  either  came  themselves  or  sent  any  message  or 
letter,  and  perceiving  that  he  inconsiderately  suffered  him¬ 
self  to  be  led  by  delusive  promises,  decamped  and  withdrew. 
He  did  not  even  then  do  any  injury  to  their  country,  for 
though  his  counterfeited  tenderness  had  brought  him  no  ad¬ 
vantage,  yet  he  still  entertained  hopes  of  prevailing  on  them 
to  renounce  their  present  engagements.  When  he  came  to 
Salapia  he  collected  there  stores  of  corn  from  the  lands  of 
Metapontum  and  Heraclea,  for  midsummer  was  now  past, 
and  the  place  appeared  commodious  for  winter-quarters. 
From  hence  he  sent  out  the  Moors  and  Numidians  to  plunder 
the  territory  of  Sallentum,  and  the  nearest  woody  parts  of 
Apulia,  where  not  much  booty  was  found  of  any  other  kind 
than  horses,  several  studs-  of  which  made  the  principal  part 
of  their  acquisition^  of  these,  four  thousand  were  distributed 
among  the  horsemen  to  be  trained. 
XXI.  The  Romans,  seeing  that  a  war  of  no  slight  moment 
was  ready  to  break  out  in  Sicily,  and  that  the  death  of  the 
tyrant  had  only  given  the  Syracusans  enterprising  leaders, 
without  working  any  change  in  their  principles  or  tempers, 
decx*eed  that  province  to  the  consul  Marcus  Marcellus.  Im¬ 
mediately  after  the  murder  of  Hieronymus,  the  soldiers  in 
Leotini  had  raised  a  tumult,  furiously  exclaiming,  that  the 
death  of  the  king  should  be  expiated  by  the  blood  of  the 
conspirators.  Afterwards,  the  words  LIBERTY  RESTOR¬ 
ED,  a  sound  ever  delightful  to  the  ear,  being  frequently  re¬ 
peated,  and  hopes  being  held  out  of  largesses  from  the  royal 

200 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  538. 

treasure,  of  serving  under  better  generals,  mention  at  the 
same  time  being  made  of  the  tyrant’s  shocking  crimes,  and 
more  shocking  lusts;  all  these  together  produced  such  an 
alteration  in  their  sentiments,  that  they  suffered  the  body  of 
the  king,  whom  just  now  they  had  so  violently  lamented,  to 
lie  without  burial.  The  rest  of  the  conspirators  remained  in 
the  place  in  order  to  secure  the  army  on  their  side;  but 
Theodotus  and  Sosis,  getting  on  horseback,  galloped  with 
all  possible  speed  to  Syracuse,  wishing  to  surprise  the  king’s 
party,  while  ignorant  of  every  thing  that  had  happened.  But 
not  only  report,  than  which  nothing  is  quicker  on  such  occa¬ 
sions,  but  likewise  an  express,  by  one* of  Hieronymus’s 
servants,  had  arrived  before  them.  Wherefore  Andranodo- 
rus  had  strengthened  with  garrisons  both  the  island*  and  the 
citadel,  and  also  every  other  post  which  was  convenient  for 
his  purpose*  After  sunset,  in  the  dusk  of  the  evening,  Theo¬ 
dotus  and  Sosis  rode  into  the  Hexapylum,  and  having 
shown  the  king’s  garment  dyed  with  blood,  and  the  orna¬ 
ment  which  he  wore  on  his  head,  passed  on  through  the 
*  Syracuse  was  founded  by  a  colony  of  Athenians,  and  rose  gradually 
the  very  fix*st  rank  of  greatness  and  splendour  At  the  time  of  thes6  trans¬ 
actions  it  consisted  of  four  parts,  each  of  which  deserv  ed  the  name  of  a  city, 
r.  The  island,  called  also  Ortygia,  was  joined  to  tffc  main  land  by  a  bi’idge, 
and  etretcliing  out  into  the  bay,  formed  two  harbours,  a  large  one  to  the 
south-east,  and  a^smaller  one  on  the  north-west.  Here  stood  the  royal  palace 
and  the  treasury,  ami,  at  the  remotest  point,  the  fountain  Arethusa  ainses. 
2.  The  Achradina.  Tliis  w  as  the  largest  and  strongest  division  of  the  city; 
it  stretched  along  the  bottom  of  the  lesser  harbour,  whose  w  aters  washed 
it,  and  was  divided  from  the  other  parts  by  a  strong  wall.  3.  The  Tycha, 
so  named  from  a  remarkable  temple  of  Fortune,  Vt/xw,  foi-med  the  south¬ 
eastern  part  of  the  city.  4  Neapolis,  or  the  New  Town;  this  was  the  latest 
built,  and  lay  w'estward  of  the  Tycha,  The  principal  entrance  into  this  part 
-was  guarded  by  a  fort  called  Hexapylum,  from  its  having  six  gates.  To  this 
part  belonged  Epipolx,  an  eminence  commanding  a  view  of  the  whole  city. 
Of  this  once  famous  city  the  on  y  part  now*  inhabited  is  the  island.  The 
ruins  of  the  rest  are  about  twenty  two  miles  in  circuix^ference,  and  are  co¬ 
vered  with  vineyards,  orchards,  and  corn  heids. 

B.C.  214.] 

BOOK  XXIV. 

201 

Tycha,  calling  the  people  at  once  to  liberty  and  to  arms,  and 
desiring  them  to  come  all  together  into  the  Achradina.  As 
to  the  populace,  some  ran  out  into  the  streets,  some  stood  in 
the  porches  of  their  houses,  some  looked  on  from  the  roofs 
and  windows,  all  inquiring  into  the  cause  of  the  commotion. 
Every  place  blazed  with  lights,  and  was  filled  with  various 
confused  noises.  Such  as  had  arms  assembled  in  the  open 
places;  such  as  had  none,  pulled  down  from  the  temple  of 
Olympian  Jove  the  spoils  of  the  Gauls  and  Illyrians,  pre¬ 
sented  to  Hiero  by  the  Roman  people,  and  hung  up  there  by 
him;  beseeching  the  god  to  lend,  with  good  will,  those  con¬ 
secrated  weapons  to  men  taking  them  up  in  defence  of  their 
country,  of  the  temples  of  their  deities,  and  of  their  liberty. 
This  multitude  was  also  joined  to  the  watch,  stationed  in 
the  several  principal  quarters  of  the  city.  In  the  island  An- 
dranodorus  had,  among  other  places,  occupied  the  public 
granary  with  a  guard;  this  place,  which  was  inclosed  with 
hewn  stone,  and  built  up  to  a  great  height,  like  a  citadel,  was 
seized  by  the  band  of  youths  appointed  by  Andranodorus 
to  garrison  it,  and  they  despatched  a  message  to  the 
Achradina,  that  the  com  therein  was  at  the  disposal  of  the 
senate. 
XXIL  At  the  first  dawn  the  whole  body  of  the  people, 
armed  and  unarmed,  came  together  into  the  Achradina  to 
the  senate-house;  and  there,  from  an  altar  of  Concord,  which 
stood  in  the  place,  one  of  the  principal  nobles,  by  name  Po- 
lysenus,  made  a  speech  fraught  with  sentiments  both  of 
liberty  and  moderation.  He  said  that  men  who  had  expe» 
rienced  the  hardships  of  servitude  and  insult,  knew  the  ex¬ 
tent  of  the  evil  against  which  they  vented  their  resentment; 
but  what  calamities  civil  discord  introduces,  the  Syracusans 
could  have  learned  only  from  the  relations  of  their  fathers, 
not  from  their  own  experience.  He  applauded  them  for  the 
readiness  with  which  they  had  taken  arms,  and  would  ap¬ 
plaud  them  yet  more  if  they  did  not  make  use  of  them  unless 
VOL.  I11.~C  c 

202 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y,R.  538. 

constrained  by  the  last  necessity.  At  present  he  thought  it 
adviseable  that  they  should  send  deputies  to  Andranodorus^ 
to  require  of  him  to  be  amenable  to  the  direction  of  the  se¬ 
nate  and  people,  to  open  the  gates  of  the  island,  and  withdraw 
the  garrison.  If  he  meant,  under  the  pretext  of  being  guar¬ 
dian  of  the  sovereignty  for  another,  to  usurp  it  into  his  own 
hands,  he  recommended  it  to  them  to  recover  their  liberty' 
by  much  keener  exertions  than  had  been  shown  against  Hie¬ 
ronymus.’’  Accordingly,  on  the  breaking  up  of  the  assembly, 
deputies  were  sent.  The  meetings  of  the  senate  were  now  re¬ 
vived;  for  though  it  had,  during  the  reign  of  Hiero,  conti¬ 
nued  to  act  as  the  public  council  of  the  state,  yet  since  his 
death,  until  now,  it  had  never  been  convened,  or  consulted 
on  any  business.  When  the  commissioners  came  to  Andra- 
nodorus,  he  was  much  moved  by  the  united  voice  of  his 
countrymen,  by  their  being  in  possession  of  the  other  quar¬ 
ters  of  the  city,  and  moreover  by  that  division  of  the  island, 
which  was  the  strongest,  being  lost  to  him,  and  in  the  hands 
of  the  other  party.  But  his  wife,  Demarata,  daughter  of 
Hiero,  still  swelling  with  royal  arrogance  and  female  pride, 
reminded  him  of  an  expression  frequently  uttered  by  Dionysius 
the  Tyrant,  who  used  to  say,  that  a  man  ought  to  relinquish 
sovereign  power  when  he  was  dragged  by  the  feet,  not  while 
he  sat  on  horseback.  It  was  easy,”  she  said,  “  at  any  mo¬ 
ment,  to  resign  the  possession  of  a  high  station;  to  arrive  at, 
and  acquire  it,  was  difficult  and  arduous.”  Desired  him  to 
‘‘  ask  from  the  ambassadors  a  little  time  for  consideration, 
and  to  employ  it  in  sending  for  the  soldiers  from  Leontini, 
to  whom,  if  he  promised  some  of  the  royal  treasure,  he  might 
dispose  of  eveiy^  pleasure.”  These  counsels, 
suited  to  the  character  of  the  woman,  Andranodorus  neither 
totally  rejected  nor  immediately  adopted;  judging  it  the 
safer  way  to  the  acquisition  of  power,  to  yield  to  the  times 
for  the  present.  He  therefore  desired  the  deputies  to  carry 
back  for  answer,  that  ‘‘  he  would  be  obedient  to  the  direc- 

BOOK  XXIV. 

203 

B.C.  214.] 

tions  of  the  senate  and  people.’’  Next  day,  at  the  first  light, 
he  opened  the  gates  of  the  island,  and  went  into  the  Forum 
in  the  Achradina.  There  he  ascended  the  altar  of  Concord, 
from  whence  Polysenus  had  addressed  the  people  the  day  be¬ 
fore,  and  first,  at  the  beginning  of  his  discourse,  spent  some 
time  in  entreating  their  pardon  for  the  del^  which  he  had 
made,  for  he  had  kept  the  gates  shut,”  he  said,  not  with 
intention  to  separate  his  own  interest  from  that  of  the  public, 
but  through  fearful  uncertainty,  the  sword  being  once  dravrn, 
when,  and  in  what  way,  an  end  might  be  put  to  the  shedding 
of  blood;  whether  they  would  be  content  with  the  death  of 
the  tyrant,  which  was  all  that  the  cause  of  liberty  required, 
or  whether  all  who  had  any  connexion  with  the  court,  either 
by  consanguinity,  affinity,  or  employments  of  any  kind,  were 
to  be  put  to  death,  as  accomplices  in  another’s  guilt.  As 
soon  as  he  perceived  that  those  who  had  freed  their  country, 
meant  also,  together  with  liberty,  to  grant  it  safety,  and  that 
the  designs  of  all  aimed  at  the  promotion  of  the  public  hap¬ 
piness,  he  had  not  hesitated  to  replace,  under  the  direction  of 
the  people,  both  his  own  person,  and  evert'  thing  else  com¬ 
mitted  to  his  charge  and  guardianship,  since  the  prince  who 
had  entrusted  him  therewith  had  perished  through  his  own 
madness.”  Then,  turning  to  those  who  had  killed  the  ty'rant, 
and  addressing  Theodotus  and  Sosis  by  name,  you  have 
performed,”  said  he,  a  memorable  exploit:  but  believe  me, 
the  career  of  your  glory  is  only  begun,  not  finished;  and 
there  yet  subsists  the  utmost  danger,  that  unless  you  exert 
yourselves  immediately  to  secure  peace  and  harmony,  the 
nation  may  carry  liberty  to  licentiousness.” 
XXIII.  After  this  discourse,  he  laid  the  keys  of  the  gates 
and  of  the  royal  treasure  at  their  feet.  Being  dismissed,  full 
of  joy,  the  people,  with  their  wives  and  children,  spent  that 
day  in  offering  thanksgivings  in  all  the  temples  of  the  gods, 
and  on  the  day  following  an  assembly  was  held  for  the  elec¬ 
tion  of  prsetors.  Among  the  first  was  chosen  Andranodorus; 

204 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  538. 

the  greater  number  of  the  rest  were  elected  from  the  band  of 
conspirators  against  the  king.  Two  of  these  were  absent  ^ 
the  time,  Sopater  and  Dinomenes;  who,  on  hearing  what  had 
passed  at  Syracuse,  conveyed  thither  the  money  belonging 
to  the  king,  which  was  at  Leontini,and  delivered  it  to  quaes¬ 
tors  appointed  for  the  purpose:  to  whom  was  also  delivered 
the  treasure  which  was  in  the  island  and  in  the  Achradina. 
That  part  of  the  w  all,  which  formed  too  strong  a  fence  be¬ 
tween  the  island  and  the  city,  was,  with  universal  approba¬ 
tion,  abolished.  The  other  events  w’hich  took  place  corres-^ 
ponded  with  the  general  zeal  for  liberty,  which  now  actu¬ 
ated  men’s  minds:  Hippocrates  and  Epicydes,  when  intelli¬ 
gence  w^as  received  of  the  tyrant’s  death,  which  the  former 
had  wished  to  conceal  even  by  the  murder  of  the  messenger, 
were  deserted  by  the  soldiers;  and,  as  the  safest  step  in  their 
present  circumstances,  returned  to  Syracuse.  Lest  their  stay 
there  should  subject  them  to  suspicion,  as  if  they  were 
w'atching  some  opportunity  for  effecting  a  revolution,  they 
addressed  first  the  praetors,  and  afterwards,  through  them, 
the  senate;  represented,  that,  being  sent  by  Hannibal  to 
Hieronymus,  as  to  a  friend  and  ally,  they  had  obeyed  his 
orders,  in  conformity  to  the  will  of  their  own  commander. 
That  they  wished  to  return  to  Hannibal,  but  as  they  could 
not  travel  with  safety  w’hile  every  part  of  Sicily  was  over¬ 
spread  with  the  Roman  arms,  they  requested  that  a  guard  might 
be  granted  to  escort  them  to  Locri  in  Italy,  and  that  thus,  with 
very  little  trouble,  the  senate  w^ould  confer  a  great  obligation 
on  Hannibal.”  The  request  was  easily  obtained,  for  the  senate 
wished  the  departure  of  those  generals  of  the  late  king,  men 
well  skilled  in  war,  and  at  the  same  time  needy  and  daring. 
But  this  measure,  so  agreeable  to  their  wishes,  they  did  not 
execute  with  the  care  and  expedition  requisite.  Meanwhile 
those  young  men,  accustomed  to  a  military’  life,  employed 
themselves  sometimes  among  the  soldiery;  at  others,  among 
the  deserters,  the  greatest  number  of  whom  were  Roman 

BOOK  XXIV. 

205 

B.C.  214.] 

seamen;  at  others,  among  the  very  lowest  class  of  plebeians, 
in  propagating  insinuations  against  the  §enate  and  nobility; 
hinting  to  them,  that  in  the  appearance  of  reviving  the  for* 
mer  alliance,  they  were  secretly  forming  and  preparing  to 
execute  a  scheme  of  bringing  Syracuse  under  the  dominion 
of  the  Romans;  and  that  then  their  faction,  and  the  few  ad¬ 
vocates  for  the  renewal  of  the  treaty,  would  domineer  with¬ 
out  control.” 
XXIV.  Crowds  of  people,  disposed  to  listen  to  and  believe 
such  reports,  flocked  into  Syracuse  in  great  numbers  ever}' 
day,  and  afforded,  not  only  to  Epicydes,  but  to  Andranodo- 
rus  likewise,  some  hopes  of  effecting  a  revolution.  The  lat¬ 
ter,  wearied  by  the  importunities  of  his  wife,  who  urged  that 
now  was  the  time  to  possess  himself  of  the  sovereignty, 
while  all  was  in  a  state  of  disorder,  in  consequence  of  liberty 
being  lately  recovered,  but  not  yet  established  on  a  regular 
footing;  while  the  soldiers,  who  owed  their  livelihood  to  the 
pay  received  from  the  late  king,  were  yet  at  hand,  and  while 
the  commanders  sent  by  Hannibal,  who  were  well  acquaint¬ 
ed  with  those  soldiers,  could  aid  the  enterprise,”  took,  as  an 
associate  in  his  design,  Themistus,  to  whom  Gelon’s  daugh¬ 
ter  was  married;  and,  in  a  few  days  after,  incautiously  dis¬ 
closed  the  affair  to  one  Ariston,  an  actor  on  the  stage,  whom 
he  was  accustomed  to  entrust  with  other  secrets;  a  man 
whose  birth  and  circumstances  were  both  reputable;  nor  did 
his  employment  disgrace  them,  because,  among  the  Greeks, 
that  profession  is  not  considered  as  dishonourable.  This 
man,  resolving  to  be  guided  by  the  duty  which  he  owed  to 
his  country,  discovered  the  matter  to  the  praetors;  who,  hav¬ 
ing  learned  by  unquestionable  proofs  that  the  information 
was  well  founded,  first  consulted  the  elder  senators,  by  whose 
advice  he  placed  a  guard  at  the  door  of  the  senate-house, 
and,  as  soon  as  Themistus  and  Andranoclorus  entered,  put 
them  to  death.  This  fact,  in  appearance  uncommonly  atro¬ 
cious,  the  cause  of  which  was  unknown  to  the  rest,  occasion- 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  ^38. 

2i)6 

ed  a  violent  uproar;  but,  having  at  length  procured  silence, 
they  brought  the  informer  into  the  senate-house.  He  then 
gave  a  regular  detail  of  every  circumstance,  showing  that  the 
conspiracy  owed  its  origin  to  the  marriage  of  Gelon’s  daugh¬ 
ter,  Harmonia,  with  Themistus;  that  the  auxiliary  troops  of 
Africans  and  Spaniards  had  been  engaged  for  the  purpose  of 
massacreing  the  praetors  and  others  of  the  nobility,  whose  pro¬ 
perty,  according  to  orders  given,  was  to  be  the  booty  of 
their  murderers;  that  a  band  of  mercenaries,  accustomed  to 
the  command  of  Andranodorus,  had  been  procured,  with  the 
design  of  seizing  again  on  the  island.  He  afterwards  laid 
before  them  every  particular;  what  things  were  to  be  done, 
and  by  whom,  together  with  the  whole  plan  of  the  conspi¬ 
racy,  supported  by  men  with  arms,  ready  to  execute  it.  On 
which  the  senate  gave  judgment,  that  they  had  suffered 
death  as  justly  as  Hieronymus.  The  crowd  round  the  senate- 
house  being  variously  disposed,  and  unacquainted  with  the 
real  state  of  the  case,  became  clamorous ;  but,  while  they 
were  uttering  furious  threats,  the  sight  of  the  conspirators’ 
bodies  in  the  porch  of  the  senate-house  impressed  them  with 
such  terror,  that  they  silently  followed  the  well -judging  part 
of  the  plebians  to  an  assembly  which  was  summoned.  So- 
pater  was  commissioned  by  the  senate  and  his  colleagues  to 
explain  the  matter  to  the  people. 
XXV.  He  brought  his  charges  against  the  deceased  as  if 
they  were  then  on  trial:  after  taking  a  review  of  their  former 
lives,  he  insisted  that  whatever  wicked  and  impious  acts  had 
been  perpetrated  since  the  death  of  Hiero,  Andranodorus 
and  Themistus  were  the  authors  of  them.  For  what,’’ 
said  he,  did  the  boy  Hieronymus  ever  do  by  the  direction 
of  his  own  will  ?  What,  indeed,  could  he  do  who  had  scarcely 
exceeded  the  years  of  childoood  ?  His  guardians  and  teachers 
exercised  the  sovereign  power,  screened  from  the  public 
hatred  which  fell  on  him;  and  therefore  ought  to  have  died 
either  ))efore  Hieronymus  or  with  him.  Nevertheless,  those 

BOOK  XXIV. 

B.C.  214.] 

2or 

men  who  had  merited  and  been  doomed  to  die,  have,  since 
the  death  of  the  tyrant,  attempted  new  crimes;  at  first  openly, 
when  Andranodorus,  shutting  the  gates  of  the  island,  as¬ 
sumed  the  throne  as  his  by  inheritance,  and  kept  as  proprie¬ 
tor  what  he  had  held  as  trustee:  afterwards,  being  abandoned 
by  those  who  were  in  the  island,  and  blockaded  by  all  the 
rest  of  the  citizens  who  held  the  Achradina,  and  finding  his 
open  and  avowed  attempts  on  the  crown  ineffectual,  he  endea¬ 
voured  to  attain  it  by  secret  machinations  and  treachery:  nor 
could  he  be  induced  to  alter  his  measures  even  by  kindness 
and  the  honour  conferred  on  him;  for  it  should  be  remem¬ 
bered  that  among  the  deliverers  of  their  country,  this  treach¬ 
erous  conspirator  against  its  liberty  was  chosen  a  praetor.  But 
the  spirit  of  royalty  has  been  infused  into  these  men  by  their 
royal  consorts,  Micro’s  daughter  married  to  one,  Gelon’s  to  the 
other.”  At  these  words  a  shout  was  heard  from  eveiy^  part  of 
the  assembly,  that  none  of  the  race  of  the  tyrants  ought  to 
live.”  Such  is  the  nature  of  the  populace;  they  are  either  ab¬ 
ject  slaves  or  tyrannic  masters.  Liberty,  which  consists  in  a 
mean  between  these,  they  either  undervalue,  or  know  not  how 
to  enjoy  with  moderation;  and  in  general,  there  are  not  want¬ 
ing  agents  disposed  to  foment  their  passions,  who,  working 
on  minds  which  delight  in  cruelty,  and  know  no  restraint  in 
the  practice  of  it,  exasperate  them  to  acts  of  blood  and 
slaughter.  Thus,  on  the  present  occasion,  the  prastors  in¬ 
stantly  proposed  the  passing  of  an  order,  and  it  was  hardly 
proposed  before  it  was  passed,  that  all  the  royal  family  should 
be  put  to  death;  whereupon  persons  sent  by  these  magistrates, 
executed  the  sentence  on  Demarata,  daughter  of  Hiero,  and 
Harmonia,  daughter  of  Gelon,  the  wives  of  Andranodorus 
and  Themistus. 
XXVI.  There  w'as  another  daughter  of  Hiero,  called  He- 
raclea,  wife  to  Zoippus;  who  having  been  sent  by  Hieronymus 
ambassador  to  King  Ptolemy,  had  continued  abroad  in  vo- 
luniary  exile.  On  getting  notice  that  the  executioners  were 

208  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.S38. 
coming  to  her  also,  she  fled  for  refuge  into  the  chapel  of  her 
household  gods,  taking  with  her  two  maiden  daughters,  with 
tht  :r  hair  dishevelled,  and  their  appearance  in  every  other 
particular  calculated  to  excite  compassion:  to  this  she  added 
prayers,  beseeching  the  executioners,  by  the  memory  of 
her  father  Hiero,  and  of  her  brother  Gelon,  not  to  suffer  her, 
an  innocent  woman,  to  be  involved  in  ruin  under  the  hatred 
incurred  by  Hieronymus.  To  her  nothing  had  accrued, 
from  his  being  on  the  throne,  but  the  exile  of  her  husband ; 
neither,  during  the  life  of  Hieronymus,  was  her  situation  the 
same  with  that  of  her  sister,  nor  since  his  death  was  her 
cause  the  same.  Must  it  not  be  allowed,  that  if  Atidrano- 
dorus  had  succeeded  in  his  projects,  her  sister  would  have 
reigned  with  him,  whereas  she  must  have  been  in  servitude 
with  the  rest?  If  any  one  should  tell  'Zoippus,  that  Hierony¬ 
mus  was  killed  and  Syracuse  free,  who  could  doubt  but  he 
would  instantly  get  on  board  a  ship  and  return  to  his  country? 
How  deceitful  were  the  hopes  of  men!  Could  he  imagine, 
that  in  his  native  soil,  restored  to  liberty,  his  wife  and  chil¬ 
dren  were  struggling  to  preserve  their  lives;  and  in  what 
respect  did  they  obstruct  the  cause  of  liberty  or  the  laws? 
What  danger  could  arise  from  them,  a  solitary,  and,  in  a 
manner,  widowed  woman,  and  her  poor  orphan  children?  But 
though  no  danger  was  apprehended  from  them,  yet  the  whole 
royal  race  was  detested.  Let  herself  and  children  be  banished 
far  from  Syracuse  and  from  Sicily;  let  them  be  conveyed  to 
Alexandria;  a  wife  to  her  husband,  the  daughters  to  their 
father.^’  Finding  them  still  inexorable,  and  wishing  to  make 
the  best  use  of  the  time,  (for  she  saw  some  even  drawing 
their  swords,)  she  desisted  from  farther  entreaties  for  her-, 
self,  and  continued  to  beseech  them  to  “  spare,  at  least,  her 
daughters,  who  were  children  of  an  age  which  even  enraged 
enemies  refrain  from  injuring;  and  not,  while  they  pursued 
their  revenge  agmnst  tyrants,  to  imitate  themselves  the  crimes 
which  had  raised  their  hatred.’’  While  she  was  speaiflng. 

BOOK  XXIV. 

209 

B.C.  214.] 
they  dragged  her  from  the  sanctuary,  and  slew  her;  and  then 
turned  their  weiipons  against  the  children,  who  were  spriiiled 
with  the  blood  of  their  mother.  But  they,  deprived  of  reason 
b)'  grief  and  fear  together,  rushed  out  of  the  chapel  with  such 
quickness,  that,  had  a  passage  been  open  to  the  public  street, 
they  would  have  filled  the  whole  ciu^  with  tumult:  even  as  it 
was,  though  the  extent  of  the  house  was  not  great,  they  seve¬ 
ral  times  made  their  way  through  the  midst  of  many  armed 
men,  without  receiving  a  wound,  and  extricated  themselves 
from  those  that  took  hold  of  them,  notwithstanding  the  num¬ 
ber  and  strength  of  the  hands  with  w'hich  they  had  to  struggle; 
but  at  length,  being  reduced  to  the  last  weakness  by  wounds, 
after  covering  ever\^  place  with  their  blood,  they  fell  and  ex¬ 
pired.  This  scene,  piteous  in  itself,  was  rendered  yet  more 
so  by  an  incident  that  ensued;  for  shortly  after,  arriv^ed  a 
message,  countermanding  their  execution,  the  sentiments  of 
the  people  having  suddenly  turned  to  the  side  of  compassion: 
and  this  compassion  was  soon  converted  into  anger,  on  ac¬ 
count  of  the  precipitancy  with  which  the  sentence  had  been 
hurried  on,  so  as  to  leave  no  time  for  re-consideration  or  the 
subsiding  of  passion.  The  populace,  therefore,  expressed 
much  discontent,  and  insisted  on  an  assembly  of  election  to 
fill  up  the  places  of  Andranodorus  and  Themistus,  for  both 
had  been  praetors;  and  this  election  was  not  at  all  likely  to 
terminate  in  a  manner  agreeable  to  the  present  pisetors. 
XXV IL  A  day  was  appointed  for  the  election,  when,  to 
the  surprise  of  all,  some  person  in  the  remotest  part  of  the 
crowd  named  Epicydes;  then  another,  in  the  same  quarter, 
Hippocrates;  which  names  w^ere  afterw’^ards  the  most  fre¬ 
quently  repeated,  with  the  manifest  approbation^f  the  multi¬ 
tude.  The  assembly  itself  was  an  irregular  one;  for,  not  the 
commons  alone,  but  also  great  numberb  of  the  soldiery,  and 
even  of  deserters,  who  wished  to  overturn  every  present 
establishment,  composed  the  disorderly  crowd.  The  magis¬ 
trates,  at  first,  pretended  ignorance  of  what  was  going  for- 
vor.  III. — D  d 

210 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  538. 

ward,  thinking  to  protract  the  business;  but,  at  last,  overcome 
by  the  united  voice  of  so  very  many,  and  dreading  an  insur¬ 
rection,  they  declared  those  men  praetors:  who,  however,  did 
not  immediately  unveil  their  sentiments,  though  greatly 
chagrined,— first,  at  ambassadors  having  gone  to  Appius 
Claudius  to  conclude  a  truce  of  ten  days,  and  then,  when 
that  was  obtained,  on  others  being  sent  to  negociate  a  re¬ 
newal  of  the  old  alliance.  At  this  time  the  Romans  had  a 
fleet  of  an  hundred  sail  at  Murgantia,  watching  what  might 
be  the  result  of  the  commotions  of  Syracuse,  in  consequence 
of  the  deaths  of  the  tyrants,*  and  to  what  points  the  view  ol 
the  people  might  be  directed  by  the  late  acquisition  of  liberty, 
to  which  they  had  so  long  been  strangers.  Meanwhile,  the 
Syracusan  ambassadors  had  been  sent  by  Appius  to  Mar¬ 
cellas  on  his  arriving  in  Sicily;  who,  when  he  heard  the 
terms  on  which  they  proposed  the  alliance,  conceiving  ex¬ 
pectations  that  the  business  might  be  adjusted  to  mutual 
satisfaction,  sent  ambassadors  on  his  part  to  Syracuse,  to 
treat  with  the  proetors  in  person.  Here  was  no  longer  the 
same  quiet  and  tranquillity:  on  news  being  received  that  a 
Carthaginian  fleet  had  arrived  at  Pachynum,  Hippocrates  and 
Epicydes,  freed  from  apprehension,  now  began,  sometimes 
among  the  mercenary'  soldiers,  at  others  among  the  deserters, 
to  spread  insinuations,  that  there  was  a  design  of  betraying 
Syracuse  to  the  Romans.  And  when  Appius  came  and  kept 
his  fleet  stationed  at  the  mouth  of  the  harbour,  with  intention 
to  raise  the  spirits  of  the  other  party,  this  gave  the  utmost 
appearance  of  credibility  to  their  ill-grounded  suggestions, 
insomuch  that  the  populace  at  the  first  ran  dowm  in  a  tu¬ 
rn  iiUuous  manner,  to  oppose  the  landing  of  his  men,  if  such 
an  attempt  l^ould  be  made. 
XXVIII.  In  this  troubled  state  of  affairs,  it  was  judged 
necessary  to  call  a  general  assembly.  Here,  while  opposite 
parties  drew  contrary  ways,  and  a  civil  war  was  on  the  point 
of  breaking  out,  one  of  the  leading  nobles,  named  Apolloni- 

BOOK  XXIV. 

211 

B.C.  214.] 
des,  addressed  them  in  a  discourse  of  veVy  salutary  tendency 
at  such  a  juncture;  telling  them  that  no  state  ever  had  a 
nearer  prospect  either  of  safety  or  of  ruin.  If  all  would 
unanimously  incline  either  on  the  side  of  the  -Romans,  or  to 
that  of  the  Carthaginians,  their  prosperity  and  happiness 
.would  equal  that  of  any  other  nation  whatever.  If  separate 
parties  laboured  to  counteract  each  other,  the  war  between 
the  Carthaginians  and  the  Romans  was  not  more  furious, 
than  would  be  that  which  must  follow  between  the  Syracu¬ 
sans  themselves,  when  each  party  should  have  its  own  troops, 
its  owii  arms,  its  own  leaders  within  the  same  walls.  The 
most  effectual  endeavours  ought  to  be  used  to  bring  all  to 
unanimity  in  opinion.  Which  of  the  alliances  might  be  the 
more  profitable,  was  a  question  of  a  very  inferior  nature,  and 
of  much  less  moment.  Nevertheless,  on  the  choice  of  allies, 
they  ought  rather  to  follow  the  judgment  of  Hiero  than  that 
of  Hieronymus,  and  give  the  preference  to  a  friendship,  of 
which  they  had  an  happy  experience  for  fiftt"  years,  before 
one  which  would  be  at  the  present  new  to  them,  and  was 
formerly  found  deceitful.  Another  consideration  ought  to  be 
allowed  some  weight  in  their  rdsolves;  that  it  was  in  their 
power  to  decline  a  treaty  of  friendship  with  the  Carthagi¬ 
nians;  and  yet  not  to  enter,  imnuediately  at  least,  into  a  war 
with  them;  whereas  with  the  Romans,  they  must  instantly 
have  either  peace  or  war,’’  The  less  of  party  spirit  and 
warmth  this  speech  contained,  the  greater  was  its  influence 
on  the  hearers.  To  the  prsetors,  and  a  select  number  of  sena¬ 
tors,  a  military  council  was  joined,  and  even  the  commanders 
of  companies,  and  the  prsefects  of  the  allies,  were  ordered  to 
share  in  their  consultations.  After  the  affair  had  been  fre¬ 
quently  debated  with  great  heat,  they  at  last  resolved,  be¬ 
cause  they  could  discover  no  plan  on  which  war  could  be 
maintained  against  the  Romans,  that  a  treaty  of  peace  should 
he  formed  with  them,  and  that  ambassadors  should  be  sent 
with  those  of  that  nation,  then  in  Syracuse,  to  ratify  it. 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  538. 

^J12 
XXIX.  Not  manT  da  vs  had  passed,  when  deputies  from 
the  Leontines  arrived,  requesting  aid  for  the  defence  of  their- 
country;  and  this  application  was  considered  as  coming  most 
seasonably  for  ridding  the  city  of  a  disorderly  turbulent 
rabble,  and  removing  their  leaders  out  of  the  way*  The 
praetor,  Hippocrates,  was  ordered  to  conduct  the  deserters 
thither;  and  these  were  accompanied  by  great  numbers  of 
mercenary  auxiliaries,  so  ,that  the  whole  amounted  to  four 
thousand  soldiers.  This  expedition  was  highly  pleasing,  both 
to  the  persons  employed,  and  to  their  employers;  the  former 
gair^ing,  what  they  had  long  wished  lor,  an  opportunity  for 
disturbing  the  government;  the  latter  rejoicing  at  such  a 
nuisance  being  removed;  the  sink,  as  it  were,  of  the  city. 
However,  this  proved  .only  like  giving  a  sick  person  present 
ease,  that  he  might  relapse  with  an  aggravation  of  his  dis¬ 
order.  For  Hippocrates  began  at  first,  by  secret  excursions, 
to  ravage  the  nearest  parts  of  the  Roman  province^  but  af¬ 
terwards,  when  Appius  had  sent  a  body  of  troops  to  protect 
the  territories  of  the  allies,  he  attacked,  with  his  entire  force, 
a  detachment  posted  in  his  way,  and  killed  a  great  number. 
"W  hen  Marcellus  was  informed  of  these  transactions,  he  in¬ 
stantly  despatched  ambassadors  to  Syracuse,  to  complain 
of  this  infraction  of  the  treaty,  and  to  represent,  that  occa¬ 
sions  of  quarrel  would  never  be  wanting,  unless  Hippocrates 
and  Epicydes  were  banished,  not  only  from  Syracuse,  but 
far  from  every  part  of  Sicily.  *  Epicydes  not  choosing,  by  re¬ 
maining  where  he  was,  either  to  face  the  charge  of  being  a 
confederate  in  his  absent  brother’s  crime,  or  to  omit  contri¬ 
buting  his  shan:  towards  effecting  a  rupture,  went  off  to  his 
seceding  countn  iiu  n  at  Leontini,  where,  finding  the  inhabi¬ 
tants  filled  with  a  sufficient  degree  of  animosity  against  the 
Roman  people,  he  undertook  to  detach  them  from  the  Syra¬ 
cusans  also.  For  the  latter,”  he  said,  had  stipulated  in 
ihcir  treaty  with  Rome,  that  every  state  which  had  been  sub¬ 
ject  to  their  kings,  should  for  the  future  be  subject  to  them; 

B.C.  214.] 

BOOK  XXIV. 

213 

and  they  were  not  now  content  with  liberty,  unless  tliey  pos¬ 
sessed  along  with  it  regal  and  arbitrary  power  over  other  na¬ 
tions.  The. proper  answer,  therefore,  to  be  given  to  any  re¬ 
quisition  from  them  was,  that  the  Leontines  deemed  them¬ 
selves  entitled  to  freedom  no  less  than  themselves,  if  it  were 
onl}^  because  their  city  was  the  spot  where  the  tyrant  fell; 
that  there  liberty  was  first  proclaimed,  where  the  troops  had 
abandoned  the  king’s  generals,  and  flocked  to  Syracuse. 
Wherefore  that  article  must  be  expunged  from  the  treaty,  or 
a  treaty  containing  such  an  article  should  not  be  admitted,” 
I'he  multitude  were  easily  persuaded;  and  when  ambassa¬ 
dors  from  Syracuse  complained  of  their  cutting  oflf  the  Ro¬ 
man  detachment,  and  delivered  an  order,  that  Hippocrates 
and  Epicydes  should  depart  either  to  Locri,  or  to  any  other 
place  which  they  chose,  provided  they  retired  out  of  Sicily, 
the  Leontines  roughly  answered,  that  they  had  not  commis¬ 
sioned  the  Syracusans  to  make  a  treaty  of  peace  with  the 
Romans  for  them,  neither  were  they  bound  by  other  people’s 
treaties, ”  This  answer  the.  Syracusans  laid  before  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  declaring  that  the.  Leontines  were  not  under  their 
direction;  that,  therefore,  the  Romans  might  make  war  on 
that  people  without  any  violation  of  the  treaty  w  ith  Syracuse, 
and  that  they  would  not  fail  to  give  their  assistance  in  it,  on 
condition  that  the  others,  when  reduced  to  submission, 
should  be  again  subjected  to  their  government.” 
XXX.  IMarceilus  marched  against  Leontini  with  his  whole 
foixe,  sending  also  for  Appius,  that  he  might  attack  it  on 
another  quarter;  and  so  great  was  the  ardour  of  the  soldiers 
on  that  occasion,  inspired  by  their  resentment  for  the  detach¬ 
ment  being  cut  off*  while  a  treaty  of  peace  was  depending, 
that  at  the.  first  sssault,  they  carried  the  town.  Hippocrates 
and  Epicydes,  when  they  saw  the  enemy  in  possession  of  the 
walls,  and  breaking  open  the  gates,  retired,  with  a  few  others, 
into  the  citadel,  from  whence  they  made  theii  escape  secretly, 
during  the  night,  to  Ilerbessus.  The  S\raciisans  havinr 

214 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

jT.R.538. 

inarched  from  home  in  a  'body,  eight  thousand  in  number, 
were  met  at  the  river  Myla  by*  a  messenger,  who  acquainted 
them,  that  Leontini  was  taken,  and  who  mixed  several  false¬ 
hoods  with  the  truth,  saying,  that  both  soldiers  and  towns¬ 
men  had  been  put  to  the  sword  without  distinction;  nor  did 
he  believe  that  any  one  above  the  age  of  childhood,  was  left 
alive;  that  the  city  was  sacked,  and  the  effects  of  the  wealthy 
bestowed  on  the  soldiers.  On  hearing  such  a  shocking  ac¬ 
count,  the  army  halted;  and,  every  one  being  highly  exas¬ 
perated,  the  commanders,  who  were  Sosis  and  Dinomenes, 
entered  into  consultation  how  they  should  act/  The  false  re¬ 
port  had  received  a  colour  of  truth  sufficient  to  justify  ap¬ 
prehension,  from  the  circumstance  of  a  number  of  deserters, 
amounting  to  two  thousand,  having  been  beaten  with  rods 
and  beheaded.  But  not  one  of  the  Leon  tines,  or  the  other 
soldiers,  had  been  hurt  after  the  capture  of  the  city  was  com¬ 
pleted;  and  every  kind  of  property  had  been  restored  to  the 
ownei^,  except  what  w^as  destroyed  in  the  first  confusion  of 
the  assault.  The  troops,  who  complained  grievously  of  their 
fellow-soldiers  being  treacherously  put  to  death,  could  not 
be  prevailed  on,  either  to  proceed  to  Leontini,  or  to  wait  in 
their  present  post*for  more  certain  intelligence.  On  which  the 
praetors,  perceiving  that  they  were  inclined  to  mutiny,  but  that 
this  ferment  would  not  be  of  long  duration  if  their  ringleaders 
in  this  foolish  conduct  were  removed,  led  the  army  to  Me- 
gara,  whence  they  themselves,  with  a  small  body  of  horse, 
proceeded  to  Herbes&iis,  with  hopes  that,  in  consequence  of 
the  general  consternation,  the  city  might  be  surrendered  into 
their  hands:  but,  being  disappointed  in  their  expectations, 
they  ne^tt  day  decamped  from  Megara,  in  order  to  Jay  siege 
to  it  with  xht  whole  of  their  force.  Hippocrates  and  Epicydes 
now  adopted  a  plan,  which,  though  at  first  sight  not  free 
from  danger,  yet,  every  hope  being  cut  off,  was  the  only  one 
which  they  could  pursue;  this  was  to  put  themselves  into 
the  hands  of  the  soldiery,  of  whom  a  great  part  were  well  ac- 

BOOK  XXIV. 

215 

B.C.214.] 
quainted  with  them^  and  all  were  incensed  on  account  of  the 
supposed  slaughter  of  their  fellow-soldiers;  and  they  accord¬ 
ingly  went  out  to  meet  the  army  on  its  approach.  It  happen¬ 
ed  that  the  corps  which  led  the  van  was  a  battalion  of  six 
hundred  Cretans,  who  in  the  reign  of  Hieronymus,  had  served 
under  their  command,  and  were  also  under  an  obligation  to 
Hannibal,  having  been  taken  prisoners  at  the  Trasimenus, 
with  other  auxiliaries  to  the  Romans,  and  dismissed.  Hip¬ 
pocrates  and  Epycides  knowing  them  by  their  standards,  and 
the  fashion  of  their  armour,  advanced  to  them,,  holding  out 
olive  branches  and  other  emblems  of  suppliants,  and  besought 
them  to  receive  them  into  their  ranks,  to  protect  them  there, 
and  not  to  betray  them  into  the  hands  of  the  Syracusans,  by 
whom  they  themselves  would  soon  be  delivered  up  to  the 
Romans,  to  be  murdered.  The  Cretans  immediately,  with 
one  voice,  bade  them  keep  up  their  courage,  for  they  should 
shane  every  fortune  with  them. 
XXXL  During  this  conversation  the  standards  had  halted, 
nor  had  the  cause  of  the  delay  yet  reached  the  general.  But 
soon  a  rumour  spread,  that  it  was'  occasioned  by  Hippocrates 
and  Epicydes,  and  a  murmur  ran  along  the  whole  line,  evi¬ 
dently  demonstrating  that  the  troops  were  pleased  at  their 
coming.  On  this,  the  prsetors  instantly  rode  forward,  at  full 
speed,  to  the  van,  asking,  What  sort  of  behaviour  was 
this?  What  did  the  Cretans  mean  by  such  disorderly  con¬ 
duct,  maintaining  conversation  with  an  enemy,  and  allowing 
them  to  mix  in  their  ranks?”  They  then  ordered  Hippocrates 
to  be  seized,*  and  put  in  chains.  On  which  words  such  a  cla¬ 
mour  ensued,  begun  by  the  Cretans,  and  continued  by  the 
rest,  as  clearly  showed  that  if  they  proceeded  farther  in  the 
matter,  they  would  have  cause  to  be  apprehensive  for  their 
own  safety.  Alarmed  and  perplexed  by  their  situation,  the\ 
ordered  the  army  to  march  back  to  Megara,  and  sent  ex- 
prei&ses  to  Syracuse,  with  accounts  of  their  present  state. 
While  the  men  were  disposed  to  entertain  every  kind  of  sus- 

216 

HISTORY  OR  ROME. 

[Y.R.  53^, 

picion^  Hippocrates,  to  increase  their  apprehensions,  em¬ 
ployed  an  artifice:  having  sent  out  some  of  the  Cretans  to 
watch  the  roads,  he  aftei-wards  read  publicly  a  letter  com¬ 
posed  by  himself,  but  which  he  pretended  had  been  inter¬ 
cepted*  The  address  was,  The  praetors  of  Stn-acuse  to  the 
consul  Marcellus.”  After  the  usual  salutations,  it  mentioned, 
that  he  had  acted  rightly  and  properly  in  not  sparing  any 
in  Leontini.  That  all  the  mercenary  soldiers  were  to  be  con¬ 
sidered  in  the  same  light,  and  never  would  Syracuse  enjoy 
tranquillity  as  long  as  one  of  the  foreign  auxiliaries  remain¬ 
ed,  either  in  the  city,  or  in  their  army:”  they  therefore  re¬ 
quested  him  to  use  his  endeavours  to  reduce  under  his  power 
those  who  were  encamped  with  their  praetors  at  Megara, 
and,  by  putting  them  to  death,  effectuate,  at  length,  the  de¬ 
livery  of  S}Tacuse.”  As  soon  as  this  was  read  to  the  soldiers, 
they  ran  on  all  sides  to  arms  with  such  clamours,  that  the 
praetors,  in  a  fright,  rode  away,  during  the  confusion,  to  Sy¬ 
racuse.  But  even  their  flight  did  not  serv,e  to  quell  the  mu¬ 
tiny,  and  several  attacks  were  made  on  the  Syracusan  troops: 
nor  would  one  of  them  have  found 'mercy,  had  not  Epievdes 
and  Hippocrates  opposed  the  rage  of  the  multitude,  not 
through  compassion,  or  any  humane  intention,  but  through 
fear  of  forfeiting  all  hope  of  ever  returning  to  the  city;  and 
from  this  further  consideration,  that,  while  they  should  find 
these  men  themselves  both  faithful  soldiers  and  hostages, 
they  would,  at  the  same  time,  engage  also  the  favour  of  their 
relations  and  friends;  in  the  first  place,  by  so  great  an  obli¬ 
gation  conferred,  and  then,  by  having  such  a  pledge  in  their 
hands.  As  they  knew,  too,  from  experience,  how  slight  and 
insignificant  an  impulse  is  sufficient  to  set  the  populace  in 
motion,  they  procured  a  soldier,  who  had  been  one  of  the 
number  besieged  in  Leontini,  and  suborned  him  to  carry  to 
Syracuse,  a  stor)"  corresponding  with  the  feigned  tale  told  at 
Myla;  and,  by  avowing  himself  the  author,  and  asserting  as 
facts,  of  which  he  had  been  an  eye-witness,  those  particulars. 

B.C.214.]  book  XXIV.  217 
of  which  doubts  were  harboured,  to  irritate  the  passious  of 
the  people. 
XXXII.  This  not  only  gained  credit  with  the  popu¬ 
lace,  but,  being  brought  before  the  senate,  had  address  enough 
to  influence  even  their  judgment;  and  several,  not  apt  to  be 
over  credulous,  openly  deserved,  that  “  it  was  happy  that  the 
avarice  an.d  cruelty  of  the  Romans  had  been  unmasked  at 
Leontini.  Had  they  come  into  Syracuse,  their  behaviour 
would  have  been  tlie  same,  or  probably  more  barbarous,  as 
the  incitements  to  avarice  were  greater  there.”  Wherefore 
all  agreed  in  opinion,  that  the  gates  ought  to  be  shot,  and 
guards  posted  for  the  defence  of  the  cit\".  But  they  did  not 
so  generally  agree  in  the  object  either  of  their  fears  or  their 
aversions.  Among  the  military  of  all  descriptions,  and  a 
great  part  of  the  plebeians,  their  hatred  fell  on  the  Roman 
nation;  while  the  prators,  and  a  few  of  the  nobility,  notwidi- 
standing  diat  their  judgment  had  been  infected  by  the  false 
intelligence,  yet  took  more  pains  to  guard  against  a  nearer 
and  more  immediate  danger:  for  Hippocrates  and  Epicydes 
were  already  at  the  Hexapylum;  and  the  relations  of  the  na¬ 
tive  soldiers  then  in  the  army,  were  using  many  arguments 
to  persuade  the  people  to  open  the  gates,  and  to  let  their 
common  country  be  defended  against  the  Romans.  And  now 
©ne  of  the  gates  of  the  Hexapylum  had  been  opened,  and  the 
troops  had  begun  to  march  in,  when  the  praetors  arrived  at  thd 
spot;  they  endeavoured,  at  first  by  commands  and  menaces, 
then  by  counsel  and  advice,  to  deter  the  inhabitants  from  their 
puipose;  and,  at  last,  finding  all  these  ineffectual,  they  de¬ 
scended  from  their  dignity,  and  had  recourse  to  entreaties, 
beseeching  them  not  to  betray  their  country  to  men  who 
were  lately  instruments  of  a  tyrant,  and  who  now  imprisoned 
the  soldiers  minds.  But,  in  the  heat  of  the  present  ferment, 
the  ears  of  the  multitude  were  deaf  to  all  such  arguments, 
and  efforts  were  made  to  break  open  the  gates  on  the  inside, 
no  less  violent  than  those  from  without.  They  were  all  soon 
VOL,  III,— E  e 

218 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  538 
forced,  and  the  whole  army  received  into  the  Hcxapylum. 
The  praetors,  with  the  youth  of  the  city,  fled  for  safety  into 
the  Achradina.  The  mercenaries,  deserters,  and  aU  the  sol¬ 
diers  of  the  late  King,  then  in  Syracuse,  augmented  the  force 
of  die  enemy*  In  consequence,  the  Achradina  was  taken  at 
the  first  assault,  and  the  prsstors,  except  such  as  could  make 
their  escape  in  the  confusion,  were  all  put  to  dea^.  Night 
put  an  end  to  the  shedding  of  blood.  Next  day  the  slaves 
were  invited  to  freedom;  all  the  prisoners  were  discharged 
from  confinement,  and  the  motley  rabble,  composed  of  all 
diese  different  sorts,  elected  Hippocrates  and  Epicydes  prae¬ 
tors:  thus  Syracuse,  after  a  short  enjoyment  of  the  sunshine 
of  liberty,  sunk  back  into  its  former  state  of  servitude. 
XXXI II.  As  soon  as  the  Romans  were  informed  of  these 
events,  they  immediately  decamped  from  Leontini,  and 
marched  to  Syracuse.  At  the  same  time  it  happened  that 
ambassadors,  sent  by  Appius,  and  who  were  approaching  the 
place  in  a  t|uinquereme,  with  difficulty  escaped  being  taken: 
which,  however,  was  the  fate  of  a  quadrireme,  ordered  to 
advance  some  distance  before  their  galley,  on  its  entering  the 
harbour.  And  now  not  only  the  laws  of  peace,  but  even  those 
of  war,  had  been  all  thrown  aside,  when  the  Roman  army 
pitched  their  camp  at  Olympium,  a  temple  of  Jupiter  so 
call^  distant  a  mile  and  a  half  from  the  city.  From  hence 
:^so  it  was  judged  proper  to  send  ambassadors,  who  were 
prevented  entering  the  city  by  Hippocrates  and  Epicydes, 
with  their  adherents,  coming  out  from  the  gate  to  meet  them. 
The  Roman,  whose  part  it  was  to  speak,  said,  that  the  Ro¬ 
mans  came  not  with  the  intention  of  making  war  on  the 
Syracusans,  but  of  giving  succour  and  support  both  to  such 
as,  after  extricating  diemselves^Crom  the  midst  of  carnage, 
fled  to  diem  for  refuge;  and  also  to  those,  who,  overpowered 
by  fear,  endured  a  bondage  more  shocking,  not  only  than 
eidle,  hut  even  dian  death.  Nor  would  the  Romans  suffer 
such  an  abominable  massacre  of  their  allies  to  pass  unpunish- 

BOOK  XXIV. 

219 

B.C.  214.] 
ed.  Wherefore  if  those,  who  had  taken  refuge  with  them, 
were  allowed  to  return  to  dieir  country  with  safety,  and  the 
authors  of  Ae  massacre  were  delivered  up,  and  liberty  and 
their  laws  restored  to  the  Syracusans,  there  would  be  no  oc¬ 
casion  for  quarrel.  If  these  requisitions  were  not  complied 
with,  whoever  was  the  cause  of  the  refusal  should  undergo 
the  severest  vengeance  which  their  arms  could  inflict.”  To 
this  Epicydes  replied,  that  if  they  had  been  charged  with 
any  message  to  him,  and  his  friends,  they  would  have  re¬ 
turned  an  answer.  That  when  the  government  of  Syracuse 
should  be  in  the  hands  of  those  to  whom  they  came,  they 
might  then  return  to  Sicily.  If  they  began  hostilities,  they 
should  learn,  on  trial,  that  the  siege  of  Syracuse  was  a  very 
different  kind  of*busincss  from  that  of  Leontini.”  So  saying, 
he  turned  his  back  on  the  ambassadors,  and  shut  the  gates. 
The  Romans  then,  immediately,  began  to  form  the  siege  of 
Syracuse,  both  by  land  and  sea;  by  land,  on  the  side  of  the 
Heaapylum;  by  sea,  on  that  of  the  Achradina,  the  wall  of 
which  is  washed  by  its  waves.  Having  mastered  Leontini  by 
the  terror  which  their  assault  inspired,  and  that  at  the  first 
attack,  they  doubted  not  but  they  should  be  able,  in  some 
quarter  or  other,  to  make  their  way  into  a  city  of  such  wide 
extent,  and  whose  defended  parts  lay  at  such  a  distance  from 
each  other;  they  pushed  forward  therefore  to  the  walls  every 
kind  of  machine  used  in  sieges. 
XXXIV.  This  enterprize,  from  the  spirit  and  vigour  with 
which  it  was  undertaken,  must  have  met  the  expected  success, 
had  it  not  been  for  one  single  person  then  in  Syracuse:  this 
was  Anhimedes,  a  man  singularly  skilled  in  the  science  of 
astronomy,  and  a  great  geometrician,  eminently  distinguished 
in  the  invention  and  construction  of  warlike  engines,  by 
means  of  which,  with  very  slight  exertions,  he  baflled  the 
efforts  of  the  enemy,  made  with  immense  laboxir.  The  wall, 
which,  being  drawn  along  imequal  eminences,  was  in  some 
paru  high  and  difficult  of  access,  in  others  low  and  liable  to 

220 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  538. 

be  approached  through  the  level  vales,  he  furnished  with 
machines  of  all  kinds,  adapted  to  the  nature  of  each  parti¬ 
cular  place.  That  of  the  Achradina,  which,  as  before  observ¬ 
ed,  is  washed  by  the  sea,  Marcellas  attacked  from  his  largest 
ships;  while  from  the  small  vessels,  the  archers,  slingers,  and 
light-infantry,  (whose  weapon  is  of  such  a  kind  that  it  cannot 
well  be  thrown  back,  except  by  experienced  hands,)  wounded 
almost  every  one  defending  the  works.  These,  requiring  room 
for  the  discharge  of  their  missiles,  kept  at  a  distance:  but  the 
other  and  larger  ships,  eight  in  number,  were  fastened  toge¬ 
ther  in  pairs,  by  the  removal  of  one  tier  of  oars;  while  those 
on  the  exterior  sides  moved  them  both  as  if  a  single  ship. 
These  carried  turrets  of  several  stories  in  height,  with  in¬ 
struments  for  demolishing  the  rampart.  A^gainst  this  naval 
armament,  Archimedes  disposed,  on  the  walls,  engines  of 
various  sizes.  On  the  ships,  which  lay  at  a  distance,  he  dis¬ 
charged  rocks  of  immense  weight;  and  those  which  lay  near¬ 
er,  lightaer  and  therefore  more  numerous  annoyances.  And 
lastly,  he  opened  in  the  wall  from  top  to  bottom  a  great  num¬ 
ber  of  spike-holes,,  a  cuUt  in  diameter,  through  which  with¬ 
out  being  seen,  or  in  danger  of  being  hurt,  they  poured 
arrows  and  darts  from  scorpions.  |  Some  ships  having  come 
up  closer,  in  order  that  the  weapons  from  the  engines  might 
fly  over  them,  he  used  an  engine  called  Tolleno,  composed 
of  a  long  lever  supported  at  the  middle,  and  fixed  in  such  a 
manner  that  one  arm  of  it  projected  beyond  the  wall;  from 
the  extremity  of  this  hung,  by  a  strong  chain,  an  iron  grapple, 
which,  taking  hold  of  the  fore  part  of  the  ship,  while  the 
other  extremity  of  the  lever  was  weighed  down  to  the  ground 
by  a  heavy  courtter poise  of  lead,  lifted  up  the  prow  and  set 
the  vessel  on  its  stem;  the  grappel  then  was  suddenly  dis¬ 
engaged,  and  the  ship  was,  to  the  utter  consternation  of  the 
seamen,  dashed  into  the  water  with  such  force,  that  even  if 
it  had  fallen  in  an  erect  position,  it  would  have  taken  in  a 
great  deal  of  water.  By  these  means  the  assailants  were 

BOOK  XXIV. 

221 

B.C.  214.] 
foiled  in  every  attempt  by  sea;  abandoning  therefore  that  part 
of  the  plan,  they  bent  all  their  efforts  to  the  pushing  forward 
the  operations  by  land,  and  with  their  whole  force.  But  on 
this  side,  too,  the  place  was  furnished  with  a  similar  train  of 
engines  of  every  description,  procured  in  a  course  of  many 
years  by  the  direction  and  at  the  expense  of  Hiero,  and 
through  the  singular  skill  of  Archimedes,  The  nature  of  the 
ground  also  was  favourable  to  the  defendants,  because  the 
rock  on  which  the  foundations  of  the  wall  were  laid,  is  in 
most  places  so  steep,  diat  not  only  bodies  thrown  from  an 
engine,  but  such  as  rolled  down  by  their  own  weight,  fell 
with  great  power  on  the  enemy:  the  same  cause*  rendered  the 
ascent  difficult  to  be  clin^Jbed,  and  the  footing  unsteady ► 
Wherefore  a  council  being  held,  it  was  resolved,  since  every 
attempt  ended  in  disappointment  and  disgrace,  to  desist  from 
farther  attacks,  and  only  to  blockade  the  place  so  closely  as 
to  cut  off  all  supplies  of  provisions,  either  by.land  or  sea. 
XXXV.  Meanwhile,  Marcellus  marched,  with  about  a  third 
part  of  the  forces,  to  recover  those  cities  which,  during  the 
general  disturbances,  had  revolted  to  the  Carthaginians. 
Helorus  and  Herbessus  he  received  by  voluntary  surrender. 
Having  taken  Megara  by  storm,  he  sacked  and  demolished 
it,  in  order  to  strike  terror  into  others,  particularly  the  Syra¬ 
cusans.  About  the  same  time  Himilco,  who  had  for  a  long 
time  kept  his  fleet  at  the  promontory  of  Pachjmum,  landed 
at  Heraclea,  which  is  also  called  Minoa,  twenty-five  thou¬ 
sand  infantry,  three  thousand  horses,  and  twelve  elephants; 
a  much  greater  force  than  he  had  before  on  board  his  ships 
at  Pachynum.  When  Syracuse  was  seized  by  Hippocrates, 
he  had  gone  to  Carthage,  and  there,  being  encouraged  by  am^ 
bassadors  from  him  as  chief,  and  by  letters  from  Hannibal, 
who  affirmed  that  the  time  was  now  come  for  recovering 
possession  of  Sicily  with  the  highest  honour;  and  as  his  own 
advice  given  on  the  spot  had  no  small  degree  of  influence, 
he  easily  procured  an  order,  that  the  greatest  force  possible 

222 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.H. 
©f  infantry  and  cavalry  should  be  transported  into  that  island 
Immediately  on  his  arrival  he  reduced  Heraclea,  and  within 
a  few  days  after,  Agrigentum;  raising  at  the  same  time  in  all 
the  other  states,  who  sided  with  the  Carthaginians,  such 
warm  hopes  of  expelling  the  Romans  from  Sicily,  that  at  last 
even  the  Syracusans,  besieged  as  they  were,  assumed  new 
courage.  Judging  that  a  part  of  their  forces  would  be  suffi- 
cient  for  defence  alone,  they  divided  the  business  in  such  a 
manner,  that  Epicydes  should  command  the  troops  so  ap¬ 
pointed  for  guarding  the  city,  and  Hippocrates,  in  conjunction 
with  Himilco,  conduct  the  war  against  the  Roman  consul. 
The  latter  accordingly,  with  ten  thousand  foot  and  five  hun¬ 
dred  horse,  having  passed  by  night  through  some  Intervals 
between  the  Roman  posts,  began  to  pitch  his  camp  near  the 
city  Acrillae:  while  they  were  raising  their  fortifications, 
Marceilus  came  upon  them,  for  he  was  now  returning  from 
Agrigentum,  to  which  place  he  had  in  vain  hastened  by 
quick  marches,  in  hope  of  reaching  it  before  the  enemy,  but 
he  found  it  already  in  their  possession,  and  expected  nothing 
less  at  that  time  than  to  meet  a  SjTacusan  army  in  his  way. 
However,  through  fear  of  Himilco  and  the  Carthaginians,  for 
whom  he  was  by  no  means  a  match  with  the  force  which  he 
then  had,  he  was  marching  with  all  possible  caution,  and 
with  his  troops  prepared  for  ever)^  occurrence. 
XXXVL  This  precaution  adopted  against  the  Carthagini¬ 
ans,  happened  to  prove  useful  in  respect  of  the  Syracusans  ^ 
Finding  them  scattered,  separately  employed  in  forming  their 
camp,  and  mostly  unarmed,  he  surrounded  and  cut  off  the 
whole  of  their  infantry;  the  cavalry",  after  a  slight  opposition, 
fied  wnth  Hippocrates  to  Acrae*  This  stroke  having  effectu¬ 
ally  checked  the  designs  of  those  states,  which  were  disposed 
to  revolt  from  the  Romans,  Marceilus  returned  to  Syracuse; 
and,  after  a  few  days,  Himilco,  being  joined  by  Hippocrates, 
c  ame  and  encamped  at  the  river  Anapus,  about  eight  miles 
distant.  About  the  same  time  fiftv-five  Carthaginian  ships  of 

BOOK  XXIV. 

223 

B.C.214.] 
battle,  commanded  by  Bomilcar,  as  admiral,  put  into  the 
great  harbour  at  Syracuse,  and  a  Roman  fleet  of  thirty  quin- 
queremes  landed  the  first  legion  at  Panormus;  it  seemed,  in¬ 
deed,  as  if  the  theatre  of  war  was  removed  hither  from  Italy, 
so  intent  were  both  nations  on  the  affairs  of  Sicily.  Himilco 
expected  that  the  Roman  legion,  landed  at  Panormus,  would 
fall  a  prey  to  him  on  its  way  to  Syracuse;  but  he  missed  it 
by  taking  the  road  which  led  through  the  inland  parts  of  the 
country,  while  the  legion,  keeping  close  to  the  sea-coast,  and 
being  attended  by  the  fleet,  effected  a  junction  with  Appius 
Claudius,  who,  with  a  part  of  his  forces,  came  as  far  as  Pa- 
chynum  to  meet  it.  Nor  did  the  Carthaginians  delay  longer 
at  Syracuse.  On  the  one  hand,  Bomilcar  was  diffident  of  his 
own  strength  at  sea,  as  the  Romans  had  a  fleet,  of  at  least 
double  his  number;  and,  at  the  same  dme,  as  he  perceived 
that  the  only  effect  of  his  forces  remaining  there,  where  they 
could  do  no  service,  would  be,  the  aggravating  the  distress 
of  his  allies  in  the  article  of  provisions,  he  sailed  out  into 
the  main,  and  passed  over  to  Africa.  On  the  other  hand, 
Himilco  had  in  vain  followed  Marcellus  to  Syracuse,  in 
hopes  of  finding  an  opportunity  of  engaging  him  before  he 
should  join  the  larger  division  of  his  army;  but  being  dis¬ 
appointed  in  this,  and  seeing  likewise  that  the  enemy's  post 
at  Syracuse  was  secured  from  every  attempt,  both  by  the 
fortifications  and  the  number  of  their  forces,  he  did  not 
choose  to  waste  time  to  no  purpose  in  sitting  there  as  a  spec¬ 
tator  of  the  siege  carried  on  against  his  allies,  and  therefore 
decamped  and  marched  away  his  army,  with  intention  to 
carry  it  wherever  a  prospect  of  a  revolt  from  the  Romans 
should  invite  him,  that  he  might  invigorate  by  his  presence 
the  resolution  of  those  who  favoured  his  interest.  And  first, 
through  the  treachery  of  the  inhabitants,  who  betrayed  the 
Roman  garrison,  he  got  possession  of  Murgantia,  where  the 
Romans  had  large  magazines  of  corn  and  every  kind  of 
provisions. 

224 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.538. 

XXXVII#  By  this  revolt^  other  states  were  encouraged  to 
imitate  the  example;  and  the  Roman  garrisons  were  either 
driven  out  of  the  fortresses,  or  betrayed  and  overpowered. 
Enna,  standing  on  a  lofty  eminence,  which  was  steep  and 
craggy  on  every  side,  was  not  only  impregnable  by  reason  of 
its  situation,  but  had  moreover  a  strong  force  in  its  citadel^ 
with  a  governor  who  could  not  be  easily  overreached  by 
treacheiy^  This  was  Lucius  Pinarius,  a  man  of  spirit  and  ac¬ 
tivity,  who  relied  more  on  his  own  precaution,  to  render 
every  scheme  of  perfidy  impracticable,  than  on  the  fidelity  of 
the  Sicilians;  and  his  solicitude  to  be  prepared  for  every 
emergency  was  now  increased  by  the  intelligence  he  had  re^ 
ceived  of  so  many  cities  revolting,  or  being  betrayed,  and 
the  garrisons  put  to  death.  Wherefore,  every  thing  was  kept 
in  a  state  of  readiness,  with  guards  and  watches  constantly 
on  duty,  as  well  by  night  as  by  day,  nor  did  the  soldier  ever 
quit  his  arms  or  his  post.  When  the  leading  men  in  Enna, 
who  had  already  bargained  with  Himilco  for  the  betraying  of 
the  garrison,  understood  that  the  Roman  commander  had 
left  no  room  for  the  practice  of  any  deception,  they  resolved 
to  act  openly,  and  represented  to  him,  that  the  city  and  the 
citadel  ought  to  be  under  their  care,  since  they  had  been 
connected  with  the  Romans  as  free  men  in  alliance,  not  as 
slaves  in  custody/’  They  therefore  required  that  the  keys  of 
the  gates  should  be  returned  to  them,  observing,  that  ‘‘  on 
good  allies  honour  was  the  strongest  tie,  and  that  then  only 
would  the  senate  and  people  of  Rome  think  them  deserving 
of  thanks,  when  they  should  continue  in  friendship  out  of 
their  own  free  will,  not  through  compujsion.”  To  this  the 
Roman  answered,  that  he  was  placed  there  by  his  general, 
and  from  him  had  received  the  keys  of  the  gates  and  the 
custody  of  the  citadel,  which  he  held  not  at  his  own  dispo¬ 
sal,  or  that  of  the  inhabitants  of  Enna,  but  at  his  who  had 
committed  them  to  his  charge.  That  to  relinquish  a  man’s 
post  in  a  garrison,  was,  among  the  Romans,  a  capital  crime, 

BOOK  XXIV. 

225 

B.C.  21^1 

and  that  patents  had  confirmed  that  law  even  by  the  death  of 
their  o#ti  children.  That  the  consul  Marcellas  was  not  far 
distant;  let  them  send  ambassadors  to  him,  who  had  the 
right  and  authority  to  determine.’^  They  declared  positively, 
that  the^  would  not  send,  and  gave  him  notice,  that,  since 
Words  were  of  no  avail,  they  would  seek  some  other^means  of 
asserting  their  liberty.  Pinarius  then  desired,  “  that  if  they  did 
nof  choose  to  take  the  trouble  of  sending  to  the  con^l,  they 
wotdd,  at  least,  allow  him  to  meet  the  people  in  assembly, 
that  it  tnight  be  known  whether  these  were  the  denunciations 
of  a  party  pnly,  or  of  the  whole  state;”  w^hich  being  agreed 
to,  an  assembly  was  proclaimed  for  the  following  day, 
XXXVIII.  After  this  conversation,  he  went  back  imme¬ 
diately  into  the  citadel,  and  calling  the  troops  togedier,  spoke 
thus:  “  Soldiers,  you  must  have  heard  in  what  mmner  the 
Roman  garrisons  have,  of  late,  beeti  betrayed  and  cut  off  by 
the  Sicilians.  The  same  treachery  you  have  escaped,  princi¬ 
pally  through  the  kindness  of  the  gods,  and  next  throng 
your  own  resolution,  in  keeping  cotttindal  g^ard  and  watch 
under  arms,  without  intermission  by  day  or  by  ni^t.  I  wish 
it  were  in' our  power  to  pass  the  rest  of  our  lime  without 
either  enduring  or  offering  cruel  treatment.  But  this  caution, 
which  we  have  hithertc^sed,  guards  only  against  their  se¬ 
cret  machinations;  Which,  not  having  succeeded  to  dieir  wish, 
they  now  openly  and  plainly  demand  the  keys  of  the  gates. 
The  moment  these  are  delivered  to  tbetn,  Enna  will  he  made 
over  to  the  Carthaginians,  and  we  shall  be  massacred  here  in 
a  more  shocking  manner  than  were  those  of  Mufgftntia* 
This  one  night’s  time,  I  have,  with  difficulty,  procured  fca: 
consultation,  that  I  might  apprize  you  of  the  imminent  dan¬ 
ger  to  which  you  are  exposed.  At  simrise  they  intend  to 
hold  an  assembly  for  the  purpose  of  criminating  me,  and  in¬ 
censing  the  populace  against  you:  before  to-morrow  night, 
therefore,  Enna  will  be  deluged  eitiier  wiA  your  ^lood,  of 
with  that  of  ks  inhabitants.  If  anticipate  yotur  ii^Mures, 
VOL.  III. — F  f 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

IY,R.  53a: 

you  will  have^o  resource;  if  you  anticipate  theirs,  you  will 
have  no  danger:  whoever  first  draws  the  sword,  his  will  be 
the  victory.  Do  you,  therefore,  in  arms,  and  with  all  your 
attention  awake,  wait  for  the  signal.  I  will  be  in  the  assem- 
bU%  and,  by  talking  and  disputing,  will  prolong  the  time  un¬ 
til  every  thing  shall  be  ready.  As  soon  as  I  give  the  signal 
with  my  gown,  then  let  me  see  that  you  raise  a  shout  on 
every  quarter,  attack  the  multitude,  and  mow  dowm  all  with 
the  sword;  take  care  that  no  one  be  left  alive  from  whom 
either  force  or  fraud  can  be  feared.  O!  Mother  Ceres  and 
Proserpine,  and  you  other  gods  w-hether  of  the  superior  or 
inferior  regions,  who  patronise  this  city  and  these  conse¬ 
crated  lakes  and  groves,  so  prosper  us,  I  beseech  vou,  with 
your  favour  and  assistance,  as  we  undertake  such  an  enter¬ 
prise  with  a  view  of  averting,  not  of  afflicting  injury.  I  would 
use  more  words  in  exhorting  you,  soldiers,  if  you  were  to 
have  a  contest  with  men  in  arms:  that  unarmed  and  un- 
gu4rded  crowd  you  will  kill  until  you  shall  be  satisfied  with 
killing:  besides,  the  consul’s  camp  is  at  hand,  so  that 
nothing  can  be  feared  from  Himilco  and  the  Carthaginians/^ 
XXXIX.  Being  dismissed  with  this  exhortation,  they  went 
to  take  refreshment.  Next  day  they  posted  themselves  in 
different  places,  to  block  up  the  struts,  and  shut  the  passes 
against  the  townsmen  going  out;  the  greatest  part  of  them, 
on  and  round  the  theatre,  as  they  had  been  before  accustom¬ 
ed  to  stand  spectators  of  the  assemblies.  The  Roman  com¬ 
mander  was  conducted  by  the  magistrates  into  the  presence 
of  the  people,  where  he  represented,  that  the  power  and  au¬ 
thority  of  determining  the  business  in  question  lay  in  the 
consul,  not  in  him,  urging  mostly  the  same  arguments,  which 
he  had  used  the  day  before;  on  which  a  few  at  first,  then 
greater  numbers,  at  last  all,  with  one  voice,  insisted  on  his 
delivering  the  keys;  and  when  lie  hesitated  and  demurred, 
began  to  threaten  him  furiously,  showing  evidently  that  they 
would  no  longer  refrain  from  the  utmost  violence.  The  go- 

BOOK  XXIV. 

2^7 

BX.  214.] 

vemor  then  gate  the  concerted  signal  with  his  gown.  The 
soldiers  were  prepared,  having  a  long  time  expected  it  with 
earnest  attention;  and  now,  while  some  of  them,  with  loud 
shouts,  ran  down  from  the  higher  places  against  the  rear  the 
assembly,  others,  in  close  array,  blocked  up  the  passages  from 
the  theatre.  Thus,  pent  up  in  the  inclosure,  the  inhabitants 
of  Enna  were  put  to  the  sword.  Yet  did  they  perish,  not 
only  b}‘  the  weapons  of  their  enemy,  but  bv  their  own  hasty 
flight,  for  many  tumbled  over  the  others,  and  the  whole  fall- 
ing  on  the  wounded,  the  living  on  the  dead  were  all  promis¬ 
cuously  heaped  together*  From  thence,  the  soldiers  spread 
themselves  over  the  citv,  and,  as  if  it  had  been  taken  b3- 
storm,  filled  every  part  of  it  with  terror  and  carnage,  their 
rage  renting  itself  with  no  less  fun^  on  the  unarmed  crowd, 
than  if  their  passions  had  been  exasperated  by  an  equality  of 
danger  in  ^he  heat  of  battle.  Thus,  bv  an  act  either  wholly 
unjustifiable,  or  exc useable  only  on  the  ground  of  necessiu", 
the  possession  of  Enna  was  retained.  Marcellus  showed  no 
disapprobation  of  the  deed;  on  the  contrary,  he  granted  the 
plunder  of  that  place  to  the  soldiers;  thinking  that  the  Sici¬ 
lians,  deterred  by  fear  of  like  treatment,  would  desist  from 
the  practice  of  betraying  the  Roman  fortresses.  The  history 
of  the  sad  catastrophe  of  this  city,  which  stood  in  the  middle 
of  Sicily,  and  was  so  conspicuous,  both  on  account  of  the  ex¬ 
traordinary  natural  strength  of  its  situation,  as  also  on  ac¬ 
count  of  every  part  of  it  being  rendered  sacred  hy  the  mo¬ 
numents  of  the  rape  of  Prosei*pine  of  old,  reached  everv  part 
of  the  island  almost  in  one  day.  People  considered  that  hor¬ 
rid  carnage  as  a  violation  of  the  mansions  of  the  gods,  as 
well  as  of  those  of  men;  and  now  even  those  who  had  hesi¬ 
tated  until  this  time,  openly  declared  in  favour  of  the  Car¬ 
thaginians.  Hippocrates  then  retired  to  Murgantia,  and  Hi- 
milcoto  Agrigentum;  for  they  had,  on  an  invitation  from  the 
treacherous  inhabitants,  brought  their  armies  to  Enna  to  no 
purpose.  Marcellas  returned  into  the  territory  of  Leontini, 

228 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  538. 

where,  having  stored  his  camp  with  magazines  of  corn  and 
other  provisions,  and  left  a  small  body  of  troops  to  defend 
it,  he  went  to  carry  on  the  siege  of  Syracuse.  Appius  Clau« 
dius  having  obtained  his  leave  to  go  to  Rome  to  canvass  for 
the  consulship,  he  appointed  in  his  room  Titus  Quintus 
Crispinus  to  the  command  of  the  fleet  and  of  the  old  camp* 
He  fortified  a  camp  for  himself,  in  which  he  erected  huts  for 
the  winter,  at  a  place  called  Leon,  five  miles  distant  from  the 
Hexapylum.  These  were  the  transactions  in  Sicily  previous 
to  the  commencement  of  winter. 
XL.  During  that  summer,  the  war  with  king  Philip, 
which  had  been  apprehended  for  some  time,  broke  out  into 
action.  Deputies  came  from  Oricum  to  the  propraetor  Marcus 
Valerius,  who  commanded  the  fleet  at  Brundusium  and  on 
the  neighbouring  coasts  of  Calabria,  informing  him,  that 
Philip  had  first  attempted  Appollonia,  sailing  up  the  river 
with  a  hundred  and  twenty  barks  of  two  banks  of  oars;  and, 
not  succeeding  there  as  speedily  as  he  expected,  had  after¬ 
wards  marched  his  army  secretly  by  night  to  Oricum,  which 
city,  being  situated  in  a  plain,  and  being  but  weakly  defend¬ 
ed,  either  by  fortifications  or  by  men  and  arms,  was  over¬ 
powered  at  the  first  assault.  To  this  information  they  joined 
entreaties,  that  he  would  bring  them  succour,  and  repel  the 
attacks  of  that  avowed  enemy  to  the  Romans  from  the  mari¬ 
time  cities,  which  were  assailed  for  no  other  reason,  than 
because  they  lay  contiguous  to  Italy.  Marcus  Valerius,  leav¬ 
ing  a  lieutenant-general,  Titus  Valerius,  to  maintain  his 
present  post,  and  putting  on  board  the  ships  of  burthen  a 
number  of  soldiers,  for  whom  there  was  not  room  in  the 
ships  of  war,  set  sail  with  his  fleet  fully  equipped  and  pre¬ 
pared,  and  arrived  on  the  second  day  at  Oricum,  and  with¬ 
out  much  difficulty  retook  that  city,  which  had  for  its  defence 
but  a  weak  garrison,  left  by  Philip  at  his  departure.  Hither 
came  deputies  from  the  Appollonians,  with  information, 
that  they  were  besieged,  because  they  refused  to  take  part 

BOOK  XXIV. 

229 

B.C.  214.] 
against  the  Romans,  and  that  they  were  unable  longer  to 
withstand  the  force  of  the  Macedonians,  unless  a  Roman 
garrison  were  sent  to  their  aid.  Valerius  promised  to  comply 
with  their  wishes,  and  sent  two  thousand  chosen  men  in  ships 
of  war  to  the  mouth  of  the  river,  under  the  command  of 
Quintus  Nsevius  Crista,  prsefect  of  the  allies,  a  man  of  an 
enterprising  spirit  and  experienced  in  service.  He,  as  soon 
as  his  men  were  landed,  sent  back  the  ships  to  join  the  rest 
of  the  fleet  at  Oricum,  whence  he  came;  and  leading  his 
troops  at  a  distance  from  the  river,  through  a  road  where  he 
was  least  likely  to  meet  any  of  the  king’s  part\%  got  into  town 
by  night,  without  being  discovered  by  them.  During  the  fol¬ 
lowing  day  all  remained  quiet,  while  the  prsefect  reviewed  the 
forces  of  the  Appollonians,  their  arms,  and  the  defences  of 
the  city.  On  examining  all  those  matters,  he  found  sufficient 
ground  for  confidence;  at  the  same  time  learning  from  scouts, 
that  a  great  degree  of  negligence  and  inattention  prevailed 
among  the  enemy.  In  consequence  of  this  intelligence,  he 
marched  out  of  the  city  in  the  dead  of  the  night,  without  any 
noise,  and,  on  entering  their  camp,  found  it  so  neglected  and 
exposed,  that  a  thousand  of  his  men  had  gotten  within  the 
rampart,  as  we  are  well  assured,  before  any  one  perceived 
them,  and  had  they  refrained  from  killing  the  soldiers,  might 
have  reached  the  pavilion  of  the  king.  The  destroying  of 
those  who  were  nearest  to  the  gate  roused  the  others  from 
sleep:  and  immediately  such  terror  and  dismay  took  posses¬ 
sion  of  ail,  that  not  one  of  them  offered  to  take  arms,  or  to 
attempt  expelling  the  assailants:  nay,  instead  of  that,  ,even 
the  king  himself  fled  in  the  same  condition  as  he  had  started 
out  of  bed;  half  naked  in  a  manner,  and  in  a  dress  which 
would  scarcely  be  decent  for  a  private  soldier,  much  less  a 
monarch,  he  effected  his  escape  to  his  ships  in  the  river. 
Thither  also  the  rest  of  the  multitude  directed  their  precipi¬ 
tate  flight.  Somewhat  less  than  three  thousand  men  were 
either  killed  or  taken,  but  the  number  of  prisoners  consider- 

230 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  338. 

ably  exceeded  diat  of  the  killed.  The  camp  was  then  sacked^ 
and  the  Appollonians  carried  into  their  city,  for  the  defence 
of  their  walls  on  any  future  occasion,  the  catapnltas,  balistas, 
and  other  engines,  which  had  been  provided  for  the  purpose 
of  demolishing  them;  all  the  rest  of  the  booty  found  in  the 
camp  was  consigned  to  the  Romans.  As  soon  as  the  news  of 
this  event  reached  Oricum,  Marcus  Valerius  instantly  drew 
his  fleet  to  the  mouth  of  the  river,  lest  the  King  should  at¬ 
tempt  to  escape  by  water.  Philip,  therefore,  despairing  ol 
being  able  to  cope  with  his  adversaries,  either  by  land  or  sea, 
drew  up  some  of  his  ships  into  dock,  burned  the  rest,  and 
with  his  troops.,  mostly  unarmed  and  despoiled  of  their  bag¬ 
gage,  reiurricd  bv  land  into  Macedonia.  Marcus  Valerius, 
with  the  Roman  fleet,  wintered  at  Oricum. 
XLI.  In  Spain  the  contending  parties  met  with  various  suc¬ 
cess  during  this  campaign.  For,  before  the  Romans  passed 
the  river  Iberus,  Mago  and  Hasdrubal  defeated  a  very  nu¬ 
merous  army  of  Spaniards,  and  all  farther  Spain  would  ha\  o 
revolted  from  the  Romans,  had  not  Publius  Cornelius,  by  a 
rapid  march,  arrived  in  time  to  confirm  the  wavering  rest>- 
lutions  of  his  allies.  The  Romans  encamped,  first  at  a  plact 
called  the  High  Fort,  remarkable  for  the  death  of  the  great 
Hamilcar.  The  fortress  was  strong,  and  they  had  alreacb 
provided  a  store  of  corn.  Nevertheless,  because  ail  the 
country  round  was  full  of  the  enemy’s  troops,  and  as  the  Ho¬ 
man  army,  on  its  march,  had  been  harassed  by  their  cavalry , 
without  being  able  to  take  revenge,  and  had  lost  two  thou¬ 
sand  men,  who  either  loitered  behind  or  straggled  through 
the  country,  they  removed  thence  to  the  neighbourhood  of  a 
friendly  people,  and  fortified  a  camp  at  the  mount  of  Victory. 
Hither  came  Cneius  Scipio  with  all  his  forces;  while  on  the 
other  side,  Hasdrubal,  son  of  Gisgo,  with  a  complete  army, 
joined  the  other  two  Carthaginian  generals,  and  their  whole 
combined  forces  sat  down  opposite  to  the  Roman  with  a 
river  between  them.  Publius  Scipio,  going  out  privately  witli 

B.C.  214.] 

BOOK  xxrv. 

23t 

some  light-armed  troops  to  take  a  view  of  the  adjacent  coun¬ 
try,  passed  not  unobserved  by  the  enemy,  who  would  have 
cut  him  off  in  an  open  plain,  had  he  not  seized  an  eminence^ 
which  was  nigh.  Even  there  he  was  closely  invested,  but  his 
brother  coming  up,  relieved  him  from  that  dangerous  situa¬ 
tion.  Castulo,  a  strong  city,  reckoned  among  the  most  re¬ 
markable  in  Spain,  and  so  closely  connected  with  the  Cartha¬ 
ginians,  that  Hannibal  had  married  a  native  of  it,  revolted  to 
the  Romans.  The  Carthaginians  laid  'siege  to  Illiturgi,  be¬ 
cause  it  was  held  by  a  Roman  garrison,  and  they  had  reason 
to  expect  that  it  would  soon  fall  into  their  hands,  chiefly  in 
consequence  of  a  scarcity  of  provisions.  Cneius  Scipio,  with 
a  legion  lightly  equipped,  marched  to  the  relief  of  the  allies 
and  the  garrison,  and  forced  his  way  into  the  city,  between 
the  two  camps  of  the  encmv  with  great  slaughter  of  their 
men.  On  the  day  following  he  made  a  sally,  and  fought 
with  the  same  success.  In  the  battles,  he  killed  above 
twelve  thousand  men,  and  took  more  than  ten  thousand,  with 
thirty-six  military  standards:  in  consequence  of  which  losses, 
the  Carthaginians  raised  the  siege.  They  then  sat  down  be¬ 
fore  the  city  of  Bigerra,  which  also  was  in  alliance  with  the 
Romans,  but  on  the  approach  of  Cneius  Scipio  raised  the 
siege  without  a  battle. 
XLIL  The  Carthaginians  then  removed  their  camp  to 
Munda,  whither  the  Romans  quickly  followed  them.  Here  a 
general  engagement  took  place,  which  lasted  near  four  hours: 
the  Romans  had  decidedly  the  advantage;  but,  while  they 
were  pursuing  the  victory  with  the  utmost  ardour,  the  signal 
of  retreat  was  given,  in  consequence  of  Cneius  Scipio’s  thigh 
being  pierced  through  with  a  javelin;  the  soldiers  round  him 
being  seized  with  a  panic,  in  the  supposition  that  the  wound 
was  mortal.  There  was  no  doubt,  but  that,  if  thet^  had  not 
been  thus  stopped,  they  would,  on  that  day,  have  taken  the 
enemy’s  camp.  Not  only  their  soldiers,  but  elephants  also, 
had  already  been  driven  up  to  the  rampart,  and,  on  th.e  too 

2S2  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.538. 
of  it,  thirt7*nifec  ckphants  had  been  killed  with  spears. 
Twelve  thousand  men  are  ^id  to  have  fallen  in  this  battle, 
and  near  three  thousand  to  have  been  taken,  with  fifty- seven 
military  ensigns.  From  thence  the  Carthaginians  retreated 
to  the  city  of  Aurinse,  and  the  Romans,  not  to  allow  them 
time  to  recover  from  their  defeat,  followed  them  closel5^  Here 
Scipio,  though  carried  into  the  field  in  a  litter,  engaged  them 
again,  and  obtained  a  decided  victory:  thou^  fewer  of  the 
enemy,  by  half,  were  slain  in  this  battle  than  in  the  former; 
because,  after  their  loss  on  that  occasion,  they  could  only 
bring  a  smaller  number  into  the  field.  But  as  they  are  a  race 
fitted  by  nature  for  the  reviving  of  wars  and  the  recruiting  of 
armies,  they  soon,  through  the  diligence  of  Mago,  who  was 
sent  by  his  brother  to  levy  soldiers,  filled  up  the  comple¬ 
ment  of  their  troops,  and  resumed  courage  to  risk  a-fresh  the 
issue  of  a  battle.  Though  their  battallions  were  now  com¬ 
posed  mostly  of  foreign  solcMers,  yet  fighting  on  a  side  which 
had  suffered  so  many  discomfitures  within  a  few  days,  they 
showed  the  same  spirit  as  before,  and  the  same  consequence 
ensued.  More  than  eight  thousand  men  were  slain,  not  many 
short  of  a  thousand  taken  prisoners,  together  with  fifty-eight 
military  standards.  The  greater  part  of  the  spoils  had  be¬ 
longed  to  the  Gauls,  among  which  were  golden  chains  and 
bracelets  in  great  numbers;  there  were  also  two  remarkable 
chieftains  of  the  Gauls  killed  in  that  battle,  Moenicaptus  and 
Civismarus:  eight  elephants  were  taken,  and  three  killed. 
During  this  current  of  success  in  Spain,  the  Romans  began 
to  feel  ashamed  of  having  suffered  the  town  of  Saguntum, 
the  original  object  of  dispute,  to  continue  five  years  in  the 
possession  of  the  enemy.  Wherefore,  dislodging  the  Cartha¬ 
ginian  garrison,  they  retook  possession  of  the  town,  and  re¬ 
stored  it  to  such  of  the  inhabitants  as  had  survived  the  vio¬ 
lence  of  the  conflict.  As  to  the  Turdetanians,  who  had  been 
the  instigators  of  the  war  between  the  Carthaginians  and  the 
people,  they  totally  subdued  them,  sold  them  as  slaves,  and 

BOOK  XXIV. 

233 

B.C.  2140 
rased  their  city  to  the  ground.  Such  were  the  occurrences 
in  Spain  during  the  consulate  of  Quintus  Fabius  and  Marcus 
Claudius. 
XLIII.  At  Rome,  no  sooner  had  the  new  plebeian  tri¬ 
bunes  entered  into  office,  than  one  of  them,  Lucius  Metellus, 
summoned  the  censors,  Publius  Furius  and  Marcus  Altilius, 
to  trial  before  the  people.  In  the  preceding  year,  when  he 
was  quaestor,  they  had  degraded  him  from  the  equestrian 
rank  and  from  his  tribe,  and  had  disfranchised  him  on  ac¬ 
count  of  his  having  formed  a  conspiracy  at  Cannae,  to  aban¬ 
don  Italy:  but  they  were  supported  by  the  other  nine  tribunes, 
who  protested  against  their  being  brought  to  trial,  and  were 
consequently  discharged.  The  death  of  Publius  Furius  pre¬ 
vented  their  closing  the  Lustrum;  and  Marcus  iEtilius  abdi¬ 
cated  his  office.  The  election  of  consuls  was  held  by  the 
consul  Quintus  Fabius  Maximus,  and  two  were  chosen  who 
were  both  absent  at  the  time,  Quintus  Fabius  Maximus,  the 
present  consul’s  son,  and  Tiberius  Sempronius  Gracchus,  a 
second  time.  The  praetors  appointed  were  Marcus  Atilius, 
and  two  who  were  then  curule  sediles,  Publius  Sempronius 
Tuditanus  and  Cneius  Fulvius  Centumalus,  and  lastly,  Mar¬ 
cus  j£milius  Lepidus.  It  is  recorded,  that  stage  plays  were 
now,  for  the  first  time,  exhibited  four  days  successively,  by 
direction  of  the  curule  aediles.  This  Tuditanus,  now  aedile, 
was  the  person  who,  at  Cannae,  while  the  rest  were  stupified 
by  fear,  in  consequence  of  such  a  dreadful  disaster,  made  his 
way  through  the  middle  of  the  enemy. 
XLIV.  As  soon  as  the  elections  were  finished,  the  consuls 
elect  were  called  home  to  Rome,  by  the  advice  of  the  y  ^  539^ 
present  consul  Quintus  Fabius,  and  assumed  the  ad- 
ministration.  They  then  called  a  meeting  of  the  senate,  to  de¬ 
termine  concerning  their  own  provinces  and  those  of  the  prae¬ 
tors,  the  armies  to  be  employed,  and  the  commanders  to  whom 
each  was  to  be  allotted.  These  were  distributed  in  the  following 
manner:  To  the  consuls  was  assigned  the  province  of  making 
VOL.  III. - G  g 

234 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  539. 

head  against  Hannibal;  and  of  the  armies,  the  one  which 
Sempronms  himself  had  already  under  his  command,  and 
another  commanded  by  the  late  consul  Fabius.  These  con* 
sisted  of  two  legions  each.  Marcus  ^milius,  the  prsetor,  to 
whose  lot  the  foreign  jurisdiction  had  fallen,  (his  share  in  the 
administration  of  justice  being  consigned  to  his  colleague, 
Marcus  Atilius,  city  prsetor,)  was  to  hold  the  province  ot 
Luceria,  and  the  two  legions  which  Quintus  Fabius,  the  pre¬ 
sent  consul,  had  commanded  as  praetor;  to  Publius  Sempro- 
nius  fell  the  province  of  Ariminium;  to  Cneius  Fulvius, 
Suessula,  with  two  legions  likewise  to  each;  Fulvius  to  take 
with  him  the  city  legions;  Tuditanus  to  receive  his.  from 
Marcus  Pomponius.  The  following  commanders  and  pro¬ 
vinces  were  continued:  to  Marcus  Claudius,  Sicily,  so  far  as 
the  limits  of  Hiero’s  dominions  had  extended;  to  Lentullus, 
propraetor,  the  old  Roman  province  in  Aat  island;  to  Titus 
Otacilius,  the  fleet.  No  additions  were  made  to  dicir  armies. 
Greece  and  Macedonia  were  allotted  to  Marcus  Valerius, 
with  the  legion  and  fleet  which  he  .had  there;  to  Quintus 
Mucius,  Sardinia,  with  his  old  army,  which  consisted  of  two 
legions,  and  to  Caius  Terentius,  Picenum,  with  the  one  le¬ 
gion  at  the  present  under  his  command.  It  was  ordered, 
that,  besides  those  mentioned,  two  city  legions  should  be 
levied,  and  twenty  thousand  troops  of  the  allies.  These  were 
the  leaders,  these  the  forces,  provided  for  the  defence  of  the 
Roman  empire,  against  a  multitude  of  enemies,  either  de¬ 
clared  or  suspected.  The  consuls,  after  raising  the  two  city 
legions,  and  filling  up  the  numbers  of  the  others,  before  they 
quitted  Rome,  expiated  several  prodigies,  which  had  been 
reported.  A  wall  and  a  gate  had  been  struck  by  lightning, 
and  also  the  temple  of  Jupiter  at  Aricia.  Besides  which, 
several  deceptions  of  the  eyes  and  ears  were  credited  as  facts; 
that  the  figures  of  ships  of  war  had  appeared  in  the  river  at 
Tarracina,  where  no  such  ships  were;  that  in  the  temple  of 
Jupiter,  at  Vicilinum  in  the  district  of  Compsa,  a  clashing 

BOOK  XXIV. 

235 

B.C.  213.] 
of  arms  was  heard,  and  that  the  river  at  Amitumum  flowed 
in  streams  of  blood.  When  the  expiation  of  these  was  per¬ 
formed,  according  to  die  direction  of  the  pontiffs,  the  consuls 
set  out,  Sempronius  to  Lucania,  Fabius  to  Apulia.  The 
father  of  the  latter  coming  into  the  camp  at  Suessula,  as 
lieutenant-general  under  his  son,  the  son  went  out  to  meet 
him,  and  the  lie  tors,  out  of  reverence  to  his  dignity,  went  on 
in  silence,  until  the  old  man  rode  past  eleven  of  the  fasces, 
when  the  consul  ordering  his  next  lictor  to  take  care,  he 
called  to  him  to  dismount,  and  the  father  then,  at  length, 
alighting,  said,  ‘‘  I  had  a  mind,  my  son,  to  try  whether  you 
were  properly  sensible  of  being  consul.” 
XL V .  Into  this  camp  Darius  Altinius  of  Arpi  came  pri¬ 
vately  by  night,  with  three  slaves,  promising  that  if  he  were 
properly  rewarded,  he  would  betray  Arpi  to  them.  Fabius 
held  a  council  to  consider  of  the  matter,  when  some  were  of 
opinion,  that  he  ought  to  be  scourged  and  put  to  death  as  a 
deserter,  being  a  common  foe  to  both  parties,  ever  ready  to 
change  sides;  who,  after  the  misfortune  at  Cann;se,  as  if  faith 
ought  to  follow  the  changes  of  fortune,  had  gone  over  to  the 
Carthaginians,  and  drawn  Arpi  into  a  revolti  and  now,  when 
the  Roman  affairs  were,  contrary  to  his  hopes  and  wishes, 
recovering  from  that  disaster,  it  must  appear  doubly  base  to 
offer  to  serve,  by  an  act  of  treachery,  the  party  on  whom  he 
had  practised  his  treachery  before.  Such  a  wretch,  who 
always  appeared  to  act  on  one  side,  while  his  wishes  were  on 
the  other,  such  a  perfidious  ally  and  fickle  enemy,  ought  to 
be  made  a  third  lesson  to  deserters  along  with  the  Falerian 
and  Pyrrhus’s  traitors.”  On  die  other  hand  Fabius,  the  consul’s 
father,  said,  that  ‘‘  people  did  not  attend  to  the  state  of  the 
times;  but,  in  the  very  heat  of  war,  as  in  a  time  of  tranquil¬ 
lity,  pronounced  their  decisions  on  every  case  without  any 
allowance  for  circumstances.  Thus,  at  a  time  when  they 
should  rather  contrive  and  labour  to  prevent,  if  possible,  any 
of  the  allies  revolting  from  the  Roman  cause,  or  become 

236 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  539. 

wavering  in  their  inclinations,  they  were  of  opinion,  that  a 
person  who  repented  and  showed  an  inclination  to  return  to 
his  former  connexions,  ought  to  be  punished  for  an  example. 
But  if  those  who  had  once  forsaken  the  part  of  the  Romans, 
were  at  no  time  allowed  to  return  to  it,  who  could  doubt,  but 
that  their  nation  would  be  deserted  by  its  allies,  and  that 
they  would  shortly  see  every  state  in  Italy  combined  under 
Carthaginian  treaties?  Nevertheless,  he  was  not  disposed  to 
think  that  any  confidence  should  be  reposed  in  Altinius:  but 
he  would  strike  out  a  middle  way  of  proceeding,  and  recom¬ 
mend  that,  at  present,  he  should  not  be  treated  either  as  an 
enemy  or  an  ally,  but  should,  during  the  continuance  of  the 
war,  be  kept  in  custody,  at  a  small  distance  from  the  camp, 
in  some  city,  whose  fidelity  could  be  relied  on;  and  that,  in 
the  event  of  peace,  it  should  be  considered  whether  his  for¬ 
mer  defection  pleaded  stronger  for  punishment,  or  his  present 
return  for  pardon.”  This  advice  of  Fabius  was  adopted.  Alti- 
nius  was  bound  in  chains,  and,  together  with  his  attendants, 
delivered  into  custody;  and  a  large  quantity  of  gold  which  he 
had  brought  with  him,  was  ordered  to  be  kept  for  his  use. 
He  was  sent  to  Cales,  where  he  was  allowed  to  go  out  by 
day,  attended  by  guards,  who  confined  and  watched  him  by 
night.  When  he  was  missed  at  his  house  in  Arpi,  search 
was  made  for  him  at  first,  then  the  report  of  what  had  hap¬ 
pened  spreading  through  the  city,  occasioned  a  tumult  among 
the  citizens,  as  if  they  had  lost  their  leader;  so  that,  dread¬ 
ing  an  alteration  of  their  present  system,  they  despatched, 
instantly,  to  Hannibal,  an  account  of  the  affair.  This  was  not 
at  all  displeasing  to  the  Carthaginian,  because  he  had  long 
harboured  suspicions  of  him,  knowing  the  duplicity  of  his 
character;  and  besides,  he  had  now  gained  an  excuse  for 
seizing  and  confiscating  his  great  property.  However,  in 
order  to  make  people  believe  that  he  was  actuated  rather  by 
anger  than  rapaciousness,  he  exhibited  a  scene  of  uncommon 
barbarity;  for,  having  ordered  his  wife  and  children  to  be 

BOOK  XXIV. 

23f 

BX.  213.] 
brought  into  the  camp,  he  made  a  strict  inquiry  c<mccming 
the  flight  of  Altinius,  and  likewise  concerning  the  quantities 
of  gold  and  silver  which  he  had  left  at  home;  and,  when  he 
had  got  sufficient  information  of  every  particular,  he  burned 
them  alive. 
XL VI.  Fabius  set  out  from  Suessula,  intending  to  open 
the  campaign  with  the  siege  of  Arpi,  and  having  pitched  his 
camp  about  half  a  mile  from  the  place,  and  taken  a  near  view 
of  the  situation  and  fortifications  of  the  town,  he  resolved  to 
make  his  principal  attack  on  a  quarter  where  the  works  were 
the  strongest,  and  the  guard  the  most  negligently  kept.  After 
providing  every  thing  requisite  for  an  assault,  he  selected 
out  of  the  whole  army  the  ablest  centurions,  and  placed  over 
them  tribunes  of  known  braver\",  giving  them  six  hundred 
soldiers,  which  number  was  deemed  sufficient,  with  orders, 
that,  on  the  sounding  of  the  signal  of  the  fourth  watch,  they 
should  advance  with  scaling  ladders  to  the  chosen  spot.  The 
gate  on  that  side  was  low  and  narrow,  the  corresponding 
street  being  little  frequented,  as  leading  through  a  deserted 
part  of  the  town.  He  ordered  them,  after  first  scaling  the 
wall,  to  proceed  to  this  gate,  and  break  down  the  bars  on  the 
inside;  then,  as  soon  as  they  had  got  possession  of  that  quar¬ 
ter  of  the  city,  to  give  the  signal  with  a  cornet,  that  the  rest 
of  the  forces  might  join  them,  saying,  that  he  would  have 
every  thing  in  readiness.  His  orders  were  executed  with 
vigour  and  spirit;  while  a  circumstance,  which  seemed  likely 
to  obstruct  the  undertaking,  proved  the  most  favourable  for 
concealing  their  operations.  A  heavy  rain  at  midnight  obliged 
the  guards  and  watches  in  the  town  to  slip  away  from  their 
posts,  and  run  for  shelter  into  the  houses,  while  the  loudness 
of  the  storm,  which  was  most  violent  at  the  beginning,  pre¬ 
vented  their  hearing  the  noise  made  by  those  who  were  break¬ 
ing  the  postern,  and  the  sound,  becoming  afterwards  more 
soft  and  regular,  lulled  most  of  the  men  to  sleep.  As  soon  as 
the  assailants  had  secured  possession  of  the  gate,  they  placed 

238 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

tY.R.S39. 

the  cornet  players  in  the  street,  at  equal  distances,  and  or¬ 
dered  them  to  sound  as  a  summons  to  the  consul;  who,  find¬ 
ing  this  part  of  the  plan  executed,  immediately  ordered  his 
troops  to  march,  and,  a  little  before  day,  entered  the  city 
through  the  broken  gate. 
XL VI I.  At  length  the  enemy  were  roiised,  the  rain  too 
abating  with  the  approach  of  day.  There  was  in  the  city  a 
garrison  of  HannibaFs  troops,  amounting  to  five  thousand 
effective  men,  and  the  armed  people  of  Arpi  themselves 
were  three  thousand  more.  These  latter,  the  Carthaginians, 
to  guard  against  any  treachery  on  their  rear,  opposed  in 
front  to  the  enemy.  The  fight  was  maintained  for  some 
time  in  the  dark,  and  in  narrow  streets,  the  Romans  having 
seized  not  only  all  the  passes,  but  the  houses  likewise  next 
to  the  gate,  lest  they  might  be  struck  or  wounded  by  any 
thing  thrown  down  from  them.  Some  of  the  Arpians  and 
Romans  recognising  each  other,  began  to  enter  into  conver¬ 
sation;  the  latter  asking  what  had  been  the  demerit  of  their 
countrymen,  or  what  the  merit  of  the  Carthaginians,  that 
could  induce  Italians  to  wage  war  in  their  favour,— in  favour 
of  foreigners  and  barbarians;  in  fine,  against  their  ancient 
allies,  and  striving  to  reduce  Italy  to  a  state  of  vassalage, 
and  to  make  it  a  tributary  province  to  Africa?  The  Arpians, 
in  excuse  for  themselves,  declared,  that,  without  knowing 
any  thing  of  the  matter,  they  had  been  sold  to  the  Carthagi¬ 
nians  by  those  who  had  the  management  of  their  affairs,  and 
that  they  were  kept  in  a  state  of  subjection  and  oppression 
by  a  faction  of  a  few.  In  consequence  of  this  declaration, 
greater  numbers  on  both  sides  joined  in  the  conversation. 
At  last  the  praetor  of  Arpi  was  brought  by  his  countrymen  to 
the  consul,  and  mutual  assurances  being  given,  in  the  midst 
of  the  standards  and  troops,  the  Arpians  on  a  sudden  turned 
their  arms  against  the  Carthaginians  in  favour  of  the  Ro¬ 
mans.  A  body  of  Spaniards,  also,  nearly  a  thousand  in 
number,  came  over  to  the  consul,  without  stipulating  any 

BOOK  XXIV. 

239 

B.C.213.] 
other  condition  than  that  the  Carthaginian  garrison  should 
be  allowed  to  depart  unhurt;  which  article  was  punctually 
fulfilled:  the  gates  were  thrown  open:  they  were  dismis¬ 
sed  in  safety,  and  joined  Hannibal  at  Salapia.  Thus  was 
Arpi  restored  to  the  Romans,  without  any  other  loss  than 
that  of  the  life  of  one  man,  long  since  branded  with  trea¬ 
son,  and  lately  with  desertion.  To  the  Spaniards  a  dou¬ 
ble  allowance  of  provisions  was  ordered;  and,  on  very 
many  occasions  afterwards,  the  goverment  found  them 
brave  and  faithful  soldiers.  While  one  of  the  consuls 
was  in  Apulia,  smd  the  other  in  Lucania,  an  hundred 
and  twelve  Campanian  horsemen,  all  men  of  noble  birth, 
having,  under  pretence  of  ravaging  the  enemy’s  countr5s 
obtained  leave  from  the  magistrates  to  go  out  of  Capua, 
came  to  the  Roman  camp  above  Suessula,  told  the  advanced 
guard  who  they  were,  and  that  they  wished  to  speak  with  the 
praetor.  Cneius  Fulvius,  who  commanded  there,  on  receiv¬ 
ing  their  message,  ordered  ten  of  their  number,  unarmed, 
to  be  conducted  into  his  presence;  and  having  heard  their 
demands,  which  amounted  to  no  more  than  that,  on  Capua 
being  recovered,  their  property  might  be  restored  to  them, 
he  received  them  all  into  protection.  At  the  same  time  the 
other  praetor,  Sempronius  Tuditanus,  reduced,  by  force,  die 
town  of  Aternum,  took  above  seven  thousand  prisoners,  and 
a  considerable  quantity  of  brass  and  silver  coin.  At  Rome 
a  dreadful  fire  raged  during  two  nights  and  one  day;  every 
thing  between  the  Salinse  and  the  Carmental  gate  was  level¬ 
led  to  the  ground,  as  were  the  iEquimaelium  and  the  Juga- 
rian  street.  The  fire,  catching  the  temples  of  Fortune,  of 
Mother  Matuta,  and  of  Hope,  on  the  outside  of  the  gate, 
and  spreading  to  a  vast  extent,  consumed  a  great  number  of 
buildings,  both  religious  and  private. 
XL VI II.  During  this  year,  the  two  Comclii  Publius 
and  Cneius,  by  the  prosperous  course  of  affairs  in  Spain,  and 
from  their  having  recovered  many  old,  and  acquired  many 

240 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[YJl.  539. 

new  allies,  were  encouraged  to  extend  their  views  to  Africa 
itself,  SyphaXi  at  this  time  king  of  a  part  of  Numidia,  had  sud¬ 
denly  commenced  a  war  with  the  Carthaginians:  to  him  they 
sent  three  centurions  as  ambassadors,  to  form  a  treaty  of 
frendship  and  alliance,  and  to  assure  him,  that,  if  he  continued 
to  prosecute  the  war  against  the  Carthaginians,  the  Roman 
senate  and  people  would  be  thankful  for  the  service,  and  would 
use  their  best  endeavours  to  repay  the  kindness  afterwards  to 
his  entire  satisfaction.  This  embassy  was  very  acceptable  to 
the  barbarian:  he  entered  into  conversation  with  the  ambas¬ 
sadors  on  the  art  of  war;  and  when  he  heard  the  discourses 
of  those  experienced  veterans,  and  compared  his  own  prac¬ 
tice  with  such  a  regular  system  of  discipline,  he  became  sen¬ 
sible  of  his  ignorance  in  many  particulars.  Then  he  request¬ 
ed,  as  the  first  instance  of  that  favour,  which  he  might  expect 
from  good  and  faithful  allies,  that  two  of  them  might  carry 
back  to  their  commanders  the  result  of  their  embassy,  and 
the  other  remain  with  him  as  his  instructor  in  military  know¬ 
ledge;  adding  that  the  people  of  Numidia  were  quite  unac¬ 
quainted  with  the  method  of  fighting  on  foot,  and  were  useful 
only  on  horseback:  that  this  was  the  mode  practiced  by  their 
ancestors  since  their  first  existence  as  a  nation,  and  to  the 
same  had  the  present  generation  been  accustomed  since 
their  childhood.  That  he  had  to  deal  with  an  enemy  whose 
chief  confidence  lay  in  the  power  of  their  infantry;  and 
that,  therefore,  if  he  expected  to  put  himself  on  an  equality 
with  them  in  point  of  firm  strength,  he  must  procure  a 
body  of  foot  soldiers  to  oppose  theirs.  That  his  dominicms 
abounded  with  numbers  of  men  fit  for  the  purpose,  but 
that  he  was  totally  ignorant  of  the  proper  method  of  arm¬ 
ing,  training,  and  marshalling  them;  and  they  were  in  every 
respect  awkward  and,  unmanageable,  like  a  mere  mob  col¬ 
lected  by  chance.’^  The  ambassadors  answered,  that  they 
would,  at  the  present,  comply  with  his  desire,  provided  he 
gave  them  an  assurance  that  he  would  send  the  person  back,  in 

BOOK  XXIV. 

241 

B.C.  213.] 
case  their  commanders  should  disapprove  of  what  they  had 
done.  The  name  of  him  who  remained  with  the  king  was  Quin¬ 
tus  Statorius.  With  the  two  centurions,  the  Numidian  sent  into 
Spain  ambassadors  on  his  part,  to  receive  the  ratification  of 
the  convention  from  the  Roman  generals j  and  he  charged  them, 
after  they  should  have  executed  this  commission,  to  j^rsuade 
the  Numidians,  who  acted  as  auxiliaries  in  the  Cartha^nian 
garrisons,  to  come  over  to  the  other  side.  Satorius,  finding 
abundance  of  young  men,  raised  an  army  of  infantry  for  the 
king,  and  forming  them  into  distinct  bodies,  according  to  the 
Roman  method,  taught  them,  in  taking  their  posts  and  per¬ 
forming  their  several  evolutions,  to  follow  their  standards  and 
keep  their  ranks;  and  he  so  inured  them  to  the  practice  of 
military  works,  and  other  duties  of  soldiers,  that,  in  a  short 
time,  the  king  placed  not  more  confidence  in  his  cavalry  than 
in  his  infantry,  and,  even  in  a  pitched  battle,  on  a  level  plain, 
he  defeated  an  army  of  Carthaginians.  The  arrival  of  the 
king’s  ambassadors  was  productive  of  great  advantages  to  the 
Romans  in  Spain,  for,  as  soon  as  it  was  known,  the  Numidians 
began  to  come  over  in  great  numbers  from  the  enemy.  In  this 
manner  did  friendship  commence  between  the  Romans  and 
S}T>hax.  Of  which  transaction,  as  soon  as  the  Carthaginians 
gotnotice,  they  instantly  despatched  ambassadors  to  Gala,  who 
reigned  in  the  other  part  of  Numidia,  over  the  nation  called 
Massylians. 
XLIX.  Gala  had  a  son  named  Masinissa,  at  that  time 
only  seventeen  years  old,  but  endowed  with  such  talents  as, 
even  then,  afforded  strong  presumption  that  he  would  leave 
the  kingdom  more  extensive  and  opulent  than  when  he  re¬ 
ceived  it.  The  ambassadors  represented,  that,  since  Syphax 
had  united  himself  with  the  Romans,  for  the  purpose  of  being 
enabled,  by  their  assistance,  to  exert  greater  force  against  the 
other  kings  and  natives  of  Africa,  it  would  be  the  interest  of 
Gala  to  enter  into  alliance,  as  soon  as  possible,  with  the  Car¬ 
thaginians,  on  the  other  side;  that,  before  Syphax  passed  over 
vor.  ITT. — H  h 

24S 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  53f. 

into  Spain,  or  the  Romans  into  Africa,  it  would  be  very  prac* 
ticable  to  overpower  the  former,  who  had,  as  yet,  gained  no 
advantage  from  his  connexion  with  Rome,  except  the  name 
of  it.  Gala  was  easily  persuaded  to  take  part  in  the  war, 
especially  as  his  son  earnestly  solicited  the  command  of  die 
armies;  and,  in  conjunction  with  the  legions  of  the  Cartha¬ 
ginians,  he  totally  defeated  Syphax  in  a  great  battle,  in  which, 
as  we  are  told,  thirty  thousand  men  were  slain.  Syphax  fled 
from  the  field  with  a  few  horsemen,  and  took  refuge  among 
the  Maurusian  Nufnidians,  who  inhabit  the  remotest  coast 
of  the  ocean,  opposite  to  Gades.  Here  the  barbarians,  attract¬ 
ed  by  his  fame,  flocked  to  him  from  all  sides,  in  such  num¬ 
bers,  that  he  was  soon  at  the  head  of  a  very  great  army. 
In  order  to  prevent  his  carrying  this  force  into  Spain, 
from  which  he  was  separated  only  by  a  narrow  streight, 
Masinissa,  with  his  victorious  troops,  came  up  with  him; 
and  there,  by  his  own  strength,  without  any  aid  from  the 
Carthaginians,  he  maintained  the  war  against  Syphax  with 
great  glo^)^  In  Spain  nothing  memorable  was  performed, 
except  that  the  Roman  generals  brought  over  to  their  side 
the  youth  of  Celtiberia,  granting  them  the  same  pay  which 
they  had  stipulated  with  the  Carthaginians,  and  sending 
above  three  hundred  Spaniards  of  the  highest  distinction  in¬ 
to  Italy,  to  endeavour  to  draw  off  their  countrymen,  who 
served  as  auxiliaries  in  Hannibal’s  army.  The  only  incident 
which  occurred  in  Spain  remarkable  enough  to  deserve  being 
recorded,  was,  that  the  Celtiberians,  in  this  year,  were  the 
first  mercenary  troops  ever  entertained  in  the  Roman  armies. 

THE 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

BOOK  XXV. 
PubJius  Cornelius  Scipio,  afterwards  caRed  Africanus,  elected  xdile  before 
he  had  att^ed  the  ag*e  required  by  the  law.  The  citadel  of  Tarentum, 
in  which  the  Roman  garrison  had  taken  refuge,  betrayed  to  Hannibal. 
Games  instituted  in  honour  of  Apollo,  called  ApolUaarian.  Quintus  Ful* 
vius  sold  Appius  Claudius,  consuls,  defeat  Hanno  the  Carthagiman  genera.1. 
Tiberius  Sempronius  Gracchus  betrayed  by  a  Lucanian  to  Mago,  and  slain. 
Centenius  Penula,  who  had  been  a  centurion,  asks  the  senate  for  the  com¬ 
mand  of  an  army,  promising  to  engage  and  vanquish  Hannibal;  is  cut  off 
with  eight  thousand  men.  Cneius  Fuivius  engages  Hannibal,  and  is  beaten, 
with  the  loss  of  sixteen  thousand  men  slain;  he  himself  escapes  with  only 
two  hundred  horsemen.  Quintus  Fuivius  and  Appius  Claudbus,  consuls, 
lay  siege  to  Capua.  Syracuse  taken  by  Claudius  Marcellus,  after  a  siege 
of  three  years.  In  the  tumult  occasioned  by  taking  the  city,  Archimedes 
is  kiUed,  while  intently  occupied  upon  some  figures  w’hich  he  had  drawn 
in  the  sand.  Publius  and  Cornelius  Scipio,  after  having  performed  many  emi¬ 
nent  services  in  Spain,  are  slain,  together  with  nearly  the  whole  of  their 
armies,  eight  years  after  their  arrival  in  that  country;  and  the  possession 
of  that  province  would  have  been  enrirely  lost,  but  for  the  valour  and 
activity  of  Lucius  Marcius,  a  Roman  knight,  who,  collecting  the  scattered 
remains  of  the  vanquished  armies,  utterly  defeats  the  enemy,  storming 
their  two  camps,  killing  thirty -seven  thousand  of  them,  and  taking  eighteen 
hundred,  together  with  an  immense  booty. 
I.  HANNIBAL  passed  the  summer,  during  which  these 
events  took  place  in  Africa  and  Spain,  in  the  ter-  y  ^  53^ 
ritory  of  Tarentum,  in  continual  expectation  of  2i3. 
having  that  city  betrayed  into  his  hands.  Meanwhile  some 

244 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  5o9. 

inconsiderable  towns  of  that  district,  with  others  belonging 
to  the  Sallentines,  revolted  to  him.  At  the  same  time,  of 
the  twelve  Bruttian  States  which  had,  a  year  or  two  before, 
gone  over  to  the  Carthaginians,  the  Consentians  and  Thu- 
rians  put  themselves  again  under  the  protection  of  the  Ro¬ 
man  people,  and  more  of  them  would  have  done  the  same, 
had  not  Lucius  Pomponius  Veientailus,  prsefect  of  the  allies, 
who,  in  consequence  of  several  predatory  expeditions  in 
the  territory  of  Bruttium,  had  acquired  an  appearance  of 
a  regular  commander,  assembled  a  tumultuary  army,  and 
fought  a  battle  with  Hanno.  A  vast  number  of  his  men  were 
killed  or  taken  on  the  occasion,  but  they  were  only  an  undis¬ 
ciplined  rabble  of  peasants  and  slaves;  and  the  least  part  of 
the  loss  was  the  prefect  himself  being  taken  among  the  rest; 
for,  besides  his  inconsiderate  rashnesss  in  bringing  on  this 
engagement,  having  been  formerly  a  farmer  of  the  revenue, 
he  had,  by  every  iniquitous  practice,  proved  faithless  and 
detrimental,  both  to  the  state  and  to  the  companies  eoncern- 
ed  in  that  business.  The  consul  Sempronius  had  many  slight 
skirmishes  in  LUcania,  none  worthy  of  mention,  but  reducing 
several  inconsiderable  towms.  In  proportion  as  the  war  was 
protracted  to  a  greater  length,  and  successes  and  disappoint¬ 
ments  produced  various  alterations,  not  only  in  the  situa¬ 
tions,  but  in  the  sentiments  of  men,  superstitious  observances, 
and  these  mostly  introduced  from  abroad,  gained  such  ground 
among  the  people  in  general,  that  it  seemed  as  if  either  man¬ 
kind  or  the  deities  had  undergone  a  sudden  change.  And 
now  the  customed  rites  were  disused,  not  only  in  private, 
and  within  doors,  but  even  in  the  public  streets,  the  Forum, 
and  the  Capitol.  These  were  frequented  by  crowds  of 
women  sacrificing,  and  offering  prayers  to  their  gods,  in 
modes  hitherto  unknown  at  Rome.  A  low  sort  of  sacrificers, 
and  soothsayers,  had  enslaved  the  people’s  understandings, 
and  the  number  of  these  were  increased  in  consequence  of 
the  great  influx  of  the  peasantr\’  from  the  country,  who,  as 

BOOK  XXV. 

245 

BX.  213,] 
their  lands  lay  long  untilled  by  reason  of  the  continuance  of 
the  war,  and  the  inroads  of  the  enemy,  were  driven  into  the 
city  through  want  and  fear.  These  found  an  easy  means  of 
profit,  in  working  on  the  deluded  minds  of  the  multitude, 
which  practice  they  carried  on  as  if  it  were  a  lawful  occupa¬ 
tion.  At  first,  every  well-judging  person  expressed  indig¬ 
nation  at  such  proceedings;  aftenvards,  the  matter  came  to 
be  noticed  by  the  senators,  and  attracted  public  censure  from 
the  government.  The  adiles,  and  the  judges  of  criminal 
causes*,  were  sharply  rebuked  by  the  senate,  for  not;  having 
prevented  these  practices,  although,  when  they  had  attempt¬ 
ed  to  disperse  from  the  Forum  the  crowd  assembled  on  such 
an  occasion,  and  to  remove  the  implements  of  their  rites, 
they  were  in  imminent  danger  of  personal  injury.  The  evil 
now  appearing  too  powerful  to  be  checked  by  the  efforts  of 
the  inferior  magistrates,  the  senate  gave  a  charge  to  Marcus 
Atilius,  prsetor  of  the  city,  to  free  the  pid^lic  from  those  su¬ 
perstitious  nuisances.  For  this  purpose,  he  read  their  decree 
in  a  general  assembly;  and,  at  the  same  time,  gave  notice, 
that  “  whosoever  had  any  books  of  divination,  and  forms  of 
prayer  used  on  such  occasions,  or  the  art  of  sacrificing  in 
writing,  should  bring  all  such  books  and  writings  to  him 
before  the  calends  of  April,  and  that  no  person  should  in  any 
place,  either  public  or  consecrated,  perform  sacrifice  in  any 
new  or  foreign  mode.” 
IL  Several  of  the  priests  established  by  law  died  this  year, 
Lucius  Cornelius  Lentulus,  chief  pontiff,  Caius  Papirius 
Maso,  son  of  Caius,  a  pontiff,  Publius  Furius  Philus,  an 
augur,  and  Caius  Papirius  Maso,  son  of  Furius,  a  decemvir 
for  the  direction  of  religious  rites.  In  the  room  of  Lentulus 
Nvas  substituted,  in  the  college  of  pontiffs,  Marcus  Cornelius 
Cethegus;  in  that  of  Papirius,  Cneius  Servilius  Ccepio;  Lu¬ 
cius  Quintius  Flaminius  was  created  augur,  and  Lucius  Cor- 
*  These  were  three-  They  were  elected  by  the  people  to  judge  iu  criminal 
causes,  superintend  the  prisons,  and  the  execution  of  the  condemned. 

246 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.539. 
nelius  Lentulus  decemvir  for  the  direction  of  religious  rites. 
I'he  time  of  the  consular  election  now  drew  nigh;  but,  as  it 
was  not  judged  expedient  to  call  away  the  consuls  from  the 
war,  which  they  were  prosecuting  with  vigour,  Tiberius 
Sempronius,  consul,  nominated  Caius  Claudius  Centho  dic¬ 
tator,  to  hold  the  elections,  and  he  appointed  Quintus  Fulvius 
Flaccus  his  master  of  the  horse.  The  dictator,  on  the  first 
day  whereon  the  assembly  could  meet,  elected  consuls  Quin¬ 
tus  Fulvius  Flaccus  the  master  of  the  horse,  and  Appius 
Claudius  Fulcher,  who  had  held  the  government  of  Sicily,  as 
praetor.  Then  were  elected  praetors,  Cneius  Fulvius  Flaccus, 
Caius  Claudius  Nero,  Marcus  Junius  Silanus,  Publius  Cor¬ 
nelius  Sulla.  As  soon  as  the  elections  were  finished,  the  dic¬ 
tator  resigned  his  office.  This  year,  with  Marcus  Cornelius 
Cethegus,  Publius  Cornelius  Scipio,  aftenvards  surnamed 
Africanus  was  curule  aedile.  The  plebeian  tribunes  opposed  the 
pretensions  of  the  latter  to  the  sedileship,  and  insisted  that  he 
ought  not  to  be  admitted  as  a  candidate,  because  he  was  not 
of  the  age  required  by  law*,  on  which  he  answered,  ‘‘  If  it 
is  the  will  of  all  the  citizens  to  make  me  sedile,  I  am  old 
enough:’^  on  this,  the  people  hastened  into  their  respective 
tribes,  to  give  their  votes  in  his  favour,  and  with  such  a  de¬ 
gree  of  zeal,  that  the  tribunes  at  once  relinquished  their  de¬ 
sign.  The  compliments  paid  to  the  public  by  those  sediles 
were  these:  the  Roman  games  were  exhibited  with  magnifi¬ 
cence,  considering  the  circumstances  of  the  times,  and  repeat¬ 
ed  during  one  day;  with  a  donation  of  a  gallon  of  oil  to  each 
street.  The  plebeian  sediles,  Lucius  Villius  Tappulus,  and 
*  Ko  person  could  obtain  a  curule  office  until  he  bad  serv’ed  ten  cam* 
paigns;  and,  as  the  military  age  commenced  at  seventeen,  a  man  inu^  be 
at  least  twenty-seven  before  he  was  qualified  to  sue  for  the  quscstorship.  I- 
seems  that  by  this  l&w  the  requisite  ages  were  settled  thus; 
For  the  quxstorship  -  -  ol  years, 
curule  scdilesliip  -  3r 
praetorship  -  -  40 
consulship  -  -  43 

BOOK  XXV. 

247 

B.C.  213.] 
Marcus  Fundanius  Fundulus,  brought  before  the  people  a 
charge  of  incontinency  against  a  considerable  number  of  ma¬ 
trons,  and  several  who  were  convicted  were  driven  into  exile. 
The  plebeian  games  were  repeated  during  two  days;  and,  on 
occasion  of  these  games,  a  banquet  in  honoqr  of  Jupiter  was 
celebrated. 
III.  Quintus  Fulvius  Flaccus,  a  third  time,  and  Appius 
Claudius,  entered  upon  the  administration  of  the  y  54Q 
consulship.  The  provinces  were  assigned  to  the  prse- 
tors  by  lot;  the  administration  of  justice,  both  to  citizens  and 
foreigners,  formerly  divided  between  two,  now  fell  to  Publius 
Cornelius  Sulla;  Apulia  was  allotted  to  Cneius  Fulvius  Flac¬ 
cus,  Suessula  to  Caius  ClaudiusjNero,  and  Etruria  to  Marcus 
Junius  Silanus.  It  was  decreed,  that  the  consuls  should  con¬ 
duct  the  war  against  Hannibal,  and  that  each  should  receive 
two  legions,  one  from  Quintus  Fabius  consul  of  the  former 
year,  the  other  from  Fulvius  Centumalus;  that,  of  the  praetors, 
Fulvius  Flaccus  should  command  those  legions  which  were 
at  Luceria,  under  the  praetor  iEmilius,  and  Claudius  Nero 
those  which  were  in  Pkenum  under  Caius  Terentius,  and 
that  they  themselves  should  raise  recruits  to  fill  up  the  num¬ 
bers  of  their  respective  armies.  To  Marcus  Junius,  for  the 
service  in  Etruria,  were  given  the  two  city  legions  of  the 
preceding  year.  Tiberius  Sempronius  Gracchus  and  Publius 
Sempronius  Tuditanus  were  continued  in  command  of  their 
provinces,  Lucaniaand  Gaul,  with  the  same  forces  as  before; 
as  was  Publius  Lentulus^in  the  old  Roman  province  in  Sicily; 
Marcus  Marcellas  in  Syracuse,  and  the  late  dominions  of 
Hiero;  Titus  Otacilius  in  the  command  of  the  fleet,  Marcus 
Valerius  in  that  of  Greece,  Quintus  Mucius  Scaevola  in  that 
of  Sardinia,  and  the  two  Cornelii,  Publius  and  Cneius,  in  that 
of  Spain.  In  addition  to  the  troops  already  on  foot,  two  city 
legions  were  levied  by  the  consuls,  the  number  of  these  this 
year  being  raised  to  twenty-three.  The  behaviour  of  Marcus 
Postumius  Pyrgensis  impeded  these  levies  of  the  consuls, 

248 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  540, 

and  went  very  near  ejxxting  a  great  and  general  commotion. 
This^  man  was  a  farmer  6f  the  revenue,  and  for  many  years 
had  not,  in  the  whole  empire,  any  equal  in  fraud  and  avarice, 
excepting -Lucius  Pomponius  Veientanus,  who  was  made 
prisoner  by  the  ,  Carthaginians  under  Hanno,  while  he  was 
inconsiderately  ravaging  the  lands  of  Lucania.  As  the  pub* 
lie  were  to  undergo  any  loss  of  the  supplies  sent  for  the  use 
of  the  armies,  which  should  be  occasioned  by  storm,  these 
two  had  fabricated  accounts  of  pretended  shipwreck;  and 
even  such  as  they  reported  with  a  degree  of  trutii,  had  hap¬ 
pened  through  their  own  fraudulent  contrivance,  not  through 
accident.  Having  put  a  few  goods,  of  little  worth,  on  bc^d 
of  old  shattered  vessels,  they  sunk  these  in  the  deep,  after 
taking  out  the  sailors  into  boa^  prepared  for  the  purpose, 
and  then  made  a  false  return  of  the  cargoes,  as  of  much  more 
considerable  value  than  they  really  were,  A  discovery  of 
tiiis  fraud  had  been  made  tiie  yem-  before  to  Marcus  Atilius 
the  praetor,  and  by  him  communicated  to  the  senate;  but  still 
no  vote  of  censure  had  passed  on  it,  because  the  senators 
were  unwilling  to  disoblige,  at  such  a  time  as  that,  the  body 
of  revenue  farmers.  The  assembly  of  the  people,  however, 
proved  a  more  strict  avenger  of  it;  and  two  plebian  tribunes, 
Spurius  and  Lucius  Carvilius,  exerting  themselves  at  last, 
when  they  saw  that  such  conduct  was  become  generally 
o^ous  and  scandalous,  proposed  a  fine  on  Marcus  Postumius 
of  two  hundred  thousand  asses  in  weight.*  When  the  day 
arrived  on  which  the  cause  was  to  b«  argued,  such  vast  num¬ 
bers  of  the  commons  attended  the  assembly,  that  the  area  of 
the  Capitol  could  scarcely  contain  them;  and  when  the  plead¬ 
ings  were  finished,  the  only  hope  which  the  defendant  seemed 
to  have,  was,  that  Caius  Servilius  Casca,  a  plebian  tribune, 
his  near  relation  and  intimate  friend,  should  interpo^  a  pro¬ 
test,  before  the  tribes  were  called  on  for  their  opinions.  After 

*  645/.  165.  Sit 

BOOK  XXV. 

249 

B.C.  212.] 
the  witnesses  had  been  examined^  the  tribunes  desired  the 
people  to  withdraw^  and  the%m  was  brought,  in  order  that 
the  tribes  should  draw  lots,  and  then  proceed  to  determine 
the  matter.  Meanwhile  the  revenue  farmers  urged  Casca  to 
stop  the  proceedings  for  that  day,  at  which  the  commons 
loudly  declared  their  displeasure,  and  Casca  happening  to 
sit  foremost  at  a  front  comer  of  the  Rostrum,  his  mind  was 
highly  agitated  at  once  by  fear  and  shame.  Finding  no  sup^ 
port  in  him,  the  revenue  farmers,  for  the  purpose  of  obstruct¬ 
ing  the  business,  rushed,  in  a  compact  body,  into  the  space 
which  had  been  cleared  by  the  wididrawing  of  some,  wrang¬ 
ling  at  the  same  time  with  the  remmning  people  and  with  the 
tribunes.  The  dispute  now  seemed  likely  to  proceed  to  vio¬ 
lence,  when  the  consul  Fulvius  said  to  the  tribunes, 
you  not  see  that  your  authority  is  annihilated,  and  Aat  an 
insurrection  will  probably  be  the  consequence,  unless  you 
quickly  dismiss  the  assembly  of  the  commons?’’ 
IV.  The  commons  were  accordingly  dismissed;  and  the 
consuls,  having  assembled  the  senate,  required  their  judgment 
concerning  the  interruption  given  to  the  assembly  of  the 
people,  and  the  audacious  violence  of  the  revenue  farmers, 
representing  at  the  same  time,  that  Marcus  Furius  Camilus, 
whose  banishment  was  followed  by  the  downfall  of  the  city, 
had  submitted  to  a  sentence  of  condonation,  jmssed  on  him 
by  his  angry  countrymen.  That  before  him,  the  decemvirs, 
w^hose  laws  were  the  public  rule  of  conduct  to  the  present 
day,  and,  afterwards,  many  of  the  most  distinguished  per¬ 
sonages  in  the  state,  had  yielded  themselv^  to  the  public 
judgment.  But  Postumius,  an  obscure  individual  of  Pyrgi, 
had  wrested  from  the  Roman  people  their  right  of  sufFr^e; 
had  dissolved  an  assembly  of  the  commons,  annihilated  the 
authority  of  the  tribunes,  arrayed  a  band  of  men,  and  seized  on 
a  post,  with  design  to  cut  off  all  communication  between  the 
commons  and  their  tribunes,  and  to  prevent  the  tribes  being 
called  to  vote.  That  nothing  had  restrained  the  people  from 
''OL.  III. — I  i 

HIST<»y  OF  ROME, 

2BO 

[YM.  540, 

riot  aiai  Ui:»)d$h€d,  bi#  cala»ie&s  ai|d  modor^ioii  <rf  the 
magiatraies,  in  giving  for  tHe  dmc  to  the  de^>enite  auda¬ 
ciousness  of  a  few,  in  suflfering  them^lves  and  the  Roman 
pi^k  to  be  overccme,  and  xa^er  dian  an  occasion  should 
be  given  to  dmse,  who  wished  for  a  riot,  dissolving,  according 
to  the  defenthmt’s  desire,  the  as^mbly,  whose  proceedings 
he  intend^,  to  hinder  by  force  of  aras.”  Every  man  erf  char- 
s^ler  reprohatd  «uch  conduct  as  its  heinousness  deserved, 
mid  adecree  of  the  senate  was  j^ised,  declaring  such  violent 
outn^  trei^ont^ainst  the  ^te,  and  of  pernicious  example; 
cm  wWch  ^  Cmrilii,  plebeian  tribunes,  desisting  from  the 
prosecutiem  erf  the  fine,  immediately  brou^t  forward  a  capi¬ 
tal  accusadim  against  Postumius,  and  ordered,  that  unless 
he  gave  bail,  he  shcmld  be  taken  into  custody  by  the  beadle, 
and  esuried  to  faisem*  Postumius,  after  pving  bail,  did  not 
s^pear.  The  tribui^then  proposed  to  the  commons,  and  the 
commons  p^ss^  this  orckr,  diat  if  Marcus  Postumius  did 
not  sg^)ear  berfme  die  calends  of  imd,  being  summoned 
on  dmt  cky^  did  not  answer  to  fihe  chax^,  or  show  sufficient 
cause  for  Ms  xum-a{^pem*ance,  he  should  be  adjudged  an  exile, 
his  goods  sbxmU  be  confiscated,  and  himself  intordicted  from 
fire  and  wat^.^  They  then  proceeded  to  prosecute  on  capi¬ 
tal  charge,  and  c^npelied  to  give  bmi,  each  of  those  who 
Imd  fomented  the  tumult  and  chsordcr.  At  first,  they  threw 
into  pxison  mch  as  could  not*  find  security,  and  afterwards, 
even  such  «s  could;  to  avoid  the  danger  of  which  treatment, 
most  erf  th<»e  ccmcort^d  went  into  exile.  Such  were  the  con¬ 
sequences  erf  die  fraud  of  the  revenue  farmers,  and  of  their 
daring  attempt  to  screen  them^lves  from  punishment 
V,  An  assepibly  was  then  held  for  the  election  of  a  chief 
pontiiT,  at  which  Marcus  Cmnelius  Cediegus,  the  new  pontiff, 

*  There  was  no  Iw  wluch  authorised  the  sentencing  a  Roman  citizen^ 
Erectly,  to  hanishment  but  by  the  intertUcHon  above  mentioned,  the  exhni- 
asd  vks  deprived  of  every  ri^t  of  a  citizen;  and,  it  being  declared  unlawful 
to  supply  lum  with  any  neccssaiy,  he  was  cofiq>eIled  to  go  into  exile. 

wyoK  XXV* 

B,C.  212.] 

Ut 

preridcd.  Three  casdida^  mamtained  a  very  obsttnale  la¬ 
test,  Quintus  Fttlvius  Flaeeua,  now  a  tlurd  time  consul,  who 
formerly  served  the  xMct  of  censor;  Titus  Manlius 
Torquatus,  distinguished  likewise  by  two  consulships  and  the 
censorship;  and  Publius  Lkinius  Crateus,  who  was  also  to 
solicit  for  the  office  of  curule  The  latter,  young  as  he 
was,  gsdned  a  complete  victory  over  his  competitors  in  this 
dispute,  notwithstanding  tfieir  ^Ivantages  in  respect  of  years, 
and  the  hcmmirs  with  which  they  wtre  decc«rated.  Before  him 
there  had  not  occurred,  in  the  course  of  an  himdred  jusd 
twenty  years,  an  instance  of  any  person  who  had  not  sat  in  a 
cumle  chmr,  l^ing  created  chief  pontiff,  excepting  Publius 
Comelus  Calu^uu  Although  ^e  iccmsuls  found  it  vei^  diffi¬ 
cult  to  complete  the  levies  of  young  men  for  the  purposes  of 
filling  up  vacancies  in  tiie  old  legions  and  raising  new  <mes 
for  the  city,  yet  the  senate  forbade  them  to  cease  their  endea- 
votirs,  and  ordered  two  sets  of  triumvirs  to  be  appointed,  cme 
of  which  within,  and  the  other  beyond,  the  distance  of  fifty 
miles,  should  inspect  into  the  number  of  free-bom  men  in  all 
the  market-towns  and  villages,  and  enlist  such  for  soldiers  as 
had  s^ngdi  enough  to  carry  arms,  though  they  should  not 
yet  have  attained  the  regular  a^  for  service;  and  that  ^  the 
plebian  tribunes  would  be  pleased  to  propose  to  the  people 
die  passing  of  an  order,  That  all  pem»ns  under  the  age  of 
seventeen  years,  who  should  take  the  military  oath,  should 
be  allowed  their  years  of  service,  in  like  manner  as  if  they 
had  been  of  the  age  of  seventeen,  or  older,  when  enlisted**’ 
In  pursuance  of  this  decree  of  the  senate,  two  sets  of  triumvirs 
were  appointed,  who  enlisted  free-bom  youths  in  every  jmrt 
of  the  country. 
VI.  At  this  time  a  letter  was  read  in  the  seimte,  writtoi 
frenn  Sicily  by  Marcus  MarceUus,  relative  to  a  request  of  the 
troops  serving  under  Publius  Lentulus.  This  army  eemsisted 
of  those  who  had  been  in  the  little  of  Csmme;  Aey  had  teen 
sent  abroad  into  Sicily,  as  mentioned  before,  under  a  rule, 

.  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  540. 
that  they  shouH  not  be  brought  home  to  Italy  before  the 
conclusion  of  the  Carthaginian  war.  With  the  permission  of 
Lentulus,  they  sent  the  most  respectable  among  the  horsemen 
and  centurions,  and  a  chosen  number  of  the  legionary  infan¬ 
try  as  deputies  to  Marcus  Marcellus,  to  his  winter-quarters; 
and,  when  they  were  admitted  to  an  audience,  one  of  them 
addressed  him  in  this  manner:  Marcus  Marcellus,  we  would 
have  carried  our  remonstrances  into  Italy  to  you,  while  you 
were  consul,  immediately  after  the  passing  of  that  severe,  if 
we  may  not  call  it  uigust,  decree  of  die  senate  concerning  us, 
had  we  not  entertained  the  hope,  that  being  sent  into  a  pro¬ 
vince  full  of  disturbance,  in  consequence  of  the  death  of  their 
kings,  to  main^in  a  war  of  difficulty  against  the  united 
forces  of  the  Sicilians  and  Carthaginians,  we  might,  by  our 
wounds  and  blood,  have  made  satisfaction  to  the  anger  of 
the  senate,  as,  in  thememory  of  our  fathers,  our  countrymen, 
taken  by  Pyrrhus  at  Heraclea,  made  atonement  by  their  ex¬ 
ertions  in  arms  against  the  same  Pyrrhus.  Yet,  Conscript 
Fathers,  for  what  demerit  on  our  part  did  you  then  conceive, 
or  do  you  now  retain,  displeasure  against  us?  Addressing 
you,  Marcus  Marcellus,  I  consider  myself  as  addressing  both 
the  consuls  and  the  whole  senate;  for  had  you  been  our  con¬ 
sul  at  Cannae,  both  our  affairs  and  those  of  the  public  would 
have  been  in  a  happier  state.  Suffer  me  then,  I  beseech  you, 
before  I  complain  of  the  hardship  of  our  situation,  to  clear 
ourselves  of  the  guilt  which  is  laid  to  our  charge.  If  the 
cause  of  our  ruin  at  Cannae  was  not  the  wrath  of  the  gods, 
nor  the  decree  of  fate,  under  whose  laws  the  immutable  series 
of  human  events  is  carried  on  in  a  regular  chain,  but  miscon¬ 
duct  in  some,  to  whom,  I  pray  you,  is  that  misconduct  to  be 
imputed?  To  the  soldiers,  or  to  the  commanders?  Asa  sol¬ 
dier,  I  shall  certainly  never  say  anything  of  my  commander, 
especially  since  I  know  that  thanks  have  been  givei#him  by 
the  senate,  for  not  having  despaired  of  the  commonwealth, 
and  that,  since  his  flight  from  Cannae,  he  has  been  continued 

B.C.  2lSi.] 

BOOK  XXV. 

25S 

in  command  ^a^gh  every  succeeding  year.  We  have  heard, 
moreover,  that  o^rs  who  saved  their  lives  on  that  melan¬ 
choly  occasion,  smd  who  were  then  oar  miliary  tribunes,  sue 
for,  and  administer  offices  of  honour,  and  hold  the  command 
of  provinces:  Is  it.  Conscript  Fathers^  ^lat  3rou  e^ily  grant 
pardon  to  ymirselves,  and  to  your  of&piing;^  while  yon  inex¬ 
orably  pour  vengeance  on  our  worthk^is  heads?  Was  it  no 
disgrace  for  a  consul,  and  other  chiefs  of  state,  to  fly,, 
when.no  other  hope  was  left;  and  did  you  send  your  soldiers 
into  the  field,  under  a  particular  obligation  to  die  there?  At 
the  Allia,  almost  the  whole  army  fled;  at  the  Caudine  Forks, 
the  troops,  without  eVen  attempting  opposition,  surrendered 
to  the  enemy;  not  to  mention  other  and  shameful  defeats. 
Nevertheless,  so  far  were  these  armies  from  having  any  mark 
of  ignominy  contrived  for  them,  that  the  city  of  Rome  was 
recovered  by  means  of  those  very  troops  who  had  fled  from 
the  Allia  to  Veii^  and  the  Caudine  legions,  who  had  returned 
without  arms  to  Rome,  being  sent  back  armed  into  Samnium, 
sent  under  the  yoke,  that  very  enemy  who  had  so  lately  ex¬ 
ulted  in  their  disgrace.  But  can  atiy  one  make  a  charge  of 
cowardice,  or  running  away,  on  the  troops  who  fought  in  the 
battle  of  Cannse,  in  which  more  than  fifty  thousand  men  fell; 
from  which  the  consul  made  his  escape  with  only  sevmty 
horsemen;  and  from  Which  no  one  brought  away  his  life,  who 
does  not  owe  it  to  the  enemy’s  being  fatigued  with  killing? 
At  the  time  when  the  proposal  of  ransoming  the  prisoners 
was  rejected,  people,  in  general,  bestowed  praises  on  us,  for 
having  reserved  ourselves  for  the  use  of  the  commonwealth, 
for  having  gone  back  to  the  consul  to  Venusia,  and  formed 
an  appearance  of  a  regular  army.  No>v,  we  are  in  a  worse 
condition  than  were  those  taken  by  an  enemy  in  the  time  of 
our  fathers:  for,  in  their  case,  there  was  only  an  alteration 
made  in  their  arms,  in  their  station  in  the  army,  and  in  die 
place  where  they  were  to  pitch  their  tents  in  camp;  all  which, 
however,  they  reversed,  at  once,  by  a  strenuous  exerdon  in 

254 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y-E.  540, 
die  service  of  the  public,  by  one  successful  Imttk*  None  of 
them  were  sent  into  t^mishment;  not  one  was  precluded  from 
the  b<^  of  serving  out  his  legal  term,  and  gaining  a  dis- 
in  short,  they  were  brought  face  to  face  with  an 
enemy,  in  fighting  whom  they  ini^t  at  once  put  an  end  either 
to  their  life  or  their  dishonour.  We,  to  whom  nothing  can 
be  Imputed,  except  that  our  conduct  was  die  cause  that  any 
.  one  Roman  soldier  survived  the  battle  of  Cannae,  are  driven 
away  to  a  distance,  not  only  from  our  native  connjtry,  and 
from  Italy,  but  even  from  an  enemy,  to  a  place  where  we  may 
grow  old  in  exile,  shut  out  from  all  hope,  all  opportunity  of 
obliterating  our  disgrace,  or  of  appeasing  die  wrath  of  our 
coimtrymen,  or,  in  fine,  of  dying  with  honour.  However,  wc 
seek  not  cither  an  end  of  our  ignominy,  or  the  rewards  of 
valour;  we  desire  only  permission  to  give  a  proof  of  our 
spirit,  and  to  exercise  our  courage;  we  seek  labour  and  dan¬ 
ger,  that  we  may  discharge  die  duties  of  men,  and  of  soldiers. 
This  is  now  the  second  year,  during  which  war  is  msdntained 
in  Sicily  with  great  vigour  on  both  sides;  the  Carthaginimis 
conquer  some  cities,  the  Romans  others;  armies  of  infancy, 
and  df  cavalry,  engage  in  battle;  the  operations  are  carried 
on  at  Syracuse  by  land  and  by  sea;  we  plsdnly  hear  the  shouts 
of  the  combatants,  and  the  din  of  their  arms,  while  we  lie  in¬ 
active  and  torpid,  as  if  we  had  neither  hands  nor  armour. 
With  legions  composed  of  slaves,  the  consul  Tiberius  Sem- 
pronius  fought  many  pitched  battles:  they  enjoy  die  fruits  of 
their  labour,  freedom,  and  the  rights  of  citizens*  Let  us  be 
considered  at  least  as  slaves,  purchased  for  the  purpose  of  the 
present  war.  Let  us  be  allowed  to  face  the  enemy,  and  to  ac- 
qinre  freedom  in  battle.  Do  you  choose  to  try  our  courage 
on  sea,  or  on  land;  in  the  field,  or  in  assaulting  t»wns?  Our 
petition  is  for  the  most  arduous  enterprizes,  the  greatest  la¬ 
bour,  and  the  utmost  danger:  that  what  ought  to  have  hap¬ 
pened  at  Cannae,  may  happen  as  soon  as  possible,  since  the 

BX,  2120  BOOK  XXV.  255 
whole  remainder  of  our  lives,  from  that  day,  has  been  doomed 
to  shame.’’ 
VII.  At  the  conclusion  of  this  speech  they  prostrated  them¬ 
selves  at  Marcellus’s  feet.  Marcellos  told  them,  that  a  busi¬ 
ness  of  that  sort  lay  not  within  his  authority,  or  his  power; 
that  he  would  write  to  the  senate,  and  govern  himself,  in 
every  particular,  by  the  judgment  of  that  body.  His  ktter 
on  the  subject  was  brought  to  the  new  consuls,  and  read  by 
them  in  the  senate,  when  the  matter  being  taken  into  consi¬ 
deration,  a  decree  was  passed  to  this  purpose,  that  the 
senate  saw  no  reason  why  the  interests  of  the  commonwealth 
should  be  entrusted  to  men  who  had  deseKed  their  fellow- 
soldiers  in  battle  at  Cannae.  That  if  Marcus  Claudius,  the 
proconsul,  was  of  a  different  opinion,  he  should  act  as  he 
might  judge  consistent  with  the  public  good,  and  Ms  own 
honour;  provided  that  none  of  those  {arsons  should  be  ex¬ 
cused  from  labour,  or  receive  any  military  present  in  reward 
of  countge,  or  be  brought  home  to  Italy  while  the  enemy 
had  any  footing  there.”  After  this,  in  pursuance  of  a  decree 
of  the  senate,  and  an  order  of  the  people,  an  assembly  of 
election  was  held  by  the  city  praetor,  in  which  were  created 
five  commissioners  for  repairing  the  walls  and  towers,  and 
two  sets  of  triumvirs;  one,  to  search  for  the  cfiects  belonging  to 
the  temples,  and  register  the  offerings;  the  otiier,  to  repair 
the  temples  of  Fortune,  and  Motiier  within  the  Cai> 
mental  gate,  and  likewise  that  of  Hope,  on  the  outside  of  the 
gate,  which  had  been  consumed  by  fire  the  year  before. 
There  were  dreadful  storms  at  this  time;  on  tibe  Allmn  mount, 
a  shower  of  stones  lasted,  without  intermission,  for  two  days; 
many  places  were  struck  with  lightning;  two  buildings  in  the 
Capitol,  the  rampart  of  the  camp  above  Suessula,  in  many 
places,  and  two  of  the  men  on  guard  were  killed.  A  wall 
and  some  towers  at  Cumae  were  not  only  struck,  but  demo¬ 
lished  by  lightning.  At  Reate,  a  huge  rock  was  seen  to  fly 
about,  and  the  sun  appeared  more  red  than  usual,  and  of  a 

256 

HISTOBY  Of  ROME. 

[Y.R.  540- 

colour  like  blood,  Oa  account  of  these  iwrodigies  there  was 
a  supplication  for  one  day,  the  consuls  employing  themselves, 
for  several  others,  in  the  performance  of  religious  rites;  at 
the  same  time  solemn  worship  was  performed,  during  nine 
days^  The  revolt  of  the  Tarentines,  after  having  teen  long 
hoped  for  by  Hannibal,  and  apprehended  by  the  Romans, 
happened  to  be  accelerated  by  a  esmse  which  m-iginated  at  a 
distance:  a  Tareutine,  named  Phileas,  had  teen  a  long  time 
at  Rome  under  the  pretext  of  political  business-  Being  a  man 
of  a  restless  disposition,  and  conceiving  that  be  was  losing 
his  active  powers  during  his  stay  in  that  city,  he  contrived 
to  gain  access  t®  the  hostages  from  Tar^tum,  who  were 
kept  in  the  court  of  die  Temple  of  Liberty,  and  guarded  with 
the  less  care,  because  it  was  not  the  interest  either  of  them¬ 
selves  or  of  their  state  to  impose  upon  the  Romans.  Having, 
after  frequent  conversations,  procured  their  concurrence  in 
his  scheme,  and  bribed  two  of  their  kee^^rs,  he  brought  them 
out  of  their  confinement  in  the  beginning  of  the  night,  and 
fled  in  ccmipany  with  them.  As  soon  as  day  arrived,  the 
news  of  their  escape  spread  through  the  city,  and  a  party, 
sent  in  pursuit  of  them,  seized  them  all  at  Tarracina,  and 
brought  them  back.  They  were  ied  into  die  Comitium,  and 
with  the  approbation  of  the  people  scourged  with  rods,  and 
thrown  down  from  the  rock. 
VIH.  The  cruelty  of  this  punisment  exasperated  the  in¬ 
habitants  of  the  two  most  considerable  Grecian  cities  in  Italy, 
both  as  communities,  and  as  individuals  connected  in  rela¬ 
tion,  or  friendship,  with  the  persons  thus  put  to  death.  A  con¬ 
spiracy  was  formed  in  consequence,  by  about  thirteen  of  the 
young  nobility  at  Tarentum,  at  the  head  of  whom  were  Nico 
and  Philemenus.  Judging  it  necessary,  before  they  took  any 
step,  to  confer  with  Hannibal,  they  went  out  of  the  city  by 
night,  under  pretence  of  hunting,  and  repaired  to  the  place 
where  he  lay.  When  they  came  within  a  small  distance  of 
his  camp,  the  rest  concealed  themselves  in  a  wood  near  the 

BOOK  XXV. 

257 

B.C.  212.] 

road,  while  NIco  and  Philemenus,  proceeding  to  the  advanced 
guard,  were  taken  Into  custody,  and,  at  their  own  request, 
conducted  into  the  presence  of  Hannibal.  When  they  had  laid 
before  him  the  reasons  for  their  undertaking,  and  what  they 
intended  to  perform,  they  received  high  commendations,  and 
a  profusion  of  promises^  and  were  desired,  in  order  to  make 
their  countrymen  believe  that  they  came  out  of  the  city  in 
search  of  plunder,  to  drive  home  before  them  some  cattle 
belonging  to  the  Carthaginians,  which  had  been  turned  into 
pasture;  at  the  same  time,  assurance  was  given  them,  that  they 
might  do  it  with  safety,  and  without  a  dispute.  Such  a  booty 
acquired  by  the  young  men  was  much  noticed,  and  ^people 
wondered  the  less  at  their  frequently  repeating  the  same  kind 
of  enterprize.  At  another  meeting  with  Hannibal,  a  covenant 
was  solemnly  ratified,  that  the  Taren tines  should,  together 
with  freedom,  retain  their  own  laws,  and  all  their  rights;  that 
they  should  neither  pay  any  kind  of  tribute  to  the  Carthagini¬ 
ans,  nor,  without  their  own  consent,  receive  a  garrison  from 
them;  but  that  the  present  garrisons,  when  overpowered, 
should  be  put  into  the  hands  of  the  Carthaginians.  After  the 
terms  were  thus  settled,  Philemenus  continued  his  practice  of 
going  out,  and  returning  into  the  city,  by  night,  w^ith  still 
greater  frequency,  attended  by  dogs  and  other  requisites  for 
hunting,  of  which  he  was  remarkably  fond;  then,  bringing 
home  something,  which  he  either  took  himself  in  the  chase, 
or  carried  off  from  the  enemy,  who  laid  it  purposely  in  his 
w-ay,  he  generally  presented  it  to  the  commander,  or  to  the 
watchmen  at  the  gates,  who  supposed  that  he  chose  to  pass 
particularly  by  night,  through  fear  of  surprize.  When  this 
practice  had  now  become  so  customary,  that,  at  w^hatever  time 
of  night  he  gave  the  signal  by  a  whistle,  the  gate  would  be 
opened,  Hannibal  thought  it  was  time  to  put  their  design  into 
execution.  He  lay  at  the  distance  of  three  days’ journey,  and, 
in  order  that  his  keeping  his  camp  fixed  in  one  and  the  same 
spot,  for  such  a  length  of  time,  might  create  the  less  wonder, 
VOL.  Ill,— K  k 

258 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R-  540. 

feigned  himself  sick.  Even  the  Romans  in  garrison  at  Taren- 
turn  had  now  ceased  to  look  with  suspicion  on  his  rem^ing 
so  long  inactive. 
IX.  But  when  he  determined  to  go  on  to  Tarentum,  choos¬ 
ing  out  of  the  infantry  and  cavalry  ten  thousand  men,  who, 
in  activity  of  body,  and  lightness  of  their  armour,  seemed 
best  qualified  for  expedition, he  began  his  march  at  the  fourth 
watch  of  the  night;  having  first  detached  about  eighty  Numi- 
dian  horsemen,  with  orders  to  scour  the  country  on  each  side 
of  the  road,  examining  everyplace  carefully ,  least  any  of  the 
people  who  might  observe  his  approach  from  a  distance  should 
escape;  to  bring  back  such  as  were  before  them  on  the  way, 
and  to  kill  all  whom  they  met,  in  order  that  the  neighbouring 
inhabitants  might  have  reason  to  suppose  it  a  plundering 
party,  rather  than  an  army*  Hannibal,  after  marching  with 
rapid  speed,  pitched  his  camp  at  the  distance  of  about  fifteen 
miles  from  Tarentum:  nor  did  he,  even  there,  discover  to  the 
soldiers  their  destination,  only  giving  it  in  charge  not  to  suf¬ 
fer  any  one  to  turn  aside,  or  quit  the  line;  and,  above  all,  to 
keep  their  attention  alert  to  receive  orders,  and  to  do  nothing 
without  the  command  of  their  officers;  adding,  that  in  due 
time  he  would  let  them  know  what  he  wished  to  be  done. 
About  the  same  hour,  a  report  had  reached  Tarentum,  that 
a  small  number  of  Numidian  horsemen  were  ravaging  the 
lands,  and  had  spread  terror  among  tlie  inhabitants  through 
a  great  part  of  the  country:  but  the  Roman  commander  paid 
no  farther  regard  to  this  intelligence,  than  to  order  a  party  of 
cavalry  to  go  out  v^vy  early  next  morning,  to  stop  these 
depredations;  and,  so  far  was  he  from  increasing  his  vigilance 
in  other  respects,  that,  on  the  contrary,  he  considered  this  in¬ 
road  of  the  Numidians  as  a  proof,  that  Hannibal  and  his 
army  had  not  stirred  from  their  camp.  Early  in  the  night, 
the  Carthaginian  put  his  troops  in  motion,  and  Philemenus, 
with  his  usual  burthen,  taken  in  hunting,  served  him  as  a 
guide,  while  the  rest  of  the  conspirators  waited  for  the  con- 

BOOK  XXV. 

259 

B.C.  212.] 
certed  signals.  It  had  been  settled  among  them,  that  Phileme- 
nus,  bringing  in  his  game  through  the  gate  where  he  was  ac¬ 
customed  to  pass,  should  introduce  some  men  in  arms,  while 
Hannibal  should,  on  another  side,  approach  the  gate  called 
Teihenis,  which,  being  about  the  middle  of  the  land  side, 
faced  towards  the  east  and  near  which,  within  the  walls, 
stood  som^  tombs,  where  Nico  waited  his  arrival.  On  ap¬ 
proaching  the  place,  Hannibal,  according  to  agreement,  rais¬ 
ed  up  a  fire,  and  made  it  blaze.  The  same  signal  was  return¬ 
ed  by  Nico,  and  then  the  fires  were  extinguished  on  both 
sides.  Hannibal  led  on  his  men  in  silence  to  the  gate.  Nico, 
falling  suddenly  on  the  giiltt-ds,  who  were  fast  asleep,  slew 
them  in  their  beds,  and  threw  the  gate  open.  Hannibal  then 
entered  with  his  infantry,  but  ordered  the  cavalry  to  halt 
without,  in  order  that  if  occasion  should  require,  they  might 
have  open  ground  to  act  in.  At  the  same  time,  Philemenus, 
on  the  other  side,  drew  nigh  the  postern  through  which  he 
had  usally  passed,  and  his  signal,  which  had  now  become 
familiar,  with  his  well  known  voice,  saying  that  he  was  hard¬ 
ly  able  to  bear  the  weight  of  a  huge  beast  he  had  killed,  soon 
brought  out  a  watchman,  and  the  gate  was  opened.  While 
two  young  men  carried  in  a  boar,  he  himself  followed  with  a 
huntsman  unincumbered,  and  while  the  watchman,  astonish¬ 
ed  at  the  size  of  the  animal,  turned  incautiously  to  those  who 
carried  it,  he  ran  him  through  with  a  hunting  spear.  About 
thirty  armed  men  then  pushed  in,  slew  the  rest  of  the  watch¬ 
men,  and  broke  open  the  next  gate,  through  which  a  band  of 
soldiers  in  array  immediately  burst  in.  These  were  conducted 
thence,  in  silence,  to  the  Forum,  and  there  joined  Hannibal. 
The  Carthaginian  now  sent  the  Tarentines  of  his  party,  with 
two  thousand  Gauls,  formed  in  three  divisions,  through  the 
several  parts  of  the  city  with  orders  to  take  possession  of  the 
most  frequented  streets,  and,  on  a  tumult  arising,  to  kill  the 
Romans  every  where,  and  spare  the  townsmen.  But  to  render 
this  practicable,  he  gave  direction  to  the  young  T arentines,  that 

260 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  540. 

whenever  they  saw  any  of  their  countr}  men  at  a  distance, 
they  should  bid  them  be  quiet  and  silent,  and  fear  nothing. 
X.  Now  all  was  tumult  and  uproar  as  usual  in  a  city  new¬ 
ly  taken,  but  how  occasioned,  no  one  knew  with  certainty. 
The  Taren tines  supposed,  that  the  Romans  had  risen  in  arms 
to  sack  the  city;  the  Romans,  that  an  insurrection,  with  some 
treacherous  intent,  had  taken  place  among  the  townsmen. 
The  commander,  being  roused  at  the  beginning  of  the  dis¬ 
turbance,  fled  away  to  the  port,  and  getting  into  a  boat  was 
carried  round  to  the  citadel.  The  consternation  was  increas¬ 
ed  by  the  sound  of  a  trumpet  heard  from  the  theatre:  it  was 
a  Roman  one,  procured  before  hand  by  the  conspirators  for 
this  purpose,  and  being  unskilfully  blown  by  a  Greek,  it  was 
impossible  to  discover  who  gave  that  signal,  or  to  whom  it 
was  given.  V/hen  day  appeared,  the  sight  of  the  Carthaginian 
and  Gallic  arms,  removed  all  doubt  from  the  minds  of  the 
Romans;  and,  on  the  other  side,  the  Greeks  seeing  these  lie 
slaughtered  in  every  quarter,  perceived  that  the  city  was  taken 
by  Hannibal.  When  the  light  became  more  clear,  and  the 
Romans,  who  survived  the  carnage,  had  fled  into  the  citadel, 
the  tumult  began  gradually  to  subside,  then  Hannibal  ordered 
the  Tarentines  to  be  called  together  without  their  arms.  They 
all  attended,  some  few  excepted,  who  had  accompanied  the  Ro¬ 
mans  in  their  retreat  into  the  citadel,  resol v’^ed  to  share  every 
fortune  with  them.  Here  Hannibal  addressed  the  Tarentines 
in  terms  of  much  kindness;  reminded  tliem  of  his  behaviour 
to  their  countr}  men,  whom  he  had  taken  at  the  I'rasimenus 
or  Cannae,  inveighing,  at  the  same  time,  against  the  overbear¬ 
ing  tyranny  of  the  Romans^  He  then  ordered  each  to  retire 
to  his  own  house, and  to  write  his  name  on  the  door;  because, 
on  a  signal  shortly  to  be  given,  he  would  order  every  house, 
not  so  inscribed,  to  be  plundered;  adding,  that  if  any  should 
^vrite  his  name  on  the  habitation  of  a  citizen  of  Rome,  (for 
the  Romans  lived  in  houses  of  their  own,)  he  should  be 
treated  as  an  enemy.  The  assembly  was  then  dismissed,  and 

BOOK  XXV. 

261 

B.C.212.] 
as  soon  as  the  doors  were  marked  with  inscriptions,  so  as  to 
distinguish  the  houses  of  friends  from  those  of  enemies,  the 
signal  was  given,  and  the  troops  spread  themselves  through 
all  parts  of  the  town  to  plunder  the  quarters  of  the  Romans, 
in  which  a  considerable  booty  was  found. 
XI.  On  the  following  day,  he  led  on  his  forces  to  attack 
the  citadel;  but  found,  that  on  the  side  towards  the  sea,  which 
flows  almost  round  it,  forming  it  into  a  peninsula,  it  was  de¬ 
fended  by  very  high  rocks,  and,  on  the  side  towards  the  town, 
by  a  wall,  and  a  very  large  ditch;  and  that  consequently  it  was 
impregnable,  either  in  the  way  of  assault,  or  by  regular  ap¬ 
proaches.  Not  choosing  either  to  be  detained  from  more  im¬ 
portant  business,  by  taking  on  himself  the  care. of  defending 
the  Tarentines,  or  in  case  he  left  them  without  a  strong  gar¬ 
rison,  to  put  it  in  the  power  of  the  Romans  to  attack  them 
from  the  citadel  whenever  they  pleased,  he  determined  to  cut 
off  the  communication  between  the  citadel  and  the  city  by  a 
rampart.  Besides, he  entertained  some  hopes, that  the  Romans, 
attempting  to  hinder  this,  might  be  brought  to  an  engagement, 
and  that,  should  tliey  sally  fortli  with  more  than  ordinary  eager¬ 
ness,  great  numbers  of  them  might  be  cut  off,  and  the  strength 
of  the  garrison  thereby  reduced  to  such  a  degree,  that  the  Ta¬ 
rentines  could  alone  defend  the  city  against  them.  As  soon  as 
the  work  was  begun,  the  garrispn,  suddenly  throwing  open 
one  of  the  gates,  made  an  attack  on  the  workmen.  The  guard 
there  stationed  suffered  themselves  to  beaten  off,  in  order  that 
the  others  might  grow  bolder  on  success,  and  that  great  num¬ 
bers  of  them  might  join  the  pursuit,  and  advance  to  a  greater 
distance.  This  they  did:  when  on  a  signal  given,  the  Cartha¬ 
ginians,  whom  Hannib^  had  kept  in  readiness  for  this  pur¬ 
pose,  rushed  forward  on  all  sides.  The  Romans  were  unable 
to  withstand  their  onset;  while  the  narrowness  of  the  ground, 
and  the  difficulties  caused  by  the  part  of  the  work  already 
begun,  and  the  implements  collected  for  carrying  it  on,  ob¬ 
structed  their  hasty  flight,  so  that  most  of  them  tumbled  head- 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  540. 
long  into  the  ditch,  and  more  lives  were  thus  lost  than  in  the 
battle.  The  work  was  then  carried  on  without  any  farther 
obstruction.  A  ditch  of  vast  dimensions  was  dug,  and  on  the 
inner  side  of  that  a  rampart  thrown  up.  It  was  resolved  like¬ 
wise  to  add  at  a  small  distance  behind,  and  in  the  same  di¬ 
rection,  a  wall,  so  that  even  without  a  garrison  die  townsmen 
might  be  able  to  secure  themselves  against  any  attack  of  the 
Romans.  Hannibal,  however,  left  a  company  to  serve  as  such, 
and  at  the  same  time  to  assist  in  completing  the  wall;  and  then 
marching  out  with  the  rest  of  his  forces,  he  encamped  at  the 
river  Galesus,  about  five  miles  distant  from  the  city.  From  this 
post  he* returned  to  inspect  the  work,  and  finding  that  it  had  ad¬ 
vanced  much  more  briskly  than  he  had  expected,  conceived 
hopes  of  being  able  even  to  make  himself  master  of  the  cit¬ 
adel,  whicii  is  not  secured,  like  other  fortresses  of  the  kind, 
by  height  of  situation,  but  built  on  level  ground,  and  divided 
from  the  city  only  by  a  wall  and  a  trench.  The  approaches 
were  now  pushed  forward  with  every  kind  of  machinery, 
when  a  reinforcement,  sent  from  Metapuntum,  inspired  the 
Romans  with  courage  to  assail  the  works  of  the  enemy,  by 
surprize,  in  the  night.  Some  of  them  they  levelled,  others 
they  destroyed  by  fire^  this  put  an  end  to  Hannibal’s  attacks 
on  the  citadel  in  that  quarter.  His  only  prospect  of  success 
was  now  in  a  blockade,  and  that  not  very  flattering,  because 
the  citadel,  being  seated  on  a  peninsula,  commanded  the  en¬ 
trance  of  the  harbour,  and  hac  the  sea  open;  while  the  city  was 
of  course  debarred  from  the  importation  of  provisions,  and 
the  besiegers  were  in  more  danger  of  want,  than  the  besieged. 
Hannibal,  calling  together  the  chiefs  of  the  Tarentines,  enu¬ 
merated  all  the  present  difficulties,  and  added,  that  ‘‘  he  could 
neither  see  any  way  of  storming  so  strong  a  fortress,  nor  place 
any  hope  in  a  blockade,  as  long  as  the  enemy  had  the  command 
of  the  sea.  But  if  he  were  possessed  of  ships,  by  means  of  which 
he  could  prevent  the  introduction  of  supplies,  the  garrison 
would  speedily  either  abandon  the  place,  or  surrender.’’  In 

BOOK  XXV. 

263 

B.C.  212.] 
this  the  Tarentines  agreed  with  him^  but  they  were  of  opi¬ 
nion,  that  ‘‘  be  who  offered  the  counsel  ought  likewise  to  offer 
aid  to  put  it  in  execution:  for,  if  the  Carthaginian  ships 
were  called  over  from  Sicily,  they  would  be  able  to  effect  the 
purpose;  as  to  their  own,  which  were  shut  up  in  a  narrow 
creek,  how  could  they,  while  the  enemy  commanded  the  har¬ 
bour’s  mouth,  ever  make  their  way  into  the  open  sea 
‘‘They  shall  make  their  way,”  said  Hannibal:  “many  things, 
difficult  in  their  nature.,  are  made  easy  by  good  management. 
Your  city  lies  in  a  plain;  very  wide  and  level  roads  stretch  out 
to  eveiy^  side;  by  that  which  runs  across  the  middle  of  the 
city,  from  the  harbour  to  the  sea,  I  will,  without  much  labour, 
carry  over  your  ships  on  waggons.  The  sea,  now  in  posses¬ 
sion  of  the  foe,  will  then  be  ours;  we  will  invest  the  citadel 
on  that  side,  and  on  this  by  land;  or  rather,  we  will  shortly 
take  possession  of  it,  for  the  garrison  will  either  abandon  it, 
or  surrender  themselves  with  it.”  This  discourse  excited 
not  only  hopes  of  the  design  being  accomplished,  but  the 
highest  admiration  of  the  general’s  skill.  Immediately  wag¬ 
gons  were  collected  from  all  parts,  and  fastened  together; 
machines  were  applied  to  haul  up  the  ships,  and  the  road 
was  repaired,  in  order  that  the  vehicles  might  meet  the  less 
obstruction  in  passing.  Beasts  for  drawing,  with  a  number 
of  men,  were  then  procured;  the  work  was  commenced  with 
briskness,  so  that, 'in  a  few  days,  the  fleet,  equipped  and 
manned,  sailed  round  the  citadel,  and  cast  anchor  just  before 
the  mouth  of  the  harbour.  In  this  state  Hannibal  left  affairs 
at  Tarentum,  and  returned  to  his  winter-quarters.  Whether 
the  defection  of  the  Tarentines  took  place  in  this,  or  the  pre¬ 
ceding  year,  authors  are  not  agreed  :  the  greater  number,  and 
those  who  lived  nearest  to  the  time  of  these  transactions, 
represent  it  as  having  happened  as  here  stated. 
XII.  At  Rome,  the  Latine  festival  detained  the  consuls 
and  prsetors  until  the  fifth  of  the  calends  of  May:  on  that  day, 
having  completed  the  solemnities  on  the  mount,  they  set  out 

264 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.540. 

for  their  respective  provinces.  A  new  perplexity,  respecting 
religious  matters,  afterwards  occurred,  arising  from  the  divi¬ 
nations  of  Marcius.  This  Marcius  had  been  a  celebrated 
soothsayer,  and  when,  in  the  preceding  year,  an  inquiry  after 
such  books  as  regarded  them  was  made,  according  to  the  de¬ 
cree  of  the  senate,  his  had  come  into  the  hands  of  Marcus 
Atiiius,  the  city  praetor,  who  was  employed  in  that  business, 
and  he  had  handed  them  over  to  the  new  praetor  Sulla.  Qf 
two  predictions  of  this  Marcius,  one,  on  account  of  its  verity, 
for  it  was  actually  fulfilled,  procured  credit  to  the  other,  the 
time  of  whose  completion  had  not  yet  arrived.  In  the  former 
of  these,  the  defeat  at  Cannae  was  foretold,  nearly  in  these 
words:  Roman  of  Trojan  race,  fly  the  river  Cannae,  lest  fo¬ 
reigners  compel  thee  to  fight  in  the  plain  of  Diomede.  But 
thou  wilt  not  believe  me  until  thou  fillest  the  plain  with 
blood,  and  the  river  carry  many  of  thy  thousands  slain  from 
the  fruitful  land  into  the  great  sea.  To  fishes,  and  birds, 
and  beasts  of  prey  inhabiting  the  earth,  to  these,  thy  flesh  be 
food.  For  so  has  Jupiter  said  to  me.”  Those  who  had 
served  in  the  army  in  those  parts  recollected  the  plains  of 
the  Argive  Diomede  and  the  river  Cannae,  as  well  as  the 
defeat  itself.  The  other  prophecy  was  then  read:  it  was  more 
obscure;  and  the  expression  more  perplexed: — Romans,  if 
you  wish  to  expel  the  enemy,  and  the  ulcer  %vhich  has  come 
from  afar,  I  direct,  that  games  be  vowed  to  Apollo,  and  that 
they  be  performed  in  honour  of  that  deity,  every  year,  with 
cheerfulness.  When  the  people  shall  have  granted  a  parti¬ 
cular  sum  out  of  the  public  fund,  let  private  persons  contri¬ 
bute,  each  according  to  his  ability.  At  the  performance  of 
these  games,  that  prastor  will  preside  who  shall  hold  the  su¬ 
preme  administration  of  justice  in  respect  to  the  people  and 
commons.  Let  the  decemvirs  sacrifice  victims  after  the 
Grecian  mode.  If  you  do  these  things  ^properly  t'ou  shall 
ever  rejoice,  and  your  state  will  improve;  for  Apollo  will  ex¬ 
tirpate  your  foes  who  quietly  feed  on  your  plains.”  They 

B.C.  212.] 

BOOK  XXV. 

265 

took  one  day  to  explain  this  prophecy,  and  on  the  following, 
a  decree  of  the  senate  was  passed,  that  the  decemvirs  should 
examine  the  hooks  concerning  the  performance  of  games  and 
sacrifices  to  Apollo.  When  the  examination  was  made,  and 
the  result  reported  to  the  senate,  they  voted,  that  games 
should  be  vowed  to  Apollo,  and  that  when  these  should  be 
finished,  ten  thousand  asses  in  weight^  should  be  given  to 
the  praetor  to  defray  the  expenses  of  the  public  worship,  and 
also  two  victims  of  the  larger  sort.”  By  another  decree  they 
ordered,  that  ‘‘the  detemvirs  should  sacrifice  according  to 
the  Grecian  rites,  and  with  the  following  victims:  to  Apollo, 
with  a  gilded  steer;  to  Diana,  tvith  nvo  white  gilded  goats; 
and  to  Latona,  with  a  gilded  heifer.”  The  praetor,  when 
about  to  exhibit  the  games  in  the  great  circus,  published  a 
proclamation,  that  the  people  should,  during  those  games, 
pay  in  their  contributions,  proportioned  to  their  ability,  for 
the  service  of  Apollo.  This  was  the  origin  of  the  Apolli- 
narian  games,  which  were  vowed  and  performed  for  the  at¬ 
taining  of  success,  and  not  of  health,  as  is  generally  supposed. 
At  the  exhibition  of  the  games  all  wore  garlands,  the  ma¬ 
trons  made  supplications,  and  people  in  general  feasted 
in  the  courts  of  their  houses,  with  their  doors  open;  and 
the  day  was  solemnized  with  every  kind  of  religious  cere¬ 
mony. 
XIIL  While  Hannibal  was  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Ta- 
rentum,  both  the  consuls  continued  in  Samnium,  showing 
every  appearance  of  an  intention  to  besiege  Capua.  Thp 
inhabitants  of  that  city  began  already  to  feel  a  calamity, 
usually  attendant  on  long  sieges,  a  famine,  the  consequence 
of  their  having  been  hindered  by  the  Roman  armies  from 
tilling  their  lands.  They  therefore  sent  deputies  to  Hanni¬ 
bal,  entreating  that,  before  the  consuls  should  march  the  le¬ 
gions  into  their  couiitr}',  and  all  the  roads  should  be  occu« 

♦  52/.  IQd. 

vor.  III. — L  1 

266 

HISTORY  OF  ROME,  [Y.R,  540, 
pied  by  their  5  parties,  he  would  order  com  to  be  conveyed 
into  Capua  from  the  neighbouring  places.  On  this,  Hanni- 
bal  immediately  commanded  Hanno  to  march  away  with  his 
army  from  Bruttium  into  Campania,  and  to  take  care  that 
the  Capuans  should  be  well  supplied  with  corn.  Hanno,  on 
leaving  Bruttium,  was  careful  to  avoid  the  camps  of  the 
enemy,  and  the  consuls  who  were  in  Samnium;  and  coming 
near  Beneventum,  encamped  on  an  elevated  spot,  three  miles 
from  that  town.  From  thence  he  issued  orders  that  the 
com  collected  in  the  summer  should  ^e  brought  in  from  the 
states  of  that  country,  who  were  of  his  party,  to  his  camp, 
and  appointed  troops  to  escort  the  convoys.  He  then  sent 
an  express  to  the  Capuans,  fixing  a  day  on  which  they  should 
attend,  to  receive  the  corn,  with  the  carriages  of  all  kinds, 
and  beasts  of  burthen,  which  they  could  collect.  This  busi¬ 
ness  the  Campanians  conducted  with  their  usual  carelessness 
and  indolence;  little  more  than  forty  carriages  were  sent,  and 
with  them  a  few  beasts  of  burthen:  for  which  they  were 
sharply  rebuked  by  Hanno,  who  observed,  that  even  hunger, 
which  kindled  a  spirit  in  dumb  beasts,  could  not  stimulate 
those  people  to  active  diligence;  however,  he  appointed 
another  day,  when  they  were  to  come  for  the  corn  with  more 
sufficient  means  of  conveyance.  The  people  of  Beneventum 
being  informed  of  every  particular  of  these  transactions,  in¬ 
stantly  despatched  ten  deputies  to  the  consuls  encamped  near 
*  Bovianum,  who,  as  soon  as  they  heard  what  was  going  on  ^ 
Capua,  agreed  between  themselves,  that  one  of  them 
should  lead  his  army  into  Campania;  and,  accordingly,  Ful- 
vius,  to  whose  lot  that  province  had  fallen,  setting  out  by 
night,  inarched  into  the  town  of  Bemeventum.  Here,  the 
distance  being  short,  he  quickly  learned,  that  Hanno  had. 
gone  out  with  a  division  of  his  army  to  forage;  that  the  busi¬ 
ness  of  delivering  the  corn  to  the  Capuans  was  managed 
by  a  quaestor;  that  two  thousand  carts  had  arrived,  attended 
by  a  disorderly  unarmed  rabble;  that  every  thing  was  done 

BOOK  XXV. 

267 

B.C.  212.] 
with  hurry  and  confusion,  and  that  the  regularity  of  a  camp, 
and  military  subordination  were  entirely  banished  by  the  in¬ 
termixture  of  such  a  number  of  peasants.  This  intelligence 
being  sufficiently  authenticated,  the  consul  issued  orders  that 
the  soldiers  should  get  in  readiness,  against  the  next  night, 
their  standards  and  arms,  as  he  intended  to  attack  the  Car¬ 
thaginian  camp.  Leaving  all  their  knapsacks  and  baggage 
at  Bene ven turn,  they  began  their  march  at  the  fourth  watch; 
and  arriving,  a  little  before  day,  at  the  camp,  struck  such 
terror  there,  that  if  it  had  stood  on  level  ground,  they  might 
undoubtedly  have  taken  it  at  the  first  assault:  it  was  protect¬ 
ed  by  the  height  of  its  situation,  ^and  its  fortifications,  which 
could  not  be  approached  on  any  side,  except  by  a  steep  and 
difficult  ascent. 
XIV.  At  the  dawn  of  day  a  furious  battle  commenced: 
the  Carthaginians  not  only  maintained  their  rampart,  but, 
having  the  advantage  of  the  ground,  tumbled  down  the  ene¬ 
my  as  they  climbed  up  the  steeps;  nevertheless,  the  obstinate  ** 
courage  of  the  latter  overcame  all  obstacles,  and  they  made 
their  way  in  several  parts  at  once  up  to  the  rampart  and 
trenches,  but  at  the  expense  of  many  wounds,  and  a  great 
loss  of  men.  The  consul,  therefore,  calling  together  the 
military  tribunes,  told  them,  that  ‘‘this  inconsiderate  attempt 
must  be  given  up,  and  that  he  judged  it  the  safer  course  to 
carry  back  the  army,  immediately,  to  Beneventum,  and  then, 
on  the  day  following,  to  pitch  his  camp  so  close  to  that  of 
the  enemy,  as  to  put  it  out  of  the  power,  either  of  the  Cam¬ 
panians  to  go  out,  or  of  Hanno  to  return  into  it;  and  that,  in 
order  to  effect  this  with  the  greater  ease,  he  should  send  for 
his  colleague,  and  the  army  under  his  command;  and  that 
they  should  direct  their  whole  force  to  that  point.”  This 
plan  of  the  general  was  disconcerted,  after  the  retreat  began 
to  sound,  by  the  shouts  of  the  soldiers,  expressing  their  scorn 
of  such  pusilanimous  orders.  Close  to  one  of  the  enemy 
gates  was  a  Pelignian  cohort,  whose  commander,  Vibius  Ac- 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

261^ 

[Y.R,  540. 

cuseus,  snatched  the  standard,  and  threw  it  over  the  rampart; 
uttering  imprecations  on  himself  and  the  cohort,  if  they  left 
their  ensign  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy.  He  then  rushed 
forwards,  across  the  ditch  and  rampart,  into  the  camp.  The 
Pelignians  now  fought  within  the  rampart,  when  Valerius 
Flaccus,  a  military  tribune  of  the  third  legion,  began  up¬ 
braiding  the  Romans  Vith  dastardly  behaviour,  in  yielding 
up  to  the  allies  the  honour  of  taking  the  camp.  On  this, 
Titus  Pedanius,  first  centurion,  and  who  commanded  the 
first  ccntur)^  snatching  the  ensign  from  the  standard-bearer, 
cried  out,  this  standard  too,  and  I  vour  centurion,  will  in¬ 
stantly  be  within  the  rampart;  let  those  follow  who  wish  to 
save  the  same  from  falling  into  the  enemy’s  hands.’’  Then 
crossing  the  ditch,  he  was  followed,  first,  by  the  men  of  his 
century,  and,  afterwards,  by  the  whole  legion.  The  consul 
now,  seeing  them  mount  the  rampart,  altered  his  design,  and 
instead  of  calling  off  the  troops,  exerted  himself  to  incite  and 
animate  them;  representing  the  imminent  hazard  and  danger 
to  which  that  ver^’  gallant  cohort  of  their  allies,  and  a  legion 
of  their  own  countrymen,  were  exposed.  On  which  they, 
one  and  all,  with  the  utmost  ardour,  regardless  whether  the 
ground  was  easy  or  difficult,  pushed  onwards  through  every 
obstacle;  and,  in  spite  of  the  showers  of  weapons,  which  fell 
on  every  side,  and  of  all  the  opposition  which  the  enemy  with 
their  arms  and  bodies  could  give  them,  forced  their  way  in. 
Many  even  of  the  wounded,  and  of  those  whose  blood  and 
strength  began  to  fail  them,  struggled  forward,  that  thev 
might  fall  in  the  camp  of  the  enemy.  It  was  entered  there¬ 
fore  in  as  short  a  space  as  if  it  had  stood  in  a  plain,  and  had 
no  fortification  to  protect  it.  Both  armies  being  now  shut 
up  together  within  the  rampart,  the  sequel  was  a  carnage, 
not  a  fight:  upw'ards  of  six  thousand  of  the  enemy  were  slain, 
and  above  seven  thousand  taken,  together  with  the  Campa¬ 
nians  who  came  for  the  com,  and  all  their  train  of  waggons 
and  beasts  of  burthen.  There  was  also  great  abundance  of 

BOOK  XXV. 

2€>9 

B.C.  212.] 
other  booty,  which  Hanno  and  his  plunderers  had  collected 
out  of  the  lands  of  the  states  in  alliance  with  the  Roni^n 
people.  After  demolishing  the  enemy’s  camp,  the  army  re¬ 
turned  to  Beneventum,  and  there  the  consuls  (for  Appius 
Claudius  came  thither  in  a  few  days  after),  divided  and  sold 
the  spoil.  Those  who  were  chiefly  instrumental  in  this  affair, 
particularly  Accuseusthe  Peiignian,  and  Titus  Pedani us  first 
centurion  of  the  third  legion,  received  honorary  presents. 
^^Planno,  who  was  then  at  Caminium,  in  the  territory  of  Caeres, 
on  being  informed  of  the  loss  of  his  camp,  returned  with 
the  small  party  of  foragers  which  he  had  with  him,  into 
Bruttium,  in  a  manner  more  like  a  flight  than  a  march. 
XV.  The  Campanians,  w^hen  informed  of  the  disaster 
which  had  fallen  on  them  and  their  allies,  despatched  depii- 
ties  to  Hannibal,  to  acquaint  him,  that  the  two  consuls  were 
at  Beneventum,  within  one  day’s  march  of  Capua;  so  that  the 
war  might  almost  be  said  to  be  close  to  their  gates  and  walls* 
That  unless  he  afforded  them  speedy  succour,  Capua  wt>uld 
fall  into  the  enemy’s  power  in  a  shorter  time  than  Arpi  had 
done.  That  even  Tarcntum,  taken  in  its  whole  extent,  not 
to  speak  of  its  citadel,  ought  not  to  be  deemed  of  such  con¬ 
sequence,  as  to  induce  him  to  neglect  the  defence  of  Capua, 
(a  city  which  he  used  to  compare  to  Carthage,)  and  to  throw 
it  into  the  hands  of  the  Roman  people.”  Hannibal  promised 
to  pay  due  attention  to  the  affairs  of  the  Campanians;  and, 
for  the  present,  sent  with  their  deputies  a  body  of  two  thou¬ 
sand  horsemen,  to  assist  them  in  protecting  their  lands  from 
depredations.  Meanwhile,  the  Romans,  among  the  variety 
of  their  other  concerns,  were  not  disregardful  of  the  citadel 
of  Tarcntum,  and  the  garrison  besieged  in  it.  By  direction 
of  the  senate,  Caius  Servilius,  lieutenant  general,  was  sent 
by  Publius  Cornelius,  prietor,  into  Etruria,  to  purchase  corn; 
with  which  having  loaded  several  vessels,  he  passed  through 
the  guardships  of  the  enemy,  and  an'ived  in  the  port  of  Ta- 
rentum.  His  coming  produced  such  a  change  in  their  dis- 

270 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  540. 
position,  that  they  who,  a  little  before,  when  their  hopes  of 
relief  were  small,  hadTrequently,  in  conferences,  been  soli¬ 
cited  by  the  Caithaginian  to  desert  the  Roman  cause,  began 
now  to  solicit  him  to  come  over  to  them.  The  garrison  was 
abundantly  strong,  for  the  troops  stationed  at  Metapontum 
had  been  brought  hither  for  the  defence  of  the  citadel.  The 
Metapontines  being  hereby  freed  from  the  restraint  under 
which  they  had  been  held,  instantly  revolted  to  Hannibal; 
as  did  the  Thurians,  on  the  same  coast,  induced,  not  only  b^^, 
the  example  of  the  Taren tines  and  Metapontines,  with  whom 
they  were  connected  by  consanguinity,  being  originally  des¬ 
cended  from  natives  of  the  same  country  of  Achaia,  but 
principally  by  resentment  against  the  Romans,  for  the  late 
execution  of  the  hostages.  The  friends  and  relations  of  these 
sent  letters  and  messages  to  Hanno  and  Mago,  who  were  at 
no  great  distance  in  Bruttium,  that  if  they  brought  their  army 
near^the  walls,  they  would  deliver  the  city  into  their  hands. 
Thefl-e  was  a  small  garrison  at  Thurium  commanded  by 
Marcus  Atinius,  and  they  supposed  that  he  might  be  easily 
tempted  to  engage  rashly  in  a  battle;  not  from  any  confidence 
in  his  own  troops,  (for  they  were  very  few,)  but  from  rely¬ 
ing  on  the  support  of  the  young  men  of  the  place,  whom  he 
had  purposely  formed  into  companies  and  armed,  that  he 
might  have  them  ready  to  aid  him  in  exigencies  of  the  kind. 
The  Carthaginian  commanders,  dividing  their  forces,  entered 
the  territory  of  Thurium;  and  then  Hanno,  at  the  head  of 
the  infantry,  in  hostile  array,  advanced  towards  the  city; 
while  Mago,  with  the  cavalry,  halted  under  the  cover  of  some 
hills,  which  stood  conveniently  for  concealing  the  stratagem. 
Atinius  learning  nothing  from  his  scouts  but  the  march  of 
the  infantry,  and  ignorant  both  of  the  tre^cher}^  within  the 
city,  and  of  the  enemy’s  ambush,  led  out  his  forces  to  battle. 
The  infantrr  engaged  without  any  degree  of  vigour,  the  only 
exertions  being  made  by  the  few  Romans  in  front,  the^Thu- 
rians  rather  waiting  for  the  issue,  than  taking  any  part  in  the 
action,  while  the  Carthaginian  line  retreated  on  purpose  to 

BOOK  XXV. 

271 

B.C.  212.] 
draw  the  incautious  enemy  to  the  back  of  the  hill,  where  their 
horse  was  posted.  No  sooner  did  they  arrive  here,  than  the 
cavalry,  rushing  on  with  loud  shouts,  instantly  put  to  flight 
the  crowd  of  Thurians,  who  were  almost  ignorant  of  disci¬ 
pline,  and  not  very  faithfully  attached  to  the  party  on  whose 
side  they  appeared.  The  Romans,  notwithstanding  their 
being  surrounded,  and  hard  pressed,  by  the  infantry  on  one 
side,  and  the  cavalry  on  the  other,  maintained  the  fight  for  a 
considerable  time:  at  last,  they  also  turned  their  backs,  and 
fled  towards  the  city.  Here  the  conspiratorl  were  collected 
together  in  a  body,  and  received  wdth  open  gates  the  multi¬ 
tude  of  their  country^men;  but  when  they  saw  the  routed  Ro¬ 
mans  making  towards  them,  they,  cried  out,  that  the  Cartha¬ 
ginians  were  close  at  hand,  and  if  the  gates  were  not  speed¬ 
ily  closed,  the  enemy,  and  all  together,  would  pour  in.  In 
this  manner  they  shut  out  the  Romans,  and  left  them  to 
perish  by  the  sword.  Atinius,  however,  with  a  few  others, 
gained  admittance.  A  dispute  now  arose,  and  lasted  for 
some  time,  one  party  maintained  that  they  ought  to  defend 
the  city,  another,  that  they  ought  to  yield  to  fortune,  and 
surrender  it  to  the  conquerors.  But,  as  is  too  often  the  case, 
bad  counsels  prevailed.  They  conveyed  Atinij(^,  with  a  few 
attendants,  to  the  ships  near  the  shore,  which  they  did  out 
of  personal  regard  to  himself,  and  on  account  of  the  justice 
and  mildness  of  his  conduct  in  command,  rather  than  out  of 
good  will  to  the  Rom^s,  and  then  opened  their  gates  to  the 
Carthaginians.  The  consuls  led  their  legions  from  Bene- 
ventum  into  the  territory  of  Campania,  with  the  intention 
not  only  of  destroying  the  corn,  which  was  now  in  the  blade, 
but  of  laying  siege  «to  Capua;  hoping  to  signalize  their  con¬ 
sulate  by  the  destruction  of  so  opulent  a  city,  and,  at  the 
same  time,  to  free  their  government  from  the  great  shame 
of  suffering  a  revolt  so  near  home  to  pass  unpunished  during 
the  space  of  three  years.  But,  that^  Beneventum  should  not 
be  without  a  garrison,  and  that,  in  case  of  sudden  emergen¬ 
cies,  if  Hannibal  should  come  to  Capua  to  succour  his  allies. 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.540. 

as  they  had  bo  doubt  but  he  would,  there  might  be  a  body 
of  cavalry  to  oppose  his,  they  ordered  Tiberius  Gracchus 
to  come  from  Lucania  to  Beneventum,  with  his  horse  and 
light  infantry,  and  to  appoint  some  officer  to  command  the 
legions  in  camp,  in  order  to  preserve  peace  in  Lucania. 
XVI.  While  Gracchus  was  performing  sacrifices,  prepara¬ 
tory  to  his  departure  from  Lucania,  a  prodigy  of  disastrous 
import  occurred  :  when  a  victim  was  killed,  two  snakes,  creep¬ 
ing  up  from  some  hiding-place  to  the  entrails,  eat  the  liver, 
and  after  being*  seen  by  all  present,  suddenly  vanished.  It  is 
even  said,  that  when,  by  advice  of  the  aru spices,  the  same 
sacrifice  was  repeated,  and  the  pots  containing  the  entrails 
were  more  carefully  watched,  the  snakes  came  a  second,  and 
a  third  time;  and  after  eating  the  liver,  went  away  unhurt. 
Though  the  diviners  gave  warning,  that  this  portent  concer- 
ed  the  general,  and  that  he  ought  to  be  on  his  guard  against 
secret  enemies,  and  plots,  yet  his  impending  fate  could  not 
be  averted  by  any  effort  of  prudence.  There  was  a  Lucanian, 
called  Flavius,  the  head  of  that  division  of  his  countrymen 
who  adheared  to  the  Romans  when  the  other  went  over  to 
Hannibal;  and  he  was,  that  year,  in  the  chief  magistracy, 
having  been  •lected  praetor  by  his  party.  This  man,  changing 
his  mind  on  a  sudden,  and  seeking  some  means  of  ingratia¬ 
ting  himself  with  the  Carthaginian,  did  not  think  it  enough 
to  draw  his  countrymen  into  a  revolt,  unless  he  ratified  the 
league  between  him  and  the  enemy  with  the  head  and  blood 
of  his  commander,  to  whom  he  was  also  bound  by  ties  of 
hospitality,  and  whom,  notwithstanding,  he  determined  to 
betray.  He  held  a  private  conference  with  Mago,  who  com¬ 
manded  in  Bruttium,  and  having  receive  from  him  a  solemn 
promise,  that  if  he  would  deliver  the  Roman  general  into  the 
hands  of  the  Carthaginians,  the  Lucanians  should  be  receiv¬ 
ed  into  friendship,  and  retain  their  own  laws  and  their  liberty, 
he  conducted  the  Carthaginian  to  a  spot,  whither,  he  said,  he 
would  bring  Gracchus  with  a  few  attendants.  He  then  desired 

BOOK  XXV, 

27^ 

B,  C.  212.] 
Mago  to  arm  both  horsemen  and  footmen,  and  to  take  pos« 
session  of  that  retired  place,  where  a  very  large  number 
might  be  concealed.  After  thoroughly  examining  the  same 
on  all  sides,  they  appointed  a  day  for  the  execution  of  the 
plan.  Flavius  then  went  to  the  Roman  general,  and  told 
him,  that  “Jie  had  made  some  progress  in  an  affair  of  great 
consequence,  to  tjie  completion  of  which  the  assistance  of 
Gracchus  himself  was  necessary.  That  he  had  persuaded 
all  the  praetors  of  those  states  in  Lucania,  who,  during  the 
general  defection  In  Italy,  had  rev^olted  to  the  Carthaginians, 
to  return  into  friendship  with  the  Romans,  alleging  that  the 
power  of  Rome,  which,  by  the  defeat  at  Cannae,  had  been 
brought  to  the  brink  of  ruin,  was  every  day  improving  and 
increasing,  while  Hannibal’s  strength  was  declining,  and  had 
sunk  almost  to  nothing.  That  with  regard  to  their  former 
transgression,  the  Romans  would  not  be  implacable;  for  never 
was  there  a  nation  more  easily  appeased,  and  more  ready 
to  grant  pardon;  and  asking,  how  often  had  their  own  an¬ 
cestors  received  pardon  of  rebellion?  These  things,”  he 
said,  he  had  represented  to  them;  but  that  it  would  be 
more  pleasing  to  them  to  hear  the  same  from  Gracchus  him¬ 
self,  to  be  admitted  into  his  presence,  and  to  touch  his  right- 
hand,  that  they  might  carry  with  them  that  pledge  of  faith. 
He  had  fixed  a  place,”  he  said,  for  the  parties  to  meet,  re¬ 
mote  from  observation^  and  at  a  small  dist^ce  from  the  Ro¬ 
man  camp;  there  the  business  might  be  finished  in  a  few 
words,  and  the  alliance  and  obedience  of  the  whole  nation  of 
Lucania  secured  %o  the  Romans*”  Gracchus,  not  perceiv¬ 
ing,  either  in  this  discourse,  or  in  the  proposition  itself,  any 
reason  to  suspect  perfidy,  and  being  imposed  on  by  the  plau- 
sibiUty  of  the  tale,  left  the  camp  with  his  lictors  and  one 
troop  of  horse,  and  following  the  guidance  of  his  guest,  fell 
precipitately  into  the  snare.  The  enemy  at  once  rose  from., 
their  ambush,  and,  wh^t  removed  all  doubt  of  treachery,  Fla" 
vius  joined  himself  to  them.  Weapons  were  now  poured 
ni. — M  m 

274 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  540. 

from  all  sides  on  Gracchus  and  his  horsemen.  He  immedi¬ 
ately  leaped  down  from  his  horse,  ordered  the  rest  to  do  the 
same,  and  exhorted  them,  ‘‘  as  fortune  had  left  them  but 
one  part  to  act,  to  dignify  that  part  by  their  bravery.  To  a 
handful  of  men,  surrounded  by  a  multitude  in  a  valley  hem¬ 
med  in  by  woods  and  mountains,  what  else  was  left  than  to 
die?  The  only  alternative  they  had  was,  either  tamely  wait¬ 
ing  their  blows,  to  be  massacred,  like  cattle,  without  the 
pleasure  of  revenge,  or  with  minds  totally  abstracted  from 
the  thoughts  of  pain  or  of  what  the  issue  might  be,  and  actuated 
solely  by  resentment  and  rage,  to  exert  every  vigorous  and 
daring  effort,  and  to  fall  covered. with  the  blood  of  their  exr 
piring  foes.'’  He  desired  that  “  all  should  aim  at  the  Lucani- 
an  traitor,  and  deserter;”  adding  that  “  whoever  should  send 
that  victim  before  him  to  the  infernal  regions,  would  acquire 
distinguished  glory,  and  the  greatest  consolation  for  his  own 
loss  of  life.”  While  he  spoke  thus,  he  wrapped  his  robe 
about  his  left  arm,  (for  they  had  not  even  brought  bucklers 
with  them,)  and  then  rushed  on  the  murderers-  The  fight 
was  maintained  with  greater  vigour  than  could  have  been  ex¬ 
pected,  considering  the  smallness  of  their  number.  The  Ro¬ 
mans,  whose  bodies  were  uncovered  and  exposed,  on  all 
sides,  to  weapons  thrown  from  the  higher  grounds  into  a 
deep  valley,  %vere  mostly  pierced  through  with  javelins. 
Gracchus  being  now  left  without  support,  the  Carthaginians 
endeavoured  to  take  him  alive;  but,  observing  his  Lucanian 
guest  among  them,  he  rushed  with  such  fury  into  the  thick¬ 
est  of  the  band,  that  they  could  not  sieze  him  without  the 
loss  of  many  lives.  Mago  immediately  sent  his  body  to 
Hannibal,  desiring  that  it  should  be  laid,  with  the  fasces  ta¬ 
ken  at  the  same  time,  before  the  general’s  tribunal.  This  is  the 
true  account  of  the  matter;  Gracchus  was  cut  off  in  Luca- 
nia,  near  the  place  called  the  Old  Plains. 
XVII.  Some  lay  the  scene  of  this  disaster  in  the  territory 
of  Beneventum,  at  the  river  Calor,  where  they  say,  he  went 

BOOK  XXV. 

47S 

B.  C.  212.] 
from  the  camp  to  bathe,  attended  by  his  lictors  and  three 
servants;  that  he  was  slain  by  a  party  of  the  enemy,  who 
happened  to  be  lurking  in  the  oziers  which  grew  on  the  bank, 
while  he  was  naked  and  unarmed,  attempting,  however  to 
defend  himself  with  the  stones  brought  down  by  the  river. 
Others  write,  that,  by  direction  of  the  aruspices,  he  went 
out  a  half  a  mile  from  the  camp,  that  he  might  expiate  the 
prodigies  before-mentioned  in  a  place  free  from  defilement, 
and  that  he  was  surrounded  by  two  troops  of  Numidians,  who 
were  lying  in  wait  there.  So  far  are  writers  from  agreeing 
with  regard  either  to  the  place  or  the  manner  of  the  death 
of  a  man  so  renowned  and  illustrious.  There  are  also  vari¬ 
ous  accounts  of  his  funeral:  some  say  that  he  was  hurried  by 
his  own  men  in  the  Roman  camp;  others,  whose  account  is 
more  generally  received,  that  a  funeral  pile  was  erected  for 
him  by  Hannibal,  at  the  entrance  of  the  Carthaginian  camp, 
and  that  the  troops  under  arms  marched  in  procession  round 
it,  with  the  dances  of  the  Spaniards,  and  the  several  mo¬ 
tions  of  their  arms  and  bodies  peculiar  to  each  nation;  while 
Hannibal  himself  joined  in  solemnizing  his  obsequies  with 
every  mark  of  respect,  both  in  the  terms  in  which  he 
spoke  of  him,  and  in  the  manner  of  performing  the  rites. 
Such  is  the  relation  of  those  who  state  the  affair  as  having 
happened  in  Lucania.  If  those  are  to  be  believed  who  af¬ 
firm  that  he  was  killed  at  the  river  Calor,  the  enemy  kept 
possession  of  Gracchus’s  head  only,  which  being  brought  to 
Hannibal,  he  immediately  sent  Carthalo  to  convey  it  into  the 
Roman  camp  to  Cneius  Cornelius,  the  quaestor;  solemnizing 
the  funeral  of  the  general  in  his  camp;  in,  the  performance 
of  which  the  Beneventans  joined  with  the  soldiers. 
XVIIL  The  consuls,  having  entered  the  Campaniair  ter¬ 
ritories,  spread  devastation  on  all  sides,  but  were  soon  alarm¬ 
ed  by  the  townsmen,  in  conjunction  with  Magoand  his  cav¬ 
alry,  marching  hastily  out  against  them.  They  called  in  the 
troops  to  their  standards,  from  the  several  parts  where  they 

376 

HISTORY  OF  ROME 

[Y,  R,  540, 

were  dispersed;  but,  before  they  had  completed  the  forming 
of  their  line  of  battle,  they  were  pul  to  the  rout,  and  lost 
above  fifteen  hundred  men.  On  this  success,  that  people, 
naturady  disposed  to  arrogance,  assumed  the  highest  degree 
of  confidence,  and  endeavoured  to  provoke  the  Romans  by 
frequent  skirmishes:  but  the  battle,  into  which  they  had  been 
incautiously  drawn,  had  rendered  the  consuls  more  circum¬ 
spect.  However,  the  spirit  of  their  party  was  revived,  and 
the  boldness  of  the  other  diminished,  by  an  occurrence,  in  it¬ 
self,  of  a  trivial  nature,  but  that,  in  war,  scarcely  any  inci¬ 
dent  is  so  insignificant,  that  it  may  not,  on  some  occasion, 
give  cause  to  an  event  of  much  importance,  A  Campanian, 
called  Radius,  had  .been  a  guest  of  Titus  Q,uintius  Crispinus, 
and  lived  on  terms  of  the  closest  friendship  and  hospitality 
with  him,  and  their  intimacy  had  increased  in  consequence 
of  Crispinus  having,  in  his  own  house  at  Rome,  given  very 
kind  and  affectionate  attendance  to  Radius  in  a  fit  of  sickness 
which  he  had  there  before  the  defection  of  Campania.  This 
Radius,  now,  advancing  in  front  of  the  guards  posted  before 
one  of  the  gates  desired  that  Crispinus  might  be  called;  on 
being  told  of  it,  Crispinus,  retaining  a  sense  of  private  du¬ 
ties  even  after  the  dissolution  of  the  public  treaties,  imagi¬ 
ned  that  his  old  acquaintance  wished  for  an  amicable  inter¬ 
view,  and  went  out  to  some  distance.  As  soon  as  they  came 
within  sight  of  each  other,  Radius  cried  out,  “  Crispinus,  I 
challenge  you  to  combat;  let  us  mount  our  horses,  and,  mak¬ 
ing  the  rest  keep  back,  determine  which  of  us  is  superior  in 
arms.”  To  which  Crispinus  answered,  that  “  they  were 
neither  of  them  at  a  loss  for  enemies,  on  whom  they  might 
display  their  valour:  that,  for  his  part,  should  he  even  meet 
himdn  the  field  of  battle,  he  would  turn  aside,  to  avoid  im¬ 
bruing  his  hands  in  the  blood  of  a  guest;”  he  then  attempted 
to  go  away.  Whereupon,  the  Campanian,  with  greater  pas¬ 
sion,  upbraided  him  as  a  coward;  casting  on  him  undeserved 
reproaches,  which  might  with  greater  propriety  have  been 

BOOK  XXV. 

B.  C.  212.j 

2rr 

applied  to  himself,  at  the  same  time  charging  him  as  be¬ 
ing  an  enemy  to  the  laws  of  hospitality,  and  as  pretending 
to  be  moved  by  concern  for  a  person  to  whom  he  knew  him¬ 
self  unequal;  he  said,  that**  if  not  sufficiently  convinced,  that 
by  the  rupture  of  the  public  treaties,  private  obligations  were 
at  the  same  time  dissolved,  Badius,  the  Campanian,  now, 
in  presence  of  all,  in  the  hearing  of  the  two  armies,  reimunced 
all  connections  of  hospitality  with  Titus  Quintius  Crispinus, 
the  Roman.  He  was  under  no  bond  of  society  with  him;  an 
enemy  had  no  claim  of  alliance  on  an  enemy,  whose  country 
and  whose  tutelary  deities,  both  public  and  private,  he  had 
come  to  invade:  if  he  were  a  man,  he  would  meet  him. 
Crispinus  hesitated  long,  but,  at  last,  the  men  of  his  troop 
persuaded  him  not  to  suffer  the  Campanian  to  insult  him 
with  impunity.  Wherefore,  waiting  only  to  ask  leave  of  the 
generals *to  fight,  out  of  rule,  with  one  who  gave  him  a  chal¬ 
lenge,  with  their  perm'issioirhe  took  arms,  mounted  his  horse, 
and  calling  Badius  by  name,  summoned  him  to  the  combat. 
The  Campanian  made  no  delay,  and  they  encountered  in  full 
career.  Crispinus  passiug  his  spear  over  Badius’s  buckler, 
ran  it  through  his  left  shoulder,  and,  on  his  falling  in  conse- 
quence  of  the  wound,  dismounted  in  order  to  despatch  him 
as  he  lay,  but  Badius,  to  avoid  impending  death,  left  his 
horse  and  his  buckler,  and  ran  off  to  his  own  party.  Crispinus 
seized  the  horse  and  arms,  anefwith  these  glorious  badges  of 
victory,  and  with  his  bloody  weapon  held  up  to  view,  was 
conducted  by  the  soldiers,  amidst  praises  and  congratulations, 
to  the  consuls,  from  whom  he  received  ample  commendations, 
and  honourable  presents. 
XIX.  Hannibal  marched  from  the  territory  of  Beneven- 
tum  to  Capua,  and,  on  the  third  day  after  his  arrival  there, 
drew  out  his  forces  to  face  the  enemy,  confident  that  after 
the  Campanians  had  a  few  dtiys  before,  without  his  assistance, 
fought  them  with  success,  the  Romans  would  be  much  less 
able  to  withstand  him  and  his  army,  which  had  so  often  de 

27H 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

[Y.  R.  540, 

feated  them.  When  the  battle  began,  the  Roman  army  was 
in  danger  of  being  worsted,  in  consequence,  principally,  of 
a  charge  made  by  the  enemy’s  cavalry,  who  overwhelmed 
them  with  darts,  until  the  signal  was  given  to  their  own  cav¬ 
alry  to  charge;  and  now  the  contest  lay  between  the  horse, 
when  Sempronius^s  army,  commanded  by  the  quaestor  Cneius 
Cornelius,  being  descried  at  a  distance,  gave  an  equal  alarm, 
each  party  fearing  that  it  was  a  reinforcement  coming  to  his 
antagonist.  The  signal  of  retreat  was  therefore  given  on 
both  sides,  as  if  by-  concert;  and  quitting  the  field  on  almost 
equal  terms,  they  retired  to  their  several  camps:  the  Romans, 
however,  had  lost  the  greater  number  of  men  by  the  first  on¬ 
set  of  the  horse.  Next  night,  the  consuls,  in  order  to  draw 
Hannibal  from  Capua,  marched  away  by  different  routes, 
Fulvius  to  the  territory  of  Cumse,  Appius  Claudius  into  Lu- 
cania.  On  the  day  following,  when  Hannibal  was  hiformed 
that  the  Romans  had  forsaken  their  camp,  and  gone  off  in 
two  divisions,  by  different  roads,  he  hesitated  at  first,  con¬ 
sidering  which  of  them  he  should  pursue;  and  at  length  de¬ 
termined  to  follow  Appius,  who,  after  leading  him  about 
through  whatever  track  he  chose,  returned  by  another  road 
to  Capua.  Hannibal  met,  in  that  part  of  the  country,  an  un¬ 
locked  for  opportunity  of  striking  an  important  blow:  there 
was  one  Marcus  Centenius,  surnamed  Penula,  distinguished 
among  the  centurions  of  the  first  rank  both  by  the  size  of  his 
body,  and  by  his  courage:  this  man,  who  had  served  his  time 
in  the  army,  being  introduced  to  the  senate  by  the  praetor, 
Publius  Cornelius  Sulla,  requested  of  the  senators  to  grant 
him  the  command  of  five  thousand  men,  assuring  them,  that 
“  being  thoroughly  acquainted  both  with  the  enemy  and  the 
countr}’,  he  would  speedily  perform  something  that  should 
give  them  satisfaction;  and  that  the  same  wiles,  by  which 
hitherto  the  Roman  coftimaaders  used  to  be  entrapped,  he 
would  practise  against  the  inventor  of  them.”  The  folly 
of  this  proposal  was  equalled  by  the  folly  with  which  it  wa[^ 

B.  Cv2120 

BOOK  XXV. 

279 

assented  to;  as  if  the  qualifications  of  a  centurion  and  a  ge¬ 
neral  were  the  same.  Instead  of  five,  eight  thousand  men 
were  granted  him,  half  citizens  and  half  allies;  besides  these, 
he  collected  in  his  march  through  the  country  a  considerable 
number  of  volunteers;  and,  having  almost  doubled  the  num¬ 
ber  of  his  army,  he  arrived  in  Lucania,  where  Hannibal,  af¬ 
ter  a  vain  pursuit  of  Appius,  had  halted.  There  was  no 
room  for  doubt  about  the  result  of  a  contest  between  such  a 
captain  as  Hannibal,  and  a  sabaltem;  in  short,  between  ar¬ 
mies,  of  which  one  was  become  veteran  in  a  course  of  con¬ 
quest,  the  other  entirely  new  raised,  for  the  most  part  un¬ 
disciplined  and  but  half  armed.  As  soon  as  the  parties  came 
within  view  of  each  other,  neither  declining  an  engagement, 
the  lines  were  instantly  formed.  Notwithstanding  the  dis¬ 
parity  of  the  forces,  the  battle  was  maintained  in  a  manner 
unprecedented  under  such  circumstances,  the  Roman  soldiers, 
for  more  than  two  hours,  making  the  most  strenuous  effort^, 
as  long  as  their  commander  stood:  but  he,  anxious  to  support 
his  former  reputation,  and  dreading  moreover  the  disgrace 
which  would  afterwards  fall  on  him,  if  he  survived  a  de¬ 
feat  occasioned  by  his  own  temerity,  exposed  himself  rashly 
to  the  weapons  of  the  enemy,  and  was  slain;  on  which  the 
Roman  line  immediately  fell  into-  confusion,  and  gave  way. 
But  even  flight  was  now  out  of  Isheir  power,  for  so  effectual¬ 
ly  had  the  enemy’s  cavalry  shut  up  every  pass,  that,  out  of 
so  great  a  multitude,  scarcely  a  thousand  made  their  escape; 
the  rest,  meeting  destruction  on  every  side,  were  all  cut  off 
in  various  ways. 
XX.  The  consuls  resumed  the  siege  of  Capua  with  the 
utmost  vigour,  and  took  measures  for  procuring  and  collect¬ 
ing  every  thing  requisite  for  carrying  it  on.  A  magazine  of 
corn  was  formed  at  Casilinum;  a  strong  post  was  fortified  at 
the  mouth  of  the  Vultumus,  where  now  stands  a  city:  and 
a  garrison  was  put  into  Puteoli:  formerly  fortified  by  Fabius 
Maximus,  in  order  to  secure  the  command  both  of  the  river. 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y*  R.  540. 

and  of  the  sea  adjoining.  The  corn  lately  sent  from  Sardi¬ 
nia,  and  that  whi^h  the  pr^tor,  Marcus  Junius,  had  bought 
up  in  Etruria,  was  conveyed  from  Ostia  into  these  two  ma¬ 
ritime  fortresses,  to  supply  the  army  during  the  winter. 
Meanwhile,  in  addition  to  the  misfortune  sustained  in  Lu- 
cania,  the  army  of  volunteer  slaves,  who,  during  the  life  of 
Gracchus,  had  performed  their  duty  with  the  strictest  fideli¬ 
ty,  supposing  themselves  at  liberty  by  the  death  of  their 
commander,  forsook  therr  standards,  and  disbanded.  Han¬ 
nibal,  though  not  inclined  to  neglect  Capua,  or  to  abandon 
his  allies  at  such  a  dangerous  crisis,  yet,  having  reaped  such 
signal  adv  antage  from  the  inconsiderate  conduct  of  one  Ro¬ 
man  commander,  was  induced  to  turn  his  attention  to  an  op¬ 
portunity  which  offered  of  crushing  another.  Some  depu¬ 
ties  from  Apulia  informed  him,  that  Cneius  Fulvius,  the 
praetor,  had  at  first,  while  engaged  in  the  sieges  of  several 
cities  of  that  country,  which  had  revolted  to  Hannibal,  acted 
with  care  and  circumspection-;  but  that  afterwards,  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  an  overflow  of  success  both  himself  and  his  men 
being  glutted  with  booty,  had  ao  entirely  given  themselves 
up  to  licentiousness,  that  they  neglected  all  military  disci¬ 
pline,  Wherefore,  having  on  many  other  occasions,  and  par¬ 
ticularly  a  few  days  before,  learned  from  experience  how  lit¬ 
tle  formidable  an  army  was  when  under  an  unskilful  com¬ 
mander,  he  marched  away  into  Apulia. 
XXI.  Fulvius  and  the  Roman  legions  lay  near  Herdonia, 
where  intelligence  no  sooner  arrived  that  the  enemy  was  ap¬ 
proaching,  than  the  troops  were  very  near  snatching  up  their 
standards,  and  marching  out  to  battle  without  the  praetor’s 
orders;  and  the  suffering  themselves  to  be  restrained  was 
awin|;  to  the  opinion  entertained  by  them,  that  they  might 
act  as  they  chose.  During  the  following  night,  Hannibal,  who 
had  learned  the  disorder  in  their  camp,  and  that  most  of 
them,  calling  the  whole  to  arms,  had  presumptuously  insist¬ 
ed  on  their  commander’s  giving  the  signal,  concluded  whK 

BOOK  XXV. 

281 

B.  C.  212,] 
certainty,  that  he  should  now  have  an  opportunity  of  fight¬ 
ing  with  advantage.  He  posted  in  the  houses  all  around, 
and  in  the  woods  and  thickets,  three  thousand  light-armed 
soldiers,  who,  on  notice  given,  were  suddenly  to  quit  their 
concealments;  at  the  same  time  ordering  Mago,  with  about 
two  thousand  horsemen,  to  secure  all  the  passes  on  that  side, 
to  which  he  supposed  the  enemy  would  direct  their  flight. 
Having  made  these  preparatory  dispositions  during  the  night, 
at  the  first  dawn  of  day  he  led  out  his  forces  to  the  field: 
nor  did  Fulvius  decline  the  challenge,  though  not  so  much  led 
by  any  hope  conceived  by  himself,  as  forcibly  drawn  by  the 
blind  impetuosity  of  his  men.  The  line  was  therefore  form¬ 
ed  with  the  same  inconsiderate  hurry  with  which  they  came 
out  of  the  camp,  just  as  the  humour  of  the  soldiers  directed; 
for  each,  as  he  happened  to  come  *up,  took  whatever  post  he 
liked,  and  afterwards,  either  as  whim  or  fear  directed,  for¬ 
sook  that  post.  The  first  legion,  and  the  left  wing,  were 
drawn  up  in  front,  extending  the  line  in  length;  and,  notwith¬ 
standing  the  loud  remonstrances  of  the  tribunes,  that  it  was 
not  deep  enough  to  have  any  strength  or  firmness,  and  that 
the  enemy  would  break  through  wherever  they  attacked,  so 
far  were  they  from  paying  attention,  that  they  would  not 
even  listen  to  any  wholesome  advice.  Hannibal  now  came 
up,  a  commander  of  a  very  different  character,  and  with  an 
army  neither  of  a  like  kind,  nor  marshalled  in  like  manner. 
The  Romans  consequently  withstood  not  their  first  attack. 
Their  commander,  in  folly  and  rashness  equal  to  Centenius, 
but  far  his  inferior  in  spirit,  as  soon  as  he  saw  the  mauer 
going  against  him,  and  his  men  in  confusion,  hastily  mount¬ 
ed  his  horse,  and  fled  with  about  two  hundred  horsemen. 
The  rest  of  the  troops,  vanquished  in  front,  and  surrounded 
on  the  flanks  and  rear,  were  put  to  the  sword,  in  such  a  man¬ 
ner,  that  out  of  eighteen  thousand  men,  not  more  than  two 
thousand  escaped.  The  camp  fell  into  the  enemy’s  hands. 
XXII.  The  news  of  these  defeats,  happening  so  quickly 
VOL.  ni. — N  V 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

:^82 

[Y.  R.  540 

after  one  another,  being  brought  to  Rome,  filled  the  miods 
of  the  public  with  much  grief  and  consternation.  However, 
as  the  consuls  were  hitherto  successful  in  their  operations  in 
the  quarter  where  the  principal  stress  of  the  war  lay,  the 
alarm  occasioned  by  these  misfortunes  was  the  less.  The  se¬ 
nate  despatched  Caius  Laetorius  and  Marcus  Metilius  depu¬ 
ties  to  the  consuls,  with  directions,  that  they  should  careful¬ 
ly  collect  the  remains  of  the  two  armies,  and  use  their  en* 
deavours  to  prevent  them  from  surrendering  to  the  enemy, 
through  fear  and  despair,  as  had  been  the  case  after  the  de¬ 
feat  at  Cannae;  andThat  they  sKould  make  search  for  the  de¬ 
serters  from  the  army  of  the  volunteer  slaves.  The  same 
charge  was  given  to  Publius  Cornelius,  who  was  also  em¬ 
ployed  to  raise  recruits;  and  he  caused  proclamation  to  be 
made  at  all  the  fairs  and  markets,  that  the  slaves  in  question 
should  be  searched  for,  and  brought  back  to  their  standards. 
All  this  was  executed  with  the  strictest  care.  Appius  Clau¬ 
dius,  the  consul,  after  fixing  Decius  Junius  in  the  command 
at  the  mouth  of  the  Vulturnus,  and  Marcus  Aurelius  Cotta 
at  Puteoli,  with  orders  that  when  any  ships  should  arrive 
from  Etruria  and  Sardinia,  to  send  off  the  com  directly  to 
the  camp,  went  back  himself  to  Capua,  where  he  found  his 
colleague  Quintus  Fulvius  busy  in  bringing  in  supplies  of  all 
kinds  from  Gasilin um,  and  making  every  preparation  foi 
prosecuting  the  siege  of  Capua,  They  then  joined  in  form¬ 
ing  the  siege,  and  also  sent  for  Claudius  Nero,  the  praetor, 
from  the  Claudlan  camp  at  Suessula;  who,  leaving  behind  a 
srrt^ll  garrison  to  keep  possession  of  the  post,  marched  down 
with  all  the  rest  of  his  forces  to  Capua.  Thus  there  were 
three  praetorian  pavilions  erected  round  that  city,  and  the 
three  armies,  commencing  their  operations  in  different  quar¬ 
ters,  proceeded  to  inclose  it  with  a  rampart  and  trench, 
erecting  forts  at  moderate  distances;  so  that  when  the  Cam¬ 
panians  attempted  to  obstruct  their  works,  they  fought  them, 
in  several  places  at  once,  with  such  success,  that,  at  last,  the 

BOOK  XXV; 

28S 

B.  C.212.] 
besieged  oon&ned  themselves  within  their  %valls  and  gates* 
However,  before  these  works  were  carried  quite  round,  the 
townsmen  sent  deputies  to  Hannibal,  to  complain  of  his 
abandoning  Capua,  and  delivering  it,  in  a  manner,  into  the 
hands  of  the  Romans;  and  to  beseech  him,  now  at  least, 
when  they  were  not  only  invested,  but  even  pent  up,  u* 
bring  them  relief.  The  consuls  received  a  letter ^jjjpm  Pub¬ 
lius  Cornelius  the  praetor,  that  before  they  completed  the 
circumvailation  of  Capua,  they  should  give  leave  to  such  of 
the  Campanians  as  chose  it,  to  retire  from  the  town,  and 
carry  away  their  effects  with  them.  That  as  many  as  with¬ 
drew  before  the  Ides  of  Alarch  should  enjoy  their  liberty 
and  their  property  entire:  but  that  both  those  who  withdrew 
after  that  day,  and  those  who  remained  in  the  place  should 
be  treated  as  enemies.’’  This  notice  was  accordingly  given 
to  the  Campanians,  who  received  it  with  such  scorn,  that 
they  answered  with  reproaches,  and  even  menaces.  Hanni¬ 
bal  had  led  his  legions  from  Herdonia  to  Tarentum,  in  hopes 
that,  either  by  force  or  stratagem,  he  might  gain  possession 
of  the  citadel  of  that  town;  but,  being  disappointed  therein, 
he  turned  his  route  toward  Brundusium,  which  he  expected 
would  be  betrayed  to  him.  While  he  was  wasting  time 
here,  also,  to  no  purpose,  the  deputies  from  Capua  came  to 
him,  bringing  at  the  same  time,  their  complaints,  and  intrea¬ 
ties  for  succour.  To  these  Hannibal  answered  in  an  arro¬ 
gant  style,  that  he  had  before  raised  the  siege  of  their  tow  n; 
and  that  the  consuls  would  not  now  wait  his  coming.  With 
this  encouragement  the  deputies  were  dismis^^ed,  and  will; 
difficulty  made  their  way  back  into  the  cit>,  which  was  b; 
this  time  surrounded  with  a  double  trench  and  a  rampart. 
XXIII.  At  the  very  time  when  the  circumvailation  t)i' 
Capua  was  going  on,  the  siege  of  Syracuse  came  to  a  cou' 
elusion,  having  been  forwarded  not  onlv  by  the  vigour  and 
spirit  of  the  besieging  general  and  his  army,  but  also  by 
treachery  within.  For  in  the  beginning  of  the  spring,  Alar^ 

284 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  540. 

cellus  had  deliberated  some  time,  whether  he  should  turn 
his  arms  against  Himilco  and  Hippocrates,  who  were  at  Ag- 
rigentum,  or  stay  and  press  forward  the  siege  of  Syracuse, 
though  he  saw  that  the  city  could  neither  be  reduced  by 
force,  as  being  from  its  situation  impregnable  by  land  or  sea, 
nor  by  famine,  as  supplies  from  Carthage  had  almost  open 
access.  Nevertheless,  that  he  might  leave  no  expedient  un¬ 
tried,  he  had  enjoined  some  deserters  from  Syracuse, — many 
of  whom  of  the  highest  rank  were  then  in  the  Roman  camp, 
having  been  banished  when  the  defection  from  the  Romans 
took  place,  on  account  of  their  disapprobation  of  ’the  design 
of  changing  sides, — to  confer  with  persons  of  their  own  way 
of  thinking,  to  sound  the  temper  of  the  people,  and  to  give 
them  solemn  assurances,  that  if  the  city  were  delivered  into 
his  hands,  they  should  live  free  under  their  own  laws.  There 
was  no  opportunity  of  conversing  on  the  subject,  because 
the  great  number  of  persons  suspected  of  disaffection  had 
made  every  one  attentive  and  vigilant  to  prevent  any  such 
attempt  passing  unobserved.  A  single  slave,  belonging  to 
some  of  the  exiles,  was  sent  as  a  deserter  into  the  city,  and 
he,  communicating  the  business  to  a  few,  opened  a  way  for 
a  negotiation  of  the  kind.  After  this,  some  few  getting  into 
a  fishing  boat,  and  concealing  themselves  under  the  nets, 
were  carried  round  in  this  manner  to  the  Roman  camp, 
where  they  held  conferences  with  the  deserters,  and  the 
same  was  done  frequently,  in  the  same  manner,  by  several 
other  parties;  at  last,  the  number  amounted  to  eighty,  and 
their  plot  was  now  ripe  for  execution,  when  a  person  called 
Attains,  offended  that  some  part  of  the  business  had  been 
concealed  from  him,  discovered  their  design  to  Epicydes, 
and  they  were  all  put  to  death  with  torture.  This  project, 
thus  rendered  abortive,  was  soon  succeeded  by  another;  one 
Damippus,  a  I.acedsemonian,  being  sent  from  Syracuse  to 
king  Philip,  had  been  taken  prisoner  by  the  Roman  fleet; 
Epicydes  earnestly  wished  to  ransom  him  in  particular,  and 

B.  C.  212.1 

BOOK  XXV. 

285 

from  this  Marcellus  was  not  averse;  for  the  Romans,  even 
at  that  time,  were  desirous  of  procuring  the  friendship  of 
the  iEtolians,  with  which  nation  the  Lacedeemonians  were  in 
alliance.  Some  persons  were  accordingly  deputed  to  treat 
for  his  release,  and  the  place  judged  the  most  central  and 
convenient  to  both  parties  was  at  the  Trogilian  port,  adjoin¬ 
ing  the  tower  called  Galeagra.  As  they  came  several  times 
to  this  spot,  one  of  the  Romans,  having  a  near  view  of  the 
Tvall,  by  reckoning  the  stones,  and  estimating,  as  far  as  he 
was  able,  the  measure  of  each  in  the  face  of  the  work,  con¬ 
jectured  nearly  as  to  its  height,  and  finding  it  considerably 
lower  than  he  or  any  of  the  rest  had  hitherto  supposed,  so 
that  it  might  be  scaled  with  ladders  of  even  a  moderate 
length,  he  represented  the  matter  to  Marcellus.  The  infor¬ 
mation  was  deemed  not  unworthy  of  attention,  but  as  that 
spot  could  not  be  openly  approached,  being,  for  the  very  rea¬ 
son  mentioned,  guarded  with  particular  care,  it  was  deter¬ 
mined  to  watch  for  a  favourable  opportunity:  this  was  soon 
found,  through  the  means  of  a  deserter,  who  brought  intelli¬ 
gence  that  the  besieged  were  celebrating  the  festival  of  Di¬ 
ana,  which  was  to  last  three  days;  and  as,  in  consequence  of 
the  siege,  most  kinds  of  provisions  were  scarce,  they  indulg¬ 
ed  themselves  in  greater  quantities  of  wine,  which  Epicydes 
supplied  to  the  whole  body  of  the  plebeians,  and  which  was 
distributed  among  the  tribes  by* the  people  of  distinction, 
Marcellus,  on  hearing  this,  communicated  his  design  to  a 
few  military  tribunes;  and  having,  by  their  means,  selected 
centurions  and  soldiers  pro|ferly  qualified  for  an  enterprise 
at  once  important  and  daring,  he  privately  procured  scaling 
ladders,  and  ordered  directions  to  be  conveyed  to  the  rest 
of  the  troops,  that  they  should  take  their  suppers  early,  and 
go  to  rest,  because  they  were  to  be  employed  on  an  expedi¬ 
tion  in  the  night.  Then,  at  the  hour  when  he  judged  that 
the  people,  who  had  begun  to  feast  early  in  the  day,  would 
be  surfeited  with  wine,  and  begin  to  sleep,  he  ordered  the 

286 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  ^:40' 

men  of  one  company  to  proceed  with  their  ladders,  while 
about  a  thousand  men  in  arms  were  with  silence  conducted 
in  a  slender  column  to  the  spot.  The  foremost  having,  with¬ 
out  noise  or  tumult,  mounted  the  wall,  the  rest  followed 
in  order,  the  boldness  of  the  former  giving  courage  even  to 
the  timorous. 
XXIV.  This  body  of  a  thousand  men  had  now  gained  pos¬ 
session  of  a  part  of  the  city,  when  the  rest,  bringing  up  great¬ 
er  numbers  of  ladders,  scaled  the  wall;  the  first  party  having 
given  them  a  signal  from  the  Hexapylos,  to  which  they  bad 
penetrated  without  meeting  a  single  person  in  the  streets:  for 
the  greater  part  of  the  townsmen  having  feasted  together  in 
the  towers,  were  now  either  overpowered  by  wine,  and  sunk 
in  sleep,  or,  being  half  inebriated,  still  continued  their  de- 
'  bauch.  A  few  of  them,  however,  who  were  surprised  in  their 
beds,  were  put  to  death.  Vigorous  efforts  were  then  made 
t6  force  open  a  postern  gate  near  the  Hexapylos,  and  at  the 
same  time,  the  signal  agreed  on  was  returned  from  the  wall 
by  a  trumpet.  And  now  the  attack  was  carried  on  in  all 
quarters,  not  secretly,  bat  with  open  force;  for  they  had 
reached  the  Epipolse,  where  there  were  great  numbers  of  the 
guards  stationed,  and  it  became  requisite  not  to  elude  the 
notice  of  the  enemy,  but  to  terrify  them;  and  terrified  they 
were:  for  as  soon  as  the  sound  of  the  trumpet  was  heard,  and 
the  shouts  of  the  troops  who  had  mastered  part  of  the  city,  the 
guards  thought  that  the  whole  was  taken,  and  some  of  them 
fled  along  the  tvall,  others  leaped  down  from  the  ramparts, 
and  crowds  flying  in  dismay,  w%re  tumbled  headlong.  A  great 
part  of  the  townsmen,  however,  were  still  ignorant  of  the  mis¬ 
fortune  which  had  befallen  them,  being  all  of  them  overpow¬ 
ered  with  wine  and  sleep;  and  in  a  city  of  such  vast  ex¬ 
tent,  what  happened  in  any  one  quarter,  could  not  be  very 
readily  known  in  all  the  rest,  A  little  before  day,  a  gate  of 
the  Hexapylos  being  forced,  Marcellas,  with  all  his  troops, 
entered  the  city.  This  roused  the  townsmen,. who  betook 

B.  C.  212,] 

BOOK  XXV* 

287 

themselves  to  arms,  endeavouring,  if  possible,  to  preserve 
the  place.  Epicides  hastily  led  out  some  troops  from  the 
island  called  Nasos,  not  doubting  but  he  should  be  able  to 
drive  out  what  he  conjectured  to  be  a  small  party,  and  which 
he  supposed'  hj^i  found  entrance  through  the  negligence  of 
the  guards,  telling  the  affrighted  fugitives  whom  he  met, 
that  they  were  adding  to  the  tumult,  and  that  they  represent¬ 
ed  matters  greater  and  more  terrible  than  they  were.  But 
when  he  saw  every  place  round  the  Epipolae  filled  with  arm¬ 
ed  men,  he  waited  only  to  discharge  a  few  missive  weapons, 
and'marched  back  into  the  Achradina,  dreading  not  so  much 
the  number  and  strength  of  the  enemy,  as  that  some  treache¬ 
ry  might,  on  such  an  opportunity,  take  place  within,  and 
that  he  might  find  the  gates  of  the  Achridina  and  the  island 
shut  against  him.  When  Marcellus  entered  the  gate,  and 
had  from  the  high  grounds  a  full  view  of  the^city,  th«  most 
beautiful  perhaps  of  any  in  those  times,  he  is  said  to  have 
shed  tears  partly  out  of  joy  at  having  accomplished  an  enter- 
prise  of  such  importance,  and  partly  from  the  sensations  ex¬ 
cited  by  reflecting  on  the  high  degree  of  renown  which  the 
place  had  enjoyed  through  a  long  series  of  years.  Memory 
represented  to  him  the  Athenian  fleet  sunk  there;  two  vast 
armies  cut  off  with  two  generals  of  the  highest  reputation: 
the  many  wars  maintained  against  the  Carthaginians  with 
such  equality  of  success;  the  great  number  of  powerful  ty¬ 
rants  and  kings,  especially  Hiero,  whom  all  remembered 
very  late^'’  reigning,  and  wdio  besides  all  the  distinctions 
which  his  own  merit  and  good  fortune  conferred  on  him. 
was  highly  remarkable  for  his  zealous  friendship  to  the  Ro¬ 
man  people:  when  all  these  reflections  occurred  to  his  mind, 
and  were  followed  by  the  consideration,  that  every  object 
then  under  kis  view  would  quickly  be  in  flames,  and  reduced 
to  ashes, ^ — thus  reflecting,  before  he  advanced  to  attack  the 
Achridina,  he  sent  forward  some  Syracusans,  who,  as  has 
keen  mentioned,  were  within  the  Homan  quarters,  to  try  if 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

28a 

[Y.  R.  540, 

they  could,  by  mild  persuasions,  prevail  on  the  Syracusans 
to  surrender  the  town. 
XXV .  The  fortifications  of  the  Achradina  were  occupied 
by  deserters,  who  could  have  no  hope  of  a  pardon  in  case  of 
a  capitulation }  these,  therefore,  would  not  suffer  the  others 
to  come  nigh  the  walls,  nor  to  hold  conversation  with  any 
one,  Marcellus,  finding  that  no  opportunity  could  offer  of 
effecting  any  thing  by  persuasion,  ordered  his  troops  to  move 
back  to  theEuryalus.  This  is  an  eminence  at  the  verge  of  the 
city,  on  the  side  most  remote  from  the  sea,  commanding  the 
road  which  leads  into  the  country  and  the  interior  parts  of 
the  island,  and  therefore  very  commodiously  situate  for  se¬ 
curing  admittance  to  convoys  of  provisions.  The  command¬ 
er  of  this  fortress  was  Philodemus,  an  Argive,  stationed  here 
by  Epicydes.  To  him  Sosis,  one  of  the  regicides,  was  sent 
by  Marcellus  with  certain  propositions;  who,  after  a  long 
conversation,  being  put  off  with  evasions,  brought  back  an 
account  that  the  Argive  required  time  for.  deliberation.  He 
deferred  giving  any  positive  answer  from  day  to  day,  in  ex¬ 
pectation  that  Hippocrates  and  Himilco,  with  their  legions, 
would  come  up;  and  he  doubted  not  that  if  he  could  once  re¬ 
ceive  them  into  the  fortress,  the  Roman  army  hemmed  in 
as  it  was  within  walls,  might  be  effectually  cut  off.  Marcel* 
lus,  therefore,  seeing  no  probability  of  the  Euryalus  being 
either  surrendered  or  taken,  encamped  between  Neapolis  and 
Tycha,  parts  of  the  city  so  named,  and  in  themselves  equal 
to  cities;  for  he  feared,  lest,  if  he  went  into  the  more  popu¬ 
lous  parts,  the  greedy  soldiers  might  not,  by  any  means,  be 
restrained  from  pillaging.  Hither  came  deputies  from  the 
Neapolis  anci  the  Tycha,  with  fillets  and  other  badges  of  sup¬ 
plicants,  praying  him  to  spare  the  lives  of  the  inhabitants, 
and  to  refrain  from  burning  their  houses.  On  the  subject  ef 
these  petitions,  offered  in  the  form  of  prayers  rather  than  of 
demands,  Marcellus  held  a  council;  and  according  to  the 
unanimous  determination  of  all  present,  published  orders  to 

BOOK  XXV. 

289 

B.  C.  212.] 
the  soldiers,  to  “  offer  no  violence  to  any  person  of  free  con¬ 
dition,  but  that  they  might  sieze  every  thing  else  as  spoil.” 
The  walls  of  the  houses  surrounding  his  camp  served  it  as  a 
fortification,  and,  at  the  gates  facing  the  wide  streets,  he  post¬ 
ed  guards  and  detachments  of  troops,  to  prevent  any  attack 
on  it  while  the  soldiers  should  be  in  search  of  plunder.  On 
a  signal  given  the  men  dispersed  themselves  for  that  purpose: 
and,  though  they  broke  open  doors,  and  filled  every  place 
with  terror  and  tumult,  yet  they  refrained  from  bloodshed, 
but  put  no  stop  to  their  ravages,  until  they  had  removed  all 
the  valuable  effects  which  had  been  amassed  there  in  a  long 
course  of  prosperous  fortune.  Meanwhile  Philodemus,  see¬ 
ing  no  prospect  of  relief,  and  receiving  assurances  that  he 
might  return  to  Epicydes  in  safety,  withdrew  the  garrison, 
and  delivered  up  the  fortress  to  the  Romans,  While  the 
attention  of  all  was  turned  to  the  commotion  in  that  part  of 
the  city  which  was  taken,  Bomilcar,  taking  advantage  of  a 
stormy  night,  when  the  violence  of  the  weather  would  not 
allow  the  Roman  fleet  to  ride  at  anchor  in  the  deep,  slipped 
out  of  the  harbour  of  Syracuse  with  thirty-five  ships,  and  find¬ 
ing  the  sea  open,  sailed  forth  into  the  main,  leaving  fifty -five 
ships  to  Epicydes  and  the  Syracusans.  After  informing  the 
Carthaginians  of  the  perilous  state  of  affairs  in  Syracuse,  he 
returned  thither,  in  a  few  days,  with  an  hundred  ships,  when 
he  received,  as  is  said,  many  valuable  presents  from  Epicydes 
out  of  the  treasure  of  Hier«. 
XXVI.  Marcelius  by  gaining  possession  of  the  Euryalus, 
and  putting  a  garrison  into  it,  was  freed  from  one  cause  of 
anxiety;  for  he  had  apprehended  that  a  body  of  the  enemy’s 
forces  might  get  into  that  fortress  on  his  rear,  and  thence 
annoy  his  troops,  pent  up  as  they  were,  and  entangled  among 
walls.  He  then  invested  the  Achradina,  forming  three  camps 
in  proper  situations,  in  hopes,  by  a  close  blockade,  of  redu¬ 
cing  it  by  a  want  of  necessaries.  The  out-guards  on  both 
sides,  had  been  quiet  for  several  days,  when  Hippocrates  and 
VOL,  III,— O  o 

^90 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  540. 

Hamilco  suddenly  arrived;  and  the  consequence  was  an  at« 
tack  on  the  Romans  in  different  quarters  at  once.  For  Hip* 
pocrates,  having  fortified  a  camp  at  the  great  harbour,  and 
given  a  signal  to  the  garrison  in  the  Achradina,  fell  on  the 
old  camp  of  the  Romans,  where  Crispinus  cofnmanded;  and, 
at  the  same  time,  Epicydes  sallied  out  against  the  posts  of 
Marcellus,  while  the  Carthaginian  fleet  warped  in  close  to 
the  shore,  which  lay  between  the  city  and  the  Roman  station, 
in  order  to  prevent  any  succour  being  sent  by  Marcellus  to 
Crispinus.  Their  attacks,  however,  caused  more  alarm  than 
real  injury;  for  Crispinus,  on  his  part,  not  only  repulsed 
Hippocrates  from  his  works,  but  made  him  fly  with  precipita* 
tion,  and  pursued  him  to  some  distance;  and,  in  the  other 
quarter,  Marcellus  beat  back  Epicydes  into  the  town.  It 
was  even  supposed  that  enough  was  now  done  to  prevent  any 
danger  in  future,  from  their  making’sudden  sallies.  To  other 
evils  attendant  on  the  siege,  was  added  a  pestilence;  a  ca¬ 
lamity  felt  by  both  parties,  and  fully  sufficient  to  divert  their 
thoughts  from  plans  of  military  operations.  It  was  now  au¬ 
tumn;  the  places,  where  they  lay,  were  in  their  nature  un¬ 
wholesome,  but  much  more  so  on  the  outside  of  the  citv 
than  within;  and  the  heat  was  so  intense,  as  to  impair  the 
health  of  almost  every  person  in  both  the  camps.  At  first, 
the  insalubrity  of  the  season  and  the  soil  produced  both  sick¬ 
nesses  and  deaths:  afterwards  the  attendance  on  the  diseased, 
and  the  handling  of  them,  spread  the  contagion  wide;  inso¬ 
much,  that  all  who  were  siezed  by  it  either  died  neglected 
and  forsaken,  or,  also  infecting  such  as  ventured  to  take  care 
of  them,  these  were  carried  off  also.  Scarcely  any  thing  was 
seen  but  funeral^;  and  both  day  and  night,  lamentations  from 
every  side  rang  in  their  ears.  At  last,  habituated  to  these 
scenes  of  woe,  they  contracted  such  savageness,  that  so  far 
from  attending  the  deceased  with  tears  and  sorrowings,  they 
would  not  even  carry  them  out  and  inter  them,  so  that  they 
lay  scattered  over  the  ground  in  the  view  of  all,  and  who 

B.  C.  212.] 

BOOK  XXV. 

391 

were  in  constant  expectation  of  a  similar  fate.  Thus  the  dead 
contributed  to  the  destruction  of  the  sick,  and  the  sick  to  that 
of  the  healthy,  both  by  the  apprehensions  which  they  excited, 
and  by  the  contagion  and  noisome  stench  of  their  bodies; 
while  some,  wishing  rather  to  die  by  the  sword,  singly  assail¬ 
ed  the  enemy’s  posts.  But  the  distemper  raged  with  much 
greater  fury  in  the  Carthaginian  camp  than  in  that  of  the 
Romans:  for  the  latter,  by  lying  so  long  before  Syracuse^ 
were  become  more  hardened  against  the  air  and  the  rains. 
Of  the  enemy’s  troops,  the  Sicilians,  as  soon  as  they  saw  that 
the  spreading  of  the  distemper  was  owing  to  an  unhealthy 
situation,  left  it,  and  retired  to  the  several  cities  in  the  neigh¬ 
bourhood,  which  were  of  their  party:  but  the  Carthaginians, 
who  had  no  place  of  retreat,  perished  (together  with  their 
commanders,  Hippocrates  and  Himilco,)  to  a  man.  Mar- 
cellus,  when  he  perceived  the  violence  of  the  disorder  in¬ 
creasing,  had  removed  his  troops  into  the  city,  where  being 
comfortably  lodged,  and  sheltered  from  the  inclemency  of 
the  air,  their  impaired  constitutions  were  soon  restored:  ne¬ 
vertheless  great  numbers  of  the  Roman  soldiers  were  swept 
away  by  this  pestilence. 
XXVII.  The  land  forces  of  the  Carthaginians  being  thus 
entirely  destroyed,  the  Sicilians,  who  had  served  under  Hip¬ 
pocrates,  collected  from  their  several  states  stores  of  provi¬ 
sions,  which  they  deposited  in  two  towns,  of  no  great  size, 
but  well  secured  by  strong  situations  and  fortifications;  one 
three  miles  distant  from  Syracuse,  the  other  five;  and,  at  the 
same  time,  they  solicited  succours.  Meanwhile  Bomilcar, 
going  back  again  to  Carthage  with  his  fleet,  gave  such  a  re¬ 
presentation  of  the  condition  of  the  allies,  as  afforded  hopes  ^ 
that  it  might  be  practicable,  not  only  to  succour  them  in  such 
a  manner  as  would  ensure  their  safety,  but  also  to  make  pri¬ 
soners  of  the  Romans  in  the  very  city  which  they  had,  in  a 
manner,  reduced;  and  by  this  means  he  prevailed  on  the  go¬ 
vernment  to  send  with  him  as  many  transport  vessels  as  could 

292 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  540. 

be  procured  laden  with  stores  of  every  kind,  and  to  make  an 
addition  to  his  own  fleet.  Accordingly  he  set  sail  with  an 
hundred  and  thirty  ships  of  war,  and  seven  hundred  trans¬ 
ports,  and  met  with  a  wind  very  favourable  for  his  passage 
to  Sicily,  but  the  same  wind  prevented  his  doubling  Cape 
Pachynum.  The  news  of  Bomilcar’s  arrival  first,  and  after¬ 
wards  his  unexpected  delay,  gave  joy  and  grief  alternately 
both  to  the  Romans  and  Syracusans.  But  Epicydes,  dread¬ 
ing  lest,  if  the  same  easterly  wind  w’hlch  then  prevailed 
should  continue  to  blow  for  some  days  longer,  the  Cartha¬ 
ginian  fleet  might  sail  back  to  Africa,  delivered  the  command 
of  the  Achradina  to  the  generals  of  the  Mercenaries,  and 
sailed  away  to  Bomilcar.  Him  he  found  lying  to,  with  the 
heads  of  his  vessels  turned  towards  Africa,  being  fearful  of 
an  engagement  with  the  enemy,  not  on  account  of  any  supe¬ 
riority  in  their  strength  or  number  of  ships  (for  his  own  was 
the  greater,)  but  because  the  wind  was  the  more  advantageous 
to  the  Roman  fleet.  With  difficulty,  then,  he  prevailed  on 
him  to  consent  to  try  the  issue  of  a  naval  engagement.  On 
the  other  side,  Marcellus,  seeing  that  an  army  of  Sicilians 
was  assembling  from  all  quarters  of  the  island,  and  that  the 
Carthaginian  fleet  was  approaching  with  abundance  of  sup¬ 
plies,  began  to  fear,  lest,  if  he  should  be  shut  up  in  an  hostile 
city,  and  that  every  passage  being  barred  both  by  land  and 
sea,  he  should  be  reduced  to  great  distress.  Although  un¬ 
equal  to  the  enemy  in  number  of  ships,  he  yet  determined 
to  oppose  Bomilcar’s  passage  to  Syracuse.  The  two  hostile 
fleets  lay  off  the  promontory  of  Pachynum,  ready  to  engage 
as  soon  as  moderate  weather  should  allow  them  to  sail  out 
into  the  main.  On  the  subsiding  of  the  easterly  wind,  which 
had  blown  furiously  for  several  days,  Bomilcar  first  put  his 
fleet  in  motion,  and  his  van  seemed  to  make  out  to  sea  with 
intent  to  clear  the  cape;  but,  when  he  saw  the  Roman  bear¬ 
ing  down  on  him,  and  being  suddenly  alarmed,  from  what 
circumstance  is  not  known,  he  bore  away  to  sea,  and  sending 

BOOK  XXV. 

29$ 

B.  C.  212.3 
messengers  to  Heradea,  ordering  the  transports  to  return  to 
Africa,  he  sailed  along  the  coast  of  Sicily  to  Tarentum. 
Epicydes,  thus  disappointed  in  a  measure  from  which  he  had 
conceived  very  sanguine  hopes,  and  unwilling  to  go  back 
into  the  besieged  city,  whereof  a  great  part  was  already  in 
possession  of  the  enemy,  sailed  to  Agrigentum,  where  he 
proposed  rather  to  wait  the  issue  of  affairs  than  to  attempt 
any  new  enterprise. 
XXVII 1.  When  the  Sicilians  in  camp  were  informed  of  all 
these  events*  (that  Epicydes  had  withdrawn  from  Syracuse, 
that  the  Carthaginians  had  abandoned  the  island,  and  in  a  man¬ 
ner,  surrendered  it  a  second  time  to  the  Romans,)  they  de¬ 
manded  a  conference  with  those  who  were  shut  up  in  the 
town,  and  learning  their  inclinations,  they  sent  deputies  to 
Marcellus,  to  treat  about  terms  of  capitulation.  There  w’as 
scarcely  any  debate  about  the  conditions,  which*  were,^ — that 
whatever  parts  of  the  country  had  been  under  the  dominion 
of  the  kings  should  be  ceded  to  the  Romans;  and  the  rest, 
together  with  independence,  and  their  own  laws,  should  be 
guaranteed  to  the  Sicilians.  I’hen  the  deputies  invited  the 
persons  entrusted  with  the  command  by  Epicydes  to  a  meet- 
ing,  and  told  them,  that  they  had  been  sent  by  the  Sicilian 
army  to  them  as  well  as  to  Marcellus,  in  order  that  those 
within  the  city,  as  well  as  those  without,  should  all  share 
one  fortune,  and  that  neither  should  stipulate  any  article,  se¬ 
parately,  for  themselves.  From  these  they  obtained  permis¬ 
sion  to  enter  the  place,  and  converse  with  their  relations  and 
friends,  to  whom  they  recited^  the  terms  which  they  had 
already  adjusted  with  Marcellus;  and,  by  the  prospect  of 
safety  which  they  held  out  to  their  view,  prevailed  on  them 
to  unite  in  an  attack  on  Epicydes’ s  generals,  Polyclitus,  Phi- 
listio,  and  Epicydes,  sumamed  Syndos.  These  they  put  to 
death,  and  then  calling  the  multitude  to  an  assembly,  and  la¬ 
menting  the  famine  they  had  undergone,  insisted,  that  “  not¬ 
withstanding  they  were  pressed  by  so  many  calamities,  yet 

294 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  540. 

they  had  no  reason  to  complain  of  fortune,  because  it  was  in 
their  power  to  determine  how  long  they  would  endure  their 
sufferings.  The  reason  which  induced  the  Romans  to  besiege 
Syracuse  was,  affection  to  its  inhabitants,  not  enmity.  For 
when  they  heard  that  the  government  was  seized  on  by  the 
partizans  of  Hannibal,  and  afterwards  by  those  of  Hierony¬ 
mus,  Hippocrates,  and  Epicydes;  they  then  took  arms,  and  laid 
siege  to  the  city,  with  the  purpose  of  subduing,  not  the  city 
itself,  but  those  who  cruelly  tyrannised  over  it.  But  after 
Hippocrates  had  been  carried  off,  Epicydes  excluded  from 
Syracuse,  his  generals  put  to  death,  and  the  Carthaginians 
expelled,  and  unable  to  maintain  any  kind  of  footing  in  Sici« 
ly,  either  by  fleets  or  armies,  what  reason  could  the  Romans 
then  have  for  not  wishing  the  safety  of  Syracuse,  as  much 
as  if  Hiero  himself,  so  singularly  attached  to  the  Roman  in¬ 
terest,  were  still  aliveP  Neither  the  city,  therefore,  nor  the 
inhabitants,  stood  in  any  other  danger  than  what  they  might 
bring  on  themselves,  by  neglecting  an  opportunity  of  recon¬ 
ciliation  with  the  Romans:  but  such  another  opportunity  they 
never  could  have,  as  that  which  presented  itself  at  that  in¬ 
stant,  on  its  being  once  known  that  they  were  delivered  from 
their  insolent  tyrants.” 
XXIX.  This  discourse  was  listened  to  with  universal  ap¬ 
probation;  but  it  was  resolved  that,  before  any  deputies  should 
be  appointed,  praetors  should  be  elected:  and  then  some  of 
the  praetors  themselves  were  sent  deputies  to  Marcellas. 
The  person  at  the  head  of  the  commission  addressed 
him  to  this  effect  Neither  was  the  revolt,  at  the  be¬ 
ginning,  the  act  of  us  Syracilsans,  but  of  Hieronymus,  whose 
conduct  towards  you,  was  not  near  so  wicked  as  his  treat¬ 
ment  of  us;  nor,  afterwards,  was  it  any  Syracusan,  but  Hip¬ 
pocrates  and  Epicydes,  two  instruments  of  the  late  king,  who 
while  we  were  distracted  between  fear  on  one  side  and  trea¬ 
chery  on  the  other,  broke  through  the  peace  established  on 
the  death  of  the  tyrsnU;  nor  can  any  period  be  named,  in 

BOOK  XXV. 

295 

B.  C.  212.3 
which  we  were  at  liberty,  and  were  not  at  the  same  time  in 
friendship  with  you.  At  present  it  is  manifest,  that  as  soon 
as  ever,  by  the  death  of  those  who  held  Syracuse  in  bondage, 
we  became  our  own  masters,  we  have  come,  without  a  mo¬ 
ment’s  hesitation,  to  deliver  up  our  arms,  to  surrender  our¬ 
selves,  our  city,  and  fortifications,  and  to  refuse  no  conditions 
which  you  shall  think  fit  to  impose.  Marcellus,  the  gods 
have  given  you  the  glory  of  taking  the  most  renowned  and 
most  beautiful  of  all  the  Grecian  cities;  whatever  memorable 
exploits  we  have  at  any  time  performed,  either  on  land  or  sea> 
all  will  go  to  augment  the  splendour  of  your  triumph.  Let  it 
not  be  your  wish,  that  men  shall  learn,  from  tradition,  how 
great  a  city  you  have  reduced,  but  rather,  that  the  city  itself 
may  stand  a  monument  to  posterity,  exhibiting  to  the  view 
of  every  one  who  shall  approach  it,  by  land  or  by  sea,  our 
trophies  over  the  Athenians  and  Carthaginians;  then,  yours 
over  us;  and  that  you  may  transmit  Syracuse,  unimpaired, 
to  your  family,  to  be  kept  under  the  patronage  and  guardian¬ 
ship  of  the  race  of  the  Marcelli.  Let  not  the  memory  of 
Hieronymus  weigh  more  with  you,  than  that  of  Hiero.  The 
latter  was  much  longer  your  friend,  than  the  former  your 
enemy;  and,  besides,  you  have  felt  many  effects  of  the  kind¬ 
ness  of  the  one,  while  the  other^s  madness  tended  only  to  his 
own  ruin.”  From  the  Romans  all  their  requests  were  easily 
obtained,  and  their  safety  ran  no  hazard  from  that  quarter: 
there  was  more  danger  from  an  hostile  disposition  among 
themselves,  for  the  deserters,  apprehending  that  they  were 
to  be  delivered  up  to  the  Romans,  brought  the  auxiliary 
troops  of  mercenaries  to  entertain  the  same  fears.  Hastily 
taking  arms,  they  first  slew  the  prsetors;  then  spreading  them¬ 
selves  over  the  city,  put  to  death  in  their  rage  every  person 
whom  chance  threw  in  their  way,  pillaging  every  thing  on 
which  they  could  lay  hands.  Afterwards,  that  they  might 
not  be  without  leaders,  they  created  six  prefects,  three  to  com¬ 
mand  in  the  Achradina,  and  three  in  the  island.  The  tumult 

296 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  540. 

at  length  subsiding,  the  mercenaries  discovered,  on  inquiry, 
the  purport  of  the  articles  concluded  on  with  Marcellus, 
and  then  began  to  see  clearly,  what  was  really  the  case,  that 
their  situation  was  widely  different  from  that  of  the  desert¬ 
ers.  Very  seasonably  the  deputies  returned  at  this  time  from 
Marcellus,  and  assured  them,  that  the  suspicion  which  had 
provoked  their  fury  was  groundless,  and  that  the  Romans 
had  no  kind  of  reason  to  demand  their  punishment. 
XXX.  One  of  the  three  commanders  in  the  Achradina 
was  a  Spaniard,  by  name  Mericus.  To  sound  him,  a 
Spanish  auxiliary  in  the  camp  of  the  Romans  was  purposely 
sent  in  the  train  of  the  deputies,  who,  taking  an  opportunity 
when  he  found  Mericus  alone,  first  informed  him  in  what 
state  he  had  left  the  affairs  of  Spain,  from  whence  he  had 
lately  come;  that  every  thing  there  was  under  subjection 
to  the  Roman  arms;”  and  added,  that  it  was  in  his  power, 
by  some  service  of  importance,  to  become  distinguished 
among  his  countrymen;  whether  it  were  that  he  chose  to  ac¬ 
cept  a  commission  in  the  Roman  army,  or  to  return  to  his 
native  country.  On  the  other  hand,  if  he  persisted  in  at¬ 
tempting  to  hold  out  the  siege,  what  hope  could  he  entertain 
when  he  was  so  closely  invested  both  by  sea  and  land?” 
Mericus  was  so  much  affected  by  these  arguments,  that,  when 
it  was  determined  to  send  deputies  to  Marcellus,  he  appoint¬ 
ed,  as  one  of  them,  his  own  brother,  who  being  conducted 
bv  the  same  Spaniard  to  a  secret  interview  with  Marcellus, 
and  having  received  satisfactory  assurances  from  him,  and 
concerted  the  method  of  conducting  the  business  they  had 
planned,  returned  to  the  Achradina.  Then  Mericus,  with  de¬ 
sign  to  prevent  all  suspicion  of  treachery,  declared,  that  he 
did  not  approve  of  deputies  thus  going  backwards  and  for¬ 
wards;  that  none  such  ought  to  be  received  or  sent;  and, 
that  the  guard  might  be  kept  with  the  stricter  care,  the  pro¬ 
per  posts  ought  to  be  divided  among  the  prsefects,  so  that 
each  should  be  answerable  for  the  safety  of  his  own  quarter.” 

BOOK  XXV. 

297 

B.  C.212.] 

Every  one  approved  of  this  division  of  the  posts;  and  the 
tract  which  fell  to  his  own  lot,  was  that  from  the  fountain 
Arethusa,  to  the  mouth  of  the  great  harbour:  of  this  he  ap¬ 
prised  the  Romans.  Marcellas  therefore  gave  orders,  that 
a  transport  ship,  full  of  soldiers,  should  be  towed  in  the 
night,  by  the  barge  of  a  quadrireme,  to  the  Achradina;  and 
that  they  should  be  landed  opposite  to  the  gate  which  is 
near  the  said  fountain.  This  being  executed  at  the'fourth 
watch,  and  Mericus  having,  according  to  concert,  admitted 
the  soldiers  into  the  gate,  Marcellus,  at  the  first  light,  as¬ 
saulted  the  walls  of  the  Achradina  with  all  his  forces,  by 
which  means  he  not  only  engaged  the  attention  of  those  who 
guarded  it,  but  caused  several  battalions  to  flock  thither  from 
the  island,  quitting  their  own  posts  to  repel  the  furious  as¬ 
sault  of  the  Romans.  While  this  alarm  was  at  the  height, 
iSomt  light  galiies,  prepared  beforehand,  sailed  round,  and 
landed  a  body  of  troops  on  the  island;  and  these,  making  an 
unexpected  attack  on  the  half-manned  posts,  and  the  open 
gate,  without  much  difficulty  made  themselves  masters  of 
the  island;  for  it  was  abandoned  to  them  by  the  garrison, 
who  fled  in  consternation.  The  deserters  maintained 
their  ground  with  no  more  steadiness  than  these;  for,  being 
diffident  in  some  degree  even  of  each  other,  they  betook 
themselves  to  flight  during  the  heat  of  the  conflict.  When 
Marcellus  learned  that  the  island  was  taken,  that  one  quar¬ 
ter  of  the  Achradina  was  in  possession  of  his  troops,  and 
that  Mericus  had  joined  them  with  the  party  under  his 
command,  he  sounded  a  retreat,  lest  the  royal  treasure, 
which  fame  represented  much  larger  than  it  was,  should  be 
rifled  by  the  soldiers. 
XXXI .  The  impetuosity  of  the  soldiers  being  restrained, 
the  deserters  in  the  Achradina  found  time  and  opportunity 
to  escape.  The  Syracusans,  at  length  delivered  from  their 
fears,  opened  the  gates  of  the  fortress,  and  sent  an  humble 
deputation  to  Marcellus,  asking  nothing  more  than  their  own 
lives,  and  those  of  their  children.  Marcellus  summoned  % 
VOL,  III.— P  p 

21^  HISTORY  OP  ROME,  [Y.  R.  540, 
council,  to  which  he  likewise  invited  those  Syracusans  who, 
having  been  driven  from  home  in  consequence  of  the  dis¬ 
turbances  in  the  city,  had  remained  in  the  Roman  quarters; 
and  he  g^ve  the  deputies  this  answer,  that  the  friendly  acts 
of  ffiero,  through  a  space  of  fifty  years,  were  not  more  in 
nund^er  than  the  injuries  committed  against  the  Roman  peo¬ 
ple  within  a  few  years  past,  by  those  who  were  in  possession 
of  Syracuse.  But  most  of  these  had  recoiled  <m  the  heads 
where  they  ought  to  fall;  and  those  people  had  inflicted  on 
each  other  much  more  severe  punishments  for  their  infrac¬ 
tion  of  treaties,  than  the  Romans  would  have  wished.  That 
he  had,  indeed,  laid  siege  to  Syracuse,  and  prosecuted  it 
through  the  three  last  years,  not  with  design  that  the  Ro* 
man  people  might  keep  that  state  in  servitude  to  them* 
selves,  but  that  the  l^ders  of  the  deserters  might  not  hold 
it  under  captivity  and  oppression.  What  part  the  Syracusank 
might  have  acted  for  the  promoting  of  this  design,  was  ma« 
nifest  from  those  of  their  countrymen  who  were  within  the 
Roman  quarters;  from  the  conduct  of  the  Spanish  general 
Mericus,  who  surrendered  the  quarter  under  his  command; 
and  from  the  late,  indeed,  but  resolute  measure  adopted  by 
themselves.  That  the  advantages  accruing  to  him,  from  all 
the  toils  and  dangers  by  sea  and  land,  which  he  had  under¬ 
gone  through  such  a  length  of  time  under  the  Syracusan 
walls,  were  by  no  means  equal  to  what  Syracuse  might  have 
procured  to  itself.’^  The  quaestor  was  then  sent  with  a  guard 
to  the  island,  to  receive  and  secure  the  royal  treasure;  and 
the  city  was  given  up  to  the  troops  to  be  plundered,  centi- 
nels  being  first  placed  at  the  several  houses  of  those  who  had 
staid  in  the  Roman  quarters.  While  numberless  horrid  acts 
of  rage  and  of  avarice  were  perpetrated,  it  is  related  that, 
in  the  violence  of  the  tumult,  which  was  as  great  as  greedy 
soldiers  ever  caused  in  sacking  a  captured  city,  Archimedes, 
while  intent  on  some  geometrical  figures  which  he  had 
drawn  in  the  sand,  was  slain  by  a  soldier,  who  knew  not  whe 

C.  212.] 

BOOK  XXV, 

he  was;  that  Matcelius  lamented  his  death,  and  gave  him 
an  honourable  funeral,  and  that  inquiry  was  also  made  for 
his  relations,  to  whom  his  name  and  memory  proved  a  pro¬ 
tection  and  an  honour.  In  this  manner  nearly,  was  Syracuse 
taken,  and  in  it  such  a  quantity  of  booty,  as  Carthage,  which 
waged  an  equal  contest  with  Rome,  would  scarcely  have  af¬ 
forded  at  that  time.  A  .few  days  before  the  conquest  of 
Syracuse,  Titus  Otacilius,  with  eighty  quinqueremes,  sailed 
over  from  Lilybaeum  to  Utica,  and,  entering  the  harbomr  be¬ 
fore  day,  seized  a  number  of  transports  laden  with  com;  he 
then  landed  his  troops,  ravaged  a  great  part  of  the  country 
round  the  city,  and  brought  back  to  his  fleet  much  booty  of 
all  kinds.  On  the  third  day  from  his  departure,  he  returned 
to  Lilybaeum,  with  an  hundred  and  thirty  vessels  filled  with 
corn  and  spoil.  He  sent  off  their  cargoes  immediately  to  Sy¬ 
racuse,  where,  if  thi|  supply  had  not  arrived  so  seasonably, 
both  the  conquerors  and  the  vanquished  were  threatened 
alike  with  a  destructive  famine. 
XXXII.  As  to  the  affairs  of  Spain,  near  two  years  had 
passed  without  any  thing  very  material  being  done,  and  the 
business  of  the  war  consisted  rather  in  scheming  than  in  act¬ 
ing;  but  imw,  the  Roman  generals,  qmtting  their  winter- 
quarters,  united  their  forces,  and  a  council  being  held,  all 
concurred  in  opinion  that,  since  their  sole  object  had  hither¬ 
to  been  to  detain  Hasdrubal  from  the  prosecution  of  his  in¬ 
tended  march  into  Italy,  it  was  now  time  to  think  of  an  end 
to  the  war  in  Spain;  and  they  trusted  that  their  strength  was 
rendered  adequate  to  the  undertaking,  by  the  addition  of 
thirty  thousand  Celtiberians,  whom  they  had,  during  the  pre¬ 
ceding  winter,  engaged  to  join  their  arms.  There  were  three 
armies  of  the  enemy;  one  under  Hasdrubal,  son  of  Gisgo^ 
and  another  under  Mago,  were  encamped  together  at  the 
distance  of  about  five  da>s  march.  The  third  lay  nearer,  mad 
was  commanded  by  Hasdrubal,  son  of  Hamilcar,  the  oldest 
general  in  Spain,  Xvho  was  posted  near  a  city  named  Ani- 

300 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  54^* 

torgis.  Him  the  Roman  generals  wished  to  overpower  tirst, 
and  they  were  confident  that  their  strength  was  abundantly 
sufficient  to  effect  it:  their  only  concern  was,  lest  Hasdrubal 
and  Mago,  dispirited  by  his  retreat,  might  retire  into  the 
inaccessible  forests  and  mountains,  and  thus  protract  the 
war.  They  therefore  concluded,  that  it  would  be  most  advi¬ 
sable  by  separating  their  forces,  to  extend  the  compass  of 
their  operations,  so  as  to  comprehend  the  whole  war  at  once. 
Accordingly,  they  divided  them  in  such  a  manner  that  Pub¬ 
lius  Cornelius  was  to  lead  two-thirds  of  the  Romans  and  al¬ 
lies  against  Mago  and  Hasdrubal;  and  Cneius  Cornelius, 
with  the  other  third  of  the  veteran  troops,  and  the  Celtibe- 
rian  auxiliaries,  was  to  act  against  the  Barcine  Hasdrubal, 
The  commanders  began  their  march  together,  the  Celtibe- 
rians  advancing  before  them,  and  pitched  their  camp  near 
the  city  of  Anitorgis,  within  view  of  the  enemy,  from  whom 
they  were  separated  by  a  river.  There  Cneius  Scipio,  with 
the  forces  before-mentioned,  halted,  and  Publius  Scipio  pro¬ 
ceeded,  according  to  his  allotment,  to  the  scene  of  action. 
XXXIII.  When  Hasdrubal  observed  that  there  were  but 
few  Roman  soldiers  in  the  camp,  and  that  all  their  dcpend- 
ance  was  on  the  Celtiberian  auxiliaries,  being  well  acquaint¬ 
ed  with  the  perfidious  disposition  of  every  barbarous  nation, 
and  particularly  of  these,  among  whom  he  had  waged  war 
for  so  many  years,  he  contrived  secret  conferences  with  their 
leaders;  for  as  both  camps  were  full  of  Spaniards,  an  inter¬ 
course  was  easy;  and  with  whom  he  concluded  a  bargain, 
that,  for  a  valuable  consideration,  they  should  carry  away 
their  troops.  Nor  did  this  appear  to  them  a  heinous  crime: 
for  it  was  not  required  that  they  should  turn  their  arms 
against  the  Romans,  and  the  hire  given  for  not  fighting  was 
as  great  as  could  be  expected  for  fighting;  besides,  rest  from 
fatigue,  the  returning  to  their  homes,  and  the  pleasure  of 
seeing  their  friends  and  families,  all  these  were  matters  high¬ 
ly  agreeable  to  them,  so  that  the  chiefs  ^ere  not  more  easily 

B.  C-  212.] 

BOOK  XXV, 

301 

persuaded  than  were  their  followers.  It  was  farther  consi¬ 
dered,  that  they  need  not  fear  the  Romans,  whose  number 
was  small,  even  if  they  should  attempt  to  detain  them  by 
force*  It  will  ever,  indeed,  be  incumbent  on  Roman  gene-% 
rals  to  avoid  carefully  such  kind  of  mistakes,  and  to  consi¬ 
der  instances  like  this  as  powerful  warnings,  never  to  confide 
so  far  in  foreign  auxiliaries,  as  not  to  keep  in  their  camps  a 
superior  force  of  their  native  troops,  and  of  their  own  proper 
strength.  The  Celtiberians,  on  a  sudden,  took  up  their 
standards  and  marched  off,  giying  no  other  answer  to  the 
Romans  (who  besought  them  to  stay),  than  that  they  were 
called  away  by  a  war  at  home.  When  Scipio  saw  that  it  was 
impossible  to  detain  the  auxiliaries  either  by  intrcaties  or 
force;  that,  without  them,  he  was  unable  either  to  cope  with 
the  enemy,  or  effect  a  re-union  with  his  brother;  and  that 
there  was  no  other  resource  at  hand,  from  which  he  could 
hope  for  safety,  he  resolved  to  retreat  as  far  back  as  possible, 
avoiding,  with  the  utmost  caution,  any  encounter  with  the 
enemy  on  equal  ground; — for  they  had  crossed  the  river,  and 
followed  almost  at  the  heels  of  his  retreating  troops. 
XXXIV.  At  the  same  time  Publius  Scipio  was  surround¬ 
ed  with  equal  fears  and  greater  danger,  occasioned  by  a  new 
enemy:  this  was  young  Masinissa,  at  that  time  an  ally  of  the  ^ 
Carthaginians,  afterwards  rendered  illustrious  and  powerful 
by  the  friendship  of  the  Romans.  He,  with  his  Numidian 
cavalry,  met  Publius  Scipio  as  he  approached,  harrassing  him 
incessantly  night  and  day.  Not  only  were  stragglers,  who 
went  to  a  distance  from  the  camp  for  wood  and  forage,  in¬ 
tercepted  by  him,  but  he  would  even  ride  up  to  the  very  in- 
trenchments;  and  often,  charging  into  the  midst  of  the  ad¬ 
vance  guards,  fill  every  quarter  with  the  utmost  confusion. 
In  the  night-time  also,  by  sudden  attacks,  he  frequently  caus¬ 
ed  terror  and  alarm  at  the  gates,  and  on  the  rampart;  nor 
did  any  place,  or  any  time,  afford  the  Romans  respite  from 
fear  and  anxiety,  confined  as  they  were  within  their  trenches. 

302 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  540. 

and  debarred  from  procuring  every  kind  of  necessazy,  suffer¬ 
ing  almost  a  regular  blockade;  and  which  they  knew  wwld 
be  still  more  close,  if  Indibilis,  who  was  said  to  be  approach- 
ing,  with  seven  thousand  five  hundred  Suessetanians,  should 
join  the  Carthaginians.  Impelled  by  the  inextricable  diffi¬ 
culties  of  his  situation,  Scipio,  heretofore  a  commander  of 
known  caution  and  prudence,  adopted  the  rash  resolution 
of  going  out  by  night  to  meet  Indibilis,  and  to  fight  him. 
Accordingly,  leaving  a  small  guard  in  the  camp,  under  the 
command  of  Titus  Fonteius,  lieutenant-general,  he  marched 
out  at  midnight,  and  falling  in  with  the  enemy,  began  an  en¬ 
gagement.  The  troops  encountered  each  other  in  the  tmler 
of  march  rather  than  of  battle;  however,  irregular  as  the  man¬ 
ner  of  fighting  was,  the  Romans  had  the  advantage.  But  on 
a  sudden  the  Numidian  cavalry,  whose  observation  the  gen¬ 
eral  thought  he  had  escaped,  falling  on  his  fianks,  struck  great 
terror  into  the  troops,  and,  while  they  had  this  new  contest 
to  maintain,  a  third  enemy  fell  upon  them,  the  Carthaginian 
generals  coming  up  with  their  rear  during  the  heat  of  the 
battle.  Thus  the  Romans  were  assailed  on  every  side,  una* 
ble  to  judge  against  which  enemy  they  might  best  direct  their 
united  strength,  in  order  to  force  a  passage.  While  their 
commander  fought,  and  encouraged  his  men,  exposing  him¬ 
self  to  ever}'  danger,  he  was  run  through  the  right  side  with 
a  lance.  The  party  who  made  the  attack  on  the  band  col¬ 
lected  about  the  general,  when  they  saw  Scipio  fall  lifeless  from 
his  horse,  being  elated  with  joy,  ran  shouting  up  and  down 
through  the  whole  line,  crying  out,  that  the  Roman  com¬ 
mander  was  killed;  which  words  clearly  determined  the  bat¬ 
tle  in  favour  of  the  enemy.  The  latter,  immediately  on  losing 
their  general,  began  to  fly  from  the  field;  but  though  they 
might  have  found  no  great  difficulty  in  forcing  their  way 
tbrough*the  Numidians,  and  the  other  light-armed  auxiliaries, 
yet  it  was  scarcely  possible  that  they  should  escape  from 
such  a  multitude  of  cavalry,  and  of  footmen  who  were  near- 

B.  C.  212.3 

BOOK  XXV. 

503 

ly  eqiial  to  the  horses  in  speed.  Accordingly,  almost  as 
many  fell  in  the  flight  as  in  the  battle,  nor  probably  would 
one  have  survived,  had  not  the  night  stopped  the  pursuit,  it 
being  by  this  time  late  in  the  evening. 
XXXV.  The  Carthaginian  generals  were  not  remiss  in 
making  advantage  of  their  good  fortune:  without  losing  time 
after  the  battle,  and  scarcely  allowing  the  soldiers  necessary 
rest,  they  marched  away,  with  rapid  haste  to  Hasdrubal,  son 
of  Hamilcar,  confidently  assured,  that  after  uniting  their  forces 
with  his,  they  should  be  able  to  bring  the  war  to  a  speedy  con¬ 
clusion.  On  their  arrival  at  his  camp,  the  warmest  congratula¬ 
tions  passed  between  the  commanders  and  the  armies,  overjoy¬ 
ed  at  their  late  successes,  in  which  so  great  a  general,  with  his 
whole  army,  had  been  cut  off;  and  they  expected,  as  a  matter  of 
certainty,  another  victory  equally  important.  Not  even  a  ru¬ 
mour  of  this  great  misfortune  had  yet  reached  the  Romans; 
but  there  prevailed  among  them  a  melancholy  kind  of  silence, 
and  a  tacit  foreboding;  such  a  presage  of  impending  evil  as 
the  mind  is  apt  to  feel  when  looking  forward  with  anxiety. 
Cornelius,  after  the  desertion  of  the  auxiliaries,  had  nothing 
to  dispirit  him  except  the  augmentation  which  he  observed 
in  the  enemy’s  force,  yet  was  he  led  by  conjectures  and  rea¬ 
soning,  rather  to  ente^ain  a  suspicion  of  some  disaster, 
than  any  favourable  hopes.  For  how,”  said  he,  “  could 
Hasdrubal  and  Mago,  unless  decisively  victorious  in  their 
own  province,  bring  hither  their  army  without  opposition: 
And  how  could  it  happen,  that  Publius  had  neither  opposed 
their  march,  nor  followed  on  their  rear,  in  order  that,  if  he 
found  it  impracticable  to  prevent  the  junction  of  the  enemy’s 
armies,  he  might,  in  any  case,  unite  his  forces  with  those  of 
his  brother.”  Distracted  with  these  perplexing  thoughts,  he 
could  see  no  other  means  of  safety  at  present,  than  by  retreat¬ 
ing  as  fast  as  possible.  Accordingly,  in  the  night,  and  while  the 
enemy,  ignorant  of  his  departure,  remained  quiet,  he  per¬ 
formed  a  march  of  considerable  length.  On  the  return  of 

304 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y,  R.  540. 

day,  the  enemy,  perceiving  that  his  army  had  decamped,  sent 
forward  the  Numidians,  and  set  out  on  the  pursuit  with  all 
the  expedition  in  their  power.  Before  night,  the  Numidians 
overtook  them,  and  harrassed  them  with  attacks,  sometimes 
on  the  flanks,  sometimes  on  the  rear.  They  then  began  to 
halt,  and  defend  themselves^  but  Scipio  earnestly  exhorted 
them  to  fight  and  advance  at  the  same  time,  lest  the  enemy’s 
infantry  should  overtake  them. 
XXXVI.  But  as  by  this  method  of  advancing  at  one  time, 
and  halting  at  another,  they  made  but  little  progress  on  their 
way,  and  as  the  night  now  approached,  Scipio  called  in  his 
men,  and  collecting  them  in  a  body,  drew  them  off  to  a  ris¬ 
ing  ground,  not  very  safe  indeed,  especially  for  dispirited 
troops,  yet  higher  than  any  of  the  surrounding  grounds. 
Here  the  infantrv,  receiving  the  baggage  and  the  cavalry  in¬ 
to  the  centre,  and  forming  a  circle  round  them,  at  first  repel¬ 
led,  without  difficulty,  the  attacks  of  the  Numidian  skirmish' 
ers.  Afterwards,  the  three  regular  armies  of  the  enemy  ap¬ 
proached  with  their  entire  force;  when  the  general  saw  that  with¬ 
out  some  fortification  his  men  would  never  he  able  to  main¬ 
tain  their  post;  he  therefore  began  to  look  about,  and  consi¬ 
der  whether  he  could  by  any  means  raise  a  rampart  round  it. 
But  the  hill  was  so  bare,  and  the  sbrface  so  rocky,  that  not 
so  much  as  a  bush  was  to  be  found  which  could  be  cut  for  pal- 
isadc?es,  nor  earth  with  which  to  raise  a  mound,  nor  any 
means  of  forming  a  trench,  or  any  other  work;  nor  was  any 
part  of  it  such  as  to  render  it  of  difficult  approach  or  ascent, 
every  side  rising  with  a  gentle  acclivity.  However,  that  they 
might  place  in  the  way  of  the  enemy  some  resemblance  of  a 
rampart,  they  tied  the  panniers  together,  and  building  them 
as  it  were  on  one  another,  formed  a  mound  about  their  post, 
throwing  on  bundles  of  every  kind  of  baggage  where  there 
was  a  deficiency  of  panniers  for  raising  it.  When  the  Car¬ 
thaginian  armies  came  to  the  place,  they  mounted  the  hill  with 
perfect  case,  but  were  at  first  so  surprised  at  this  strange  ap- 

BOOK  XXV. 

305 

B.  C.  212.3 

pearance  of  a  fortification  that  they  halted,  notwithstanding 
their  officers  every  where  called  out,  and  asked  them,  ‘‘  why 
did  they  stop,  and  not  tear  down  and  scatter  about  that  ri¬ 
diculous  work,  scarcely  strong  enough  to  stop  women  or 
children;’^  adding,  that  “  they  now  had  the  enemy  shut  up 
as  prisoners,  and  hiding  themselves  behind  their  baggage.” 
Such  were  their  contemptuous  reproofs;  but  it  was  no  easy 
matter  either  to  climb  over,  or  to  remove,  the  bulky  loads 
which  lay  in  the  way,  or  to  cut  through  the  panniers  so  close¬ 
ly  compacted  and  hurried  under  heaps  of  baggage.  The 
packages  which  obstructed  them  were  at  length  removed, 
and  a  passage  opened  to  the  troops;  and  the  same  being  done 
in  several  parts,  the  camp  was  forced  on  all  sides,  while  the 
Romans,  inferior  in  number,  and  dejected  by  misfortunes, 
were  every  where  put  to  the  sword  by  the  more  numerous, 
enemy,  elated  with  victory.  However,  a  great  number  of 
the  soldiers  fled  into  the  woods  which  lay  at  a  small  dis¬ 
tance  behind,  and  thence  made  their  escape  to  the  camp  of 
Publius  Scipio,  where  Titus  Fonteius  his  lieutenant-general, 
commanded.  Cneius  Scipio,  according  to  some  accounts, 
was  killed  on  the  hill,  in  the  first  assault;  according  to  others, 
he  fled  into  a  castle  standing  near  the  camp;  this  was  sur¬ 
rounded  with  fire,  and  the  doors,  which  were  too  strong  to 
be  forced,  being  thus  burned,  they  were  taken;  and  all  with¬ 
in,  together  with  the  general  himself  were  put  to  death. 
Cneius  Scipio  perished  in  the  seventh  year  after  his  comings* 
into  Spain,  the  twenty-ninth  day  after  the  fall  of  his  brother. 
Their  deaths  caused  not  greater  grief  at  Rome,  than  in  every 
part  of  Spain.  Nay,  among  their  countrymen,  the  loss  of 
the  armies,  the  alienation  of  the  province,  the  misfortune  o^ 
the  public,  challenged  a  share  of  their  sorrow;  w^hereas  Spain 
lamented  and  mourned  for  the  commanders  themselves,  and 
for  Cneius  even  more  than  for  his  brother,  because  he  had 
been  longer  in  the  government  of  their  country,  had  earlier 
engaged  their  affections,  and  was  the  first  who  gave  them  a 
specimen  of  the  Roman  justice  and  moderation* 
v'?L.  III. — Q  q 

306  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  540 
XXXVII.  The  army  was  now  supposed  to  be  utterly  ruined, 
and  Spain  to  be  entirely  lost,  when  one  man  retrieved  the 
Roman  affairs  from  this  desperate  conditicm:  this  was  Lucius 
Marcias,  son  of  Septimus,  a  Roman  knight,  a  young  man  of  an 
enterprising  temper,  and  of  a  capacity  which  would  do  credit 
to  a  rank  much  superior  to  that  in  which  he  was  bom.  These 
very  great  talents  had  been  improved  by  the  discipline  of 
Cneius  Scipio,  under  which  he  had,  in  a  course  of  many 
years,  acquired  a  thorough  knowledge  of  all  the  arts  of  war. 
Collecting  the  soldiers,  after  their  dispersion  in  the  flight 
and  drafting  others  out  of  the  garrisons,  he  formed  an  army 
far  from  contemptible,  with  which  he  joined  Titus  Fonteius, 
the  lieutenant-general  of  Publius  Scipio.  Such  a  superior 
ascendancy  was  possessed  by  a  Homan  knight  in  the  respect 
and  esteem  of  the  soldiery,  that,  after  fortifying  a  camp  on 
the  hither  side  of  the  Iberus,  they  determined  that  a  com* 
mander  should  he  chosen  for  the  two  armies  by  the  suffrages 
of  the  soldiers.  On  this,  relieving  each  other  successively 
in  the  guard  of  the  rampart  and  other  posts,  until  every  one 
had  given  his  vote,  they  all  concurred  in  conferring  the  chief 
command  on  Lucius  Marcius.  The  remaining  time  of  their 
stay  there,  which  was  but  short,  was  employed  in  strengthen¬ 
ing  the  camp,  and  collecting  provisions;  the  soldiers  execut¬ 
ing  every  order  not  only  wixh  diligence,  but  without  be  tray ' 
ing  any  dejection  whatever.  But  when  intelligence  was 
brought  that  Hasdrubal,  son  of  Gisgo,  was  coming  to  crush 
the  last  remains  of  opposition;  that  he  had  passed  the  Iberus 
and  was  drawing  near;  and  when  they  saw  the  signal  of  bat¬ 
tle  displayed  by  a  new  commander*— then,  recollecting  what 
captains  and  what  forces  had  used  to  support  their  confidence 
when  going  out  to  fight,  they  all  on  a  sudden  burst  into 
tears,  and  beat  their  heads.  Some  raised  their  hands  towards 
heaven,  taxing  the  gods  with  cruelty;  others  prostrate  on  the 
ground,  invoked  by  name  each  his  own  former  commander: 
nor  c(;uld  their  lamentations  be  restrained  by  all  the  efforts 

B,  C.212.] 

BOOK  XXV, 

3or 
of  the  centurions,  or  by  the  soothings  and  expostulations  of 
Marcius  himself,  who  asked  them, why  they  abandoned 
themselves  to  womanly  and  unavailing  tears,  and  did  not  ra¬ 
ther  summon  up  their  fiercest  courage,  for  the  common  de¬ 
fence  of  themselves  and  the  commonwealth,  and  for  avenging 
their  slaughtered  generals?”  Meanwhile,  on  a  sudden,  the 
shout  and  the  sound  of  trumpets  were  heard,  for  the  enemy 
were  by  this  time  near  the  rampart;  and  now  their  grief  being 
instantly  converted  into  rage,  they  hastily  snatched  up  their 
arms,  and,  as  if  instigated  by  madness,  ran  to  the  gates,  and 
made  a  furious  attack  on  the  forces,  who  were  advancing  in  a 
careless  and  irregular  manner.  This  unexpected  reception 
immediately  struck  the  Carthaginians  with  dismay:  they 
wondered  whence  such  a  number  of  enemies  could  have  start¬ 
ed  up,  since  the  almost  total  extinction  of  their  force;  whence 
the  vanquished  and  routed  derived  such  boldness,  such 
confidence  in  themselves;  what  chief  had  arisen  since  the 
death  of  the  two  Scipios;  who  should  command  in  their 
camp;  who  could  have  given  the  signal  for  battle?  Perplex¬ 
ed  and  astonished  at  so  .many  incidents,  so  unaccountable, 
they  first  gave  way;  and  then,  on  being  pushed  with  a  vigo¬ 
rous  onset,  turned  their  backs:  and  now,  either  a  dreadful 
havoc  would  have  been  made  among  the  fl>ing  party,  or  the 
pursuers  would  have  found  their  impetuosity  turn  out  incon¬ 
siderate  and  dangerous  to  themselves,  bad  not  -Marcius 
quickly  sounded  a  retreat,  and  by  stopping  them  in  the  front, 
and  even  holding  back  some  with  his  own  hands,  repressed 
the  fury  of  the  troops.  He  then  led  them  into  the  camp,  with 
their  rage  for  blood  and  slaughter  still  unabated.  The  Car¬ 
thaginians  at  first  retreated  precipitately  from  the  rampart; 
but  when  they  saw  that  there  was  no  pursuit,  they  imagined 
that  the  others  had  halted  through  fear;  and  then,  as  if  hold¬ 
ing  them  in  contempt,  they  returned  to  their  camp  at  an  easy 
pace.  Conformable  to  the  same  notion  was  their  careless 
manner  of  guarding  their  works;  for  although  the  Roman# 

308 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  540, 

were  at  hand,  yet  they  considered  them  merely  as  the  r  e- 
mains  of  the  two  armies  vanquished  a  few  days  before:  and, 
in  consequence  of  this  error,  negligence  prevailed  among  the 
Carthaginians  in  every  particular.  Marcius,  having  discov¬ 
ered  this,  resolved  on  an  enterprise,  at  first  view  rather  rash 
than  bold;  which  was,  to  go  and  attack  the  enemy’s  post;  for, 
he  considered  that  it  would  be  easier  to  storm  the  camp  of 
Hasdrubal  while  he  stood  sinjtle,  than  to  defend  his  own,  in 
case  the  three  generals  and  three  armies  should  again  unite; 
and  besides,  that,  on  one  hand  should  he  succeed  in  his  at¬ 
tempt,  he  would  gain  relief  from  the  distresses  that  encom¬ 
passed  him;  and  on  the  other,  should  he  be  repulsed,  yet  his 
daring  to  make  the  attack  would  rescue  him  from  contempt. 
XXXVIII.  However,  lest  the  suddenness  of  the  affair,  and 
the  apprehensions  incident  to  men  acting  by  night,  might 
disconcert  an  undertaking  which,  at  best,  seemed  but  ill  suit¬ 
able  to  his  present  condition,  he  judged  it  advisable  to  com¬ 
municate  his  design  to  the  soldiers,  and  to  animate  their  spi¬ 
rits.  Accordingly,  being  assembled,  he  addressed  them  in  a 
speech  to  this  effect:  Soldiers,  eithm*  my  dutiful  affection  to 
our  late  commanders,  both  during  their  lives  and  since 
their  .death,  or  the  present  situation  of  us  all,  might  be  suf¬ 
ficient  to  convince  every  one  of  you,  that  the  command  with 
which  I  am  invested,  though  highly  honourable,  as  the  gift  of 
your  judgment,  is  still  in  reality  full  of  labour  and  anxiety. 
For  at  the  time  when  (only  that  fear  benumbs  the  sense  of 
griefj  I  should  not  be  so  far  master  of  myself  as  to  be  able 
to  find  any  consolation  for  our  losses,  I  am  compelled  singly 
to  study  the  safety  of  you  all;  a  task  most  difficult  to  a  mind 
immersed  in  sorrow;  so  much  so,  that  while  I  am  devising 
the  means  of  preserving  to  our  country  these  remnants  of 
the  two  armies,  I  cannot,  even  in  those  moments,  be  wholly 
abstracted  from  it.  For  bitter  remembrance  haunts  me;  and 
the  two  Scipios,  by  day  and  by  night,  disquiet  me  with  anx¬ 
ious  cares  and  dreams,  and  often  awake  me  out  of  sleep. 

BOOK  XXV. 

309 

B.C.  212.] 
They  charge  me,  not  to  let  them,  or  their  men,  (your  fellow - 
soldiers,  who  for  eight  years  maintained  in  this  country  a 
superiority  in  arms,)  or  our  commonwealth,  remain  unre¬ 
venged;  to  follow  their  discipline,  and  their  maxims;  and 
that  as,  during  their  lives,  no  one  was  more  obedient  to  their 
commands  than  I  was,  so  I  should,  after  their  death,  ever 
deem  that  conduct  the  best,  which  I  have  most  reason  to 
think  that  they  would  have  pursued  on  any  emergency.  1 
could  wish,  soldiers,  that  you,  on  your  part,  would  not  pay 
them  the  tribute  of  tears  and  lamentations,  as  if  they  were 
no  longer  in  existence;  they  who  live  and  flourish  in  the  fame 
of  their  achievements;  but  that,  whenever  the  memory  of 
them  recurs,  you  would  go  into  battle,  as  if  you  saw  them  en¬ 
couraging  you,  and  giving  you  the  signal.  Most  certainly 
it  must  have  been  their  image  presenting  itself  to  your  eyes 
and  minds  that  animated  you  yesterday  to  that  memorable 
action,  in  which  you  gave  the  enemies  a  proof  that  the  Ro¬ 
man  race  had  not  become  extinct  with  the  Scipios,  and  that 
the  strength  and  valour  of  that  nation,  which  was  not  crush¬ 
ed  by  the  disaster  at  Cannae,  will  ever  rise  superior  to  the 
severest  inflictions  of  fortune.  Now,  after  you  have,  from 
the  suggestions  of  your  own  courage,  braved  danger  with 
such  intrepidity,  I  wish  to  try  how  much  of  the  same  brave¬ 
ry  you  will  exert  under  the  direction  of  your  commander: 
for  yesterday,  when  I  gave  the  signal  of  retreat,  on  seeing, 
you  pursue  the  routed  Carthaginians  with  precipitation,  I  did 
not  mean  to  break  your  spirit,  but  to  reserve  it  for  a  more 
glorious  and  more  advantageous  opportunity;  that  you  might 
afterwards,  in  short,  and  at  a  more  favourable  juncture,  with 
full  preparation,  and  well  armed,  assail  your  enemy  unpre¬ 
pared,  unarmed,  and  even  buried  in  sleep.  Nor,  soldiers, 
did  I  conceive  the  hope  of  such  an  occasion  offering,  incon¬ 
siderately,  and  without  reason,  but  founded  it  on  the  real 
state  of  things.  Suppose  anyone  should  ask  you,  by  what  means, 
with  your  small  numbers,  and  after  suffering  a  defeat,  you 

310 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  540, 

defended  your  camp  against  numerous  forces  elated  with  vic¬ 
tory;  you  would  surely  give  no  other  answer  than  that,  being 
from  these  very  circumstances  apprehensive  of  danger,  you 
had  strengthened  your  quarters  on  every  side  with  works, 
and  kept  yourselves  ready  and  prepared  for  action.  And 
this  is  always  the  case:  men  are  least  secure  on  that  side, 
where  their  situation  removes  the  apprehension  of  danger: 
because  wherever  they  think  care  unnecessary,  they  will  be 
there  unguarded  and  open.  There  is  no  one  thing  which  the 
enemy  at  present  less  apprehend,  than  that  we,  so  lately  block¬ 
aded  and  assaulted,  should  have  the  confidence  to  assault  their 
camp.  Let  us  dare  then  to  do  what  no  one  will  believe  we 
dare  to  undertake:  the  very  persuasion  of  its  difficulty  will 
make  it  easy  to  us.  At  the  third  watch  of  the  night  I  will  lead 
you  thither  in  silence.  I  know,  certainly,  that  thev  have  not 
a  course  of  watches,  nor  regular  guards.  The  noise  of  our 
shout  at  their  gates,  and  the  first  attack,  will  carry  the  camp. 
Then,  while  they  are  torpid  with  sleep,  dismayed  by  the 
sudden  tumult,  and  surprised,  unarmed  in  their  beds,  let  that 
carnage  be  made,  from  which  you  were  vexed  at  your  being 
recalled  yesterday.  I  am  aware  that  the  enterprise  must 
appear  presumptuous;  but  in  cases  of  difficulty,  and  when 
hopes  are  small,  the  most  spirited  counsels  are  the  safest;  be¬ 
cause,  if  in  the  moment  of  opportunity,  which  quickly  fleets 
away,  you  hesitate,  even  but  a  little,  you  will  in  vain  wish 
for  it  afterwards,  when  it  is  no  more.  They  have  one 
army  in  our  neighbourhood,  and  two  others  at  no  great 
distance.  From  an  immediate  attack  we  have  reason  to  ex¬ 
pect  success;  you  have  already  made  trial  of  your  own  strength, 
and  of  theirs;  but  if  we  defer  the  matter,  and  they,  on  being 
informed  of  our  behaviour  in  yesterday’s  irruption,  cease  to 
look  on  us  with  contempt,  it  is  probable  that  all  their  com¬ 
manders,  and  all  their  forces,  will  unite  in  one  body.  In  that 
case,  can  we  hope  to  be  able  to  withstand  the  enemy’s  three  ge¬ 
nerals,  and  three  armies,  whom  Cneius  Scipio,  with  his  army 

BOOK  XXV. 

511 

B.  C.  212.j 
entire,  could  not  withstand?  As  our  generals  were  ruined  by 
the  dividing  of  their  forces,  so  may  the  enemy,  while  sepa¬ 
rate  and  divided,  be  overpowered.  There  is  no  other  way 
in  which  we  can  act  with  effect:  let  us  therefore  wait  for  no¬ 
thing  beyond  the  opportunity  which  the  next  night  will  afford 
us.  Retire  now,  with  the  favour  of  the  gods;  refresh  your- 
selves  with  food  and  rest,  that  you  may,  strong  and  vigorous, 
break  into  the  camp  of  the  enemy  with  the  same  spirit  with 
which  you  defended  your  own.”  They  heard  with  joy  this 
new  plan  proposed  by  their  new  general,  which  pleased  them 
the  more,  on  account  of  its  daring  boldness.  The  remain¬ 
der  of  the  day  was  employed  in  preparing  their  arms,  and  tak- 
ing  their  victuals,  and  the  greater  part  of  the  night  was  given 
to  rest.  At  the  fourth  watch  they  were  in  motion. 
XXXIX.  At  the  distance  of  six  miles  beyond  the  nearest 
camp  lay  another  body  of  Carthaginians.  Between  the  two 
was  a  deep  valley,  thick  set  with  trees.  About  the  middle 
of  this  wood,  by  a  stratagem  worthy  the  genius  of  a  Car¬ 
thaginian,  a  Roman  cohort  and  some  cavalry  were  placed  in 
concealment.  The  communication  being  thus  cut  off,  the 
rest  of  the  troops  were  led  in  silence  to  the  nearest  body  of 
the  enemy,  and  finding  no  advanced  guard  before  the  gates, 
or  watches  on  the  rampart,  they  marched  in,  without  meet¬ 
ing  an  opposer,  as  they  would  into  their  own  camp.  The 
charge  was  then  sounded,  and  the  shout  raised;  some  kill 
the  assailed  before  they  are  quite  awake,  some  throw  fire 
on  the  huts  which  were  covered  with  dry  straw,  some  seize 
the  gates  to  cut  off  their  flight.  The  fire,  the  shouting,  and 
the  slaughter,  all  together,  so  stunned  and  confounded  the 
enemy’s  senses,  that  they  neither  could  hear  each  other,  nor 
think  of  what  they  should  do.  Unarmed,  they  every  where 
fell  in  among  troops  of  armed  foes:  some  hastened  to  the 
gates;  others,  finding  the  passes  shut,  leaped  over  the  ram¬ 
part:  and  every  one  as  soon  as  he  got  out,  fled  directly 
towards  the  other  camp.  These  were  intercepted  by  the 

312 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

lY.  R.  S40. 

cohort  and  cavalry  rushing  out  from  their  ambush,  and 
were  all  slain  to  a  man,  and  even  had  any  escaped,  the 
Romans,  having  taken  the  nearer  camp,  ran  forward  to 
the  other  with  such  rapid  haste,  that  no  one  could  have  ar¬ 
rived  before  them  with  the  news  of  the  disaster*  At  this 
camp,  as  it  lay  at  a  greater  distance  from  an  enemy,  and 
as  many  had  gone  out  before  day  in  quest  of  forage,  wood, 
and  booty,  they  found  every  thing  in  a  still  more  neglected 
and  careless  state;  the  capons  only  standing  at  the  out¬ 
posts,  the  men  unarmed,  sitting  or  lying  on  the  ground,  or 
walking  about  before  the  gates  and  rampart.  In  this  unguard¬ 
ed  situation  they  were  attacked  by  the  Romans,  yet  warm 
from  the  late  fight,  and  flushed  with  victory.  No  opposi¬ 
tion  therefore  could  be  given  them  at  the  entrances;  within, 
indeed,  the  first  shout  and  the  tumult  having  brought  many 
together  from  all  parts  of  the  camp,  a  fierce  conflict  arose, 
which  would  have  lasted  long,  had  not  the  sight  of  the  blood 
on  the  shields  of  the  Romans,  discovered  to  the  Carthaginians 
the  defeat  of  their  other  party,  and  struck  them  w  ith  dismay. 
This  panic  occasioned  a  general  flight;  every  one,  except  such 
as  the  sword  overtook,  rushing  out  wherever  a  passage  could 
be  found.  Thus,  in  one  night  and  day,  through  the  success¬ 
ful  conduct  of  Lucius  Marcius,  were  two  of  the  Carthagi¬ 
nian  camps  taken  by  storm.  Claudius,  who  translated  the 
annals  of  Acilius  from  the  Greek  language  into  the  Latin, 
aJfirms,  that  there  were  thirty-seven  thousand  of  the  enemy 
killed,  one  thousand  eight  hundred  and  thirty  taken,  and  a 
vast  booty  acquired;  among  which  was  a  silver  shield  of  an 
hundred  and  thirty-eight  pounds  weight,  embossed  with  the 
image  of  the  Barcine  Hasdrubal.'  Valerius  Antias  says,  that 
Mago’s  camp  only  was  taken,  where  seven  thousand  were 
killed;  and  that,  in  the  other  battle,  when  the  Romans  sallied 
out  and  fought  Hasdrubal,  ten  thousand  fell,  and  that  four 
thousand  three  hundred  anu  thirty  were  taken.  Piso  writes, 
that  Mago,  having  hastily  pursued  our  troops  who  were  re¬ 
treating,  five  thousand  of  his  men  were  killed  in  an  ambus- 

BOOK  XXV. 

313 

B.  C.  212.] 
cade.  All  mention  the  name  of  the  commander,  Marcius,  with 
great  honour;  and  to  his  real  glory  they  added  also  mira¬ 
culous  incidents;  among  others,  that  while  he  was  haranguing 
his  men,  a  flame  was  seen  at  the  top  of  his  head,  without  be¬ 
ing  felt  by  him,  to  the  great  fright  of  the  surrounding  sol- 
ditis.It  is  said,  that,  as  a  monument  of  his  victory  over 
the  Carthaginians,  the  shield  with  the  image  of  Hasdrubal, 
styled  the  Marcian,  remained  in  the  Capitol  until  the  burn¬ 
ing  of  that  temple.*  After  this,  hostilities  were  suspended 
in  Spain  for  a  long  time,  both  parties  being  unwilling,  after 
such  severe  shocks  given  and  received,  to  risk  an  action 
which  might  be  wholly  destructive  to  one  or  both. 
XL.  During  the  time  of  these  transactions  in  Spain, 
Marccllus  having,  after  the  taking  of  Syracuse,  adjusted 
the  other  affairs  of  Sicily  with  such  integrity  and  good  faith 
as  augmented  not  only  his  own  glory,  but  likewise  the  ma¬ 
jesty  of  the  Roman  people  carried  off  to  Rome  the  orna¬ 
ments  of  the  city,  the  statues  and  pictures  with  which  it 
abounded.  These  were  no  doubt  the  spoils  of  enemies,  and 
acquired  by  the  right  of  war,  yet  they  first  gave  rise  to  a 
taste  for  the  works  of  Grecian  artists,  and  to  the  consequent 
unbounded  rapacity  with  which  all  places,  indiscriminately, 
both  sacred  and  profane,  have  been  plundered;  and  which, 
at  last,  has  been  exercised  even  against  the  deities  of  Rome, 
and  that  very  temple  itself,  in  the  first  instance,  which  was 
decorated  by  Marcellus  with  peculiar  elegance:  for  formerly, 
those  which  he  dedicated  near  the  Capuan  gate  were  visited 
by  foreigners  on  account  of  their  exquisite  ornaments,  of 
which  a  very  small  portion  remains.  Supplicatory  embassies 
came  to  Marcellus  from  almost  every  state  in  Sicily;  as  their 
cases  were  dissimilar,  so  were  the  terms  granted  them. 
Such  as  either  had  not  revolted,  or  had  returned  into  amity, 
before  the  reduction  of  Syracuse,  were  received  as  faithful 
*  In  the  year  of  Rome  660. 
VOL.  III. — R  r 

314 

HISTORY  OF  ROME- 

[Y.  R.  540. 

allies,  and  treated  with  kindness;  while  such  as,  iafter  that 
event,  had  submitted  through  fear,  being  considered  as  con** 
quered,  had  terms  dictated  to  them  by  the  victor.  Still, 
however,  the  Romans  had  remaining,  at  Agrigentum,  some 
enemies  far  from  contemptible — Epicydes  and  Hanno,  who 
had  been  commanders  in  the  late  war,  with  a  third  and  new 
one,  sent  by  Hannibal  in  the  room  of  Hippocrates,  of  a  Ly- 
bophcenician  race,  a  native  of  Hippo,  called  by  his  country¬ 
men  Mutines,  an  enterprising  man,  and  instructed  under  no 
less  a  master  than  Hannibal  himself  in  all  the  arts  of  war. 
To  him  Epicydes  and  Hanno  assigned  the  auxiliary  Numi- 
dians;  with  these  he  overran  the  lands  of  their  enemies  in 
such  a  manner,  and  was  so  active  in  visiting  their  allies  for 
the  purpose  of  securing  their  fidelity,  and  of  giving  them 
succour  as  occasion  required,  that,  in  a  short  time,  he  filled  all 
Sicily  with  his  fame,  and  was  considered  as  one  of  the  prin¬ 
cipal  supports  of  the  Carthaginian  party.  The  Carthaginian 
general  therefore,  and  the  Syracusan,  who  had  hitherto  re¬ 
mained  shut  up  within  the  walls  of  Agrigentum,  were  in¬ 
duced,  not  only  by  the  advice  of  Mutines,  but  by  confidence 
in  their  strength,  to  venture  out  of  the  town,  and  they  pitched 
their  camp  on  the  bank  of  the  river  Himera.  When  Mar¬ 
cellos  was  informed  of  this,  he  instantly  put  his  troops  in 
motion,  and  sat  down,  at  the  distance  of  about  four  miles  from 
them,  to  observe  their  motions  and  intentions.  But  Mutines 
left  him  neither  room  nor  time  for  deliberation,  for  he  cross¬ 
ed  the  river,  and  charged  his  advanced  guards  with  such 
fury  as  to  cause  great  terror  and  disorder.  Next  day,  in  a 
kind  of  regular  engagement,  he  drove  the  Romans  back  into 
their  fortifications.  He  was  then  called  away  by  a  mutiny  of 
the  Numidians  which  broke  out  in  the  camp,  and  as  about 
three  hundred  of  them  had  retired  to  a  town  called  Hera- 
tlea  of  Minos,  he  went  thither,  in  order  to  pacify  and  bring 
them  back.  At  his  departure  he  is  said  to  have  recommend¬ 
ed  earnestly  to  the  other  generals  not  to  come  to  an  engage- 

BOOK  XXV. 

31S 

B.  C.  212.] 
ment  with  the  enemy  during  his  absence.  This  gave  much 
offence  to  both,  particularly  to  Hanno,  who  was  already  jea¬ 
lous  of  his  reputation:  that  Mutines  should  dictate  to  him; 
a  mongrel  African  to  a  Carthaginian  general,  commissioned 
by  the  senate  and  people/’  He  prevailed  on  Epicydes,  who 
was  disinclined  to  the  measure,  to  consent  that  they  should 
cross  the  river,  and  offer  battle;  alleging,  that  if  they  waited 
for  Mutines,  and  the  issue  of  the  battle  should  prove  fortu¬ 
nate,  the  honour  would  all  be  ascribed  to  him. 
XLL  Marcellus,  fired  with  indignation  at  the  thought 
that  he,  who  had  beaten  off  from  Nola,  Hannibal,  when  ela¬ 
ted  with  his  victory  at  Cannae,  should  give  way  to  such  ad¬ 
versaries  as  these,  and  whom  he  had  repeatedly  defeated  on 
land  and  sea,  ordered  his  men  to  take  arms  hastily,  and 
march  out  to  meet  them.  While  he  was  arranging  his  troops, 
ten  Numidians  from  the  enemy’s  line  came  to  him  at  full 
gallop,  and  told  him,  that  their  countrymen,  influenced  first 
by  the  same  motive  which  caused  the  mutiny,  in  which  three 
hundred  of  their  number  had  retired  to  Heraclea,  and  se¬ 
condly,  by  seeing  their  own  commander,  at  the  very  eve  of 
a  battle,  sent  out  of  the  way,  by  officers  who  wished  to  dero¬ 
gate  from  his  merit,  had  resolved  to  remain  inactive  during 
the  fight.  Conunry  to  the  insidious  character  6f  their  na¬ 
tion,  they  fulfilled  their  promise.  This  added  new  spirits  to 
the  R  juians,  for  the  intelligence  was  quickly  conveyed  along 
the  ranks,  that  the  enemy  were  forsaken  by  their  horse, 
which  had  been  considered  as  the  most  formidable  part  of 
their  force.  At  the  same  time,  it  damped  the  courage  of 
the  Carthaginians,*  who,  besides  seeing  themselves  deprived 
of  the  support  of  the  principal  part  of  their  strength,  be¬ 
came  even  apprehensive  of  being  attacked  by  their  own  ca¬ 
valry.  There  was  therefore  no  great  contest:  the  first  onset 
decided  the  affair.  The  Numidians  stood  quiet,  on  the 
wings,  during  the  action,  and  when  they  saw  their  con¬ 
federates  turning  their  backs,  accompanied  them  only  a  short 

316 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  540. 

way  on  their  flight;  for,  observing  that  all  in  confusion  made 
towards  Agrigentum,  in  order  to  avoid  the  hardships  of  a 
siege,  they  withdrew  themselves  into  several  of  the  neigh¬ 
bouring  cities.  Many  thousands  were  killed,  and  many  ta¬ 
ken,  together  with  eight  elephants.  This  was  the  last  battle 
fought  by  Marcellus  in  Sicily,  after  which  he  returned  in 
triumph  to  Syracuse.  The  year  was  now  near  to  a  close. 
The  Roman  senate  therefore  decreed  that  Publius  Cornelius, 
prsetor,  should  write  to  the  consuls  at  Capua,  that  while 
Hannibal  was  at  a  great  distance,  and  no  business  of  moment 
was  going  on  there,  one  of  them  should,  if  they  thought 
proper,  come  to  Rome  to  elect  new  magistrates.  On  receiv¬ 
ing  the  letter,  the  consuls  settled  between  themselves,  that 
Claudius  should  hold  the  elections,  and  Fulvius  remain  at 
Capua.  Claudius  elected  consuls,  Cneius  Fulvius  Centuma- 
lus,  and  Publius  Sulpicius  Galba,  son  of  Servius,  who  had 
not  before  held  any  curule  ofiice.  Then  Lucius  Cornelius 
Lentulus,  Marcus  Cornelius  Cethegus,  Caius  Sulpicius,  and 
Caius  Calpumius  Piso  were  elected  praetors.  The  city  ju¬ 
risdiction  fell  to  Piso,  Sicily  to  Sulpicius,  Apulia  to  Cethe- 
gus,  and  Sardinia  to  Lentulus.  The  present  consuls  were 
continued  in  command  for  the  ensuing  year. 

rHE 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

BOOK  XXVI. 
Hannibal  encamps  upon  the  banks  of  the  Anio,  within  three  miles  oi 
Rome.  Attended  by  two  thousand  horsemen,  he  advances  close  to  the 
CoUine  gate,  to  take  a  view  of  the  walls  and  situation  of  the  city.  On 
two  successive  days  the  hostile  armies  are  hindered  from  engaging  by 
the  seventy  of  the  weather.  Capua  taken  by  Quintus  Fulvius  and 
Appius  Claudius:  the  chief  nobles  die,  voluntarily,  by  poison.  Quintus 
Fulvius,  having  condemned  the  principal  senators  to  death,  at  the  mo¬ 
ment  they  are  actually  tied  to  the  stakes,  receives  dispatches  from 
Rome,  commanding  him  to  spare  their  lives,  which  he  postpones  read¬ 
ing,  until  the  sentence  is  executed.  Publius  Scipio,  offering  himseli 
for  the  service,  is  sent  to  command  in  Spain:  takes  New  Carthage  in  one 
day.  Successes  in  Sicily,  Treaty  of  friendship  with  the  .^tolians 
War  with  Philip,  king  of  Macedonia,  and  the  Acarnanians. 
I.  The  consuls  Cneius  Fulvius  Centutnalus  and  ^  ^ 
Publius  Sulpicius  Galba,  as  soon  as  they  came  in-  B.  c!2ll 
to  office,  on  the  ides  of  March,  convened  the  senate  in  the 
capitol,  and  proposed  to  their  consideration  the  state  of  the 
commonwealth,  the  method  of  conducting  the  war,  and  the 
disposition  of  the  provinces  and  armies.  Quintus  Fulvius 
and  Appius  Claudius,  the  consuls  of  the  preceding  year, 
were  continued  in  command;  the  legions  which  they  had  at 
present,  were  decreed  to  them,  and  an  injunction  was  added, 
that  they  should  not  quit  the  siege  of  Capua,  until  they  had 

J18  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  541. 
reduced  the  place.  This  was  a  point  on  which  the  Romans 
kept  their  attention  fixed  with  particular  solicitude,  not  only 
from  resentment,  for  which  no  state  ever  gave  juster  cause, 
hut  from  the  consideration,  that  a  city  so  eminent  and  pow¬ 
erful,  as  it  had,  by  its  revolt,  drawn  several  states  into  the 
same  measure,  would  probably,  if  recovered,  dispose  their 
minds  to  wish  for  a  reconciliation  with  the  government  un¬ 
der  which  they  had  formerly  lived.  Two  praetors  also,  of 
the  preceding  year,  were  continued  in  command,  Marcus 
Junius  in  Etruria,  and  Publius  Sempronius  in  Gaul,  each 
with  the  two  legions  which  he  then  had.  Marcus  Marcellus 
was  also  continued,  that  he  might,  in  quality  of  proconsul, 
finish  the  remainder  of  the  war  in  Sicily,  with  the  army  then 
under  his  command.  Directions  were  given  him,  that  he 
should  take  the  complement  requisite  for  completing  the 
numbers  of  his  troops,  if  that  should  be  necessary,  out  of 
the  legions  which  Publius  Cornelius,  proprietor,  command* 
ed  in  Sicily;  conditionally,  however,  that  he  should  not 
choose  any  soldier  from  among  those  who  had  been  prohi¬ 
bited  by  the  senate  from  receiving  a  discharge,  or  returning 
home  before  the  conclusion  of  the  war.  To  Caius  Sulpicius, 
whose  lot  was  the  province  of  Sicily,  were  decreed  the  two 
legions  formerly  commanded  by  Publius  Cornelius,  and  a 
supply  of  men  from  the  army  of  Cneius  Fulvius,  which  had 
been  shamefully  defeated  and  put  to  flight,  the  year  before, 
in  Apulia.  For  the  soldiers  of  this  description  the  senate 
had  fixed  the  same  term  of  service  as  for  those  concerned 
at  Cannse;  and,  as  a  farther  mark  of  ignominy  to  both,  it 
was  ordered,  that  they  should  not  reside  during  the  winter 
in  towns,  nor  build  their  wdnter  huts  nearer  to  any  town  than 
ten  miles.  To  Lucius  Cornelius,  in  Sardinia,  the  two  legions 
were  given  which  Quintus  Murius  had  commanded;  a  supply 
of  men,  if  requisite,  the  consuls  were  ordered  to  enlist.  Titus 
Otacilius  and  Marcus  Valerius  were  ordered,  with  the  fleets 
and  legions  then  under  their  command,  to  guard  the  coasts 

BOOK  XXVL 

319 

B.  C.  211,] 

of  Greece  and  Sicily.  On  the  former  station  were  employed 
fifty  ships  and  one  legion;  on  the  latter,  one  hundred  ships 
and  two  legions.  Twenty-three  Roman  legions  were,  this 
year,  employed  in  the  war  on  land  and  sea. 
II.  In  the  beginning  of  the  year,  on  a  letter  from  Lucius 
Marcius  being  laid  before  the  senate  that  assembly  declared 
his  services  highly  meritorious;  but  his  assuming  a  title  of 
honour  (for,  unauthorised  either  by  order  of  the  people  or 
direction  of  the  senate,  he  had,  in  addressing  the  senate, 
styled  himself  proprsetor,)  gave  general  offence.  They 
deemed  it  “  a  precedent  of  pernicious  tendency,  that  com¬ 
manders  should  be  chosen  by  the  troops;  and  that  the  es¬ 
tablished  privileges  of  assemblies,  held  under  auspices, 
should  be  transferred  to  a  giddy  soldiery,  in  camps  and  pro¬ 
vinces  remote  from  the  magistrates  and  laws.”  Several  were 
of  opinion,  that  the  senate  should  take  the  matter  into  consi¬ 
deration;  but  it  was  judged  more  expedient  to  defer  any  no¬ 
tice  of  it  until  after  the  departure  of  the  messengers  who 
brought  the  letter  from  Marcius.  It  was  agreed,  that  an 
answer  should  be  sent  to  him,  respecting  provisions  and 
clothing  for  the  army,  saying  that  the  senate  would  take  care 
of  both  those  matters:  but  it  was  resolved  that  it  should  not 
be  addressed  to  Lucius  Marcius,  propraetor,  lest  he  should 
consider,  as  determined,  a  question  which  they  had  reserved 
for  future  discussion.  After  the  couriers  were  dismissed, 
the  first  business  proposed  by  the  consuls,  and  which  was 
unanimously  agreed  upon,  was,  that  application  should  be 
made  to  the  plebeian  tribunes,  to  take  the  sense  of  the  com¬ 
mons  with  all  convenient  speed,  as  to  what  person  they  would 
choose  to  be  sent  into  Spain  with  a  commission  to  command 
the  army  lately  under  Cneius  Scipio.  The  tribunes  were  ad¬ 
vised  with  accordingly,  and  the  question  was  published  for 
consideration:  but  people’s  thoughts  were  wholly  engrossed 
by  a  contest  on  another  subject:  Caius  Sempronius  Blsesus, 
having  instituted  a  prosecution  against  Cneius  Fulvius,  on 
account  of  the  loss  of  the  army  in  Apulia,  inveighed  against 

320 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  541. 

him  continually  in  public  harangues,  affirming  that  ‘‘  although 
many  commanders  had,  through  rashness  and  unskilfalness, 
brought  their  armies  into  situations  of  extreme  danger,  yet 
never  had  any  one,  except  Cneius  Fulvius,  corrupted  his  le¬ 
gions  with  every  kind  of  vice  before  he  exposed  them  to 
destruction:  so  that  it  might  be  said,  with  truth,  that  their 
ruin  was  effected  before  they  had  even  seen  an  enemy;  and 
that  they  were  vanquished,  not  by  Hannibal,  but  by  their 
own  commander.  No  elector  could  too  carefully  scrutinize 
the  character  of  the  person  to  whom  he  was  entrusting  an 
army.  What  a  difference  between  this  man  and  Tiberius 
Sempronius!  The  latter,  though  the  army  committed  to  him 
consisted  of  slaves,  yet  by  proper  discipline  and  wise  regu¬ 
lations,  had  quickly  improved  them  to  such  a  degree,  that, 
in  the  field  of  battle,  not  one  of  them  evinced  by  his  conduct 
either  his  condition  or  his  birth;  and  they  became  a  safe¬ 
guard  to  the  allies,  a  terror  to  the  enemy.  They  snatched, 
as  it  were,  out  of  Hannibal’s  grasp,  and  restored  to  the  Ro¬ 
man  people,  the  cities  of  Cumae,  Beneventum,  and  several 
others;  whereas  Cneius  Fulvius,  having  received  an  army 
of  Roman  citizens,  honourably  born  and  liberally  educated, 
had  debauched  them  by  all  the  low  vices  of  slaves,  and  sunk 
them  into  such  a  state  of  degeneracy,  that  they  were  inso¬ 
lent  and  turbulent  among  the  allies,  spiritless  and  dastardly 
among  foes;  and  so  far  from  withstanding  the  attack  of  the 
Carthaginians,  they  withstood  not  even  their  shout.  Nor, 
indeed,  was  it  wonderful  that  the  soldiers  did  not  stand  their 
ground  in  battle,  when  their  commander  was  the  first  who 
fled.  For  his  part,  he  rather  wondered  that  any  of  them  had 
fallen  in  their  posts,  and  that  they  did  not,  one  and  all,  ac¬ 
company  Cneius  Fulvius  in  his  panic  and  flight.  Caius 
Flaminius,  Lucius  Pauilus,  Lucius  Postumius,  Cneius  and 
Publius  Scipio,  had  chosen  rather  to  fall  in  fight,  than  to 
abandon  their  troops  in  a  desperate  situation.  But  Cneius 
Fulvius  was  almost  the  only  messenger  who  brought  to 

BOOK  XXVL 

321 

B.  C.  211.J 

Rome  the  news  of  his  army  being  cut  off.  It  was  contrary 
he  said,  ‘‘  to  every  rule  of  honour  and  equity,  that  the  troops 
engaged  at  Cannae,  because  they  fled  out  of  the  field,  should  be 
transported  into  Sicily,  and  prohibited  from  returning  thence 
before  the  termination  of  the  war  in  Italy,  and  that  a  decree, 
to  the  same  purport,  should  have  been  lately  passed  in  the 
case  of  the  legions  under  the  command  of  Cneius  Fulvius, 
while  Cneius  Fulvius  himself,  after  running  away  from  a 
battle  brought  on  by  his  own  temerity,  should  escape  all 
punishment;  that  he  should  spend  his  old  age  where  he  had 
spent  his  youth,  in  the  stews  and  brothels,  while  his  soldiers, 
who  were  no  otherwise  culpable  than  in  resembling  their 
commander,  were  cast  out,  in  a  manner,  into  exile,  con¬ 
demned  to  a  service  of  ignominy.  So  unequal  was  the  dis- 
pensation  of  liberty  at  Home  to  the  rich  and  to  the  poor;  to 
the  man  who  had  arrived  at  honours,  and  to  those  who  still 
continued  in  obscurity.’' 
III.  Fulvius  endeavoured  to  transfer  the  guilt  from  him¬ 
self  to  the  soldiers;  asserting,  that  in  consequence  of  their 
insisting  violently  on  fighting,  they  were  led  out  to  the  field, 
not  on  the  same  day  on  which  they  desired  it,  because  it 
was  then  eveniifg,  but  on  the  day  following,  when  both  the 
time  and  the  ground  were  favourable  to  them;  but  that  they 
were  so  overawed,  either  by  the  reputation  or  the  strength 
of  the  enemy,  that  they  did  not  make  a  stand.  That,  in  the 
hurry  of  the  general  flight,  he  was  carried  away  by  the 
crowd,  as  had  been  the  case  of  Varro,  at  the  battle  of  Can¬ 
nae,  and  of  manj"  other  generals.  And  how  could  he,  by  his 
single  resistance,  serve  the  cause  of  the  commonwealth;  un¬ 
less,  indeed,  his  death  were  considered  as  a  remedy  for  the 
public  misfortunes?  He  had  not  been  brought  into  any  dan¬ 
gerous  situation  by  want  of  provisions,  or  by  want  of  caution; 
neither  was  he,  in  consequence  of  marching  unguardedly,  sur¬ 
prised  by  an  ambuscade,  but  defeated  by  open  force,  by  dint 
of  arms,  in  a  fair  engagement,  nor  had  he  the  power  of  de- 
voL.  iia» — S  s 

.322 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  541 
termining  the  degree  of  courage  to  be  exerted  either  by  his 
own  men,  or  by  the  enemy:  every  man’s  own  disposition  sup¬ 
plied  either  courage  or  cowardice.”  The  matter  came  twice 
to  a  hearing,  and,  at  both  times,  the  penalty  was  laid  at  a 
finfe.  At  the  third  hearing,  witnesses  were  prcwiuced;  and, 
besides  his  being  loaded  with  charges  of  the  most  scandalous 
nature,  great  numbers  deposed  on  oath,  that  the  praetor  was 
the  first  who  showed  any  symptoms  of  fear,  and  began  the 
flight;  and  that  the  soldiers,  being  abandoned  by  him,  and 
supposing  that  the  general’s  fears  were  not  without  grounds, 
fled  likewise;  on  which,  the  anger  of  the  people  was  inflamed 
to  such  a  pitch,  that  the  whole  assembly  cried  out  that  the 
prosecution  ought  to  be  capital.  On  this  point  a  new  contest 
arose;  for,  as  the  tribune  had,  op  two  former  occasions,  pro¬ 
secuted  the  offence  as  finable,  and  at  a  third,  proposed  to  pro¬ 
secute  it  as  a  capital,  an  appeal  was  made  to  the  tribunes 
of  the  commons.  They  declared,  that  “t  hey  could  not 
debar  their  colleague  from  prosecuting,  as,  by  the  prac- 
tice  of  former  times,  he  had  a  right  tu  do,  either  on  the 
written  laws,  or  the  general  practice,  until  he  should  obtain 
judgment,  either  of  capital  punishment,  or  a  fine,  against  the 
defendant  a  private  person.”  Then  Sempronius  gave  no¬ 
tice,  that  he  demanded  judgment  of  treason  against  Cneius 
Fulvius;  and  he  made  a  requisition  to  the  city  praetor,  Caius 
Calpumius,  to  appoint  a  day  for  the  assembly.  The  accused 
then  rested  his  hopes  on  another  expedient,  the  procuring  at 
his  trial  the  support  of  his  brother,  Quintus  Fulvius,  who, 
at  this  time,  stood  high  in  the  public  esteem,  both  on  ac¬ 
count  of  the  merit  of  his  past  services,  and  the  expectation 
of  his  speedily  reducing  Capua.  But  Fulvius  having  sent  a 
petition  to  this  purpose,  couched  in  terms  calculated  to  ex¬ 
cite  compassion,  as  in  a  case  where  a  brother’s  life  was  con¬ 
cerned,  and  the  senate  answering,  that  his  quitting  Capua 
would  be  injurious  to  the  public  interest,  Cneius  Fulvius,  at 
the  approach  of  the  day  appointed  for  the  assembly,  with- 

BOOK  XXVL 

323 

B*  C.  211.3 
drew  into  exile  to  Tarquinii.  The  commons  passed  an  order 
conErming  his  banishment  as  legal. 
IV.  In  the  mean-time  the  grand  operations  of  the  cam¬ 
paign  were  directed  against  Capua,  where,  however,  the 
siege  was  carried  on,  rather  by  a  close  blockade  than  by  vi¬ 
gorous  assaults.  This  caused  so  great  a  famine,  that  the  po¬ 
pulace  and  the  slaves  could  no  longer  endure  it,  and  yet  there 
was  no  way  of  sending  messengers  to  Hannibal,  the  approach¬ 
es  were  all  so  strictly  guarded.  At  length  a  Numidian  was 
found,  who,  taking  a  letter,  engaged  to  make  his  way  with  it; 
and,  going  out  by  night,  he  passed  through  the  middle  of  the 
Roman  camp.  This  encouiaged  the  Campanians  to  try, 
while  they  had  any  remains  of  vigour,  what  might  be  done 
by  sallies  from  all  sides  of  the  town.  In  many  engagements 
which  followed,  their  cavalry  were  generally  successful,  their 
infantry  worsted:  but  the  besiegers  were  not  nearly  so  much 
pleased  by  the  advantages  which  they  had  gained,  as  morti¬ 
fied  at  being  overcome,  in  any  particular,  by  an  enemy  be¬ 
sieged,  and  on  the  point  of  -being  taken.  At  last  the  Ro¬ 
mans  adopted  a  method  of  supplying  by  art  their  deficiency 
in  strength.  Out  of  all  the  legions  were  selected  young  men, 
who  from  the  power  and  lightness  of  their  bodies,  possessed 
the  greatest  agility:  10  these  were  given  bucklers,  shorter 
than  those  of  the  cavalry,  and  to  each  seven  javelins  four  feet 
long,  pointed  with  iron,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  missile 
javelins  now  used  by  the  light  infantry.  The  cavalry,  each 
taking  one  of  these  behind  him  on  his  horse,  taught  them 
by  frequent  exercise,  so  to  ride,  and  to  dismount  quickly, 
when  the  signal  was  given.  As  soon  as,  from  daily  practice, 
they  seemed  to  perform  this  with  sufficient  expertness,  they 
were  led  out  into  a  plain,  between  the  camp  and  the  walls, 
against  the  cavalry  of  the  Campanians,  who  stood  there  in 
order  of  battle.  When  they  came  within  a  weapon’s  cast, 
these  light  footmen  dismounted,  and,  forming  in  a  moment, 
instead  of  cavalry,  a  line  of  infantry  ran  forward  against  the 

324 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y^R.  S4% 

eiiemy^s  horse;  and,  as  they  advanced,  discharged  their  jave- 
Kns,  one  after  another,  with  great  fury;  by  the  vast  number 
of  which,  thrown  against  men  and  horses  indiscriminately, 
very  many  were  wounded*  But  the  novelty  and  unexpect¬ 
edness  of  such  a  proceeding  caused  still  greater  fright,  and, 
while  they  were  in  this  disorder,  the  cavalry  made  their 
charge,  and  drove  them  back  even  to  their  gates  with  great 
slaughter.  Henceforward  the  Romans  had  the  superiority 
in  the  field  in  respect  of  both  horse  and  foot.  It  was  then 
made  an  established  regulation,  that  in  all  the  legions  there 
should  be  light  infantry  of  this  sort,  who  are  called  velites. 
We  are  told,  that  the  person  had  advised  the  mixing  of 
footmen  with  the  cavalry  was  Quintus  Navius,  a  centurion; 
and  that  he  was,  on  that  account,  highly  honoured  by  the 
general. 
V.  While  affairs  at  Capua  were  in  this  state,  Hannibal’s 
judgment  was  long  suspended  between  his  wishes,  on  one 
hand,  to  acquire  possession  of  the  citadel  of  Tarentum,  and, 
on  the  other,  to  retain  Capua,  '  At  length,  however,  he  de* 
termined  in  favour  of  the  latter;  because  on  that  object  he 
saw  that  the  attention  of  all  men,  both  friends  and  enemies, 
was  fixed;  as  the  fate  of  that  city  would  demonstrate  what 
kind  of  consequences  were  to  be  expected  from  revolting 
from  the  Romans.  Leaving,  therefore,  in  Bruttium,  the  great¬ 
est  part  of  his  baggage,  and  all  his  heavier  armed  troops,  and 
selecting  such  of  the  infantry  and  cavalry  as  were  best  qua¬ 
lified  for  an  expeditious  march,  he  took  the  route  to  Cam¬ 
pania.  Notwithstanding  he  went  with  much  s‘peed,  yet  he 
was  followed  by  thirty -three  elephants.  In  a  retired  valley 
behind  Mount  Tifata,  which  overhangs  Capua,  he  halted; 
and,  having,  at  his  coming,  taken  the  fort  of  Galatia,  from 
which  he  dislodged  the  garrison  by  forte,  he  prepared  to  act 
against  the  besiegers.  He  sent  forward  to  the  besieged  in¬ 
formation  of  the  time  when  he  intended  to  assault  the  Ro¬ 
man  camp,  in  order  that  they  might  be  in  readiness,  and 

B.  C.  211.] 

BOOK  XXVL 

3a5 

pour  out  at  once  from  all  the  gates.  This  gave  the  besiegers 
a. most  violent  alarm:  for^  while  he  carried  on  his  attack  on 
one  side,  all  the  Campanians,  bodi  horse  -and  foot,  and  with 
them  the  Carthaginian  garrison,  commanded  by  Bostar,  and 
Hanno,  sallied  out  on  the  other.  In  this  dangerous  situation 
the  Romans,  lest  by  running  together  to  one  part  they  should 
leave  any  other  unguarded,  divided  their  forces  in  this  mam^r. 
Appius  Claudius  was  opposed  to  the  Campanians;  Fulvius 
to  Hannibal;  Caius  Nero,  propraetor,  with  the  cavalry  of  the 
sixth  legion,  took  post  on  the  road  leading  to  Suessula,  and 
Caius  Fulvius  Flaccus,  lieutenant-general,  with  the  cavalry 
of  the  confederates,  on  the  side  opposite  the  river  \^ultumus. 
The  fight  began  with  the  usual  shouting  and  tumult.  But, 
besides  the  other  noises  of  men,  horses,  and  weapons,  the 
multitude  of  Campanians,  unable  to  bear  arms,  being  spread 
along  the  walls,  raised  so  loud  a  shout,  accompanied  widi 
the  clangor  of  brazen  instruments,  such  as  is  commonly  made 
in  the  dead  of  night  on  occasion  of  eclipses  of  the  mocn,  that 
it  drew  the  attention  even  of  the  combatants.  Appius  easily 
repulsed  the  Campanians  from  the  rampart.  Hannibal  and 
his  Carthaginians,  a  more  powerful  force,  pressed  hard  on 
Fulvius.  There  the  sixth  legion  gave  way  to  the  enemy, 
and,  on  its  bemg  broken,  a  cohort  of  Spaniards,  with  three 
elephants  pushed  through  to  the  very  rampart.  It  had  made 
an  elFectual  breach  in  the  Roman  line;  but  while  flattered,  on 
the  one  hand,  with  the  hope  of  forcing  into  the  camp,  it  was 
threatened  on  the  other  with  being  cut  off  from  the  main 
body  of  the  army.  When  Fulvius  saw  the  dastardly  beha¬ 
viour  of  the  legion,  and  the  danger  of  the  camp,  he  exhorted 
Quintus  Navi  Us,  and  the  other  principal  centurions,  to  fall 
on  that  cohort  that  was  fighting  close  to  the  rampart,  and  to 
cut  it  in  pieces;  he  observed  to  them,  that  the  juncture  was 
critical  in  the  last  degree;  that  these  men  must  either  be  al¬ 
lowed  a  passage — and  then  they  would  break  into  the  camp 
with  less  Isdbour  than  they  had  exerted  in  forcing  their  way 

326 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  541. 
through  a  thick  line  of  troops, — or  they  must  be  despaU:hed 
at  the  foot  of  the  rampart.  This  would  not  be  a  matter^of 
much  contest;  they^  were  few  in  number,  and  shut  out  frcmi 
their  friends,  and  the  very  breach,  which,  while  the  Romaua 
were  dispirited,  was  seen  in  their  line,  would,  if  they  faced 
about  upon  the  foe,  prove  the  means  of  inclosing  and  attack¬ 
ing  them  on  all  sides  at  once.”  Navius,  on  hearing  these 
words  of  the  general,  took,  from  the  standard-bearer,  the 
standard  of  the  second  company  of  spearmen,  and  advanced 
with  it  against  the  enemy,  threatening  to  throw  it  into  the 
midst  of  them  if  the  soldiers  did  not  instantly  follow  him, 
and  take  a  share  in  the  fight.  His  person  was  very  large, 
and  the  standard,  raised  aloft,  attracted  the  eyes  of  all. 
When  he  came  up  to  the  front  of  the  Spaniards,  showers  of  ja¬ 
velins  were  poured  on  him  from  all  sides,  almost  the  whole 
body  directing  tlj-eir  attacks  against  him  alone;  hut  neither 
the  multitude  of  the  enemies,  nor  the  force  of  their  weapons, 
could  repel  the  onset  of  this  single  combatant. 
VI.  At  the  same  time,  Marcus  Atrlius,  a  lieutenant-ge¬ 
neral,  caused  the  standard  of  the  first  company  of  principes 
belonging  to  the  same  legion  to  be  brought  forward  against 
the  enemy.  The  officers  commanding  in  the  camp,  Lucius 
Porcius  Licinus  and  Titus  Popilius,  lieutenants -general, 
fought  with  vigour  in  defence  of  their  trenches,  and  killed 
on  the  very  rampart  some  elephants  in  the  act  of  attempting 
to  cross  it.  The  bodies  of  these  filling  up  the  ditch,  as  by 
a  mound  or  a  bridge,  afforded  a  passage  to  the  assailants,  and 
a  desperate  slaughter  was  made  here,  fighting  on  the  bodicfe 
of  the  dead  elephants.  On  the  other  side  of  the  camp,  the 
Campanians,  and  the  Carthaginian  garrison  had  been  repuls¬ 
ed,  and  the  fight  was  now  maintained  close  to  the  gate  of 
Capua,  which  opens  toward  the  city  of  Vulturnus.  The  Ro¬ 
mans  were  hindered  from  forcing  their  way  in,  not  so  much 
by  the  arms  of  the  soldters,  as  by  the  ballistae  and  scorpions 
with  which  the  gate  was  furnished;  and  which,  by  the  missile 

BOOK  XXVI. 

327 

B.  C.211.] 
weapons  they  threw,  kept  the  assailants  at  a  great  distance. 
The  ardour  of  the  Romans  was,  besides,  checked  by  their 
commander,  Appius  Claudius,  being  wounded j  for  while  he 
was  encouraging  his  men  in  the  van,  he  received  a  thrust 
from  a  javelin  in  the  upper  part  of  his  breast  below  the  left 
shoulder.  Nevertheless  a  vast  number  of  the  enemy  was 
killed  before  the  gate,  and  the  rest  were  driven  in  disorder 
into  the  city.  When  Hannibal  saw  that  the  Spanish,  cohort 
was  slain  to  a  man,  and  that  the  Romans  maintained  the  de¬ 
fence  of  their  camp  with  the  utmost  degree  of  vigour,  he 
gave  over  the  assault,  and  began  to  retreat;  making  his  line 
of  infantry  face  about,  and  the  cavalry  cover  their  rear  against 
any  attack.  The  legions  vrere  ardently  intent  on  pursuing 
the  enemy;  but  Flaccus  ordered  a  retreat  to  be  sounded, 
supposing  that  enough  had  been  done  to  make  the  Campa¬ 
nian,  and  Hannibal  himself,  sensible,  how  little  able  he  was 
to  protect  them*  Some  who  have  written  accounts  of  this 
battle  inform  us,  that  there  were  slain  on  that  day,  of  Han¬ 
nibal’s  army,  eight  thousand  men,  and  three  thousand  of  the 
Campanians;  and  that  fifteen  standards  were  taken  from  the 
Carthaginians,  eighteen  from  the  Campanians.  In  other  ac¬ 
counts  I  find  that  the  importance  of  the  batde  was  not  by  any 
means  so  great,  and  that  there  was  more  of  alarm  in  the  case, 
than  of  fighting;  that  a  party  of  Numidians  and  Spaniards, 
with  some  elephants,  having,  by  surprise,  broken  into  the 
Roman  camp,  the  elephants  going  through  the  middle  of  it 
overthrew  the  tents  with  great  noise,  so  that  the  beasts  of 
burden  broke  their  collars  and  ran  about  frightened;  that  to 
increase  the  disorder  a  stratagem  was  used.  Hannibal  send¬ 
ing  in  some  persons  who  could  speak  the  Latin  language, 
of  whom  he  had  many,  giving  orders,  in  the  name  of  the 
consuls,  that,  as  the  camp  was  lost,  every  man  should  fly,  as 
he  was  able,  to  the  nearest  mountains;  but  that  the  imposi¬ 
tion  was  quickly  detected;  and  its  progress  stopped  by  a 
great  slaughter  of  the  enemy,  and  that  the  elephants  were 

328 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

lY.  R,  541. 

driven  out  of  the  camp  with  firebrands.  This  battle,  in  what> 
soever  manner  begun  and  ended,  was  the  last  that  was  fought, 
previous  to  the  surrender  of  Capua.  The  tnedixtuticuSy  or 
chief  magistrate  of  the  Campanians,  for  this  year,  was  Sep- 
pius  Lesius,  a  man  of  obscure  birth  and  small  property. 
There  is  a  story,  that,  at  a  former  time,  when  his  mother 
was,  in  his  behalf  (^he  being  under  age,j  expiating  a  prodigy 
which  happened  in  the  family,  the  aruspex  answered  her, 
that  the  supreme  power  at  Capua,  would  come  to  that  boy: 
on  which  knowing  no  circumstance  that  could  countenance 
such  an  expectation,  she  replied,*^  What  you  say  supposes  the 
affairs  of  the  Campanians  in  a  trulyf desperate  state,  when  the 
supreme  magistracy  is  to  come  to  my  son.”  This  expression^ 
meant  in  derision  of  a  true  prediction,  proved  itself  true  in 
the  event;  for  the  people  being  distressed  by  the  sword  and  by 
famine,  and  destitute  of  every  kind  of  hope,  those  who  were 
entitled  by  birth  to  expect  the  posts  of  honour,  declining  to 
accept  them,  Lesius,  who  exclaimed  that  Capua  was  desert¬ 
ed  and  betrayed  by  the  nobility,  obtained  the  post  of  su¬ 
preme  magistrate,  and  was  the  last  Campanian  who  held  it. 
VIL  Hannibal,  seeing  that  he  could  neither  bring  the  ene¬ 
my  to  another  engagement,  nor  force  a  passage  through  their 
camp  into  Capua,  and  fearing,  lest  the  new  consuls  might 
cut  off  his  supplies  of  provisions,  determined  to  drop  a  de¬ 
sign  in  which  he  had  no  prospect  of  success,  and  to  remove 
from  the  place-  To  what  quarter  he  should  next  direct  his 
route  was  then  to  be  resolved;  and,  while  he  was  earnestly 
deliberating  on  this  head,  he  felt  his  mind  strongly  impelled 
to  make  an  attempt  on  Rome  itself,  the  grand  source  of  the 
war:  a  measure  always  ardently  wished  for,  and  the  omi^ 
sion  of  which,  on  the  favourable  occasion  after  the  bzttle  of 
Cannae,  was  generally  censured  by  others,  and  not  defended 
by  himself.  He  thought  that  he  need  not  despair  of  gaining 
possession  of  some  of  the  city  during  the  panic  and  tu-^ 
mult  which  his  unexpected  approach  would  occasion;  and  that 

B.  C.  211.3 

BOOK  XXVI. 

339 

when  Rome  shoiild  be  in  danger,  either  both  the  command* 
ers  or  at  least  one  of  them,  would  leave  Capua;  and  that, 
should  they  divide  their  forces,  this,  by  weakeriing  both, 
would  afford  either  him  or  the  Campanians  a  chance  of  act¬ 
ing  with  success.  One  consideration  made  him  uneasy,  that, 
on  his  departure,  the  Capuans  might  perhaps  immediately 
surrender.  He  therefore  by  rewards,  engaged  a  Numidian, 
who  was  of  a  disposition  to  undertake  any  thing  Tor  pay,  to 
be  the  bearer  of  a  letter  to  the  people,  and,  going  into  the 
Roman  camp  in  character  of  a  deserter,  to  pass  out  privately 
on  the  other  side  to  Capua.*  This  letter  was  full  of  encou¬ 
ragements  to  hold  out:  *<^his  departure,”  he  told  them,  would 
prove  the  means  of  their  safety,  as  it  would  draw  away  the 
Roman  generals  and  armies  from  before  Capua  to  the  defence 
of  Rome.”  He  exhorted  them  ‘‘  not  to  let  their  spirits  sink; 
for  by  patient  resolution,  for  a  few  days,  they  would  free 
themselves  entirely  from  the  siege.”  He  then  ordered  all  the 
vessels  on  the  river  Vulturnus  to  be  siezed,  and  brought  up 
to  a  fort  which  he  had  before  erected  for  the  security  of  hi» 
camp.  As  soon  asjhe  was  informed  that  a  sufficient  num¬ 
ber  of  these  had  been  procured  to  carry  over  his  troops,  he 
led  them  down  by  night  to  the  river,  provided  with  victuals 
for  ten  days,  and,  before  uKirning  they  gained  the  other 
side. 
VIII.  That  this  step  was  intended,  Fulvius  Flaccus  had 
discovered,  from  deserters,  before  it  was  put  in  execution; 
and  had  apprised  the  senate  of  it  by  a  letter  sent  to  Rome, 
where  men’s  minds  were  variously  affected  by  the  intelligence. 
At  a  meeting  of  the  senate,  which  was  unroediateiy  conven¬ 
ed  on  this  alarming  emergency,  Publius  Cornelius,  surnamed 
Asina,  recommended,  that  all  concern  about  Capua,  with 
every  other  matter,  should  be  laid  aside,  and  all  the  gene¬ 
rals  and  armies  called  home,  from  every  part  of  Italy,  for  the 
defence  of  the  capital.  Fabius  Maximus  represented  it  as 
utterly  disgraceful  to  retire  from  Capua,  and  to  let  their 
voj..  Tir. — T  t 

330  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  541- 
fears  e3?cited,  apd  their  motions  directed,  by  every  nod  and 
menace  of  Hannibal.  Was  it  credible,”  he  said,  ‘‘  that  he 
who  after  gaining  the  victory  of  Cannae  Ijad  not  dared  to  ap¬ 
proach  the  city,  should  now,  after  being  repulsed  from  Capua, 
conceive  an  expectath>n  of  taking  Rome?  His  purpose  in 
coming  was  not  to  attack  Rome,  but  to  raise  the  siege  of 
Capua.  As  to  Rome,  Jupiter  and  the  rest  of  the  gods,  wit¬ 
nesses  of  the  treaties  broken  by  Hannibal,  would,  with  the 
troops  then  in  the  city  defend  it.”  These  opposite  opinions 
were  both  rejected,  and  that  of  Publius  V alerius  Flaccus, 
which  pointed  out  a  middle  course,  was  adopted.  He  ad¬ 
vised,  that  due  attention  shpuld  He  paid  to  both  the  affairs 
in  question,  and  that  a  letter  should  be  sent  to  the  generals 
commanding  at  Capua,  informing  them'of  the  force  then  in  that 
city,  mentioning  that  “  they  themselves  knew  what  number 
of  troops  Hannibal  brought  with  him,  and  how  many  were 
necessary  for  carrying  on  the  siege  of  Capua;”  and  direct¬ 
ing,  that  if  one  of  the  generals  and  a  part  of  the  army 
could  be  sent  to  Rome,  and,  at  the  same  time,  the  siege  be 
properly  carried  on  by  the  remaining  troops,  and  the  other 
general;  then,  that  Claudius  and  Fulvius  should  settle  be¬ 
tween  themselves  which  should  conduct  the  siege  of  Capua, 
and  which  should  come  home  to  defend  their  native  city  in 
any  attack.”  A  decree  of  the  senate,  to  this  effect  having 
been  passed  and  carried  to  Capua,  Quintus  Fulvius,  procon¬ 
sul,  whose  part  it  was  to  go  to  Rome,  his  colleague  being  in¬ 
disposed  in  consequence  of  his  wound,  having  selected  out 
of  the  three  armies  fifteen  thousand  foot  and  one  thousand 
horse,  conveyed  them  over  the  Vulturnus.  Having  learned 
with  certainty  that  Hannibal  intended  to  go  by  the  Latine^ 
road,  he  despatched  couriers  before  him  to  the  corporate 
towns  on  and  near  the  Appian  road,  Setia,  Cora,  and  Lanu- 
vium,  with  orders  that  the  people  of  those  places  should  not 
only  have  provisions  prepared  for  their  use,  but  also  bring 
them  down  to  the  road  from  the  lands  which  lay  out  of  the 

B.C.  211.] 

BOOK  XXVI. 

331 

way;  and  that  they  should  draw  together  bodies  of  soldiers 
into  their  towns,  that  every  man  might  stand  forth  in  defence 
state. 
IX.  Hannibal,  after  passing  the  Vultumus,  encamped  for 
/  that  day  at  a  small  distance  from  the  river.  On  the  day  foh 
lowing,  he  passed  by  Gales,  and  came  into  the  Sidicinian  ter¬ 
ritory  where  he  halted  one  day  to  lay  it  waste;  and  then 
marched  along  the  Latine  way  through  the  territories  of  Su- 
essa,  Allifae  and  Casinum.  Under  the  walls  of  Casinum  he 
remained  encamped  two  days,  ravaging  the  country  round. 
Proceeding  thence  by  Interamna  and  Aquinum,  he  came  in¬ 
to  the  Fregellan  region,  to  the  River  Lyris,  where  he  found 
the  bridge  broken  down  by  the  people  with  design  to  check 
his  progress.  On  the  other  hand,  Fulvius  had  met  a  delay 
at  the  Vultumus,  for  Hannibal  had  burned  the  ships,  and  he 
found  great  difficulty,  in  a  place  where  timber  was  exceed¬ 
ingly  scarce,  to  procure  rafts  for  transporting  his  army.  But 
this  being  at  length  effected,  the  rest  of  his  march  was  easy 
and  expeditious;  for  not  only  in  the  towns,  but  on  both  sides 
of  the  road,  he  was  accommodated  with  plenty  of  provisions; 
while  the  soldiers  cheerfully  exhorted  each  other  to  quicken 
their  pace,  in  the  consideration  that  they  were  going  to  de¬ 
fend  their  native  city.  At  Rome,  a  messenger  from  Fregel- 
ia  who  had,  without  stopping,  travelled  a  day  and  a  night 
caused  a  most  violent  alarm;  which,  being  augmented  by 
people  running  up  and  down,  and  adding  groundless  cir¬ 
cumstances  to  what  they  had  heard,  put  the  whole  city  in¬ 
to  a  tumultuous  ferment.  The  lamentations  of  the  women 
were  not  only  heard  from  the  private  houses;  but  the  ma¬ 
trons  in  all  quarters,  rushing  out  into  the  public  streets,  ran  to 
all  the  temples,  where  they  swept  the  altars  with  their  dis¬ 
hevelled  hair,  fell  on  their  knees,  and  with  hands  raised  up 
towards  the  heavens  and  the  gods,  prayed  that  they  would 
rescue  the  city  of  Rome  from  the  attempts  of  its  enemies^ 
and  preserve  from  hostile  violence  the  Roman  mothers,  and 

332 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  541- 

their  little  children.  The  senate  remained  assembled  at  ihc 
Forum,  that  the  magistrates  there  might,  on  any  occasion 
consult  them  readily.  Some  accepted  commands  of  parties, 
and  repaired  to  the  several  posts  to  execute  their  duties; 
others  offered  their  services  wherever  they  might  be  requi¬ 
site.  Guards  were  posted  in  the  citadel,  in  the  capilol,  on 
the  walls,  on  the  outside  of  the  city,  and  likewise  on  the  Al¬ 
ban  mount,  and  in  the  fort  of  iEsula.  In  the  midst  of  this 
confusion,  news  arrived  that  Quintus  Fulvius,  proconsul, 
had  set  out  with  an  army  from  Capua;  and  lest  his  authority 
should  be  diminished  by  his  coming  into  the  city,*  the  se¬ 
nate  passed  a  decree  that  Quintus  Fulvius  should  have  equal 
power  with  the  consuls.  Hannibal  after  ravaging  the  lands 
of  Fregella  with  particular  severity,  in  resentment  for  the 
breaking  down  the  bridges,  came  through  the  territories  of 
Frusino,  Ferentinum,  and  Anagnia,  into  that  of  Lavici, 
thence  pursuing  his  route  through  Algidum  to  Tusculum, 
where,  being  refused  admittance  into  the  town  he  marched 
towards  the  right,  to  Gabii,  and  bringing  down  his  army 
from  thence  into  the  lands  of  the  Pupinian  tribe  pitched  his 
camp  eight  miles  from  Rome.  In  proportion  as  he  came 
nearer  to  the  city,  the  greater  was  the  number  of  its  fugi¬ 
tives  slain  by  the  Numidians,  who  advanced  before  him, 
and  very  many  prisoners  of  all  ranks  and  ages  were  taken. 
X.  During  this  general  commotion  Fulvius  Flaccus,  with 
his  army,  entered  Rome  through  the  Capuan  gate,  and  pro¬ 
ceeded  along  the  middle  of  the  city,  and  through  the  Carinae, 
to  the  Esquiliae;  where,  passing  out,  he  pitched  his  tents  be¬ 
tween  the  Esquiline  and  Colline  gates.  The  plebeian  aedilcs 
brought  thither  provisions  for  the  troops:  the  consuls  and  se¬ 
nate  came  into  the  camp,  and  there  held  their  consultation^ 
*  He  would  have  lost  all  authority  on  coming-  into  the  city:  for  within 
the  walls,  a  proconsul  had  no  jurisdiction.  Whenever,  therefore,  a 
proconsul  obtained  a  triumph  or  an  ovation  it  was  necessary  to  procure  an 
order  of  the  people,  investing  him  with  the  authority  of  a  magistrate  du¬ 
ring  that  day. 

B.  C.  211.] 

BOOK  XXVL 

335 

on  the  measures  requisite  in  the  present  state  of  affairs.  It 
was  then  resolved,  that  the  consuls  should  encamp  before 
the  Colline  and  Esquiline  gates;  that  Cai«s  Calpurnius,  city 
praetor,  should  command  in  the  capitol  and  citadel;  and  that 
the  senate  should  be  kept  assembled,  in  full  numbers,  in  the 
Forum,  as  sudden  exigencies  might  probably  require  their 
consideration.  Meanwhile,  Hannibal  moved  his  camp  for- 
ward  to  the  river  Anio,  three  miles  from  the  city,  and  post¬ 
ing  there  his  troops,  he  himself,  with  two  thousand  horse¬ 
men,  proceeded  from  the  Colline  gate  as  far  as  the  temple  of 
Hercules,  riding  about,  and  taking  as  near  a  view  as  he 
could  of  the  fortifications  and  situation  of  the  city.  Flaccus, 
ashamed  of  his  being  suffered  to  do  this,  and  so  much  at  his 
ease,  sent  out  a  party  of  cavalry  against  him,  with  orders 
to  make  those  of  the  enemy  retire  into  their  camp.  When 
the  fight  began,  the  consuls  ordered  a  body  of  Numidian 
deserters,  who  were  then  on  the  Aventine  (to  the  number  of 
twelve  hundred,)  to  march  across  the  middle  of  the  city  to 
the  Esquiliae,  judging  that  none  would  be  better  qualified  to 
act  among  the  hollows,  and  garden  walls,  and  tombs,  and  in¬ 
closed  roads  in  that  quarter.  Some  persons,  seeing  from 
the  capitol  and  citadel  these  men  filing  off  on  horseback,  on 
the  brow  of  the  Publician  hill,  cried  out,  that  the  Aventine 
was  taken;  and  this  incident  caused  such  confusion  and  ter¬ 
ror,  that,  if  the  Carthaginian  camp  had  not  been  just  at  the 
outside  of  the  walls,  the  whole  multitude  would,  in  their  con¬ 
sternation,  have  rushed  out  there.  As  it  was,  they  ran  back 
into  the  houses,  and  up  to  the  roofs,  from  whence  they  pour¬ 
ed  down  stones  and  weapons  on  their  own  soldiers  passing 
the  streets,  whom  they  took  for  enemies:  Nor  could  the 
commotion  be  suppressed,  or  the  mistake  rectified,  so  throng¬ 
ed  were  the  streets  with  crowds  of  peasants  and  cattle,  which 
the  sudden  alarm  had  driven  into  the  city.  The  party  of 
Numidian  cavalry  were  successful  against  the  enemy,  and 
drove  them  away.  As  it  was  necessary  to  suppress  in  va- 

334 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  541. 

rious  different  places  the  many  disturbances  which  were 
continually  arising  on  every  slight  occasion,  a  decree  was 
passed,  that  all  who  had  been  dictators,  consuls,  or  censors, 
should  have  the  authority  of  magistrates,  until  the  foe  should 
retire  from  the  walls.  By  this  means  a  great  many  tumults, 
which  were  raised  without  foundation,  during  the  remainder 
of  that  day,  and  the  following  night,  were  entirely  crushed. 
XI.  Next  day,  Hannibal,  crossing  the  Anio,  drew  up  his 
forces  in  order  of  battle;  nor  did  Flaccus  and  the  consuls 
decline  the  challenge.  When  the  armies  on  both  sides  stood 
nearly  marshalled  for  the  decision  of  a  contest  of  such  mag¬ 
nitude,  where  the  city  of  Rome  was  to  be  the  prize  of  the 
conqueror,  a  prodigious  shower  of  rain,  mixed  with  hail,  so 
grievously  annoyed  both  parties,  that,  scarcely  able  to  hold 
their  arms,  they  retired  to  their  respective  camps,  not  moved 
in  the  slightest  degree,  by  any  fear  of  their  adversaries.  On 
the  next  day,  likew  ise,  when  the  armies  were  formed  on  the 
same  ground,  the  same  kind  of  storm  separated  them;  and, 
as  soon  as  they  had  retired,  the  weather  became  wonderfully 
serene  and  calm.  This  was  considered  by  the  Carthaginians 
as  portentous;  and,  we  are  told,  that  Hannibal  was  heard  to 
/  say,  that sometimes  the  will,  sometimes  the  power  of  tak¬ 
ing  the  city  of  Rome,  was  denied  him.’’  His  hopes  were  also 
damped  by  two  other  incidents;  one  of  some  weight,  the 
other  trivial.  The  more  important  was,  that,  while  he  lay 
with  his  army  under  the  walls  of  the  city  of  Rome,  he  un¬ 
derstood  that  a  reinfoi  cement  of  soldiers  for  Spain  had 
marched  out,  with  standards  borne  before  them.  The  one 
of  less  importance  was,  and  which  he  learned  from  a  pri¬ 
soner,  that,  at  this  very  time,  the  ground,  whereon  his  camj^ 
stood,  happened  to  be  sold,  and  the  price  was  not  in  the 
least  lowered  on  that  account.  It  appeared  to  him  so  great 
an  insult,  that  a  purchaser  should  be  found  at  Rome  for  that 
ground  which  he  actually  held  and  possessed  by  right  of  con¬ 
quest,  that  he  immediately  called  a  crier,  and  ordered  him 

BOOK  XXVI. 

335 

B.  C.  211.] 
to  set  up  to  sale  the  silversmith’s  shops^  which  at  that  time 
stood  round  the  Roman  Forum.  Discouraged  by  all  these 
circumstances,  he  moved  his  camp  to  the  river  Tutia,  six 
miles  from  the  city,  and  proceeded  thence  to  the  grove  of 
Feronia,  where  was  a  temple  at  that  time,  much  celebrated 
for  its  richesj  the  Capenatians  and  other  neighbouring  states 
being  accustomed  to  bring  hither  the  first  fruits  of  their  lands, 
and  other  offerings,  according  to  their  abilities,  by  which 
means  it  was  decorated  with  abundance  of  gold  and  silver: 
of  all  these  offerings  the  temple  was  then  despoiled.  After 
Hannibal’s  departure,  large  heaps  of  brass  were  found  in  it, 
the  soldiers  having  through  remorse  for  this  impious  pro¬ 
ceeding,  thrown  in  pieces  of  uncoined  metal.  That  this  tem¬ 
ple  was  pillaged,  all  writers  agree.  But  Ccelius  asserts,  that 
Hannibal,  in  his  march  towards  Rome,  turned  aside  thither 
from  Eretuirt;  and  he  traces  his  route  through  Amitemum, 
Cutilii,  and  Heate;  alleging,  that,  from  Campania,  he  came 
into  Samnium,  thence  into  Pelignia;  then,  passing  near  the 
towi^of  Sulmo,  proceeded  into  the  territory  of  the  Marruci- 
nians,  thence  through  the  lands  of  Alba  into  Marsia,  and  so 
on  to  Amiternum,  and  the  village  of  Foruli.  Nor  is  this  di¬ 
versity  of  opinion  owing  to  people’s  having  lost  within  so 
shbrt  a  period,  a  distinct  remembrance  of  the  traces  of  so 
great  an  army:  for,  that  he  went  in  that  track,  is  certain;  the 
only  matter  in  doubt  is,  whether  he  took  this  route  in  ad¬ 
vancing  towards  Rome,  or  in  his  return  thence  to  Campania. 
XII.  But  Hannibal  showed  not  such  obstinate  perseve¬ 
rance  in  his  endeavours  to  raise  the  siege  of  Capua,  as  the 
Romans  did  in  pushing  it  forward;  for,  from  Lucania,  he 
hastened  away  into  Bruttium,  and  all  the  way  to  the  very 
strait  and  the  city  of  Rhegium,  with  such  speed,  that  in  con¬ 
sequence  of  his  sudden  arrival  he  w^as  very  near  taking  that 
place  by  surprise.  Capua,  though  the  vigour  of  the  siege  had 
not  in  the  mean-time  been  at  all  relaxed,  yet  felt  the  return 
of  Flaccus;  and  it  was  matter  of  great  wonder  ter  the  besieg- 

536 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

CY.  R.  541. 

ed^  that  Hannibal  had  not  come  back  at  the  same  time.  But, 
in  discoursing  with  some  of  the  besiegers,  they  soon  learned, 
that  they  were  left  to  themselves  and  abandoned;  and  that 
the  Carthaginians  considered  the  hope  of  maintaining  posses* 
sion  of  Capua  as  desperate.  This  afflicting  intelligence  was 
followed  by  an  edict  of  the  proconsul,  published  by  direc¬ 
tion  of  the  senate,  and  spread  among  the  enemy,  that  any 
native  of  Campania  who  should  come  over  before  a  certain 
day  should  be  indemnified  for  all  that  was  past.”  But  not 
one  embraced  the  offer,  though  they  were  not  restrained  by 
fidelity  to  their  associates,  so  much  as  by  their  fears,  because 
at  the  time  of  their  revolting  they  had  committed  crimes  too 
enormous,  as  they  supposed,  to  be  forgiven.  However, 
though  none  of  them  were  led  to  desert  by  a  regard  to  pri¬ 
vate  interest,  yet  neither  was  any  proper  care  taken  to  pro¬ 
mote  the  interest  of  the  public.  The  nobility  had  renounced 
all  public  business,  and  could  not  be  compelled  to  meet  in 
the  senate;  and  he  who  was  in  the  office  of  chief  magistrate, 
was  a  man  who  had  not,  from  thence,  derived  any  hcrfiour 
on  himself,  but  had,  from  his  own  worthlessness,  stripped  the 
office  of  its  weight  and  authority.  Not  one  of  the  nobles 
even  appeared  in  the  Forum,  or  in  any  public  place;  but  kept 
themselves  shut  up  in  their  houses,  in  dally  expectation  t)f 
the  downfall  of  their  city,  and  the  ruin  of  their  country,  to¬ 
gether  with  their  own  destruction.  The  administration  of 
all  business  bad  devolved  on  Bostar  and  Hanno,  the  com** 
manders  of  the  Carthaginian  garrison,  the  chief  object  of 
whose  concern  was,  their  own  danger,  not  that  of  their  allies. 
These  men  wrote  to  Hannibal  in  terms  not  only  free,  but 
harsh,  charging  him,  that  ‘‘  besides  surrendering  Capua  in^o 
the  hands  of  the  enemy,  he  had  abandoned  them  and  their 
garrison  to  the  hazard  of  all  kinds  of  torture:  that  he  had 
gone  off  to  Bruttium  as  if  on  purpose  to  be  out  of  the  way, 
lest  the  city  should  be  taken  in  Ms  sight.  This  was  not  like 
the  conduct  of  the  Romans,  whom  not  even  an  attack  on  the 

BOOK  XXVL 

33r 

BX.211.] 
city  of  Rome  could  draw  away  from  the  siege  of  Capua:  so 
much  more  steady  were  Romans  in  enmity,  than  Carthagi¬ 
nians  in  friendship,”  They  told  him,  that  “  if  he  would  re¬ 
turn  to  Capua,  and  bring  his  whole  force  thither,  both  they 
and  the  Campanians  would  be  ready  to  sally  forth  to  his  as¬ 
sistance,  They  had  not  crossed  the  Alps  for  the  purpose  of 
waging  war  with  the  people  of  Rhegium,  or  of  Tarentum: 
wherever  the  Roman  legions  were,  there  ought  likewise  to 
be  Carthaginian  armies.  In  this  manner  success  had  been 
obtained  at  Cannae;  in  this  manner  at  the  Trasi menus;  by 
uniting,  by  keeping  their  camp  close  to  that  of  the  enemy, 
by  making  trial  of  fortune.”  Ha\dng  written  a  letter  to  this 
effect,  they  gave  it  to  some  Numidians,  who  had  before  pro¬ 
mised  their  service  for  a  reward  agreed  on.  After  these 
had  come  into  the  camp  to  Flaccus  as  deserters,  intending 
to  watch  for  an  opportunity,  of  proceeding  thence,  (the 
famine  which  had  raged  so  long  in  Capua  affording  any  one 
a  colourable  pretence  for  deserting,)  a  Campanian  woman, 
who  had  been  mistress  to  one  of  these,  came  unexpectedly 
into  the  camp,  and  informed  the  Roman  general  that  the  Nu¬ 
midians  had  came  over  with  a  treacherous  design,  and  were 
carrying  a  letter  to  Hannibal;  and  that  of  this  she  was  ready 
to  convict  one  of  them,  who  had  disclosed  the  matter  to  her. 
On  being  brought  to  an  examination,  he  at  first  maintained 
firmly  that  he  did  not  know  the  woman  ;  but  afterwards, 
yielding  reluctantly  to  the  force  of  truth,  on  seeing  that 
the  racks  were  called  for  and  brought  out,  he  confessed  the 
fact.  The  letter  was  produced,  and  a  farther  discovery  made 
of  a  matter  not  hitherto  mentioned,  that  several  other  Nu¬ 
midians,  under  the  appearance  of  deserters,  v/ere  strolling 
about  in  the  Roman  camp.  These,  in  number  about  seventy^ 
were  apprehended,  and,  together  with  the  late  deserters, 
beaten  with  rods;  their  hands  were  then  cut  eff,  and  they 
were  driven  back  to  Capua. 
XIIL  The  sight  of  a  punishment  so  grievous  quite  broke 
voty  III. — U  u 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  54E 

the  spirits  of  the  Campaaians.  The  populace »  crowding 
about  the  senate-house,  compelled  Leslus  to  call  a  meeting 
of  the  senate,  and  openly  threatened  the  nobles,  who,  for  a 
long  time  past,  had  absented  themselves  from  public  assem¬ 
blies,  that,  if  they  did  not  attend  the  meeting,  they  would  go 
round  to  each  of  their  houses,  and  drag  them  out  by  force. 
The  fear  of  this  procured  the  magistrate  a  full  senate.  At 
this  meeting,  while  the  rest  proposed  sending  ambassadors 
to  the  Roman  generals,  Vibius  Virius,  who  had  been  the 
principal  promoter  of  the  revolt  from  the  Romans,  on  being 
asked  his  opinion,  said,  that  those  who  spoke  of  sending 
ambassadors,  and  of  peace,  and  a  surrender,  did  not  consi¬ 
der  either  what  they  themselves  would  do,  if  they  had  the 
Romans  in  their  power,  or  what  they  must  expect  to  suffer 
from  them.  What!”  said  he,  ‘‘  do  you  imagine  that  your 
surrender  now  will  be  of  the  same  kind  with  that,  whereby, 
in  order  to  obtain  support  against  the  Samnites,  we  deliver¬ 
ed  ourselves  and  all  belonging  to  us  into  the  hands  of  the 
Romans^  Have  you  already  forgotten  at  what  season  and  in 
what  circumstances,  we  revolted  from  the  Romans?  Have 
you  already,  forgotten  how,  at  the  time  of  this  revolt,  we 
put  to  death,  with  indignity  and  torture,  their  garrison, 
which  might  haye  been  dismissed?  How  often,  and  with 
what  bitter  animosity,  we  have  sallied  out  against  them, 
since  they  began  the  siege;  and  even  attacked  their  camp? 
That  we  invited  Hannibal,  in  hopes  of  crushing  them;  and 
that  we  lately  sent  him  hence  to  attack  the  city  of  Rome? 
Recollect,  on  the  other  hand,  the  instances  of  their  animosity 
against  us;  that  you  may,  from  thence,  be  able  to  estimate 
what  room  there  is  for  hope-  When  there  was  a  foreign 
enemy  in  Italy,  and  that  enemy  was  Hannibal;  when  war 
blazed  in  every  quarter,  they,  neglecting  every  other  con¬ 
cern,  neglecting  Hannibal  himself,  sent  both  their  consuls 
with  two  consular  armies  to  attack  Capua.  These  two  yeai^ 
they  have  kept  us  shut  up,  surrounded  with  trenches,  smd 

B.C.  2tl.j 

BOOK  XXVI. 

3B§ 
consuming  us  by  faming;  although  they  themselves,  together 
with  us,  undergo  the  extremest  dangers,  and  the  severest 
labours;  often  losing  many  at  their  rampart  and  trenches, 
and,  at  last,  being  nearly  beaten  out  of  their  camp.  But  I 
will  not  enlarge  upon  these  matters.  To  endure  toils  and 
hardships  in  attacking  an  enemy’s  city,  is  no  new  thing;  it 
is  usual*  What  I  am  going  to  mention,  affords  a  proof  of 
resentment  and  implacable  hatred.  Hannibal,  with  a  power¬ 
ful  army  of  horse  and  foot,  assaulted  their  camp,  and  got 
possession  of  a  part  of  it.  The  greatness  of  their  danger 
did  not,  in  the  least,  dispose  them  to  drop  the  siege.  Cross¬ 
ing  the  Vulturnus,  he  laid  waste  the  territory  of  Cales  with 
fire:  such  a  severe  calamity  of  their  allies  called  them  not 
away.  He  ordered  his  troops  to  march  in  hostile  array  to 
the  city  of  Rome  itself:  this  storm,  ready  to  burst  on  their 
heads,  they  likewise  slighted.  Passing  the  Anio,  he  encamp¬ 
ed  within  three  miles  of  Rome,  and  at  last  advanced  to  the 
very  walls  and  gates,  showing  a  determination  to  deprive 
them  of  their  city,  unless  they  quitted  Capua.  They  did 
not  quit  it.  Wild  [)easts  inflamed  with  blind  fury  and  rage, 
you  may  draw  away  to  the  assistance  of  their  young,  if  you 
go  up  to  their  dens  and-cubs.  As  to  the  Romans,  not  the 
blockade  of  Rome,  nor  their  wives  and  children,  whose  la¬ 
mentations  might  almost  be  heard  even  here,  not  their^altars, 
their  houses,  the  temples  of  their  gods,  and  the  sepulchres 
of  their  ancestors  profaned  and  violated,  could  draw  them 
away  from  Capua;  so  keen  are  their  wishes  to  bring  us  to  * 
punishment,  so  eager  their  thirst  for  our  blood.  And,  per¬ 
haps,  not  without  reason:  for  we,  on  our  parts,  would  have 
done  the  same,  had  fortune  given  us  the  power.  Wherefore, 
since  the  immortal  gods  have  determined  otherwise,  and 
though  I  ought  not  to  decline  death;  yet  while  I  am  free, 
while  I  am  master  of  myself,  I  can,  by  a  death.both  honour¬ 
able  and  easy,  avoid  the  tortures  and  indignities  which  the 
enemy  hopes  to  inflict  on  me.  Never  will  I  see  Appiws 

340 

HISTORY  OF  ROME 

[Y.  R.  54l« 

Claudius  and  Quintus  Fulvius  pufFed  up  with  the  insolence 
of  victory;  nOr  will  I  be  dragged  in  chains  through  the  city 
of  Rome,  as  a  spectacle  m  their  triumph,  that  I  may  after¬ 
wards,  either  in  a  dungeon  or  tied  to  a  stake,  have  my  back 
mangled  with  stripes,  and  submit  my  neck  to  a  Roman  axe; 
never  will  I  see  my  native  city  demolished,  and  reduced  to 
ashes,  nor  the  Campanian  matrons  and  virgins  dragged  to 
violation.  Alba,  from  whence  they  themselves  sprung,  they 
rased  from  the  foundation,  that  no  monument  of  their  ex¬ 
traction  or  origin  might  exist.  Can  I  believe  that  they  will 
spare  Capua,  against  which  they  are  more  violently  incensed 
than  against  Carthage?  Whosoever  of  you,  then,  are  disposed 
to  yield  to  destiny,  before  they  become  spectators  of  so 
many  scenes  of  such  horrid  kinds,  for  these  a  banquet  is 
prepared  and  ready,  this  day,  at  my  house.  When  you  have 
indulged  plentifully  in  food  and  wine,  the  same  cup  that  will 
be  given  to  me  shall  go  round.  That  cup  will  save  our  bo¬ 
dies  from  torture,  our  minds  from  insult,  our  eyes  and  ears 
from  the  sight  and  hearing  of  all  the  cruelties  and  indigni¬ 
ties  that  await  the  conquered.  There  will  be  persons  in 
readiness  to  throw  our  lifeless  bodies  on  a  large  pile  kindled 
in  the  court-yard  of  the  house.  This  way  alone  conducts  us 
to  death  with  honour  and  freedom.  Our  enemies  themselves 
will  ^mire  our  courage,  and  Hannibal  will  be  convinced, 
that  the  allies,  whom  he  deserted  and  betrayed,  were  men 
of  determined  valour.” 
XIV,  More  approved  of  the  proposal  contained  in  this 
speech  of  Vibius,  than  had  resolution  to  adopt  it.  The  great¬ 
er  part  of  the  senate,  conceiving  hopes  that  the  clemency  of 
the  Roman  people,  often  experienced  in  former  dispute^, 
might  be  extended  even  to  their  case,  after  passing  a  decree 
for  that  purpose,  sent  ambassadors  to  surrender  Capua  to  the 
Romans,  About  twenty-seven  senators  followed  Vibius  Vi- 
rius  to  his  house;  where,  after  feasting  with  him,  and,  as  far 
as  they  could,  banishing  from  their  minds,  by  wine,  all 

BOOK  XXVL 

341 

B.  €.211*J 
feeling  of  the  impending  evil,  they  every  one  took  the  poison. 
They  then  broke  up  the  meeting,  gave  their  hands,  took  the 
last  embrace,  condoling  with  one  another  on  their  own  fall, 
and  that  of  their  country.  Some  remained  there,  in  order 
to  be  burned  together  on  one  pile,  and  the  rest  retired  to 
their  several  houses.  Their  veins  were  filled  by  the  victuals 
and  wine;  which  circumstance  retarded  the  efficacy  of  the  poi¬ 
son  in  hastening  death,  so  that  most  of  them  lingered  through 
that  whole  night,  and  part  of  the  next  day;  however,  they  all 
expired  before  the  gates  were  opened  to  the  enemy.  On  the 
day  following,  the  gate  of  Jupiter  which  was  opposite  to  the 
Roman  camp,  was  opened  by  order  of  the  proconsul,  and 
through  it  marched  in  one  legion,  and  two  confederate  squad¬ 
rons,  under  the  command  of  Caius  Fulvius,  lieutenant-ge¬ 
neral.  His  first  care  was,  to  have  all  the  arms^and  weapons  in 
the  city  brought  to  him;  then,  placing  guards  at  all  the 
gates,  to  prevent  any  one  going  or  being  conveyed  out,  he 
secured  the  Carthaginian  garrison,  and  ordered  the  Campa¬ 
nian  senators  to  go  into  the  camp  to  the  Roman  generals. 
On  their  arrival  there,  they  were  all  immediately  thrown 
into  chains,  and  ordered  to  furnish  the  quaestors  with  an  ac¬ 
count  of  what  gold  and  silver  they  possessed.  The  gold 
amounted  to  seventy  pounds  weight,  the  silver  to  three  thou¬ 
sand  two  hundred.  Of  the  senators,  twenty- five  were  sent 
to  Cales,  and  twenty-eight  tol'eanum,  to  be  kept  in  custody. 
These  were  the  persons  who  appeared  to  have  been  chiefly 
instrumental  in  bringing  about  the  revolt  from  the  Romans. 
XV.  With  respect  to  the  punishment  of  the  Campanian 
senate,  Fulvius  aud  Claudius  could  by  no  means  agree. 
Claudius  was  inclined  to  favour  their  suit  for  pardon;  the 
opinion  of  Fulvius  was  more  severe.  Appius,  therefore  pro¬ 
posed,  thjit  the  entire  determination  of  that  matter,  should 
be  removed  to  Rome;  observing,  that  it^was  highly  reasonable 
that  the  senate  should  have  an  opportunity  of  inquiring, 

342 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  541 : 

whether  they  had  brought  any  of  the  Latine  confederates,  or 
of  the  municipal  towns,  to  take  part  in  their  designs,  and 
whether  they  had  been  assisted  by  them  in  the  war.  Ful- 
vius  insisted,  that  “  it  would  be  to  the  last  degree  improper^ 
that  faithful  allies  should  have  their  minds  disturfsed  by  du- 
biops  imputations,  and  be  subjected  to  informers,  who  never 
scruple  either  what  they  say  or  do.  Any  inquiry  of  that  kind, 
therefore  he  was  resolved  to  suppress  and  stifle.”  After  this 
conversation  they  parted;  and  Appius  made  no  doubt  that 
his  colleague,  though  he  spoke  in  this  determined  manner, 
would  yet,  in  a  case  of  such  importance,  wait  for  letters  from 
Rome.  But  Fulvius,  apprehensive  that  his  intention  might 
be  frustrated  by  that  very  means,  dismissed  the  officers  at¬ 
tending  at  his  pavilion,  and  ordered  the  military  tribunes  and 
praefects  of  thef  allies  to  give  notice  to  two  thousand  chosen 
horsemen,  to  be  in  readiness  at  the  third  trumpet.  With 
this  body  of  horse  he  set  out  in  the  night  for  Teanum,  and 
entering  the  gate  at  the  first  light,  proceeded  straight  to  the 
Forum.  The  arrival  of  the  horsemen  having  caused  imme¬ 
diately  a  concourse  of  the  people,  he  ordered  the  Sidicinian 
magistrate  to  be  summoned,  and  commanded  him  to  bring 
forth  the  Campanians  whom  he  had  in  his  custody.  Accord¬ 
ingly  they  were  all  brought  forth,  beaten  with  rods  and  be¬ 
headed.  From  thence,  he  rode  away  at  full  speed  to  Gales; 
where,  when  he  had  taken  his  seat  on  the  tribunal,  and  the 
lictors  were  binding  the  Campanians  to  the  stakes,  a  courier, 
arriving  in  haste  from  Rome,  delivered  him  a  letter  from 
Caius  Calpurnius,  the  prsetor,  and  a  decree  of  the  senate  in 
their  favour.  A  murmur  immediately  spread  from  the  tri¬ 
bunal  through  the  whole  assembly,  that  the  case  of  the  Cam¬ 
panians  was  reserved  for  the  cognizance  of  the  senate.  Ful¬ 
vius,  suspecting  this  to  be  so,  when  he  received  the  letter, 
thrust  it  unopened  into  his  bosom,  and  commanded  the 
crier  to  order  the  lie  tor  to  proceed  in  his  duty  according  to 
law.  Thus  those  also  who  were  at  Cales  suflFered  punishment. 

H.  C.211-] 

BOOK  xxvr. 

343 

He  then  read  the  letter  and  the  decree,  when  it  could  not  ob¬ 
struct  the  business  already  finished,  and  which  had  been  hurri¬ 
ed  on  lest  it  might  be  obstructed.  When  Fulvius  was  rising 
from  his  seat,  Taurea  Jubellius,  a  Campanian,  making  his 
way  through  the  middle  of  the  city  and  of  the  crowd,  called 
on  him  by  name.  Fulvius,  wondering  whaf  his  business 
with  him  might  be,  resumed  his  seat;  on  which  the  other 
said,  Order  me  also  to  be  put  to  death,  that  you  may  boast 
of  having  killed  a  braver  man  than  yourself.’’  Fulvius  said, 
that  the  man  had  certainly  lost  his  reason,”  and  observed 
besides,  that  if  he  were  inclined  to  comply  with  his  desire, 
he  was  now  restrained  by  a  decree  of  the  senate.”  Jubelli- 
us  on  this  exclaimed:  Since,  after  seeing  my  country  reduc¬ 
ed  to  captivity,  after  losing  my  friends  and  relations,  after 
having  killed,  with  my  own  hand,  my  wife  and  children,  to 
prevent  their  suffering  any  indignity,  I  am  denied  even  the 
means  of  dying  in  the  same  manner  with  these  my  country¬ 
men;  let  me  seek  from  my  own  resolution  a  deliverance 
from  this  detested  life;”  and  then  stabbing  himself  through 
the  breast,  with  a  sword  w^hich  he  had  concealed  under  his 
garment,  he  fell  lifeless  at  the  general’s  feet. 
XVI.  Because  not  only  the  whole  business  relative  to  the 
punishment  of  the  Campanians,  but,  also,  most  of  the  other 
transactions,  in  that  quarter,  were  conducted  agreeably  to 
the  single  judgment  of  Flaccus,  some  writers  affirm,  that 
Appius  Claudius  died  before  the  surrender  of  Capua.  They 
say,  too,  that  this  same  Taurea  neither  came  voluntarily  to 
Cales,  nor  died  by  his  own  hand;  but  that,  while  he  was 
among  the  rest,  tied  to  a  stake,  and  because  the  expressions 
which  he  loudly  vociferated  could  not  be  well  heard,  amidst 
the  noise  of  the  crowd,  Flaccus  had  ordered  silence  to  be 
made,  and  that  then  Taurea  uttered  the  words  before-men¬ 
tioned:  that  ‘‘  he,  a  man  of  consummate  valour,  w’as  to  be  put 
to  death  by  one  his  inferior  in  courage!”  that,  on  his  saying 
this,  the  crier,  by  order  of  the  proconsul,  pronounced  aloud 

544 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

[Y.  R.  541. 

this  order,  Lictor,  apply  the  rods  to  this  man  of  valour^ 
and  on  him  first  execute  the  law.”  Some  writers  assert  also, 
that  he  read  the  decree  of  the  senate  before  he  beheaded  the 
prisoners;  but  because  there  was  an  expression  annexed,  that 
if  he  judged  proper,  he  should  refer  the  business  entire  to 
the  senate,”' he  interpreted  this  as  giving  him  authority  to 
determine  what  he  judged  most  conducive  to  the  public  good. 
From  Gales  he  returned  to  Capua,  and  received  the  submis¬ 
sion  of  Attella  and  Galatia.  In  these  towns  also,  the  per¬ 
sons  who  had  been  in  the  managements  of  affairs,  were  pu¬ 
nished.  Upon  the  whole,  eighty  of  the  principal  members 
of  the  senate  were  put  to  death;  and  about  three  hundred 
Campanian  nobles  were  thrown  into  prison.  The  rest,  being 
sent  into  several  of  the  cities  of  the  Latine  confederates  to 
be  kept  in  custody,  perished  by  various  means.  The  whole 
remaining  multitude  of  Campanian  citizens  were  ordered 
to  be  sold.  How  to  dispose  of  the  town  and  its  territory 
remained  to  be  considered:  and  here,  many  were  of  opinion, 
that  a  city,  so  hostile  in  disposition,  so  near  the  Roman 
borders,  and  so  formidably  powerful,  ought  to  be  demo¬ 
lished.  However,  the  consideration  of  immediate  utility 
prevailed;  and,  on  account  of  the  soil,  which  was  well  known 
to  be  endued  with  a  fertility  qualifying  it  for  every  kind  of 
cultivation,  and  beyond  any  other  in  Italy,  the  city  was  pre¬ 
served,  to  be  a  kind  of  settlement  of  husbandmen.  For  the 
purpose  of  peopling  the  same,  all  those  of  its  former  inhabi¬ 
tants,  who  had  not  become  citizens,  together  with  the  freed- 
men,  dealers  and  tradesmen,  were  ordered  to  remain;  the 
land  and  public  buildings  became  the  property  of  the  Roman 
people.  It  was  however,  determined,  that  Capua  should 
have  no  other  privilege  of  a  city,  than  the  being  inhabited; 
no  system  of  civil  polity,  no  assembly  of  a  senate  or  commons, 
no  magistrates.  For  it  was  supposed  that  a  multitude,  with¬ 
out  a  public  council,  without  a  ruling  head,  participating  in 
no  common  rights,  would  be  incapable  of  forming  designs  in 

BOOK  XXVI. 

345 

B.  C.  211,] 

concert.  It  was  further  ordained,  that  the  administration  of 
justice  should  be  conducted  by  a  praefect,  to  be  sent  yearly 
from  Rome.  In  this  manner  were  the  affairs  of  Capua  ad¬ 
justed,  with  a  policy  in  every  particular  commendable.  Se- 
vere  and  speedy  punishment  was  inflicted  on  the  most  guilty; 
the  populace  were  dispersed  beyond  all  hope  of  return;  but 
no  passionate  resentment  was  vented,  in  fire  and  devastation 
on  the  unoffending  houses  and  walls.  There  was  impressed 
on  the  minds  of  aU  the  allies,  an  advantageous  opinion  of 
Roman  clemency  in  the  sparing  of  this  very  celebrated  and 
opulent  city,  the  demolition  of  which  would  have  deeply  af¬ 
flicted,  not  only  all  Campania,  but  every  state  in  its  neigh¬ 
bourhood,  This  conduct  extorted  also  from  the  enemy  a 
full  acknowledgment  of  the  power  of  the  Romans  to  punish 
faithless  allies  while  they  were  convinced  how  utterly  inade¬ 
quate  the  ability  of  Hannibal  was  to  afford  them  the  protec¬ 
tion  engaged  for. 
XVII.  The  attention  of  the  senate  being  no  longer  neces¬ 
sary  to  the  business  of  Capua,  they  decreed  to  Claudius 
Nero  six  thousand  foot  and  three  hundred  horse,  to  be  cho¬ 
sen  by  himself  out  of  those  two  legions  which  he  had  com¬ 
manded  at  that  place,  with  a  like  number  of  foot,  and  eight 
hundred  horse  of  the  confederate  Latines.  This  army  he 
embarked  at  Puteoli,  and  carried  over  to  Spain.  When  the 
fleet  arrived  at  Tarraco,  he  disembarked  the  troops,  hauled 
the  ships  on  shore,  and,  to  augment  his  numbers,  armed  the 
marines;  then,  marching  to  the  river  Iberus,  and  receiving 
the  forces  then  with  Titus  Fonteius  and  Lucius  Marcius 
he  proceeded  towards  the  enemy.  Hasd rubai,  son  of  Hamil- 
car,  was  at  this  time  encamped  in  Ausetania,  at  a  place 
called  the  Black  Stones,  between  the  towns  of  Ilieturge  and 
Metissa — a  valley  surrounded  by  hills  and  woods,  the  en¬ 
trances  to  which  were  seized  by  Nero.  In  order  to  extricate 
himself,  Hasdrubal  sent  a  messenger  with  the  wand  of  peace, 
engaging  that,  if  he  were  allowed  to  depart,  he  would  entire- 
VOL,  III.— X  X 

346 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  541. 

ly  evacuate  Spain.  This  proposal  the  Roman  received  with 
joy.  The  Carthaginians  then  requested,  that  a  conference 
might  be  held  in  order  to  settle,  in  writing,  the  rules  to  be 
observed  respecting  the  surrender  of  the  citadels  of  the  se¬ 
veral  towns,  and  the  appointment  of,  a  day  whereon  the  gar¬ 
risons  were  to  be  withdrawn,  removing,  without‘obstruction, 
every  thing  that  belonged  to  them.  This  request  being  com¬ 
plied  with,  Hasdrubal  gave  orders,  that  as  soon  as  it  should 
begin  to  grow  dark,  the  part  of  his  army  least  calculated  for 
expeditious  movements  should  get  out  of  the  defile  as  they 
were  able:  particular  care,  however,  was  taken  that  great 
numbers  should  not  leave  it  at  once,  because  a  few  were 
more  likely  both  to  pass  in  silence,  and  unobserved  by  the 
enemy,  and  also  to  make  their  way  through  the  narrow  and 
difficult  paths.  Next  day  the  commanders  of  it  met;  but 
the  whole  of  it  was  purposely  wasted  by  Hasdrubal  in  speak¬ 
ing  and  writing  abundance  ol  things  perfectly  immaterial; 
and,  consequently  the  conference  was  postponed  to  the  next. 
He  thus  gained  the  space  of  the  following  night  also,  to  send 
out  more  of  his  troops,  and  even  the  next  day,  did  not  con¬ 
clude  the  business,  in  this  manner  several  days  were  passed 
in  openly  debating  on  the  conditions,  and  the  nights  in  pri¬ 
vately  sending  off  the  Carthaginians;  so  that,  when  the  great¬ 
er  part  of  his  troops  had  got  clear,  his  sincerity  decreasing 
along  with  his  fears,  he  refused  to  abide  by  what  he  him¬ 
self  bad  proposed.  And  now,  almost  the  whole  of  the  in¬ 
fantry  had  made  their  way  out  of  the  defile,  when,  at  the 
dawn  of  day,  a  thick  fog  overspread  both  that  and  ail  the  ad¬ 
jacent  plains;  which  Hasdrubal  perceiving,  sent  to  Nero  to 
defer  th^  conference  until  the  next  morning,  alleging,  that 
this  was  a  day  on  which  the  Carthaginians  were  prohibited 
by  their  religion  from  transacting  any  serious  business.  Even 
this  raised  no  suspicion  of  deceit  Hasdrubal,  having  obtain¬ 
ed  the  indulgence  he  had  demanded,  instantly  quitted  the 
camp  with  his  cavalry  and  elephants;  and,  without  causing 

BOOK  XXVL 

S4T 

B.  C.  211.3 
any  alarm,  gained  a  place  of  safety.  About  the  fourth  hour, 
the  fog  being  dispersed  by  the  sun,  the  day  cleared  up,  and 
showed  to  the  Romans  the  enemy’s  deserted  canjp.  Then, 
at  last,  Nero  became  acquainted  with  Carthaginian  perfidy, 
and  was  so  provoked  at  having  thus  been  duped,  that  he  set 
out  directly  in  pursuit  of  the  retreating  enemy,  determined 
to  bring  him  to  an  engagement;  but  the  other  eluded  all  his 
endeavours.  Some  skirmishes  however  took  place  between 
the  rear  of  the  Carthaginians  and  the  advanced  guard  of  the 
Romans. 
XVIII^  Meanwhile  these  Spanish  states,  which,  after  the 
late  disaster,  had  abandoned  the  cause  of  the  Romans,  did 
not  return  to  their  alliance,  but  no  others  had  lately  deserted 
them.  At  Rome,  since  the  recovery  of  Capua,  the  senate 
and  people  gave  not  more  earnest  attention  to  the  affairs  of 
Italy,  than  to  those  of  Spain;  they  therefore  determined  to 
augment  the  army  there,  and  to  send  a  general  to  command  it. 
But  it  was  not  so  easy  to  agree  on  the  person  to  be  sent,  as 
it  was  to  perceive  that  extraordinary  care  ought  to  be  em¬ 
ployed  in  the  choice  of  one  to  be  commissioned  to  such  a 
charge,  in  which  two  most  eminent  commanders  had  fallen 
within  the  space  of  thirty  days,  and  where  he  was  to  supply 
the  place  of  the  two.  Some  named  one,  some  another,  until 
the  resolution  was  at  last  adopted,  of  leaving  it  to  the  people 
in  assembly,  to  elect  a  proconsul  for  Spain;  and  the  consuls 
accordingly  proclaimed  a  day  for  the  election.  It  had  been 
expected,  at  first,  that  those  who  believed  themselves  quali¬ 
fied  for  such  an  important  command,  would  become  candi* 
dates;  and  the  failure  of  this  expectation  renewed  the  afflic¬ 
tion  of  the  public,  for  the  severe  blow  which  they  had  sus¬ 
tained,  and  for  the  generals  whom  they  had  lost.  Under  this 
dejection  of  mind,  almost  incapable  of  forming  a  judgment 
on  the  state  of  things,  the  people,  nevertheless,  on  the  day 
of  election,  repaired  to  the  field  of  Mars,  where  they  fixed 
their  eyes  on  the  magistrates,  watching  the^  countenances  of 

348 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  54E 

the  several  men  of  the  greatest  eminence,  who  only  cast  looks 
of  perplexity  one  on  another.  And  now,  every  one  began 
with  added  sorrow  to  remark,  that  their  affairs  were  hope¬ 
less,  and  the  cause  of  the  public  so  desperate  that  no  one 
dared  to  accept  the  command  in  Spain,  when  on  a  sudden, 
Publius  Cornelius  Scipio,  a  son  of  Publius,  who  was  killed 
in  Spain,  being  then  about  the  age  of  twenty-four,  went  up 
to  an  eminence,  from  whence  he  could  be  seen,  and  declared 
himself  a  candidate.  The  eyes  of  the  whole  assembly  were 
instantly  turned  on  him,  and  universal  acclamations  testified 
hopes  and  presages  of  prosperity  and  success  to  his  commis¬ 
sion,  Orders  were  given,  that  they  should  immediately  pro¬ 
ceed  to  give  their  suffrages,  when  not  only  every  century, 
without  exception,  but  every  individual,  voted,  that  Publius 
Scipio  should  have  the  command  in  Spain.  When  the  busi¬ 
ness  was  finished,  and  the  vehemence  and  ardour  of  their 
emotions  had  subsided,  a  sudden  silence  ensued;  and  they 
now  began  to  reflect  on  the  strange  manner  in  which  they 
had  acted,  governing  themselves  rather  by  partial  inclina¬ 
tion,  than  by  judgment.  His  early  age  was  the  principal 
cause  of  their  uneasiness:  while  some  at  the  same  time  con¬ 
ceived  terrible  apprehensions  from  the  fortune  attending  his 
house,  and  even  from  his  name.  The  two  families  he  be¬ 
longed  to  were  then  in  mourning;  and  he  was  to  set  out  for 
a  province  where  he  must  carry  on  his  operations  between 
the  tombs  of  his  father  and  of  his  uncle. 
XIX.  When  he  perceived  that,  after  going  through  the 
business  with  such  great  alacrity  of  zeal,  the  people  were 
yet  impressed  with  solicitude  and  anxiety,  he  summoned 
an  assembly;  and  there  enlarged  on  the  subject  of  his  years, 
on  the  command  entrusted  to  him,  and  the  war  to  be  carried 
on;  and  this  he  did  with  such  magnanimity  and  elevation  of 
sentiment,  as  to  rekindle  and  renew  the  ardour  which  had 
subsided,  and  to  fill  the  people  with  greater  confidence  than 
t  ithcr  the  faith  reposed  in  any  human  professions,  or  than 

BOOK  XXVL 

349 

B.  0,2110 
reason,  judging  from  the  most  promising  state  of  aflPairs, 
usually  supplies.  For  Scipio  was  deserving  of  admiration, 
not  only  for  real  virtues,  but  also  for  a  certain  judicious  me- 
thod  of  displaying  them  to  advantage,  to  which  he  had  been 
trained  from  his  youth.  He  generally  represented  any  mat¬ 
ter,  which  he  wished  to  carry  with  the  multitude,  as  recom¬ 
mended  either  by  a  vision  in  the  night,  or  by  ^n  admonition 
impressed  on  his  mind  by  the  gods;  whether  owing  to  the  in¬ 
fluence  of  some  kind  of  superstition  in  him,  or  with  the  de¬ 
sign  of  bringing  men  to  execute  his  orders  and  schemes 
without  hesitation,  as  if  they  were  directed  by  the  responses 
of  an  oracle.  To  prepare  their  minds  for  this,  he  never  trans¬ 
acted  any  business,  public  or  private  (from  the  very  moment 
of  assuming  the  manly  gown,)  without  first  going  to  the  Ca¬ 
pitol,  walking  into  the  temple,  and  sitting  there  for  some 
time;  generally  alone,  and  in  some  retired  spot.  This  cus¬ 
tom,  which  was  observed  by  him  through  the  whole  course 
of  his  life,  made  several  people  give  credit  to  a  notion  which 
was  then  propagated  either  by  his  own  contrivance  or  by 
some  unknown  author,  that  he  was  of  divine  extraction; 
like  to  the  fable  formerly  told  of  Alexander  the  Great.  The 
fiction  went,  that  he  was  begotten  by  a  huge  serpent;  in 
which  form  the  prodig}’,  it  was  said,  had  been  very  often 
seen  in  his  mother’s  chamber,  and  on  people’s  coming  in, 
glided  away  suddenly,  and  disappeared.  These  miraculous 
stories  he  himself  never  discouraged,  but  rather  artfully 
countenanced,  neither  contradicting  any  thing  of  the  kind, 
nor  absolutely  affirming  it.  Many  other  remarkable  inci¬ 
dents  in  respect  of  this  youth  (some  real  and'others  fictitious^) 
had  procured  for  him  a  degree  of  admiration  surpassing 
what  was  due  to  any  human  being;  and  these  were  the  mo¬ 
tives  which  then  induced  the  public  to  intrust  him,  at  so  un¬ 
ripe  an  age,  with  the  conduct  of  so  momentous  a  business  as 
that  to  which  he  had  aspired.  To  the  remains  of  the  whole- 
army,  still  in  Spain,  and  the  forces  carried  thither  from  Pu- 
teoli  with  Claudius  Nero,  were  added  ten  thousand  foot  and 

sso 

history  of  ROME: 

[Y.  ft.  541. 

one  thousand  horse;  and  Mau-cus  Junius  Silanus,  propraetor, 
was  sent  with  him,  to  assist  in  the  management  of  affairs. 
Thus  setting  sail  from  Ostia,  on  the  Tiber,  with  a  fleet  of 
thirty  ships,  which  were  all  quinqueremes,  and  coasting 
along  the  shore  of  the  Tuscan  sea,  the  Alps,  and  the  Gallic 
gulf,  and  then  doubling  the  promontory  of  Pyrene,  he  dis¬ 
embarked  his.  forces  at  Emporium,  a  city  of  Greeks,  who 
came  originally  from  Phocaea.  Thence,  having  ordered  the 
fleet  to  follow,  he  marched  by  land  to  Tarraco,  and  there 
held  a  convention  of  all  the  allies;  for,  on  the  news  of  his 
arrival,  embassies  had  poured  in  from  every  state  in  the  pro¬ 
vince.  Here  he  ordered  the  ships  to  be  laid  up  on  shore,  af* 
ter  sending  back  four  triremes  of  the  Massilians,  which  had, 
out  of  respect,  accompanied  him  from  home.  He  then  ap¬ 
plied  himself  to  giving  answers  to  the  embassies  of  the  se¬ 
veral  states,  whose  minds  had  been  held  in  suspense  by  the 
succession  of  so  many  various  events;  and  this  he  performed 
with  much  dignity  of  spirit,  resulting  from  a  thorough  con¬ 
fidence  in  his  own  abilities;  but  at  the  same  time,  not  oifec 
presumptuous  word  fell  from  him,  and  in  every  thing  w^ich 
he  said,  there  appeared  at  once  the  greatest  elevation  of  sen¬ 
timent,  and  the  greatest  candour. 
XX.  Leaving  Tarraco,  he  visited  the  several  states  of  the 
allies,  and  the  winter-quarters  of  the  army.  Here  he  bestow¬ 
ed  much  praise  on  the  soldiers,  for  having,  after  all  their 
sufferings,  in  two  such  dreadful  disasters  succeeding  one 
another,  still  retained  possession  of  the  province,  not  allow¬ 
ing  the  enemy  to  derive  any  advantage  from  their  success, 
but  excluding  them  entirely  from  the  country  on  the  hither 
side  of  the  Iberus,  and  honourably  securing  the  safety  of  the 
allies.  Marcias  he  kept  near  himself,  and  treated  with  him 
upon  terms  so  highly  honourable  as  plainly  demonstrated, 
that  he  feared  nothing  less,  than  that  any  one  might  eclipse 
his  own  glory.  Siianus  then  succeeded  in  the  room  of  Nero, 
and  the  troops  lately  arrived  went  into  winter  quarters.  Sci- 
pio  having,  without  loss  of  time,  repaired  to  the  places  where 

BOOK  XXVL 

S51  ‘ 

B.C.  211.3 

his  presence  was  requisite,  and  finished  the  business  there  to 
to  be  done,  returned  to  Tarraco.  The  enemy  were,  by  this 
time,  possessed  with  an  opinion  of  Scipio  not  inferior  to  that 
entertained  by  his  own  countrymen  and  the  allies;  and  they 
felt,  mdteover,  a  kind  of  foreboding  of  what  was  to  come, 
which  (the  less  able  they  were  to  account  for  apprehensions 
of  which  no  cause  appeared)  impressed  the  greater  dread 
upon  their  minds.  They  had  gone  into  winter  quarters  in 
different  parts  of  the  country;  Hasd rubai,  son  of  Gisgo,  at 
Gades,  on  the  ocean;  Mago  in  the  inland  parts,  the  greatest 
part  of  his  troops  being  stationed  above  the  pass  of  Castulo; 
and  Hasdrubal,  son  of  Ham  dear,  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
SagUntum,  on  the  banks  of  the  Iberus.  Towards  the  end  of 
that  summer  wherein  Capua  was  taken,  and  Scipio  came  in¬ 
to  Spain,  a  Carthaginian  fleet,  which  was  called  over  from 
Sicily  to  Tarentum  to  cut  off  the  supplies  of  the  Roman 
garrison  in  the  citadel,  shut  up  indeed,  every  access  to  it 
by  sea;  but,  by  lying  there  too  long,  caused  a  greater  scarci¬ 
ty  among  their  friends  than  among  the  enemy:  for  the  quan¬ 
tity  of  corn  that  could  be  brought  into  the  town  along  the 
coasts,  which  were  kept  in  awe,  and  through  the  ports,  which 
were  kept  open  by  the  power  of  the  Carthaginian  fleet,  was 
not  equal  to  the  consumption  of  the  fleet  itself,  crowded  as 
it  was  with  a  mixed  multitude  of  people  of  every  descrip¬ 
tion;  and  while  the  garrison  of  the  citadel,  being  few  in  num¬ 
ber,  could  support  themselves  out  of  the  magazines  previous¬ 
ly  formed  without  any  importation,  all  that  could  be  brought 
in  was  too  little  to  answer  the  demands  of  the  Tarentines 
and  the  fleet.  At  last  the  fleet  was  sent  away,  which  gave 
greater  satisfaction  than  its  coming  had  done,  but  produced 
very  little  relief  to  the  scarcity;  for  when  the  naval  force  was 
removed,  no  more  corn  could  be  brought  in. 
XXI.  Towards  the  close  of  this  summer,  Maicus  Mar- 
celius  having  returned  to  Rome  from  his  province  of  Sicih 
the  praetor,  Caius  Calpumius,  assembled  the  senate  in  the 
temple  of  Bellona,  to  give  him  audience.  Here,  after  ex- 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y,  R.  541. 
patiating  on  the  services  which  he  had  performed,  and  com¬ 
plaining  in  mild  terms,  not  more  on  his  own  account  than  on 
that  of  his  soldiers,  that  though  he  had  completed  all  the 
business  of  the  province,  he  had  not  been  allowed  to  bring 
home  the  army,  he  requested  permission  to  enter  the  city  in 
triumph.  This  occasioned  a  long  debate,  wherein  it  was  urg¬ 
ed  on  one  side,  that  after  they  had  in  his  absence  decreed  a 
supplication  and  a  thanksgiving  to  the  immortal  gods  in  his 
behalf,  and  for  services  happily  accomplished,  the  refusing 
him  a  triumph  when  he  appeared  to  demand  it,  would  imply 
an  inconsistency;  and,  on  the  other,  that,  as  they  had  decreed 
that  he  should  give  up  the  command  of  the  army  to  a  suc¬ 
cessor  (which  kind  of  decree  was  never  passed,  unless  when 
war  still  subsisted  in  the  province,)  there  would  be  no  less  in¬ 
consistency  in  voting  him  a  triumph,  as  if  the  war  were  con¬ 
cluded,  and  while  the  troops,  who  could  best  testify  whether 
he  merited  that  honour  or  not,  were  in  a  distant  country. 
The  matter  was  at  length  compromised,  with  a  decree  that 
he  should  enter  the  city  in  ovation.  I'he  plebeian  tribunes, 
by  direction  of  the  senate,  proposed  to  the  people  the  issuing 
of  an  order,  that*  Marcus  Marcellus  should  enjoy  the  au¬ 
thority  of  a  general  during  the  day  on  which  he  should  pass 
through  Rome  in  ovation.  On  the  day  preceding  that  of 
his  entrance,  he  triumphed  on  the  Alban  mount;  and,  in  his 
ovation  had  great  abundance  of  spoils  borne  before  him  into 
the  city.  Together  with  a  model,  representing  the  captured 
city  of  Syracuse,  were  carried  in  procession  the  catapultas, 
balistas,  and  every  other  kind  of  engine  used  in  war.  Like¬ 
wise,  the  valuable  ornaments  collected  by  their  kings,  at  vast 
expense,  during  a  long  continuance  of  peace;  abundance  of 
wrought  silver  and  brass  furniture  of  various  kinds,  precious 
garments,  and  a  great  number  of  remarkably  fine  statues, 
with  which  kind  of  ornaments  Syracuse  had  abounded  as 
much  as  any  ©f  the  Grecian  cities.  Eight  elephants  were 
also  led  in  his  train,  as  an  emblem  of  his  victory  over  .the 
Carthaginians;  and  what  formed  not  the  least  attractive  part 

BOOK  XXVI. 

355 

B,  C.  211.3 

of  the  show,  he  was  preceded  by  Sosis  the  Syracusan,  and 
Mcricus  the  Spaniard,  with  crowns  of  gold  on  their  heads, 
the  former  of  whom  had  guided  the  Romans  into  Syracuse 
by  night,  the  other  had  delivered  the  island  and  its  garrison 
into  their  hands.  To  both  of  these  the  freedom  of  the  state 
was  granted,  and  to  each  five  hundred  acres  of  land.  The 
portion  intended  for  Sosis  was  ordered  to  be  given  to  him 
in  the  territory  of  Syracuse,  out  of  the  estates  which  had 
belonged  either  to  the  kings  or  to  the  enemies  of  the  Roman 
people,  with  any  house  that  he  should  choose  of  those  which 
had  belonged  to  persons  punished  according  to  the  laws  of 
war.  Mericus,  and  the  Spaniards  who  came  over  with  him, 
were  to  have  a  city  and  lands  allotted  to  them,  in  some  of  those 
parts  of  Sicil)'  which  had  revolted  from  the  Romans:  and 
Marcus  Cornelius  was  commissioned  to  assign  these  to  them 
wherever  he  should  judge  proper.  Four  hundred  acres  of 
land  in  the  same  country  were  decreed  to  Belligenes,  by 
whose  persuasions  Mericus  had  been  prevailed  on  to  secede 
from  the  Carthaginians  over  to  the  Romans.  After  the  de¬ 
parture  of  Marcellus  from  Sicily,  a  Carthaginian  fleet  land¬ 
ed  eight  thousand  foot  and  three  thousand  Nuraidian  horse, 
who  were  soon  joined  by  the  Murgantians,  and  their  revolt 
was  followed  by  that  of  Hybla,  and  several  other  clues  of 
less  note.  The  Numidians;  headed  by  Mutines,  making  ex¬ 
cursions  through  every  part  of  the  island,  wasted  with  fire 
and  sword  the  lands  of  those  who  were  in  alliance  with 
Rome.  Besides  these  untoward  circumstances,  the  Roman 
troops,  being  incensed  partly  because  they  had  not  been  car¬ 
ried  home  with  their  commander,  and  partly  l^cause  they 
had  been  forbidden  to  winter  in  towns,  became  very  remiss 
in  their  duty,  and  wanted  rather  a  leader  than  inclination  for 
a  mutiny.  In  the  midst  of  these  difficulties,  the  praetor,  Mar¬ 
cus  Cornelius,  by  sometimes  soothing,  sometimes  reproving 
the  soldiers,  brought  them  to  a  calmer  temper,  and  also  re¬ 
duced  to  submission  all  the  states  which  had  revolted;  out 
VOL,  lu. — y  y 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  541, 

354 
of  which  he  assigned  Murgantia  to  those  Spaniards  who 
were  entitled  to  a  city  and  lands  by  the  senate’s  decree. 
XXII.  Asb  oth  the  consuls  were  employed  in  the  one 
province  of  Apulia^  and  as  the  danger  to  be  apprehended 
from  Hannibal  and  the  Carthaginians  was  not  diminished, 
they  were  ordered  to  cast  lots  for  Apulia  and  Macedonia  as 
their  provinces.  Macedonia  fell  to  Sulpicius,  and  he  suc¬ 
ceeded  in  the  room  of  Lsevinus.  Fulvius  was  called  to 
Rome  to  preside  at  the  elections;  and,  holding  an  assembly, 
the  younger  Veturian  century,  being  the  first  to  vote,  named 
Titus  Manlius  Torquatus,  and  Titus Otacilius,  consuls.  Man¬ 
lius  being  present,  a  crowd  gathered  around  him  to  offer  their 
congratulations,  there  being  no  doubt  of  the  concurrence  of 
the  people.  Surrounded  as  he  was  by  a  vast  multitude,  he 
went  up  to  the  consul’s  tribunal,  requesting  permission  to 
say  a  few  words,  and  that  the  century  which  had  voted  might 
be  called  back.  After  the  assembly  had  waited  some  time 
with  impatience,  to  know  what  be  intended  to  require,  he  ex¬ 
cused  himself  from  accepting  the  office,  on  accountof  the  weak¬ 
ness  of  his  eyes,  observing,  that  “  it  would  be  shameless  pre¬ 
sumption  in  a  pilot,  or  a  general,  who  was  obliged  to  transact  his 
own  prefer  business  by  the  help  of  other  people’s  eyes,  to  ex¬ 
pect  that  the  lives  and  fortunes  of  men  should  be  committed 
to  his  charge.  Wherefore,  he  requested  the  consul  to  order 
the  younger  Veturian  century  to  be  called  back  to  vote  anew, 
and  to  recollect,  while  they  were  electing  consuls,  the  war 
that  subsisted  in  Italy,  with  the  present  exigences  of  the 
commonwealth;  and  that  people’s  ears  were  scarcely  yet  re¬ 
lieved  from  the  noise  and  tumult  raised  by  the  enemy,  when 
a  few  months  ago  they  lay  close  to  the  wails  of  Rome.” 
Here  he  was  interrupted  by  the  century,  who  one  and  all 
cried  out  that  they  would  not  alter  their  vote.  Torquatus 
then  replied,  should  I  become  consul,  neither  shall  I  be 
able  to  endure  your  behaviour,  nor  you  my  government;  go 
back,  then,  and  vote  again,  and  consider  that  there  is  a  Car- 
thaginian  war  subsisting  ki  Italy,  and  that  the  leader  of  your 

BOOK  XXVI. 

35$ 

B.  C,  211.] 
enemies  is  Hannibal.”  The  century  then,  moved  by  the  au¬ 
thority  of  the  man,  and  the  murmurs  of  admiration  express- 
ed  by  all  around,  besought  Titus  to  summon  the  elder  Ve- 
turian  century,  as  they  wished  to  confer  with  persons  older 
than  themselves,  and  to  be  directed  by  them  in  their  choice 
of  consuls.  The  elder  Veturian  century  was  accordingly 
summoned,  and  time  was  allowed  for  the  others  to  confer 
with  them,  apart  from  the  crowd,  in  the  inclosure  of  the  vo¬ 
ters.  The  elders  said,  that  there  were  three  proper  objects 
for  their  consideration,  two  of  whom  had  already  passed 
through  a  full  course  of  public  honours,  Quintus  Fabius,  and 
Marcus  Marcellus;  that  if  they  had  a  particular  wish  to  elect 
a  consul,  yet  untried,  against  the  Carthaginians,  there  was 
Marcus  Valerius  Laevinus,  who  had  conducted  the  war 
against  king  Philip,  both  on  land  and  sea,  with  extraordina- 
success.  They  accordingly  consulted  together,  respecting 
those  three,  and  the  elders  being  dismissed,  the  younger 
century  proceeded  to  vote.  They  named  as  consuls  Marcus 
Claudius  Marcellus,  whose  character  then  shone  in  full 
splendour,  in  consequence  of  his  glorious  conquest  of  Sicily, 
and  Marcus  Valerius,  both  absent; — and  were  followed  by 
all  the  rest  of  the  centuries.  Men  may  ridicule  the  admirers 
of  ancient  times,  but  1  shall  ever  remain  persuaded,  that  even 
though  there  should  exist  a  republic  of  philosophers,  such 
as  speculative  men  are  fond  of  forming  in  imagination,  but 
which  never  was  known,  yet  there  could  not  be  produced 
either  a  nobility  of  more  solid  judgment,  and  of  more  unam¬ 
bitious  tempers,  nor  a  populace  guided  by  sounder  moral 
principles,  than  were  these  of  whom  I  speak.  That  a  century 
of  young  men  should  wish  to  consult  their  elders  on  the 
choice  of  a  person  to  whom  they  were  to  entrust  the  govern¬ 
ment  by  their  vote,  appears  indeed  at  present  scarcely  credi¬ 
ble;  but  it  is  because,  in  the  fashion  of  this  age,  even  sons  | 
slight  and  disregard  the  counsel  of  their  parents. 
XXII I.  They  then  proceeded  to  the  election  of  praetors, 
and  Publius  Manlius  Volso,  Lucius  Manlius  Acidinus, 

356 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  541, 

Caius  Laetorius,  and  Lucius  Cincius  Alimentus,  were  chosen. 
It  happened  that,  just  as  the  elections  were  finished,  an  ac¬ 
count  arrived  that  Titus  Otacilius,  whom  the  people  would 
probably  have  appointed  consul,  in  his  absence,  together  with 
Titus  Manlius,  if  the  course  of  the  election  had  not  been  in¬ 
terrupted,  had  died  in  Sicily.  The  games  of  Apollo  had  been 
celebrated  the  year  before,  and,  on  the  proposal  of  the  prae¬ 
tor,  Calpumius,  that  they  should  be  performed  this  year  sdso, 
a  decree  was  made  by  the  senate,  that  they  should  be  cele¬ 
brated  annually  for  ever.  This  year  several  prodigies  were 
seen  and  reported.  At  the  temple  of  Concord,  a  statue  of 
Victory,  which  stood  on  the  summit  of  the  roof,  being  struck 
by  lightning,  and  shaken  at  its  base,  fell  and  stuck  among 
the  ensigns  of  the  goddess  which  were  on  the  pediment. 
From  Anagnia  and  Fregella  reports  were  brought,  that  a 
wall  and  some  gates  were  by  the  like  means  thrown  down; 
that,  in  the  forum  of  Sudertum,  streams  of  blood  ran  for  a 
whole  day;  that  a  shower  of  stones  fell  at  Eretum,  and  that 
at  Reate  a  mule  had  produced  a  foal.  These  prodigies  were 
expiated  with  the  greater  victims;  the  people  were  ordered 
to  perform  a  supplication,  of  one  day’s  continuance,  to  avert 
the  wrath  of  the  gods,  and  the  nine  days  festival  was  solem¬ 
nized.  Several  of  the  public  priests  died  this  year,  and  new 
ones  were  appointed  in  their  places.  In  the  room  of  Marcus 
wSlmilius  Numida,  decemvir  of  religious  affairs,  was  substi¬ 
tuted  Marcus  iEmilius  Lepidus;  in  the  room  of  Marcus 
Pomponius  Matho,  pontiff,  Caius  Livius;  and  in  the  room 
of  Spurius  Carvilius  Maximus,  augur,  Marcus  Servilius.  Be¬ 
cause  Titus  Otacilius  Crassus,  who  was  a  pontiff,  died  after 
the  conclusion  of  the  year,  there  was  no  nomination  of  any 
person  to  his  place.  Caius  Claudius,  fiamen  of  Jupiter,  be¬ 
cause  he  had  committed  some  irregularity  in  the  distribution 
of  the  entrails,  resigned  the  office. 
XXIV.  About  this  time  Marcus  Valerius  L^vinus,  after 
having  first  sounded  the  dispositions  of  the  principal  men  in 
secret  conferences,  came  with  some  light  ships  to  a  council 

BOOK  XXVL 

357 

B.  C.  211.] 
of  the  iEtoUans,  which  had  been  previously  summoned  for 
this  purpose.  Here^  to  convince  them  of  the  flourishing  state 
of  the  affairs  of  Italy  md  Sicily,  he  expatiated  in  high  tenns 
on  the  reduction  of  Capua,  and  of  Syracuse,  adding,  that 
the  Romans  inherited,  even  from  their  earliest  ancestors, 
a  constant  disposition  to  study  the  interest  of  their  allies; 
some  of  whom  they  had  admitted  into  their  state  to  equal 
privileges  with  themselves,  and  others  were  supported  by 
them  in  such  situations,  that  they  chose  rather  to  be  allies, 
than  fellow-citizens.  That  the  iEtolians  would  be  held  by 
them  in  the  higher  degree  of  estimation,  on  account  that  they 
would  be  the  first,  of  all  the  nations  separated  from  them  by 
the  sea,  who  united  with  them  in  friendship.  That  Philip 
and  the  Macedonians  were  troublesome  neighbours;  but  that 
he  had  already  broken  their  strength  and  spirits,  and  was  de¬ 
termined  to  reduce  them  so  low,  that  they  should  not  only 
evacuate  those  cities,  of  which  they  had  forcibly  deprived 
the  i£tolians,  but  should  find  Macedonia  itself  an  uneasy  re¬ 
sidence.  As  to  the  Acamanians,  whose  dismemberment 
from  their  body  gave  the  ^^itulians  much  concern,  he  engag¬ 
ed  to  replace  them  under  the  former  charter  of  obedience  to 
their  authority  and  jurisdiction.”  These  assertions  and  pro¬ 
mises  of  the  Roman  general,  Scopas,  who  was  then  praetor 
of  the  nation,  and  Dorimachus,  a  principal  man  among  the 
j£tolians,  confirmed  by  their  own  authority;  and  therefore, 
with  the  less  reserve,  and  greater  assurance  of  gaining  belief, 
extolled  the  power  and  exalted  reputation  of  the  Roman 
people.  However,  that  which  had  the  greatest  influence  was 
the  hope  of  recovering  Acamania.  The  particulars  were  ac¬ 
cordingly  reduced  to  writing,  on  which  they  were  to  join  in 
a  treaty  of  alliance  and  friendship  with  the  Roman  people, 
and  a  clause  was  added,  that  if  it  was  agreeable  to  their 
own  wish,  the  Eleans,  and  Lacedsemonians  should  be  includ¬ 
ed  on  the  same  terms  of  friendship,  and  also  Attains,  Pleu- 
ratus,  and  Scerdiiaedus.”  Attains  was  king  of  Asia,  the 
others  of  Thrace  and  Illyria.  The  terms  of  the  treaty  were. 

358 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  541. 

that  the  iEtolians  should  immediately  commence  war 
against  Philip  on  land;  that  the  Romans  should  assist  them 
with  not  less  than  twenty  ships  of  five  banks  of  oars:  that, 
of  all  the  cities  that  should  be  taken  as  far  as  Corcyra,  be¬ 
ginning  from  iEtolia,  the  buildings  of  every  description,  to¬ 
gether  with  the  lauds  thereunto  belonging,  should  be  the 
property  of  the  iEtolians;  all  other  booty  of  what  kind  soever 
to  be  given  up  to  the  Romans:  that  the  Romans  should  use 
their  endeavours  to  secure  to  the  iEtoHans  the  possession  of 
Acamania:  that,  if  the  iEtolians  should  make  peace  with 
Philip,  an  article  should  be  inserted  in  the  treaty,  declaring 
it  valid,  only  on  condition  that  Philip  should  refrain  from 
committing  hostilities  on  the  Romans,  their  allies,  or  any 
under  their  dominion;  in  like  manner  if  the  Roman  people 
should  form  an  alliance  with  the  king,  that  they  should  take 
care  not  to  allow  him  a  right  of  making  war  on  the  iEtolians 
and  their  allies.”  Such  was  the  purport  of  the  negociation 
entered  into  by  the  above-named  powers,  two  copies  of  which 
were  made  two  years  after,  and  deposited,  one,  by  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  in  the  capitol,  and  the  other  by  the  iEtolians,  at  Olym¬ 
pia,  that  these  consecrated  records  might  bear  evidence  of 
its  contents*  This  delay  arose  from  the  iEtolian  ambassa¬ 
dors  having  been  too  long  detained  at  Rome,  which  however 
was  no  impediment  to  the  business  of  the  war;  for  the  iEto- 
lians  immediately  commenced  hostilities  against  Philip,  while 
Laevinus  attacked  Zacynthus,  a  small  island  near  the  coast 
of  Ailtolia,  which  has  one  city  of  the  same  name  with  itself. 
This,  excepting  the  citadel,  he  reduced  by  storm,  and  taking 
from  the  Acamanians  iEniadse  and  Nasus,  put  them  into 
the  hands  of  the  iEtolians.  Judging  that  Philip  was  now  suf¬ 
ficiently  embroiled  in  .war  with  his  neighbours  to  prevent  his 
thinking  of  Italy,  the  Carthaginians,  and  his  compact  with 
Hannibal,  he  retired  to  Corcyra. 
XXV.  Philip  received  the  account  of  the  defection  of  the 
iEtolians  at  Pella,  where  he  had  fixed  his  residence  for 
the  winter.  As  he  was  to  move  his  army  into  Greece  in 

BOOK  XXVI. 

359 

B.  C.  2i2.J 

the  beginaing  of  the  next  spring,  he  determined  to  strike 
terror  into  the  Illyrians,  and  the  cities  in  that  quarter, 
in  return  for  the  alarms  which  they  had  caused  to  him, 
so  that  they  should  leave  Macedonia  unmolested  during  his 
absence^  accordingly,  he  undertook  a  sudden  expedition 
against  the  territories  of  Oricum  and  Apollonia.  The  Apol- 
lonians  who  came  out  to  meet  him  he  compelled  to  fly  with 
dismay  into  their  city;  then,  after  ravaging  the  frontiers  of 
Illyricum,  he  pursued  his  route  with  the  same  degree  of  ex¬ 
pedition  into  Pelagonia,  where  he  took  Sintia,  a  town  belong¬ 
ing  to  the  Dardanians,  and  which  would  have  afforded  them 
a  passage  into  Macedonia.  Having  finished  this  business 
with  all  possible  speed,  he  turned  his  thoughts  to  the  war 
which  he  had  to  maintain  against  the  iEtolians  and  the 
Romans  in  conjunction,  and  marched  down  through  Pelago¬ 
nia,  Lyncus,  and  Bottaea  into  Thessaly,  in  hopes  that  many 
of  these  states  might  be  prevailed  upon  to  join  him  in  sup¬ 
port  of  the  war  with  the  jEtolians.  Leaving  therefore  at  the 
narrow  entrance  of  Thessaly,  one  of  his  generals,  named  Per¬ 
seus,  with  four  thousand  soldiers,  to  secure  the  pass  against 
the  iEtolians,  he  went  himself  at  the  head  of  his  army,  be¬ 
fore  he  should  be  engaged  by  more  important  business,  into 
Macedonia,  and  thence  into  Thrace  and  Maedica.  This  na¬ 
tion  had  been  accustomed,  whenever  they  saw  the  king  em¬ 
ployed  in  a  foreign  war,  and  the  kingdom  left  unguarded,  to 
make  incursions  into  Macedonia:  he  therefore  set  about 
wasting  the  country  about  Phragandae,  and  laid  siege  to  the 
city  of  Jamphorina,  the  capital  and  principal  fortress  of  Mse- 
dica.  Scopas,  when  he  learned  that  the  king  had  gone  into 
Thrace,  and  was  employed  in  car^dng  on  war  there, 
armed  all  the  young  men  of  the  iEtolians,  and  prepared  to 
carry  hostilities  into  Acarnania.  This  nation,  conscious  of 
their  inability  to  oppose  him,  seeing  too  that  the  cities  of 
^niadse  and  Nasus  were  already  lost,  and  that  they  were 
besides  threatened  with  an  invasion  by  the  Romans,  formed 
a  plan  of  action  dictated  by  passion  rather  than  by  prudence. 

360 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

tY.  R,  541 

Their  wives,  children,  and  all  persons  above  the  a^e  of  sixty 
years,  they  sent  away  into  the  neighbouring  states  of  Epirus: 
while  all  from  fifteen  to  sixty  bound  themselves  to  each  other 
by  an  oath,  to  march  against  the  enemy,  and  not  to  return 
home  unless  victorious;  framing  a  dreadful  execration  on 
such  of  their  countrymen  as  should  receive  into  their  city  or 
house,  or  admit  to  their  table  or  fire-side,  any  one  who  had 
given  way  to  the  foe,  or  quitted  his  post  in  battle.  They  ad¬ 
dressed  also  a  most  solemn  obtestation,  of  the  same  purport, 
to  the  states  with  whom  they  had  an  intercourse;  beseeching, 
at  the  same  time,  the  Epirotes  to  inter  in  one  common  tomb 
such  of  their  men  as  should  fall  in  battle,  and  to  fix  this  epi¬ 
taph  over  their  graves:  here  lie  the  acarnanians,  who 
DIED  riGIITiNG  IN  DFEEXCE  OF  THEIR  COUNTRY,  AGAINST 
THE  VIOLENCE  AND  INJUSTICE  OF  THE  AETOLIANS.  With 
minds  highly  inflamed  by  these  and  such  like  means,  they 
encamped  in  the  extreme  border  of  their  country,  on  the  side 
where  they  expected  the  enemy ;  and,  by  the  despatches  which 
they  sent  to  Philip,  representing  the  great  danger  that  threat¬ 
ened  them,  obliged  him  to  drop  the  prosecution  of  the  de¬ 
signs  in  which  he  was  engaged,  although  Jamphorina  had  al¬ 
ready  capitulated,  and  all  his  affairs  were  in  a  prosperous 
train.  The  enterprise  intended  by  the  ^toHans  was  postpon¬ 
ed,  first,  on  their  hearing  of  the  association  entered  into  by 
the  Acarnanians;  and,  afterwards,  on  the  news  of  Philip’s 
approach,  which  made  them  even  draw  back  into  the  interior 
parts  of  their  own  country.  Philip,  however,  though  he  had 
hastened  by  long  marches  to  prevent  the  Acarnanians  being 
overwhelmed,  yet  did  not  advance  farther  than  Dios,  whence 
on  hearing  that  the  ALtolians  had  retired  from  Acarnania, 
he  also  removed  to  Pella. 
XXV L  Early  in  the  spring  Lsevinus  set  sail  from  Corcy- 
ra,  and,  doubling  the  cape  of  Leucate,  came  to  Naupactum, 
whence  he  sent  notice,  that  he  was  proceeding  to  Anticyra 
in  order  that  Scopas  and  the  iEtoIians  might  be  thereto  join^ 
him.  Antyra  stands  in  Locris,  on  the  left  hand  on  entering 

BOOK  XXVI. 

361 

B.  C.  2lO0 
the  Corinthian  Gulf,  and  the  march  thither  by  land  i« 
as  is  the  passage  by  sea,  from  Naupactum.  In  about  three 
days  after  this,  the  siege  of  that  town  was  commenced  by 
the  combined  forces;  but  the  attack  on  the  side  next  the  sea 
was  the  more  difficult  to  be  withstood,  because  there  were  on 
board  the  fleet  engines  and  machines  of  every  sort;  and  be¬ 
sides,  the  assailants  were  Romans.  In  a  few  days,  therefore, 
the  city  capitulated,  and  was  given  up  to  the  iEtolians.  The 
spoil,  according  to  compact,  fell  to  the  Romans.  Here  Lae- 
vinus  received  a  letter,  acquainting  him  that  he  had  been  de¬ 
clared  consul  in  his  absence,  and  that  Publius  Sulpicius  was 
coming  to  succeed  him  in  the  command  of  the  fleet.  But 
he  was  siezed  by  a  tedious  sickness,  which  delayed  his 
return  to  Rome  longer  than  any  one  wished.  Mar-  y 
cus  Marcellus,  entering  on  the  consulship  on  the  S*  C.  210. 
ides  of  March,  held,  on  the  same  day,  a  meeting  of  the  se¬ 
nate,  mer^y  for  form’s  sake,  for  he  declared,  that  he 
would  introduce  nothing  respecting  the  state  of  the  common¬ 
wealth,  or  the  distribution  of  the  provinces,  in  the  absence 
of  his  colleague.  That  be  understood  that  there  were  great 
numbers  of  Sicilians  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  city,  at  the 
country  houses  of  persons  who  wished  to  depreciate  his 
character;  and  so  far  was  he  from  hindering  an  open  publi¬ 
cation  of  the  charges  fabricated  and  circulated  by  his  ene¬ 
mies,  that  he  would  have  given  them  instantly  an  opportu¬ 
nity  of  laying  such  charges  before  the  senate;  were  it  not 
that  they  pretended  some  kind  of  fear  to  speak  of  a  consul 
in  the  absence  of  his  colleague.  That,  however,  when  Lae- 
vinus  arrived,  he  would  certainly  suffer  no  business  to  be 
transacted  before  the  Sicilians  were  introduced  to  an  audi¬ 
ence  of  the  senate.  That  Marcus  Cornelius  had  made  a 
kind  of  levy  through  all  Sicily,  for  the  purpose  of  sending 
to  Rome  the  greater  number  of  complaints  against  him;  and 
that  the  same  person  with  a  view  to  injure  his  reputation, 
had,  by  his  letters,  filled  the  city  with  false  representations 
VOL.  III.— ^  2 

362 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  542. 

of  war  fitlll  subsisting  in  Sicily.’’  The  consul’s  behaviour 
on  that  day  made  people  conceive  a  good  opinion  of  the 
moderation  of  his  temper.  He  then  adjourned  the  senate^ 
and  it  was  expected  that  there  would  be  almost  a  total  sus¬ 
pension  of  every  kind  of  business  until  the  return  of  the  other 
consul.  Want  of  employment,  as  usual,  gave  occasion  to 
various  murmurs  against  the  populace:  they  made  great  com¬ 
plaint  of  “  the  length  of  the  war;  of  the  devastation  of  the 
country  by  Hannibal  on  all  sides  of  the  city;  of  Italy  being 
exhausted  by  levies  of  men,  and  of  the  loss  of  armies  hap¬ 
pening  almost  every  year;  of  consuls  being  now  elected,  who, 
both  of  them,  had  a  passion  for  war;  men  too  enterprising 
and  daring,  who,  in  a  time  of  profound  peace,  were  capa¬ 
ble  of  exciting  quarrels,  and  therefore  there  was  the  less  rea¬ 
son  to  expect  that,  during  the  actual  existence  of  hostilities, 
they  would  allow  the  public  time  to  breathe.” 
XXVII.  These  discourses  were  interrupted  by  a  fire 
which  broke  out  near  the  Forum,  in  the  night  preceding  the 
festival  of  Minerva.  Seven  shops,  where  five  were  after¬ 
wards  built,  and  the  banking-houses,  which  are  now  called 
the  New  Banks,  were  in  flames  in  several  places  at  once. 
Next  the  private  buildings  were  consumed  (for  the  public 
halls  were  not  then  there, J  with  the  prison,  called  the  Quarry, 
and  the  fish-market,  also  the  old  palace  of  king  Numa.  With 
difficulty  the  temple  of  Vesta  was  saved,  principally  by  the 
activity  of  thirteen  slaves,  who  were  afterwards  purchased 
for  the  public,  and  discharged  from  servitude.  The  fire  rag¬ 
ed  during  anight  and  a  day.  There  was  no  doubt  of  its  be¬ 
ing  caused  by  human  means,  the  fiamesblazing  out  at  the  same 
moment,  and  at  considerable  distances.  The  consul  therefore, 
by  direction  of  the  senate, published  a  proclamation,  that  who¬ 
ever  discovered  the  persons  that  had  occasioned  the  same, 
such  discoverer  should  receive  as  a  reward,  if  a  freeman,  a 
sum  of  money,  if  a  slave,  his  liberty.  Induced  by  this,  a  slave 
belonging  to  the  Campanian  family  of  the  Calivii,  by  name 
Mannus,  gave  information,  that  “  his  masters,  and  five  other 

B.C.  210.3 

BOOK  XXVI. 

365 

young  Campanian  noblemen,  whose  parents  had  been  behead- 
ed  by  Quintus  Fulvius,  were  the  perpetrators  of  the  deed, 
and  that  they  would  effect  the  like  destruction  in  various 
places,  if  they  were  not  put  into  confinement.’’  On  this  they 
were  taken  into  custody,  as  were  also  their  slaves.  At  first 
they  spoke  with  scorn  of  the  informer  and  his  discovery: 
they  said  he  had  run  away  from  his  masters,  in  consequence 
of  having  been  chastised  the  day  before  with  a  whipping; 
and,  in  a  fit  of  resentment  and  folly,  had  forged  this  charge, 
on  the  ground  of  an  event  merely  accidental.”  But,  when 
they  were  brought  face  to  face  with  their  accuser,  and  the 
instruments  of  their  villany  began  to  be  examined  by  torture 
in  the  middle  of  the  Forum,  they  all  confessed  their  guilt; 
and  the  masters  and  their  slaves  who  were  privy  to  the  de¬ 
sign  were  punished  as  they  deserved.  The  informer  receiv¬ 
ed  his  liberty  and  twenty  thousand  assesj^  The  consul  Lse- 
vinus,  as  he  passed  by  Capua,  was  surrounded  by  a  multi¬ 
tude  of  the  Campanians,  who  besought  him,  with  tears,  to 
give  them  permission  to  go  to  Rome,  there  to  entreat  the  se¬ 
nate  to  suffer  themselves  to  be  moved,  at  length,  with  com¬ 
passion;  and  not  to  carry  resentment  so  far  as  to  their  utter 
ruin,  nor  to  let  the  whole  race  of  Campanians,  be  extirpated 
by  Quintus  Flaccus.  Flaccus  declared,  that  “  he  had  no 
personal  quarrel  whatsoever  with  the  Campanians;  a  public 
and  hostile  enmity  towards  them  he  certainly  had, and  should 
retain  as  long  as  he  knew  them  to  harbour  the  same  senti¬ 
ments  towards  the  Roman  people.  There  was  not  on  earth,” 
he  said,  any  race,  or  any  state,  that  bore  a  more  inveterate 
hatred  to  the  Roman  name.  The  reason  of  his  keeping  them 
confined  within  the  walls  was,  that  when  any  of  them  con¬ 
trived  to  get  out  they  roamed  about  the  country  like  wild 
beasts,  tearing  and  slaying  whatever  fell  in  their  way.  Some 
had  fled  to  join  Hannibal,  others  had  gone  to  set  Rome  on 
fire,  and  the  consul  would  find,  in  the  half-burnt  Forum,  the 
traces  of  Campanian  villany.  An  attempt  had  been  made 

♦61^  lU.  8(/. 

364 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  542. 

even  on  the  temple  of  Vesta,  on  the  sacred  fire,  and  the  fatal 
pledge*  of  the  Roman  empire  deposited  in  her  shrine.  For 
his  part,  he  could  by  no  means  thrnk  it  safe  to  allow  the 
Campanians  to  enter  the  walls  of  Rome.”  Laevinus,  how¬ 
ever,  ordered  the  Campanians  to  follow  him  thither;  having 
first  made  them  bind  themselves  by  an  oath  to  Flaccus,  to 
return  to  Capua  on  the  fifth  day  after  receiving  an  answer 
from  the  senate.  Surrounded  by  this  train,  and  followed 
also  by  the  Sicilians  and  jEtolians,  who  came  out  to  meet  him 
he  proceeded  to  Rome,  bringing  into  the  city,  as  accusers  of 
two  men,  whose  characters  had  been  rendered  illustrious  by 
the  conquest  of  two  very  celebrated  cities,  the  parties  whom 
they  had  vanquished  in  war.  However  both  the  consuls 
proposed,  first,  to  the  consideration  of  the  senate,  the  state 
of  the  commonwealth,  and  the  disposal  of  the  provinces. 
XXVIII.  Laevinus  then  made  a  report  of  the  state  of^ 
Macedonia  and  Greece,  of  the  JEtolians,  Acamanians,  and 
Locrians;  and  of  the  services  which  he  himself  had  perform¬ 
ed  there,  on  land  and  sea;  acquainting  them,  that  ‘‘  Philip, 
who  came  with  an  army  against  the  iEtolians,  had  been  driv¬ 
en  back  by  him  into  Macedonia,  and  had  retired  into  the 
interior  parts  of  his  kingdom;  and  that  the  legion  might  be 
brought  home  from  thence,  the  fleet  being  sufficient  to 
prevent  any  attempt  of  the  king  upon  Italy.”  This  part  of 
the  business  which  respected  himself,  and  the  province  where 
he  had  .commanded,  he  went  through  alone:  the  questions 
relativefto  the  distribution  of  the  provinces  were  put  by 
both  consuls  jointly.  The  senate  decreed,  that  ‘‘  Italy,  and 
the  war  with  Hannibal,  should  be  the  province  of  one  of  the 
consuls;  that  the  other  should  have  the  command  of  the  fleet 
lately  under  that  of  TitusOtacilius;  and,  in  conjunction  With 
♦This  was  the  famous  Palladiom,  said  to  have  been  brought  by  iSneas 
from  Troy,  and  preserved,  with  most  religious  care,  in  the  temple  of  Vesta, 
What  it  was,  (so  sacr^ly  was  it  kept  from  the  public  eye,)  no  one  ever 
certainly  knew:  supposing  it  however,  to  have  resembled  the  one  stolen 
byfDiomede  and  Ulysses,  as  mentioned  by  Sinon  in  the  -Sinead,  then  it 
must  have  been  an  image  of  Minerva,  armed. 

B.  C.  210.1 

BOOK  XXVL 

365 

the  praetor,  Lucius  Cincius  the  government  of  Sicily.”  The 
two  armies  decreed  to  them  were  those  then  in  Etruria  and 
Gaul,  consisting  of  four  legions.  The  two  city  legions  of 
the  former  year  were  ordered  to  be  sent  into  Etruria;  the 
two  lately  under  the  command  of  the  consul  Sulpicius  into 
Gaul;  and  Gaul,  with  these  legions,  to  be  governed  by  such 
person  as  the  consul  who  had  the  province  of  Italy  should 
appoint.  Caius  Calpumius,  being  continued  in  command  for 
a  year  after  the  expiration  of  his  prsetorship,  was  sent  into 
Etruria.  Capua  was  appointed  the  province  of  Quintus  Ful- 
vius,  whose  command  was  also  prolonged  for  a  year.  An  or¬ 
der  was  made,  that  the  numbers  both  of  the  native  and  allied 
troops  should  be  reduced,  so  that  out  of  two  legions  should 
be  formed  one,  containing  five  thousand  foot  and  three  hun¬ 
dred  horse,  and  that  those  men  should  be  discharged  who 
had  served  the  greatest  number  of  campaigns;  but  that,  in 
each  legion  of  the  allies,  there  should  be  left  seven  thousand 
foot  and  three  hundred  horse;  and  that.  In  discharging  the 
old  soldiers,  the  same  rule  should  be  observed  respecting  the 
length  of  their  services.  With  regard  to  Cneius  Fulvius. 
consul  of  the  last  year,  no  alteration  was  made,  either  in  his 
province  Apulia,  or  in  the  army  under  his  command;  only 
he  was  continued  another  year  in  authority.  Publius  Sulpi¬ 
cius  his  colleague,  was  ordered  to  disband  his  whole  force, 
excepting  the  marines;  as  was  Marcus  Cornelius,  as  soon  as 
the  consul  should  arrive  in  the  province.  To  the  prsetor, 
Lucius  Cincius,  for  the  defence  of  Sicily,  were  assigned  the 
troops  of  Cannae,  equivalent  to  two  legions.  To  the  praetor 
Publius  Manlius  Volso,  were  allotted,  for  the  service  of 
Sardinia,  the  same  number  of  legions  which  Lucias  Corneli¬ 
us  had  commanded  in  the  same  province  the  year  before. 
The  consuls  were  ordered  to  raise  legions  for  the  city,  but 
not  to  oblige  any  man  to  enlist  who  had  served  in  the  ar¬ 
mies  of  Marcus  Claudius,  Marcus  Valerius,  or  Quintus 
Fuivius,  and  the  number  of  Roman  legions  to  be  employed 
during  that  year  was  fixed  at  twenty-one. 

366  HISTORY  OF  ROME,  [Y.  R.542. 
XXIX.  When  the  senate  had  passed  these  decrees,  the 
consuls  cast  lots  for  the  provinces.  Sicily,  and  the  fleet,  fell 
to  Marcellas;  Italy,  with  the  war  against  HannibaU  to  L»vi- 
nus.  This  decision,  as  if  Syracuse  were  now  a  second  time 
taken,  struck  the  Sicilians,  who  stood  within  sight  of  the 
consuls,  waiting  till  the  lots  were  drawn,  with  such  dismay, 
that  their  bitter  lamentations,  and  mournful  expressions  of 
grief  attracted  the  eyes  of  .all  present,  and  afforded  afterwards 
much  matter  of  discourse.  For  they  went  round  to  each  of 
the  senators,  dressed  in  mourning,  and  affirming,  that  they 
were  resolved  to  abandon,  not  only  each  his  native  state,  but 
all  Sicily,  if  Marcellus  should  come  thither  again  as  gover¬ 
nor.  Formerly,  when  they  had  deserved  no  harsh  treatment 
at  his  hands,  he  had  been  implacable  in  his  resentment  to¬ 
wards  them;  to  what  lengths,  then,  might  not  his  anger  now 
carry  him,  when  he  knew  that  they  had  come  to  Rome  with 
complaints  against  him?  Better  would  it  be  for  that  island 
to  be  buried  under  the  fires  of  iEtna,  or  sunk  in  the  sea, 
than  to  be  delivered  over  as  it  were  to  execution  at  the  will 
of  an  enemy.” — These  complaints  of  the  Sicilians,  after 
being  at  first  carried  about  to  the  houses  of  the  nobility,  and 
canvassed  in  frequent  conversations,  which  took  rise  either 
from  compassion  to  the  Sicilians,  or  ill-will  to  Marcellus, 
made  their  way  even  into  the  senate.  A  requisition  was 
there  made  to  the  consuls,  that  the  senate  should  be  consult¬ 
ed  on  an  exchange  of  provinces.  To  this  Marcellus  answer¬ 
ed,  that  “  though  the  Sicilians  had  been  already  heard  by 
the  senate,  his  opinion  might  still  be  difterent;  but  in  order 
that  no  one  should  be  able  to  say  that  these  people  were 
curbed  by  fear,  or  restrained  from  uttering  their  complaints 
with  freedom  against  a  man  to  whose  power  they  were  soon 
to  be  subject;  in  the  present  state  of  things,  if  his  colleague 
had  no  objection,  he  was  ready  to  change  his  province.”  He 
warmly  intreated  them  not  to  prejudge  the  depending 
cause  by  the  interposition  of  any  decree.  For  since  it  would 
be  unjust  to  give  his  colleague  his  choice  of  a  province  with- 

B.  C.  210.] 

BOOK  XXVL 

367 

out  putting  it  to  the  lot,  how  much  greater  would  be  the  in¬ 
justice,  nay,  the  indignity,  if  that  which  he  had  obtained  by 
lot  were  transferred  to  the  other?  Accordingly  the  senate, 
after  declaring  what  was  their  wish,  without  passing  a  de¬ 
cree,  adjourned,  and  the  consuls,  between  themselves,  made 
an  exchange  of  provinces.  Thus  did  fate,  impending  over 
Marceilus,  drag  him,  as  it  were,  within  the  sphere  of  Hanni¬ 
bal;  that  he  who  had  been  the  first  Roman  commander  who 
ravished  from  that  general  a  large  portion  of  his  glory,  by 
defeating  him  in  battle,  might  be  the  last  who  contributed, 
by  his  fall,  to  the  aggrandizement  of  the  same  man’s  reputa¬ 
tion;  and  this  at  a  time  when  the  events  of  the  war,  in  ge¬ 
neral,  were  particularly  favourable,  to  the  side  of  the  Ro¬ 
mans. 
XXX.  When  the  provinces  were  exchanged,  the  Sicilians 
were  introduced  into  the  senate,  where  they  expatiated,  in 
many  words,  on  the  unalterable  attachment  of  king  Hiero 
to  the  Roman  people,  assuming  merit  from  thence  to  them¬ 
selves  and  their  nation.  “  As  to  the  tyrants,  Hieronymus, 
and,  after  him,  Hippocrates  and  Epicydes,  they  themselves 
had  ever  detested  them,”  they  said,  “  for  many  reasons,  but 
particularly  for  taking  part  with  Hannibal  against  the  Ro¬ 
mans.  For  this  cause  Hieronymus  was  put  to  death  fay  the 
principal  young  men  of  the  nation,  authorised,  in  a  manner, 
by  the  public  voice.  Seventy  of  their  youths,  of  the  highest 
distinction,  had  conspired,  on  the  same  account,  to  kill  Hip¬ 
pocrates  and  Epicydes,  but  were  disappointed  of  the  support 
which  they  expected  from  Marcellas,  by  a  delay  in  the 
bringing  up  of  his  army  to  Syracuse  at  the  time  agreed  on; 
so  that,  their  design  being  discovered,  they  were  all  put  to 
death  by  the  tyrants.  Even  the  tymnnical  usurpation  of  Hip¬ 
pocrates  and  Epycides  owed  its  beginning  tathe  cruelty  prac¬ 
tised  by  Marcellas  in  the  sacking  of  Leontini.  The  principal 
Syracusans,  alarmed  at  this,  never  ceased  afterwards  implor¬ 
ing  Marcellas,  and  promising  to  deliver  the  city  into  his 
ands,  at  any  time  that  he  chose  to  appoint;  but  his  wish 

368 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  542. 

was  to  take  it  by  assault.  Finding,  however,  after  every  ef¬ 
fort  which  could  be  made  on  land  or  sea,  that  this  was  im¬ 
practicable,  he  chose  to  depend  on  Sosis,  a  brazier,  and  Me- 
ricus,  a  Spaniard,  for  putting  him  in  possession  ol  Syracuse, 
rather  than  on  the  first  men  of  the  city,  who  had  so  often, 
to  no  purpose,  voluntarily  made  the  same  offer;  in  order,  no 
doubt,  that  he  might  have  the  more  plausible  excuse  for  plun¬ 
dering  and  massacring  the  oldest  allies  of  the  Roman  people* 
If  the  defection  to  Hannibal  had  been  the  act,  not  of  Hie¬ 
ronymus,  but  of  the  senate  and  people  of  Syracuse;  if  the 
body  of  the  Syracusans,  and  not  their  tyrants,  Hippocrates 
and  Epkydes,  who  held  them  in  subservience  to  their  will, 
had  shut  the  gates  against  Marcellus;  if  they  had  waged 
war  against  the  Roman  people  with  the  animosity  of  Car¬ 
thaginians,  to  what  greater  length  could  Marcellus  have  car¬ 
ried  hostilities  than  he  did;  unless  he  were  to  demolish  the 
city?  He  certainly  left  nothing  at  Syracuse  except  the  walls 
and  empty  houses,  while  the  temples  were  broken  open  and 
pillaged,  and  from  which  the  ornaments  of  the  gods,  and  even 
the  gods  themselves,  had  been  carried  away.  Many  were  strip¬ 
ped  of  their  whole  possessions,  so  as  not  to  have  remaining, 
from  the  wreck  of  their  fortunes,  even  the  naked  soil,  out  of 
which  they  might  support  themselves  and  their  families. 
Wherefore  they  besought  tlie  Conscript  Fathers  to  order  res¬ 
toration  to  be  made  to  the  owners,  if  not  of  all  their  property, 
at  least  of  such  part  of  it  as  could  be  found  and  claimed 
on  proof.”  When  they  had  uttered  their  complaints  in  this 
manner,  and  were  ordered  by  Leevinus  to  withdraw  from 
the  senate-house,  that  the  members  might  deliberate  on  the 
subject  of  their  demands;  No,”  said  Marcellus,  “  let  them 
stay,  that  I  may  answer  in  their  hearing,  since,  Conscript 
Fathers,  such  are  the  terms  on  which  we  serve  in  your  wars, 
that  the  parties,  whom  we  conquer  by  our  arms,  are  to  be¬ 
come  our  prosecutors,  and  two  cities,  taken  this  year,  are  to 
prosecute  their  captors,  Capua  Fulvius,  and  Syracuse  Mar¬ 
cellus.” 

BOOK  XXVI. 

B.C.  210.] 

XXXI.  The  deputies  being  brought  back  into  the  senate- 
house,  the  consul  then  said  ;  Conscript  Fathers,  I  anr\  not 
so  tinmindful  of  the  majesty  of  the  Roman  people,  and  of  the 
high  office  with  which  I  am  invested,  as  that  I  should,  while 
bearing  the  dignity  of  a  consul,  appear  as  a  defendant  to  an¬ 
swer  charges  made  by  Greeks,  if  the  subject  of  the  present 
inquiry  were  merely  respecting  misconduct  on  my  part.  But 
the  question  is,  not  what  I  have  done,  but  rather  what  those 
men  deserved  at  mv  hands.  For,  if  they  were  not  our  ene¬ 
mies,  I  should  be  equally  blameable  for  injuring  Stracuse 
now,  as  when  Hiero  was  alive.  But,  if  they  renounced  our 
alliance,  attacked  our  ambassadors  with  violence  and  arms, 
shut  the  gates  of  their  city  and  called  in  an  army  of  Cartha¬ 
ginians  to  defend  it  against  us;  who  can  think  it  unreason¬ 
able  that  men  who  committed  hostilities  should. have  suffer¬ 
ed  them  in  turn  ?  I  rejected  the  offers  of  the  principal  Syra¬ 
cusans  to  give  me  possession  of  the  city,  it  is  true;  I  chose 
rather  to  confide,  in  a  case  so  important,  soleh^  in  Sosis,  and 
the  Spaniard  Mericus.  You  are  not  the  meanest  of  the  Syra¬ 
cusans,  since  you  object  meanness  to  others.  Now,  is  there 
one  among  vou,  who  ever  promised  to  open  the  gates  to  me, 
or  to  admit  mv  armed  troops  into  the  city?  You  execrate 
and  abhor  those  who  did  ;  and  do  not,  even  here,  abstain 
from  reviling  them  ;  so  far  is  it  from  being  fact,  that  your¬ 
selves  would  have  done  the  same.  The  low  condition  of  the 
persons  emploved,  which  these  men  make  a  matter  of  reproach, 
shows,  Conscript  Fathers,  how  ready  I  was  to  listen  to  the 
offers  of  any  man  who  was  willing  to  exert  himself  in  the  ser¬ 
vice  of  our  state.  Before  I  commenced  the  siege  of  Syracuse, 
I  tried  to  effect  a  restoration  of  tranquillity,  at  one  time  by 
sending  ambassadors,  at  another  time,  by  going  myself  to 
treat  on  the  subject;  and,  afterwards,  when  they  neither 
scrupled  to  offer  violence  to  my  ambassadors,  nor  would  give 
any  answer  to  myself  in  a  personal  interview  with  their  lead¬ 
ers  at  the  gates,  1  then,  after  surmounting  many  difficulties 
vor.  III. — 3  A 

370 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  542. 
on  land  and  sea,  at  length  took  Syracuse  by  force  of  arms. 
Of  the  consequences  which  befel  them  on  the  capture  of  their 
city,  they  might,  with  more  propriety,  complain  to  Hannibal 
and  the  Carthaginians,  and  to  their  companions  in  defeat, 
than  to  the  senate  of  the  nation  which  conquered  them.  Con¬ 
script  Fathers,  if  I  had  intended  to  deny  that  Syracuse  was 
plundered,  I  would  never  have  decorated  the  city  of  Rome 
with  its  spoils.  As  to  what  I,  in  capacity  of  a  conqueror, 
either  took  from  individuals,  or  bestowed  on  any,  I  am  fully 
conhdent  that  I  acted,  in  those  respects,  agreeably  both  to 
the  laws  of  war  and  to  the  deserts  of  each.  That  you  ratify 
these  proceedings.  Conscript  Fathers,  concerns  the  interest  of 
the  republic  more  than  that  of  mine.  My  duty  has  been  dis¬ 
charged  with  honour ;  but  it  is  of  importance  to  the  common¬ 
wealth  that  you  do  not,  by  rescinding  my  acts,  render  other 
commanders  in  future  remiss.  And  now.  Conscript  Fathers, 
.  as  you  have  heard  both  the  Sicilians  and  me  face  to  face,  we 
will  retire  together  from  your  house,  that  the  senators  may., 
in  my  absence,  deliberate  with  the  greater  freedom.  The 
Sicilians  were  accordingly  dismissed,  and  he  went  away  to 
the  Capitol  to  enlist  soldiers. 
XXXII.  The  other  consul  then  required  the  determina¬ 
tion  of  the  fathers  respecting  the  demands  of  the  Sicilians; 
on  which  a  long  and  warm  debate  ensued.  A  great  part  of 
the  senate,  adopting  an  opinion  introduced  by  Titus  Manlius 
Torquatus,  declared,  that  in  their  judgment  the  war  ought  to 
have  been  waged  against  the  tyrants,  who  were  equal  ene¬ 
mies  to  the  Syracusans  and  to  the  Roman  people;  that  the 
city  ought  to  have  been  recovered  by  treaty,  not  taken  by 
force;  and,  when  recovered,  should  have  been  re-established 
in  freedom  under  its  ancient  laws,  and  not  subjected  to  the 
calamities  of  war,  after  having  been  long  harassed  under  a 
wretched  slavery.  In  the  contests  between  the  tyrants  and 
the  Roman  general,  the  prize  proposed  to  the  conqueror  had 
been  utterly  destroyed,  a  city  of  the  greatest  beauty  and 

BOOK  XXVL 

371 

B.C.  210.] 

fame,  formerly  the  granary  and  treasury  of  the  Roman  peo¬ 
ple;  one  by  whose  generosity  and  munificence  the  republic 
had,  on  many  occasions  of  difficulty,  and  lately,  in  the  pre¬ 
sent  Carthaginian  war,  been  assisted,  honoured,  and  adorn¬ 
ed.  If  King  Hiero,  that  most  faithfvd  friend  to  the  interests 
of  the  Roman  empire,  were  to  rise  from  the  shades,  with 
what  face,  could  either  Syracuse  or  Rome  be  shown  to  him? 
When,  after  beholding  his  native  city  in  its  plundered  and 
half-demolished  state,  he  should,  on  coming  into  Rome,  see, 
at  the  entrance  of  it,  almost  in  the  very  gates,  the  spoils  of 
his  own  coMTitryV^  Although  these,  and  many  such  warm 
expressions,  tending  to  disparage  the  character  of  Marcellus, 
and  excite  compassion  for  the  Sicilians,  were  uttered  by  the 
members,  yet  the  senate,  through  their  regard  for  Marcellus, 
pursued  a  milder  course  in  forming  their  decree;  the  pur¬ 
port  of  which  was,  that  all  acts  done  by  him  in  his  admi¬ 
nistration  of  the  war,  and  after  his  final  success  therein, 
should  be  deemed  valid.  In  respect  of  the  time  to  come,  the 
senate  would  take  care  of  the  concerns  of  Syracuse,  and 
would  give  a  charge  to  the  consul  Laevinus,  to  promote  the 
prosperity  of  that  city,  as  far  as  could  be  done  without  de¬ 
triment  to  the  commonwealth.”  Two  senators  were  sent  to 
the  Capitol  to  desire  die  consul  to  come  back  to  the  senate- 
house;  and,  the  Sicilians  also  being  called  in,  the  decree  w^as 
read.  The  deputies,  after  receiving  assurances  of  kindness, 
were  dismissed;  and  they  then  threw  themselves  at  the  feet 
of  the  consul  Marcellus,  beseeching  him  to  pardon  the  ex¬ 
pressions  which  they  had  used,  for  the  purpose  of  procuring 
]^ty  and  relief  of  their  misfortunes,  and  to  receive  them  and 
die  city  of  S)T*acuse  into  his  protection  and  patronage.  The 
consul  returned  a  mild  jmswer,  and  dismissed  them. 
XXXIII.  The  senate  next  gave  audience  to  the  Campa¬ 
nians,  who  spoke  in  a  more  piteous  strain,  but  had  a  more 
difficult  cause  to  plead;  for  neither  could  they  deny  that 
they  had  deserved  the  punishments  inflicted,  nor  were  there 

372  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  542. 
tyrants  in  the  case,  on  whom  they  could  transfer  the  guilt. 
They  only  alleged,  that  they  had  suffered  encHigh  of  punish¬ 
ment,  in  so  many  senators  being  taken  off  by  poison,  and  so 
many  by  the  executioner.  That,  of  their  nobles,  only  a  few 
remained  alive,  whom  neither  consciousness  of  crime  had 
driven  to  acts  of  despair,  nor  the  resentment  of  their  con¬ 
queror  condemned  to  death:  who,  in  behalf  of  themselves  and 
their  families,  prayed  for  liberty,  and  some  portion  of  their 
property;  being  citizens  of  Rome,  and  most  of  them  closely 
connected  there  in  affinities  and  near  relationships,  in  con¬ 
sequence  of  the  frequent  intermarriages  wffiich  took  place 
during  a  long  series  of  years.”  They  were  then  order¬ 
ed  to  withdraw,  and  the  senators  were  for  some  time  in 
doubt  whether  Quintus  Fulvius  should  not  be  called  home 
from  Capua,  (for  the  other  proconsul,  Claudius,  had  died 
after  the  taking  of  the  place,)  in  order  that  the  matter  might 
be  discussed  in  the  presence  of  the  commander,  as  had  been 
done  in  the  case  of  Marcellus  and  the  Sicilians.  But  after¬ 
wards,  seeing  in  the  house  Marcus  Atilius,  and  Flaccus’s 
brother,  Caius  Fulvius,  who  had  been  lieutenant-generals 
under  him;  also  Quintus  Minucius,  and  Lucius  Veturius 
Philo,  who  had  held  the  same  commission  under  Claudius, — 
men  who  had  been  present  at  everv^  transaction;  and  being 
unwilling  either  to  recall  Fulvius  from  Capua,  or  to  delay 
the  Campanians  by  an  adjournment,  they  desired  to  hear  the 
sentiments  of  Marcus  Atilius  Regulus,  whom  they  deemed 
superior  in  judgment  to  any  of  the  rest  who  had  been  at  Ca¬ 
pua;  and  he  spoke  to  this  effect:  “  1  recollect  attending  the 
consuls,  in  council,  after  the  reduction  of  Capua,  when  in¬ 
quiry  was  made  whether  any  of  the  Campanians  had  deserv¬ 
ed  well  of  our  state;  when  it  was  discovered  that  two  women 
had  done  so,  Vestia  Oppia,  a  native  of  Atilla,  resident  in 
Capua,  and  Fancula  Cluvia,  formerly  a  courtesan;  the  for¬ 
mer  having  daily  offered  sacrifice  for  the  safety  and  success 
of  the  Roman  people,  the  latter  having  secretly  conveyed 

B.C.  210  ]  BOOK  XXVL  373 
food  to  the  starving  prisoners.  But  it  was  at  the  same  time 
found,  that  the  disposition  of  all  the  rest  of  the  Campanians 
towards  us  was  precisely  that  of  the  Carthaginians;  yet 
those  beheaded  by  Fulvius  were  not  the  most  criminal 
among  them,  but  the  most  eminent  in  rank.  How  the  senate 
can  determine  on  the  case  of  the  Campanians,  who  are  Ro¬ 
man  citizens,  without  an  order  of  the  people,  I  do  not  see. 
This  rule  was  observed  by  our  ancestors,  in  respect  of  the 
revolted  Sa tricans,  and  measures  were  taken  that  Marcus 
Antistius,  plebeian  tribune,  should  first  propose,  and  the 
commons  pass,  an  order  empowering  the  senate  to  decide 
finally  in  the  affair  of  that  people.  My  opinion,  therefore,  is, 
that  application  be  made  to  the  tribunes  of  the  commons, 
that  one  or  more  of  them  may  propose  to  the  people  an  or¬ 
der  authorising  us  to  determine  concerning  the  Campanians.’^ 
By  direction  of  the  sena'te,  Lucius  Atilius,  a  plebeian  tri¬ 
bune,  made  the  proposition  accordingly  in  these  words:  “  Con¬ 
cerning  all  the  Campanians,  Atellans,  Calatians,  Sabatians, 
who  have  surrendered  themselves  to  Fulvius,  proconsul,  and 
submitted  to  the  power  and  dominion  of  the  Roman  people; 
also  concerning  whatsoever  they  may  have  given  up,  whe¬ 
ther  land,  city,  divine,  or  human  property;  with  respect  to 
all  these  things  I  ask  you,  Roman  citizens,  what  you  choose 
should  be  done?”  The  commons  passed  this  order: — What¬ 
soever  the  senate,  being  first  sworn,  or  the  majority  of  its  mem¬ 
bers,  then  present,  may  determine,  that  we  will  and  order.” 
XXXIV.  In  pursuance  of  this  order  of  the  people,  the  se¬ 
nate  took  the  business  into  consideration;  and,  in  the  first 
place,  restored  to  Oppia  and  Cluvia  their  liberty  and  effects, 
with  directions,  that  if  they  wished  to  ask  any  other  re¬ 
ward  from  the  senate,  they  should  come  to  Rome.”  Separate 
decrees  were  passed  respecting  the  several  families  of  the 
Campanians,  all  of  which  it  would  be  useless  to  enumerate. 
The  properties  of  some  were  ordered  to  be  confiscated;  them¬ 
selves,  their  wives,  and  children  to  be  sold,  excepting  such 

374 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[y*R.  542. 

of  their  daughters  as  had  been  placed  in  marriage  beferre 
they  came  into  the  power  of  the  Roman  people.  Others  were 
ordered  to  be  kept  in  close  confinement,  and  their  cases  to 
be  considered  at  a  future  time.  They  also  made  distinct 
estimates  of  the  possessions  of  others,  hi  order  to  determine 
whether  they  should  be  forfeited  or  not.  They  voted,  that 
all  the  cattle  seized,  except  the  horses;  all  the  slaves,  ex¬ 
cept  grown-up  males;  and  every  thing  which  did  not  apper¬ 
tain  to  the  soil,  should  be  restored  to  the  owners.  They  or¬ 
dered,  that  all  the  Campanians,  Atellans,  Galatians,  and  Sa- 
batians,  exclusive  of  those  who,  themselves  or  their  parents, 
were  then  among  the  enemy,  should  be  free;  with  the  re¬ 
striction,  that  none  of  them  should  be  capable  of  becoming  a 
Roman  citizen,  or  a  Latine  confederate;  and  that  none  of 
those  who  had  been  in  Capua  while  the  gates  were  shut, 
should  remain  beyond  a  certain  day  in  the  city  or  territory 
thereof.  They  voted,  that  a  place  of  habitation  should  be  as¬ 
signed  to  those  people  beyond  the  Tiber,  and  not  contigu¬ 
ous  to  it:  that  such  as  had  neither  been  in  Capua  during  the 
war,  nor  in  any  Campanian  city  which  had  revolted  from  the 
Roman  people,  should  be  removed  to  the  other  side  of  the 
river  Liris,  next  to  Rome;  and  those  who  had  come  over  to 
the  Romans  before  Hannibal  came  to  Capua,  to  the  hither 
side  of  the  Vultumus:  that  none  of  them  should  have  land 
or  house  nearer  to  the  sea  than  fifteen  miles:  that,  as  to  those 
who  should  be  transplanted  to  the  farther  side  of  the  Tiber, 
neither  themselves  nor  their  posterity  should  purchase  or  pos¬ 
sess  property  in  any  other  place  than  in  the  Veientian,  Su- 
trian,  or  Nepetian  territories;  nor  should  any  possess  a  greater 
extent  of  ground  than  fifty  acres:  that  the  property  of  all  the 
senators,  and  of  those  who  had  held  public  employments  at 
Capua,  Atella,  or  Calatia,  should  be  sold  at  Capua;  but  that 
the  men  of  free  condition,  who,  according  to  the  order  pass¬ 
ed,  were  likewise  to  be  set  up  for  sale,  should  be  sent  to 
Rome.  The  images  and  brazen  statues,  which  were  said  to 

BOOK  XXVI. 

3/5 

B.C.  210.] 
have  been  taken  from  the  encmvt  whether  they  were  sacred 
or  private  property,  disposal  of  the  college  of 
pontiffs.  They  then  dismissed  the  Campanians,  whose  dis¬ 
tress  and  affliction  were  increased  by  these  determinations 
beyond  what  they  had  felt  at  their  coming  to  Rome,  and  who 
exclaimed  no  longer  against  Fulvius’s  cruelty  towards  them, 
but  against  the  rigorous  severity  of  the  gods,  and  their  own 
accursed  fortune. 
XXXV.  After  the  Sicilians  and  Campanians  were  dis¬ 
missed,  a  levy  of  troops  was  made;  and,  as  soon  as  that  was 
finished,  the  business  of  procuring  a  supply  of  rowers  for  the 
fleet  came  under  consideration.  As  there  was  neither  a  suf¬ 
ficiency  of  men  for  this  purpose,  nor  any  money,  at  that 
time,  in  the  treasury  to  purchase  or  pay  them,  the  consuls 
published  an  edict,  that  private  persons  should,  as  on  former 
occasions,  in  proportion  to  their  fortunes  and  stations,  sup¬ 
ply  rowers  with  pay  and  subsistence  for  thirty  days.  This 
edict  caused  such  loud  murmurs  and  such  ill-humour  among 
the  people,  that  a  leader,  rather  than  matter,  was  wanting  to 
produce  an  open  insurrection.  It  was  said,  that  the  con¬ 
suls,  after  they  had  done  with  the  Sicilians  and  Campanians, 
had  taken  the  Roman  commons  in  hand,  to  harass  and  ruin 
them:  that,  after  being  exhausted  by  paying  taxes  for  so 
many  years,  they  had  nothing  left  but  land,  and  that  naked 
and  waste.  Their  houses  the  enemy  had  burned;  the  slaves, 
who  ought  to  till  the  ground,  the  state  had  taken  away, 
sometimes  purchasing  themr  for  soldiers  at  a  trifling  price,  at 
others  ordering  them  to  serve  as  rowers.  If  any  one  had  a 
little  silver  or  brass,  he  was  obliged  to  part  with  it  to  pay 
rowers  and  the  yearly  duties.  As  to  themselves,  no  autho¬ 
rity,  no  force,  could  compel  them  to  give  what  they  had  not. 
The  consuls  might  sell  their  goods,  and  vent  their  cruelty  on 
their  persons,  which  were  all  that  remained:  nor  had  the\ 
any  thing  wherewith  they  could  even  redeem  or  save  them¬ 
selves  from  such  treatment.”  7'hese  discontented  expression'^ 

STS 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  542- 
were  uttered  not  in  private,  but  openly  in  the  Forum,  and  in 
the  presence  of  the  consuls  themselves,  by  immense  multi¬ 
tudes  that  stood  around  them;  nor  were  the  consuls  able, 
either  by  reproof  or  consolation,  to  pacify  them.  It  was  at 
length  determined  to  give  them  three  days,  to  consider  of 
these  matters;  and  this  time  they  themselves  employed  in 
procuring  information,  and  contriving  the  best  mode  of  pro¬ 
ceeding.  On  the  following  day,  they  held  a  meeting  of  the 
senate  on  the  subject  of  a  supply  of  rowers,  and  after  using 
many  arguments  to  show  that  the  remonstrances  of  the  com¬ 
mons  were  but  reasonable,  they  changed  the  tenor  of  their 
discourse  so  far  as  to  say,  that  this  burthen,  whether  rea¬ 
sonable  or  unreasonable,  must  be  imposed  on  the  private  ci¬ 
tizens.  How  could  the  fleets  be  otherwise  manned,  as  there 
was  no  money  in  the  treasury  ;  and,  without  fleets,  how 
could  Sicily  be  kept  in  obedience,  Philip  be  kept  out  of 
Italy,  or  the  coasts  of  Ital^^  protected?” 
XXX V'l.  In  circumstances  of  such  extreme  perplexity,  de¬ 
liberation  was  of  little  avail,  and  a  kind  of  torpor  possessed 
men’s  faculties,  until  the  consul  Lsevinus  addressed  them 
thus:  ‘"As  the  magistrates  in  point  of  dignity  precede  the 
senate,  and  the  senate  the  people,  so  ought  they  to  take  the 
lead  in  undergoing  every  thing  burthensome  and  difficult. 
When  you  wish  to  enjoin  any  task  on  inferiors;  if  you  im¬ 
pose  the  same  duty  on  yourself  and  your  connexions,  you 
will  find  those  inferiors  the  more  ready  to  obey.  Nor  is  an 
expense  deemed  heavy,  when  people  see  those  of  the  highest 
ranks  take  on  themselves  more  than  their  proportion  of  it. 
Do  we  wish,  then,  that  the  Roman  people  should  have  a 
fleet,  and  the  means  of  equipping  it?  That  private  citizens 
should,  without  murmuring,  supply  rowers?  Let  us  enforce 
the  edict  first  on  ourselves.  Let  us,  senators,  lodge  to-mor¬ 
row  in  the  public  treasury  all  our  gold,  silver,  and  coined 
brass;  each  reserving  of  the  gold,  rings  for  himself,  his  wife, 
and  children,  and  a  bulla  for  his  son;  and  he  who  has  a  wife 

BOOK  XXVI. 

B.C.  210.] 

srr 

and  daughters,  an  ounce  weight  for  each,  out  of  the  silver; 
and  for  those  who  have  sat  in  a  curule  chair,  let  them  have  Ae 
ornaments  of  a  horse,  and  a  pound  weight  of  silver,  tha^  they 
may  not  be  without  a  salt-cellar  and  a  dish  to  be  used  in  the 
worship  of  the  gods.  To  the  other  senators,  only  a  pound  of 
silver  and  five  thousand  asses'^  of  brass  coin  should  be  al¬ 
lowed,  that  is,  for  every  father  of  a  family.  All  the  rest  of 
our  goi(^,  silver,  and  coined  brasSy  let  us  at  once  convey  to 
the  receivers  of  the  public  money,  before  we  pass  any  decree, 
that  our  voluntary  contribution,  and  the  ardour  of  our  zeal 
in  aiding  the  republic,  may  excite  a  spirit  of  emulation  in  the 
equestrian  order  first,  and  then  in  the  people  in  general.  This 
is  the  only  equitable  way  which  my  colleague  and  myself, 
after  much  conversation  on  the  subject,  have  been  able  to 
discover;  adopt  it,  then,  and  may  the  gods  be  propitious  to 
you.  The  safety  of  the  commonwealth  effectually  ensures  the 
safety  of  private  property;  if  you  abandon  the  interest  of  the 
republic,  you  will  in  vain  attempt  to  preserve  your  own.’’ 
This  scheme  was  received  with  warm  and  unanimous  appro¬ 
bation,  insomuch  that  the  thanks  of  the  body  were  returned 
td  the  consuls.  The  senate  was  then  adjourned,  and  all  the 
members  immediately  hastened  to  bring  in  their  gold,  silver, 
^nd  brass  to  the  treasury,  and  this  with  such  ardour  and 
emulation,  that  while  each  pressed  to  have  his  name  among 
theiirst  in  the  public  registers,  the  commissioners  were  not 
able  to  receive,  nor  the  clerks  to  enter,  the  contributions. 
The  zeal  and  unanimity  displayed  by  the  senate  were  copied 
by  the  equestrian  order,  and,  after  them,  by  the  commons. 
Thus,  without  any  edict,  ‘without  any  authoritative  act  of 
magistracy,  the  state  was  provided  with  a  sufficient  supply  of 
rowers,  and  also  with  a  fund  for  their  support;  and  every 
preparation  for  the  campaign  being  finished,  the  consuls  set 
out  for  their  respective  provinces. 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  54^. 
'XXXVII.  At  no  ^riod  of  the  war  did  both  the  Romans 
and  the  Carthaginians  feel  a  greater  vicissitude  of  hopes  and 
fearsf  such  an  interrhixture  of  events,  of  opposite  natures, 
taking  place  alike  on  both  sides.  For  on  that  of  the  Romans, 
with  regard  to  die  provinces,  the  misfortunes  in  Spain  on  the 
one  hand,  and  the  successes  in  Sicily  on  the  other,  produced 
a  mixture  of  sorrow  and  rejoicing;  and  in  Italy,  as  the  loss 
of  Tarcntum  vr&s  injurious  and  grievous,  so  the  citadel  and 
garrison  being  preserved,  beyond  expectation,  was  matter  of 
joy:  while  in  like  manner,  the  sudden  terror  and  panic, 
caused  by  the  investiture  and  attack  of  the  city  of  Rome, 
were  in  a  few  days  converted  into  triumph  by  the  reduction 
of  Capua.  Affairs  beyond  sea  were,  also,  balanced  in  a  kind 
of  counterpoise.  Philip  became  their  enemy  at  a  juncture 
very  far  from  seasonable;  but  then  they  acquired  new  allies 
in  the  jEtolians,  and  in  Attains,  king  of  Asia;  fortune  thus 
early  pledging  her  promise,  as  it  were,  to  the  Romans,  for  the 
empire  of  the  east.  On  the  side  of  the  Carthaginians,  like¬ 
wise,  the  loss  of  Capua  was  counterbalanced  by  the  acquisi¬ 
tion  of  Tarentum;  and,  as  they  valued  themselves  highly  on 
the  honour  of  having  advanced  to  the  walls  of  the  city  of 
Rome  without  opposition,  so  they  were  grieved  at  the  failure 
of  their  design,  and  felt  ashamed  at  being  slighted  to  such  a 
degree,  as  that,  while  they  lay  under  the  viralls  of  Rome,  a 
Roman  army  should  have  marched  out,  from  another  quarter 
of  the  city,  for  Spain.  With  regard  also  to  Spain  itself,  as 
they  thought  they  had  good  reason  to  hope,  that,  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  the  destruction  of  two  renowned  generals  and  pow¬ 
erful  armies,  the  war  there  would  be-at  an  end,  and  the  Ro¬ 
mans  expelled  the  country,  so  their  mortification  was  the 
greater  in  proportion,  on  finding  that  Lucius  Marcius,  a 
leader  who  owed  his  post  to  the  irregular  voice  of  the  mul¬ 
titude,  had  rendered  their  victor)^  insignificant  and  fruitless. 
Thus,  Fortune  holding  the  scales  even,  every  thing  on  both 
sides  hung  in  suspense,  and  the  parties  retained  their  hopes 

BOOK  XXVL 

S79 

B.C*  MO.] 

unabated,  aud  their  fears -^nallayed,  just  as  if  they  were  ixovr 
first  commencing  the  Var, 
XXXVIII.  One  circumstance,  above  all,  filled  Hannibars 
mind  with  the  most  painful  reflections;  it  was,  that  in  cw 
sequence  of  the  Romans  having  prosecuted  the  siege  of  Ca¬ 
pua  with  so  much  more  determined  resolution  than  he  ha^ 
exei'ted  for  its  relief,  many  of  the  states  of  Italy  had  con¬ 
ceived  sentiments  very  unfavourable  to  his  cause.  He  found  f 
it  impossible  to  maintain  his-  authority  over  all  of  these  by 
force,  unless  he  were  to  break  down  his  army  into  a  great 
number  of  small  detachments,  which  would  very  ill  suit  his 
condition  at  the  time;  nor  could  he  leave  the  fidelity  of  allies 
opemto  the  solicitations  of  hope,  or  the  direatenings  of  fear. 
Wherefore,  as  his  mind  had  from  nature  a  strong  bias  to  ava¬ 
rice  and  cruelty,  he  determined  to  plunder  the  places  which 
he  could  not  keep,  and  s<^  leave  them  to  the  enemy  in  a  state 
of  desolation.  This  scheme,  so  dishonourable  in  its  puipose, 
proved  equally  so  in  its  consequences:  for  it  alienated  from 
him  the  affections  not  only  of  the  persons  so  greatfy  aggriev¬ 
ed,  but  likewise  of  all  the  rest;  this  specimen  of  his  charac¬ 
ter  extending  its  influence  far  beyond  the  numbers  involved 
in  the  calamity.  The  Roman  consul  at  the  same  time  was 
not  remiss  in  making  trials  of  the  disposition  of  every  citv 
where  any  prospect  of  success  appeared.  la  Salapia  there 
were  two  leading  men,  Dasius  and  Blasius:  the  former  was 
a  friend  to  Hannibal;  the  latter,  as  far  as  he  could  with 
safety,  favoured  the  interest  of  the  Romans,  and,  by  means 
of  secret  emissaries,  had  given  Marcellus  hopes  of  having 
the  place  betrayed  to  him;  but  this  was  a  measure,  which, 
without  the  concurrence  of  Dasius,  could  not  be  effected. 
After  long  and  anxious  deliberation,  and  then,  rather  from 
want  of  a  more  promising  plan,  than  hope  of  succeeding,  he 
opened  the  proposition  to  Dasius.  But  he,  being  both  averse 
from  the  design,  and  glad  also  of  an  opportunity  of  injuring 
his  competitor  for  power,  disclosed  the  affair  to  Hannibal, 

380 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

i;y.r.542. 

who  summoned  them  both  before  him;  and,  while  he  was 
employed  on  his  tribunal  in  despatching  some  other  business, 
intending  presently  to  attend  to  that  of  Blasus,  the  accuser 
and  accused  both  standing  together  in  a  spot  cleared  for 
them  by  the  people,  Blasius  began  to  urge  Dasius  on  the  sub¬ 
ject  of  surrendering  the  town.  On  which  the  latter,  as  if  the 
matter  rfow  proved  itself,  exclaimed,  that  the  other  was  at¬ 
tempting  to  seduce  him  to  treachery,  even  in  Hannibal’s  im¬ 
mediate  presence.  To  Hannibal,  and  to  those  who  were  pre¬ 
sent,  the  more  audacious  the  fact  charged  on  Blasius  was, 
the  less  credible  it  appeared.  They  knew  that  there  was  an 
emulation  and  hatred  subsisting  between  the  two,  and  sup¬ 
posed  that  an  imputation  of  this  kind  was  alleged,  because, 
as  from  its  nature,  it  could  not  be  supported  by  the  testi¬ 
mony  of  witnesses,  it  was  the  more  likely  to  be  false.  The 
parties  were  therefore  dismirsed;  but  Blasius,  notwithstand¬ 
ing  what  had  passed,  never  desisted  from  this  bold  undertak¬ 
ing,  until  by  incessant  teasing  on  the  same  subject,  and  prov¬ 
ing  how  advantageous  such  a  measure  would  be  to  them¬ 
selves  and  their  country,  he  extorted  the  other’s  consent  that 
Salapia,  and  the  Carthaginian  garrison,  which  consisted  of 
live  hundred  Numidians,  should  be  delivered  up  to  Marcel- 
lus.  This,  however,  could  not  be  effected  without  considera¬ 
ble  bloodshed;  for  these  Numidians  were  much  the  bravest 
body  of  Cavain’^  in  the  whole  Carthaginian  army,  and  this 
was  an  occurrence  which  it  was  impossible  for  them  to  fore¬ 
see.  But  though  they  could  not,  in  the  city,  make  use  of  their 
horses,  yet,  on  the  tumult  arising,  they  hastily  took  arms, 
and  attempted  to  make  their  way  out;  when,  finding  an 
escape  impracticable,  they  sold  their  lives  dear,  fighting  to 
the  last;  nor  did  more  than  fifty  of  their  whole  number  fall 
alive  into  the  hands  of  the  Salapiaus.  The  loss  of  this  body 
of  cavalry  was  a  much  severer  blow  to  Hannibal  than  that  of 
the  place,  for  thenceforward  the  Carthaginians  were  never 
superior  in  cavalry,  which  they  had,  hitherto,  always  been. 

BOOK  XXVL 

3gl 

B.C.  210.3 
XXXIX.  At  this  time  the  scarcity  in  the  citadel  of  Taren- 
turn  became  almost  intolerable.  Marcus  Livius,  commander 
of  the  Roman  garrison  there,  relied  entirely  for  supplies,  on 
Sicily;  and  to  secure  to  these  a  safe  passage  along  the  coast 
of  Italy,  a  fleet  of  twenty  ships  had  been  stationed  at  Rhe- 
gium.  The  charge  of  the  fleet  and  provisions  was  entrusted 
to  Decius  Quintius,  a  man  of  obscure  birth,  but  who,  by 
many  brave  actions,  had  acquired  a  large  share  of  military 
fame.  At  first,  he  had  only  five  ships,  the  largest  of  which 
were  two  triremes,  given  him  by  Marcellus;  afterwards^ 
when  he  was  known  to  have  behaved,  on  many  occasions, 
with  much  spirit  and  bravery,  he  received  a  reinforcement  of 
three  quinqueremes;  at  last,  he  himself,  by  exacting  from  the 
confederate  states  of  Rhegium,  Velia,  and  Paestum,the  ships 
due  by  treaty,  had  made  up  a  fleet  of  twenty  sail,  as  above- 
mentioned.  Having,  with  this  fleet,  set  sail  from  Rhegium, 
he  was  met  at  Sacriportus,  about  fifteen  miles  from  the  city, 
by  Democrates,  w^ith  an  equal  number  of  Tarentine  ships. 
The  Roman  was  coming  to  the  relief  of  the  garrison,  not 
supposing  it  probable  that  he  should  meet  an  enemy;  from 
Croton  and  Sybaris,  however,  he  had  furnished  his  ships  with 
their  full  complement  of  rowers,  and  besides,  considering  the 
size  of  his  vessels,  they  were  exceedingly  well  equipped  and 
armed.  It  so  happened,  that,  just  when  the  Tarentine  came 
in  sight,  the  wind  entirely  died  away,  a  circumstance  which 
gave  him  full  time  to  adjust  the  rigging,  and  put  the  rowers 
and  soldiers  in  readiness  for  die  battle  that  was  to  follow. 
They  engaged  with  a  degree  of  ardour  seldom  shown  by 
complete  fleets,  because  the  objects  for  which  they  contended 
were  of  more  importance  than  the  fleets  themselves.  The 
Tarentines,  having  recovered  their  city  from  the  Romans,  at 
the  end  of  almost  one  hundred  years,  struggled  now  to  dili¬ 
ver  the  city  also  from  subjection;  knowing  that  if,  by  the  ex¬ 
ertions  of  their  fleet,  they  should  take  from  the  enemy  the 
dominion  of  the  sea,  they  would  be  thereby  effectually  ex- 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

3a2 

[Y.R.  542. 

eluded  from  even  a  distant  hope  of  provisions:  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  on  the  other  hand,  laboured,  by  retaining  possession  of 
the  citadel,  to  show  the  world,  that  the  loss  of  the  city  was 
owing,  not  to  the  strength  or  valour  of  the  assailants,  but  to 
artifice  and  treachery.  The  signal,  then,  being  given  on  both 
sides,  they  charged  each  other  with  the  beaks  of  their  vessels, 
and  none,  during  the  ecmflict,  either  drew  back  his  own  ship, 
or  suffered  his  adversary  to  get  clear  of  him,  but  held  it  by 
throwing  in  an  iron  grapple;  and  thus  the  engagement  became 
so  close,  that  they  fought,  not  only  with  missile  weapons,  but 
with  swords,  and  almost  hand  to  hand.  The  prows,  being 
lashed  together,  remained  unmoved,  while  die  sterns  were 
turned  round  by  the  force  of  their  .adversaries  oars.  The 
ships  were  crowded  so  close  together,  and  within  so  narrow  a 
place,  that  scarcely  any  weapon  fell  without  effect  into  the 
sea.  They  pressed  front  against  front,  like  lines  of  land  forces, 
and  the  combatapts  could  pass  from  one  ship  to  another. 
But  there  w^  one  conflict  remarkable  above  the  rest,  between 
two  which  engaged  in  the  van:  in  the  Roman  ship  was  Quin- 
tius  himself;  in  the  Tarentine,  Nico,  sumamed  Perco,  who 
bitterly  hated,  and  was  hated,  by  die  Romans,  not  only  in 
consequence  of  the  public  quarrel,  but  also  of  personal  re-* 
sentment,  for  he  was  one  of  that  faction  which  had  betrayed 
Tarentum  to  Hannibal.  This  man,  while  Quintius  was  en¬ 
couraging  his  men,  and,  at  the  same  time,  fighting,  and  off 
his  guard,  darted  a  spear  through  his  body,  and  he  fell  head¬ 
long,  with  his  armour,  into  die  sea;  then  the  victorious  Ta¬ 
rentine  boldly  leaped  into  the  ship,  where  the  loss  of  the 
commander  had  thrown  all  into  confusion,  and  they  quickly 
retired  before  him.  The  forepart  of  the  ship  was  now  in  |k>s- 
session  of  the  Tarentines,  while  the  Romans,  in  a  compact 
body,  with  difiiculty  defended  the  poop;  when  another  tri¬ 
reme  of  the  enemy  suddenly  appeared  at  the  stem,  and  the 
Roman  ship,  thus  inclosed  between  the  two,  was  taken.  The 
rest,  on  seeing  this,  were  struck  with  dismay,  and  fled  in 

BOOK  XXVI. 

38S 

B.C.  210.] 

different  directions.  Some  were  sunk  in  the  deep,  and  others, 
being  run  aground  by  the  rowers,  soon  became  a  prey  to  the 
Thurians  and  Metapontines,  Of  die  store-ships,  which  fol¬ 
lowed  with  the  provisions,  a  few  fell  into  the  enemy’s  hands; 
the  remainder  stood  away  into  the  main,  and  escaped  by  shift¬ 
ing  their  sails  with  every  change  of  the  wind.  In  the  mean¬ 
time,  the  fortune  of  affairs  at  Tarentum  was  not  at  aU  the 
same:  for  a  party,  amounting  to  four  thousand  men,  having 
gone  out  to  forage,  spreading  themselves  up  and  down  the 
country,  Livius,  the  commander  of  the  Roman  garrison,  who 
carefully  watched  every  opportunity  of  acting  to  advantage, 
sent  out,  from  the  citadel,  Caius  Persius,  an  active  and  brave 
officer,  with  two  thousand  soldiers.  He  fell  upon  the  enemy 
while  they  were  scattered  wideH%  and  in  small  parties;  and, 
after  continuing  for  a  long  time  to  cut  them  off,  drove  the 
small  remainder  of  this  large  detachment  to  the  city,  where 
they  were  admitted  through  the  gates  half  opened,  lest  the  Ro¬ 
mans  should  enter  along  with  them,  and  become  masters  of  it. 
Thus  the  affairs  of  Tarentum  were  equally  balanced,  the  Ro¬ 
mans  being  victorious  on  land,  the  Tarentines  by  sea.  Both 
were  disappointed  alike  in  their  hopes  of  provisions,  even  after 
they  had  actually  come  within  their  sight. 
XL.  About  this  time,  after  a  great  part  of  the  year  had 
elapsed,  and  he  had  been  long  wished  for  by  both  the  old  and 
new  allies,  the  consul  Lsevinus  arrived  in  Sicily,  where  he 
judged  that  the  first  and  most  material  business  to  be  done, 
was,  the  regulating  the  affairs  of  Syracuse,  which  had  not 
yet  been  reduced  into  order  in  the  short  space  since  the  late 
pacification.  He  then  led  his  legions  to  Agrigentum,  Avhich 
was  the  only  place  still  in  arms,  and  held  by  a  strong  garri¬ 
son  of  Carthaginians;  and  here  fortune  favouredhis  enterprize. 
The  Carthaginians  were  commanded  by  Hanno,  but  placed 
their  whole  dependence  on  Miitines  and  the  Numidians.  The 
latter,  making  frequent  excursions  through  every  part  of  Si- 
cilv,  carried  off  spoil  from  the  allies  of  the  Romans,  and  neither 

384 

HISTORY t)F  ROME. 

[Y.R.  342. 

fcnrce  nor  art  could  shut  him  out  from  Agrigcntam,  nor  hin¬ 
der  him  from  sallying  forth  whenever  he  thought  proper.  The 
h^^  reputation  which  he  thus  acquired,  as  it  obscured  the 
fame  of  the  commander  in  chief,  excited  his  envy ;  so  that 
even  success,  because  obtained  by  his  means,  afforded  but 
little  pleasure  to  Hanno,  who  at  last  took  from  him  his  com* 
mission,  and  gave  it  to  his  own  son^  thinking  that,  by  divest¬ 
ing  him.  of  the  command,  he  should  deprive  him  of  his  po¬ 
pularity  among  the  Numidians.  But  the  effect  was  widely  dif¬ 
ferent,  for, by  this  discovery  of  his  jealousy,  he  increased  their 
attachment  to  Mutines,  who  did  not  tamely  submit  to  the  in¬ 
dignity  of  this  undeserved  ill-treatment,  but  quickly  despatch* 
ed  secret  emissaries  to  Laevinus,  to  treat  about  the  surrender 
of  the  town.  Through  these,  mutual  assurances  were  given, 
and  the  method  of  accomplishing  the  business  concerted;  and 
then  the  Numidians,  dislodging  or  killing  the  guards,  seized 
a  gate  which  opened  towards  the  sea,  and  received  a  party  of 
Romans  sent  thither  for  the  purpose.  When  these  were  al¬ 
ready  marching  into  the  heart  of  the  city  and  the  Forum, 
with  much  noise  and  tumult,  Hanno,  thinking  that  it  was 
nothing  more  than  such  a  disturbance  and  secession  of  the  Nu¬ 
midians  as  had  happened  before,  came  out  to  quell  the  mutiny: 
but  observing,  at  a  distance,  that  the  number  was  greater 
than  that  of  those  forces,  and  hearing  the  Roman  shout,  with 
which  he  was  not  unacquainted,  he  resolved,  before  he  came 
within  reach  of  their  weapons,  to  betake  himself  to  flight. 
Getting  out  of  the  town  at  an'  opposite  gate,  he  took  Epicydes 
with  him,  and  came  with  a  small  number  to  the  sea  side. 
There  they  luckily  found  a  bark,  and  abandoning  to  the  en¬ 
emy  the  island  of  Sicily,  about  which  a  contest  had  been 
maintained  through  so  many  years,  passed  over  to  Africa, 
'rhe  rest  of  the  Carthaginians  and  Sicilians  attempted  to  fly 
with  blind  precipitation,  but  the  gates  being  closed,  they  were 
cut  to  pieces.  Laevinus,  on  gaining  possession  of  the  town, 
scourged  and  beheaded  those  who  bad  been  in  the  manage- 

BOOK  XXVI. 

585 

B,C.  210.] 
ment  of  the  affairs  of  Agrigentum:  the  rest  he  sold,  together 
with  the  spoil,  and  remitted  all  the  money  to  Rome.  Accounts 
of  the  sufferings  of  the  Agrigotxtines  spreading  through  all 
Sicily,  produced  at  once  a  general  revolution  in  favour  of  the 
Romans.  In  a  short  time,  twenty  towns  were  betrayed  to  them, 
six  taken  by  storm,  and  forty  put  themselves  under  their  pro¬ 
tection  by  voluntary  surrender.  To  the  leading  men  in  these 
states  the  consul  dispensed  rewards  and.  punishments  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  merits  and  demerits  of  each;  and  having  com¬ 
pelled  the  Sicilians  at  length  to  lay  aside  arms,  and  turn  their 
thoughts  to  agriculture,  that  the  island  might,  from  its  fertile 
soil,  not  only  afford  plenty  of  subsistence  to  the  inhabitants, 
but,  as  it  had  done  on  many  occasions  formerly,  contribute 
supplies  of  provisions  to  Rome,  and  even  to  all  Italy,  he  left 
Sicily,  carrying  with  him  a  large  multitude  from  Agathyma. 
This  was  a  motley  rabble,  four  thousand  in  number,  compos¬ 
ed  of  vagabonds  of  every  description,  exiles,  and  bankrupts, 
the  greater  part  guilty  of  capital  crimes,  who,  even  when  they 
lived  in  their  native  countries  under  the  government  of  laws, 
and  afterwards,  when  a  similarity  of  condition,  arising  from 
various  causes,  had  drawn  them  together  to  Agathyrna,  al¬ 
ways  supported  themselves  by  robberies  and  rapines.  Such 
men  as  these,  so  likly  to  excite  new  disturbances,  the  consul 
thought  it  unsafe  to  leave  behind,  in  an  island  which  had  but 
just  then  obtained  rest  from  intestine  wars,  and  where  the 
people  were  but  beginning  to  unite  on  the  terms  of  concord 
established  by  the  late  pacification  :  besides,  they  might  prove 
useful  to  the  people  of  Rhegeum,  who  w^ted  a  band  trained 
to  robberies,  for  the  purpose  of  ravaging  the  territories  of 
Bruttium.  Thus,  so  far  as  concerned  Sicily,  this  year  put  an 
end  to  hostilities. 
XLL  In  Spain,  Publius  Scipio,  as  soon  as  the  spring 
appeared,  launched  his  ships;  summoned  to  Tarraco,  by  an 
edict,  the  auxiliary  troops  of  the  allies,  and  then  directed  the 
fleets  and  transports  to  proceed  to  die  mouth  of  the  river  Ibe- 
VOL.  III.— 3  C 

386 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.RJ42 

rus.  This  place  he  also  appointed  for  the  meeting  of  the  le¬ 
mons  whom  he  ordered  out  of  winter  quarters;  and  he  him*- 
self,  attended  by  five  thousand  men  of  the  allied  troops,  set 
out  from  Tarraco  to  join  the  army.  When  he  arrived  at  the 
camp,  thinking  it  proper  to  say  something  encouraging  to  the 
soldiers,  particularly  those  who  had  been  longest  in  the  pro¬ 
vince,  and  had  survived  so  many  and  so  great  disasters,  he 
called  them  together,  and  addressed  them  in  this  manner: 
“  Never  has  there  been  a  new  commander,  except  myself, 
who  could,  with  justice  and  propriety,  give  thanks  to  his  sol¬ 
diers  before  he  had  employed  them.  Fortune  laid  me  under 
obligations  to  you  ere  I  saw  your  camp,  or  knew  my  province; 
first,  because  you  showed  such  dutiful  respect  to  my  father 
and  uncle  during  their  lives,  and  since  their  deaths;  and 
next,  because,  when  the  possession  of  the  province  had  been 
lost  by  a  dreadful  calamity,  you  recovered  it  by  your  bravery, 
and  have  preserved  it  entire  for  the  Roman  people,  and  for 
me  who  succeed  to  the  command.  But  as,  through  the  bounty 
of  the  gods,  the  design  of  our  present  proceedings  is  not  to 
maintain  our  own  footing  in  Spain,  but  to  deprive  the  Car¬ 
thaginians  of  all  footing  in  it;  not  to  stand  on  the  bank  of  the 
Iberus,  and  hinder  the  enemy  from  passing  it,  but  to  pass 
over  ourselves,  and  cariy’^  the  war  to  the  other  side,  I  fear 
lest,  to  some  of  you,  the  undertaking  may  seem  too  great  and 
too  bold,  considering  the  remembrance  of  our  late  misfor¬ 
tunes,  and  my  early  time  of  life.  There  is  no  person  living, 
from  whose  memory  the  defeats  in  Spain  can  less  be  oblite¬ 
rated  than  from  mine;  for  there  my  father  and  uncle  lost 
their  lives  within  the  space  of  thirty  days;  so  that  funerals  in 
our  family  followed  one  another  in  quick  succession.  But 
while  the  disaster  which  bereft  our  house  of  parents:  and  left 
me  almost  the  only  surviving  member  of  it,  depresses  my 
mind  with  grief,  still  the  fortunes  of  our  nation,  and  its  cou¬ 
rageous  spirit,  forbid  me  to  despair  of  the  public  welfare.  It 
is  the  lot  assigned  to  us,  by  some  kind  of  fatality,  that,  in 

BOOK  XXVL 

387 

B.C.  210.] 
all  important  wars,  we  should  pass  through  defeat  to  victory. 
Omitting  instances  in  ancient  times,  the  case  of  Porsena,  the 
Gauls,  and  the  Samnites,  I  shall  begin  with  the  Punic 
wars.  In  the  last,  how  many  fleets,  how  many  generals,  how 
many  armies,  were  lost?  Need  I  mention  the  like  events  dur¬ 
ing  the  present  war?  At  all  the  defeats  I  was  either  present 
in  person,  or  lamented  more  deeply  than  any  other,  those 
from  which  I  was  absent.  The  Trebia,  the  Trasimenus,  Can- 
n®,  what  are  they  but  monuments  of  Roman  consuls  and  ar¬ 
mies  slain?  Hien  the  defection  of  Italy,  of  the  greater  part 
of  Sicily,  of  Sardinia;  the  extreme  terror  and  affright,  when 
HannibaPs  camp  was  pitched  between  the  Anio  and  the  walls 
of  Rome,  and  that  victorious  commander  was  seen  at  our 
very  gates.  But  amidst  this  general  ruin  of  affairs,  the  cou¬ 
rage  of  the  Roman  people  alone  stood  unshaken  and  im¬ 
moveable.  This,  when  all  our  hopes  lay  prostrate  on  the 
ground,  raised  and  supported  them.  And  first  of  all,  you, 
soldiers,  under  the  conduct  and  auspices  of  my  father,  with¬ 
stood  Hasdrubal,  when,  after  the  defeat  at  Cann®,  he  was  on 
his  way  to  the  Alps  and  to  Italy;  where,  if  he  had  effected  a 
junction  with  his  brother,  the  Roman  name  would  not  now 
have  been  in  existence:  but  the  successes  obtained  here  have 
counterbalanced  the  losses  sustained  in  other  places.  At  pre¬ 
sent,  through  the  good  favour  of  the  gods,  affairs  in  Italy 
and  Sicily  are  in  a  prosperous  train,  daily  improving,  and 
wearing  a  more  favourable  aspect.  In  Sicily,  Syracuse  and 
Agrigentum  have  been  taken;  the  enemy  entirely  expelled 
the  island,  and  the  province  restored  to  the  dominion  of  the 
Rcunan  people.  In  Italy,  Arpi  has  been  recovered,  Capua 
takoa;  Hannibal,  after  a  disorderly  flight,  through  his  whole 
route  from  the  city  of  Rome,  has  been  obliged  to  retreat  into 
the  remotest  comer  of  Bruttium,  where  he  prays  to  the  gods 
for  nothing  more  than  that  he  may  be  permitted  to  withdraw 
in  safety,  and  quit  the  land  of  his  enemy.  Could  there  then, 
soldiers,  be  a  greater  inconsistency,  than  that,  when  disasters 

388 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  542 

were  thus  crowded.one  upon  another,  and  the  gods  them¬ 
selves  seemed,  in  a  manner,  to  take  part  with  Hannibal,  you, 
with  my  parents,  ffor  I  will  mention  both  under  the  same 
revered  name,)  supported  here  the  tottering  fortune  of  the 
Roman  people;  and  that  now  when,  in  other  quarters,  every 
event  is  prosperous  and  joyful,  you  should  let  your  courage 
sink?  As  to  the  events  which  have  lately  happened,  I  wish 
they  had  passed  without  giving  me  more  cause  of  mourning 
than  they  have  given  you.  Now,  however,  the  immortal 
gods,  the  guardians  of  the  Roman  empire,  who  inspired  all 
the  centuries  with  the  resolution  of  offering  the  command  to 
be  given  to  me,  by  their  auguries  and  auspices,  and  by  vi¬ 
sions  in  the  night,  portend  all  prosperity  and  joy.  My  own 
mind,  likewise,  which  has  hitherto  been  my  surest  prophet, 
presages  that  Spain  is  to  be  ours;  that  the  whole  Carthagi¬ 
nian  race  will  soon  be  banished  hence,  and  spread  themselves 
over  the  lands  and  seas  in  their  ignominious  flight.  What 
my  mind  prognosticates  from  its  own  feelings,  the  same  is 
suggested  by  reason,  and  supported  by  arguments  of  no  de¬ 
lusive  nature.  Their  allies,  disgusted  by  their  ill-treatment, 
send  ambassadors  to  implore  our  protection;  their  three 
commanders,  having  quarrelled  to  such  a  degree  as  almost 
to  come  to  open  hostilities,  have  divided  their  army  into 
three  parts,  and  drawn  these  asunder  into  countries  the  most 
remote  from  each  other.  The  same  fortune  now  impends  over 
them  which  formerly  crushed  us;  for  they  are  deserted  by 
their  confederates,  as  we  were  formerly  by  the  Celtiberians; 
and  they  have  divided  their  forces,  which  was  the  cause  of 
destruction  to  my  father  and  uncle.  Intestine  discord  will 
hinder  them  from  acting  together  again;  nor  will  they,  sepa¬ 
rately,  be  able  to  resist  us.  Only  do  you,  soldiers,  preserve 
your  attachment  to  the  name  of  Scipio,  to  the  offspring  of 
your  own  commanders;  a  branch,  as  it  were,  shooting  forth 
from  the  trunks  which  have  been  felled.  You,  vetenm  sol¬ 
diers,  lead  your  new  cotnmander,  and  your  young  associates, 

BOOK  XXVL 

389 

B.C.210.] 

over  the  Iberus;  lead  us  into  those  lands  where  you  have 
often  marked  your  route  with  many  deeds  of  valour.  Trust 
me,  you  shall  soon  find,  that  the  resemblance  which  you  sup¬ 
pose  you  see  in  me  to  my  father  and  uncle,  is  not  confined  to 
figure,  countenance,  and  features;  but  that  I  inherit  no  small 
portion  of  their  capacity,  their  honour,  and  their  courage; 
these  you  shall  find  so  faithfully  copied  from  the  original, 
that  every  man  of  you  shall  say,  that  his  own  commander, 
Scipio,  has  either  returned  to  life,  or  has  been  bom  again.” 
XL II.  Having,  by  this  discourse,  animated  the  courage  of 
his  men,  and  leaving  three  thousand  foot  and  three  hundred 
horse,  under  Marcus  Silanus,  for  the  defence  of  the  province, 
he  marched  the  rest  of  his  forces,  which  amounted  to  twenty- 
five  thousand  foot,  and  two  thousand  five  hundred  horse,  ovei 
the  Iberus.  Although  many  now  advised,  that,  as  the  Car- 
tha^nian  armies  were  separated  at  so*  great  distances,  he 
should  attack  the  one  that  lay  nearest ;  yet,  apprehending  that 
such  a  step  would  probably  make  them  all  reunite,  and  that 
he  should  not,  alone,  be  able  to  cope  with  the  three  armies, 
he  determined,  for  the  present,  to  employ  his  forces  in  an  at¬ 
tack  on  New  Carthage,  a  city  which  possessed  great  wealtii 
of  its  own,  and  was  besides,  at  that  time,  filled  with  the  ene¬ 
my’s  magazines  of  every  kind  for  the  use  of  the  war ;  there 
were  lodged  their  arms,  their  money,  and  the  hostages  from 
all  the  states  of  Spain.  It  was,  also,  most  conveniently  situ¬ 
ated  for  a  passage  into  Africa,  having  a  harbour  sufficient!) 
capacious  for  any  fleet  whatever,  and,  there  is  reason  to  think, 
the  only  one  in  all  that  tract  of  the  Spanish  coast  that  joins 
our  sea.  No  one  in  the  whole  army  knew  the  destination  of 
its  march  except  Caius  Laelius.  He  was  sent  round  with 
the  fleet,  and  ordered  so  to  regulate  the  sailing  of  it,  that  the 
army  should  come  within  view,  and  the  ships  enter  the  har¬ 
bour,  at  the  same  point  of  time.  On  the  seventh  day  after 
leaving  the  Iberus,  the  fleet  and  army  arrived,  as  had  been 
concerted,  at  Carthage ;  the  camp  was  pitched  on  the  north- 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  542. 

ern  side  of  the  city,  and  a  rampart  was  thrown  up  on  the 
rear  of  it,  the  front  being  secured  by  the  nature  of  the  ground. 
The  situation  of  Carthage  is  this :  about  the  middle  of  the 
coast  of  Spain  is  a  bay,  which  is  open  to  the  south-west  wind 
more  than  to  any  other,  and  stretches  inland  two  thousand 
five  hundred  paces,  spreading  in  breadth  to  an  extent  some¬ 
what  greater.  In  the  mouth  of  this  bay  lies  a  small  island, 
which  breaks  the  force  of  the  sea,  and  renders  the  harbour 
secure  from  all  winds  except  the  south-west:  from  the  bottom 
of  the  bay  there  runs  out  a  peninsula,  consisting  of  high  land, 
on  which  the  city  is  biult,  and  this  is  surrounded  on  the  east 
and  south  by  the  sea ;  on  the  west  it  is  inclosed  by  a  morass, 
which  spreads  a  little  way  towards  the  north,  and  whose 
depth  is  variable  according  as  the  sea  overflows  or  ebbs. 
The  city  is  connected  with  the  continent  by  an  isthmus,  about 
two  hundred  and  fifty  paces  broad  ;  on  which,  though  a  for¬ 
tification  would  have  cost  but  little  labour,  the  Roman  ge¬ 
neral  did  not  raise  any,  choosing  either  to  mortify  the  enemy 
by  this  display  of  confidence,  or,  as  he  would  often  have  oc¬ 
casion  to  advance  to  the  walls,  to  have  a  retreat  open. 
XLllL  When  he  had  completed  his  works  in  those  parts 
which  required  defence,  he  drew  up  the  ships  in  the  harbour 
in  order  of  battle,  with  intent  to  dispirit  the  enemy  with  the 
sight  of  a  marine  force  also  to  be  employed  against  the  town; 
then  going  round  the  fleet  in  a  boat,  he  charged  the  com¬ 
manders  to  keep  the  night-watches  with  great  care,  because 
an  enemy,  when  he  is  first  besieged,  is  apt  to  make  every  ef¬ 
fort  in  every  quarter.  He  then  went  back  to  the  camp,  and 
wishing  to  explain  to  the  soldiers  his  reason  for  preferring 
this  plan  of  opening  the  campaign  with  the  siege  of  a  town, 
and  by  exhortations  to  inspire  them  with  hopes  of  reducing 
it,  he  called  them  to  an  assembly,  and  spoke  to  this  effect : 
Soldiers,  if  any  man  among  you  shall  suppose  that  you  have 
been  brought  hither  for  the  sole  purpose  of  attacking  a  single 
he  will  judge  merely  from  the  work  in  which  you  are 

BOOK  XXVL 

391 

B.C.  210,] 
employed)  without  taking  into  calculation  the  advantages  to 
accrue  from  it.  For  you  will,  in  fact,  attack  the  walls  of  one 
city ;  but,  in  that  one  city,  you  will  capture  all  Spain.  Here 
are  the  hostages  of  all  her  illustrious  kings  and  states  ;  and, 
as  soon  as  these  shall  be  in  your  power,  they  will  instantly 
deliver  up  to  our  disposal  every  thing  which  is  now  under 
subjection  to  the  Carthaginians.  Here  is  deposited  the  ene¬ 
my’s  treasure,  without  which  they  cannot  proceed  in  the  war, 
having  mercenary  troops  to  maintain  ;  and  which,  at  the  same 
time,  will  be  most  serviceable  to  us,  as  the  means  of  con¬ 
ciliating  the  friendship  of  the  barbarians.  Here  are  their  en¬ 
gines,  arms,  accoutrements,  and  all  their  warlike  stores, 
which,  while  they  answer  our  purposes,  will  leave  the  enemy 
destitute.  Besides,  we  shall  gain  possession  of  a  city  of  dis¬ 
tinguished  beauty  and  opulence,  and  highly  convenient  to  us 
on  account  of  its  excellent  harbour,  by  means  of  which  we 
can  have  constant  supplies,  both  from  sea  and  land,  of  every 
thing  requisite  for  the  maintenance  of  the  war.  And  while 
we  acquire  to  ourselves  these  great  advantages,  we  shall  at 
the  same  time  strip  the  enemy  of  much  greater.  This  is  their 
grand  fortress ;  this  their  granaiy^,  their  treasury,  their  ar¬ 
mory  ;  this  is  the  repository  of  all  their  wealth.  Hence  there 
is  a  direct  passage  into  Africa ;  this  is  the  only  station  for  a 
fleet  between  the  Pyrenees  and  Gades,  and  from  hence  Af¬ 
rica  spreads  its  terror  over  all  Spain.  But  as  I  perceive  that 
you  are  arrayed  and  marshalled  for  action,  let  us  pass  on,  and 
assault  New  Carthage  with  our  whole  strength,  with  confi¬ 
dence  and  courage.”  To  this  they  all  replied  with  a  loud 
voice,  ‘^that  they  would  do  so;”  and  he  immediately  led 
them  to  the  city,  giving  orders  for  the  assault  both  by  sea 
and  land. 
XLIV.  On  the  other  side  Mago,  the  commander  of  the 
Carthaginians,  when  he  saw  the  preparations  for  an  assault 
going  forward  both  on  land  and  sea,  disposed  his  forces  in 
the  following  manner :  opposite  to  the  Roman  camp  he  drew 

592 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  542. 

up  two  thousand  of  the  townsmen ;  the  citadel  he  garrisoned 
with  five  hundred  soldiers,  and  five  hundred  others  he  placed 
on  a  high  part  of  the  city,  towards  the  east ;  the  rest  of  the 
troops  he  ordered  to  watch  carefully  every  occurrence,  and  to 
hasten  to  whatever  spot  the  shout,  or  sudden  exigencies, 
might  call  them.  Then,  opening  the  gate,  he  sent  out  those 
whom  he  had  formed  in  the  street  leading  towards  the  Ro¬ 
man  camp.  The  Romans,  by  direction  of  the  general  him¬ 
self,  drew  back  a  little,  that  by  being  near  their  camp  they 
might  the  more  easily  receive  reinforcements  during  the  en¬ 
gagement.  At  the  beginning,  both  parties  stood  their  ground, 
with  little  advantage  on  either  side  ;  but,  after  some  time,  the 
reinforcements  continually  sent  from  the  camp  not  only  drove 
back  the  enemy,  but  pressed  them  so  close,  while*  they  fled 
in  disorder,  that  had  not  a  retreat  been  sounded,  they  would 
probably  have  rushed  into  the  city  intermixed  with  the  fugi¬ 
tives.  Nor  ’was  the  consternation  greater  in  the  field  than  in 
every  part  of  the  city ;  in  many  places  the  troops  in  a  panic 
abandoned  their  posts  and  fled,  and  the  walls  were  left  de¬ 
fenceless,  those  who  ought  to  guard  them  having  leaped 
down  wherever  they  found  a  %vay.  Scipio,  going  up  on  an 
eminence  called  Mercury’s  Hill,  observed  this  their  state,  on 
which  he  ordered  all  his  men  to  be  called  out  from  the  camp, 
to  bring  scaling-ladders,  and  advance  to  the  assault.  He 
himself,  covered  by  the  shields  of  three  able  young  men,  be¬ 
cause  weapons  of  all  kinds  were  now  cast  from  the  place  in 
vast  numbers,  came  up  close  to  the  works,  encouraged  his 
men  and  gave  the  necessary  orders.  But  what  contributed 
above  all  to  inflame  the  courage  of  the  soldiers,  was  his  be¬ 
ing  thus  an  immediate  spectator  and  witness  of  the  bravery 
or  cowardice  of  every  one  of  them.  They  rushed  forward, 
therefore,  regardless  of  the  enemy,  or  of  the  wounds  inflicted 
by  them ;  nor  could  the  walls,  or  the  armed  troops  with 
which  they  were  now  lined,  deter  them  from  mounting  with 
^'ager  emulation.  At  the  same  time  an  assault  commenced 

BOOK  XXVI. 

393 

B.C.  210.] 

fr<«n  the  ships  on  that  quarter  of  the  town  which  is  washed 
by  the  sea.  But  here,  though  a  great  alarm  was  raised,  little 
effectual  exertion  could  be  made  ;  because,  while  the  men 
brought  in  the  boats  to  the  shore,  while  they  hastily  landed 
the  soldiers  and  scaling-ladders,  and  while  every  one  pressed 
forward  to  the  land  by  the  speediest  way,  through  their  own 
hurry  and  impatience  they  obstructed  one  another. 
XLV.  In  the  mean  time  the  Carthaginian  general  had 
ag^in  filled  the  walls  with  numerous  troops,  and  great  abun¬ 
dance  of  weapons,  brought  out  from  their  immense  maga¬ 
zines,  lay  in  heaps  ready  for  use.  But  neither  men  nor 
weapons,  nor  any  thing  else,  proved  such  an  effectual  defence 
as  the  walls  themselves ;  for  they  were  of  such  a  height,  that 
few  of  the  ladders  could  reach  the  summit,  and  the  longer 
any  of  these  were,  the  weaker  they  were  in  proportion :  as 
those,  then,  who  had  mounted  to  the  top  could  not  advance, 
and  others  nevertheless  climbed  up  after  them,  the  ladders 
were  broken  by  their  weight.  In  several  cases,  where  the 
the  ladders  stood  upright,  the  men,  on  rising  to  so  great  a 
height,  were  seized  with  giddiness,  and  fell  to  the  ground. 
While  men  and  ladders  were  every  where  falling -in  this 
manner,  and  the  enemy,  from  success,  assumed  more  bold¬ 
ness  and  alacrity,  the  signal  for  retreat  was  given.  This  af¬ 
forded  hopes  to  the  besieged,  not  only  of  present  rest  after 
such  a  laborious  contest,  but  also  of  future  safety  ;  as  it  made 
them  imagine  that  their  city  ^vas  impregnable  by  scalade 
and  assault,  and  that  their  works  were  so  difficult  to  be  sur- 
moutitedy  that  they  would  always  give  time  to  their  com¬ 
manders  to  bring  up  forces  to  their  relief.  Scarcely  had  the 
noise  of  the  first  tumult  subsided,  when  Scipio  ordered  other 
men,  who  were  fresh  and  unfatigued,  to  take  the  ladders 
from  the  weary  and  wounded,  and  to  renew  the  assault  with 
additional  vigour.  Being  told  at  this  juncture  that  the  tide 
was  ebbing,  and  having  before  learned  from  some  fishermen 
of  Tarraco,  (who  used  to  pass  through  the  morass  in  light 
VO  I..  III. — 3  D 

394 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

[Y.R.  542, 

boats,  and,  when  these  ran  aground,  by  wading,)  that  foot¬ 
men  might  easily  find  a  passage  to  the  wall,  he  in  person  led 
five  hundred  soldiers  thither.  It  was  now  about  mid-day, 
and,  besides  the  water  being  naturally  drawn  off  into  the  sea 
by  the  reflux  of  the  tide,  a  brisk  northerly  wind  arising,  car¬ 
ried  the  water  along,  in  the  same  direction  with  the  tide,  and 
had  rendered  it  so  shallow,  that  in  some  places  it  reached 
only  to  the  navel,  in  others  scarcely  to  the  knees.  This  cir¬ 
cumstance,  discovered  in  reality  by  his  own  diligence  and 
sagacity,  Scipio  attributed,  as  a  prodigy,  to  the  interposition 
of  the  gods,  who,  to  give  a  passage  to  the  Romans,  changed 
the  course  of  the  sea,  and  removed  morasses,  opening  ways 
never  before  trodden  by  human  foot.  Impressing  this  on 
his  men,  he  bade  them  follow  Neptune,  who  acted  as  their 
guide,  and  make  their  way  to  the  wall  through  the  middle  of 
the  swamp, 
XL VI.  On  the  land  part,  the  assailants  had  a  most  labo¬ 
rious  task.  The  height  of  the  walls  was  not  the  only  ob¬ 
struction  that  they  met,  for,  as  the  enemy  had  the  Romans 
below  them,  they  could  aim  their  blows  against  either  of 
their  sides  as  they  came  up  ;  so  that,  while  they  were  climb¬ 
ing,  these  were  more  endangered  than  the  fronts  of  their 
bodies.  But,  in  the  other  quarter,  the  five  hundred  found  no 
difficulty  either  in  crossing  the  morass,  or  mounting  the  ram¬ 
part  :  for  neither  was  that  side  strengthened  by  any  work, 
being  deemed  sufficiently  secure  by  the  nature  of  the  ground 
and  the  marsh,  nor  was  there  any  party  of  soldiers  or  guard 
stationed  at  it,  because  all  were  intent  on  bringing  succour  to 
the  place  where  the  danger  appeared.  Entering  the  city, 
therefore,  without  opposition,  they  proceeded  with  the  ut¬ 
most  speed  to  the  gate  ;  at  which  the  whole  contest  was 
maintained;  and  so  intent  on  this  dispute  were,  not  only  the 
minds  of  all,  but  likewise  the  eyes  and  ears  of  the  combatants, 
and  of  the  people  who  looked  on  and  encouraged  them,  that 
no  one  perceived  that  the  enemy  had  entered  the  place,  until 

B.C.  210.] 

BOOK  XXVL 

395 

their  weapons  came  pouring  on  their  backs,  and  they  found 
themselves  between  the  two  forces.  The  garrison  were  so 
affrighted  and  confounded,  that  they  were  no  longer  capable 
of  making  a  defence,  The  walls  were  seized  by  the  Romans, 
who,  both  within  and  without,  applied  themselves  to  the 
breaking  open  the  gate,  and  this  being  soon  cut  to  pieces,  so 
as  to  leave  a  clear  passage,  the  troops  marched  in  to  the  at¬ 
tack.  By  this  time,  great  numbers  had  got  in  by  scaling  the 
walls,  and  these  employed  themselves  every  where  in  killing 
the  townsmen.  Those  who  had  entered  by  the  opening, 
composing  a  regular  body,  under  their  officers,  and  main¬ 
taining  their  ranks,  proceeded  through  the  heart  of  the  city 
into  the  Forum.  Scipio,  perceiving  that  the  enemy  fled  hence 
by  two  different  ways  ;  some  towards  the  hill,  which  lay  east¬ 
ward,  and  was  defended  by  a  garrison  of  five  hundred  men, 
others  to  the  citadel,  into  which  Mago  himself  had  retired, 
with  almost  all  the  soldiers  who  had  been  beaten  off  from 
the  walls,  sent  one  half  of  his  forces  to  storm  the  hill,  and 
led  himself  the  other  half  against  the  citadel.  The  hill  was 
taken  at  the  first  attack.  Mago  attempted  at  first  to  defend 
the  citadel,  but  soon  seeing  every  place  filled  with  the  enemy, 
and  that  no  hope  remained,  surrendered  himself,  the  citadel, 
and  garrison.  Until  the  citadel  was  surrendered,  the  soldiers 
had  continued  to  put  the  townsmen  to  the  sword  in  every 
quarter,  nor  did  they  spare  any  adult  who  fell  in  their  way  ^ 
but  then,  on  a  signal  given,  they  desisted  from  shedding 
blood,  and,  being  now  completely  victorious,  *  they  turned 
themselves  to  the  collecting  of  the  plunder,  the  quantity  of 
which,  of  all  sorts,  was  immense. 
XLVII.  The  males  of  free  conditbn  taken  prisoners 
amounted  to  ten  thousand;  of  these,  such  as  were  citizens  of 
New  Carthage  he  discharged,  and  restored  to  them  the  city, 
and  all  their  effects,  which  the  war  had  not  consumed.  There 
were  two  thousand  artisans,  whom  he  adjudged  to  be  the 
public  property  of  the  Roman  people,  giving  them  hopes  of’ 

396 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.542. 

speedily  regaining  their  liberty,  provided  they  worked  indus¬ 
triously  in  the  service  of  the  army.  Of  the  rest  of  the  mul¬ 
titude,  all  the  younger  inhabitants,  and  the  able-bodied  slaves, 
he  sent  to  fill  up  the  numbers  of  rowers  in  his  fleet,  which  he 
augmented  with  eight  ships  captured  here.  Besides  all  these, 
were  found  the  hostages  of  the  Spanish  states,  who  were 
treated  with  as  much  care  and  attention,  as  if  they  had  been 
the  children  of  allies.  The  quantity  of  military  stores  taken 
was  exceedingly  great;  catapultas,  of  the  larger  size,  one 
hundred  and  twenty,  of  the  smaller,  two  hundred  and  eighty- 
one;  ballistas,  large,  twenty-three,  small,  fifty- two  ;  of  scor¬ 
pions,  large  and  small,  and  of  arms  and  missive  weapons,  a 
vast  number;  militar}'  standards,  seventy-four.  Of  gold  and 
silver  also,  a  prodigious  mass  was  brought  in  to  the  general; 
there  were  two  hundred  and  seventy-six  golden  bowls,  every 
one  of  them  almost  of  a  pound  weight;  of  silver,  wrought  and 
coined,  eighteen  thousand  three  hundred  pounds  weight,  and 
of  silver  utensils  a  prodigious  number.  All  these  articles 
were  weighed  and  reckoned  to  the  qusestor  Caius  Flarainius; 
besides  forty  thousand  pecks  of  wheat,  and  two  hundred  and 
seventy  thousand  of  barley.  One  hundred  and  thirteen  store- 
ships  were  boarded  and  taken  in  the  harbour,  several  of  them 
with  their  cargoes,  consisting  of  com  and  arms:  likewise 
brass,  iron,  canvass,  hemp,  and  other  materials  proper  for 
equipping  a  fleet:  so  that,  among  such  vast  stores  of  every 
thing  useful  in  war,  Carthage  itself  was  the  least  valuable 
acquisition.  ‘ 
XLVIII.  Scipio,  ordering  Caius  Lselius,  with  the  marines, 
to  guard  the  city,  led  back  the  legions  into  their  camp.  As 
the  soldiers  were  much  fatigued  by  having  gone  through, 
in  one  day,  every  different  kind  of  fight;  for  they  had  engaged 
the  enemy  in  the  field,  had  undergone  great  labour  and  dan¬ 
ger  in  storming  the  city,  and,  after  it  was  taken,  had  fought 
on  disadvantageous  ground  with  those  who  had  .taken  refuge 
in  the  citadel;  he  directed  them  to  employ  the  remainder  of 

BOOK  XXVL 

397 

B.C.  210.] 
that  day  in  taking  refreslnnent  and  rest.  On  the  day  following, 
having  called  together  both  the  land  and  the  naval  forces^  he 
began  with  returning  praise  and  thanks  to  the  immortal  gods, 
whp  had  ‘‘  not  only,  in  the  space  of  one  day,  given  him  pos¬ 
session  of  the  most  opulent  city  in  all  Spain,  but  had  previ¬ 
ously  amassed  in  it  the  greatest  part  of  the  wealth  of  that 
country,  and  of  Africa  also,  so  that  no  resources  were  now 
left  to  the  enemy,  while  he  and  his  army  had  a  superfluity  of 
all  things.”  He  then  highly  commended  the  courageous  be¬ 
haviour  of  the  soldiers,  observing,  that  neither  the  force 
sent  out  against  them,  nor  the  height  of  the  walls,  nor  the 
unexplored  fords  of  the  morass,  nor  a  fort  seated  on  a  steep 
hill,  nor  the  citadel,  though  most  strongly  fortified,  had  de¬ 
terred  them  from  surmounting  and  breaking  through  every 
obstacle.  Wherefore,  though  he  owed  every  acknowledg¬ 
ment  to  them  all,  nevertheless  the  person  who  first  mounted 
the  wall  was  entitled  to  the  peculiar  honour  of  a  mural 
crownj”  and  he  desired  that  he  who  thought  himself  deserv¬ 
ing  of  that  present  should  claim  it.  Two  claimants  appeared, 
Quintus  Trebellius,  a  centurion  of  the  fourth  legion,  and  Sex¬ 
tus  Digitius,  one  of  the  marines:  but  the  warmth  with  which 
they  themselves  supported  their  pretensions  was  far  inferior 
to  the  eager  zeal  which  each  excited  in  his  favour  among  the 
corps  to  which  he  belonged.  Caius  Laelius,  commander  of  the 
fleet,  favoured  the  marines,  Marcus  Sempronius  Tuditanus 
the  legionaries.  This  contention  threatening  at  length  to  end 
in  a  mutiny,  Scipio  published  notice,  that  he  appoint  three 
delegates,  who,  after  examining  the  merits  of  the  case, 
and  hearing  witnesses,  should  determine  which  had  made  his 
way  first  into^the  town.  Accordingly,  he  named  Caius  Lae¬ 
lius  and  Marcus  Sempronius  advocates  for  the  contending 
parties,  with  Publius  Cornelius  Caudinus,  a  person  uninte¬ 
rested  in  the  cause,  as  umpire:  and  ordered  these  three  dele¬ 
gates  to  sit  and  determine  in  it.  But  the  dispute  was  now 
maintained  with  greater  violence  than  ever,  in  consequence 

398 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  542. 
of  those  men  of  high  rank,  who  had  acted,  not  as  advocates, 
but  as  moderators  in  the*  case,  being  thus  excluded.  Where¬ 
fore  Caius  Laelius,  quitting  the  court,  went  up  to  the  tribu¬ 
nal  to  Scipio,  and  told  him,  that  the  proceedings  of  parties 
surpassed  all  bounds  of  temperance  and  moderation,  inso¬ 
much  that  they  hardly  refrained  from  blows.  But,  though  no 
violence  should  ensue,  nevertheless  such  conduct  afforded 
an  ill  example;  as,  in  this  case,  the  honour  due  to  merit  was 
sought  by  one  or  other  through  the  means  of  fraud  and  false¬ 
hood.  On  this  side  stood  the  legionary  soldiers,  on  that  the 
marines,  both  ready  to  swear,  by  all  the  gods,  rather  what 
they  wished,  than  what  they  knew  to  be  true;  and  to  involve 
in  the  crime  of  perjury  not  only  themselves  in  their  own  per¬ 
sons,  but  the  militaiy^  standards  and  eagles,  and  the  sacred 
word  of  a  soldier:’’  he  added,  that  he  brought  him  this  in¬ 
formation  at  the  desire  of  Publius  Cornelius  and  Marcus 
Sempronius.’’  Scipio,  highly  approving  ofLaeliiis’s  conduct, 
summoned  a  general  assembly,  and  there  pronounced  judg¬ 
ment,  that  having  received  sufficient  proof  that  Quintus 
Trebellius  and  Sextus  Digitius  gained  the  top  of  the  wall  at 
the  same  time,  in  acknowledgment  of  tlieir  bravery  he  be¬ 
stowed  mural  crowns  “on  both.”  He  then  bestowed  gifts  on 
the  rest,  in  proportion  to  their  courage  and  merit:  above  all, 
he  honoured  Caius  Laelius,  commander  of  the  fleet,  with 
every  encomium  of  the  highest  kind  that  could  have  been 
paid  to  himself,  and  presented  him  besides,  with  a  golden 
crown  and  thirty  oxen. 
XL IX.  He  then  ordered  the  hostages  of  the  Spanish  states 
to  be  called.  What  the  number  of  these  was,  I  will  not  pre¬ 
sume  to  affirm;  for  I  find,  in  some  writers,  that  they  were 
about  three  hundred,  in  others,  seven  hundred  and  twenty- 
five.  Authors  differ  as  much  in  respect  of  other  patticulars; 
the  Carthaginian  garrison,  one  writer  says,  amounted  to  ten 
thousand  men;  another  to  seven,  another  to  no  more  than 
two  thousand.  In  some  accounts  ten  thousand  prisoners  are 

BOOK^^XVI. 

S99 

B.C.  210.] 

said  to  have  been  taken^  in  others  above  twenty-five  thousand. 
I  should  set  down  the  scorpions,  great  and  small,  that  were 
taken  at  sixty,  if  I  were  to  follow  the  Greek  historian  Sile- 
nus;  if  Valerius  Antias,  at  six  thousand  greater,  and  thir¬ 
teen  thousand  smaller;  so  contradictory^  are  die  several  ac¬ 
counts,  Nay,  they  do  not  even  agree  as  to  the  commanding 
officer.  The  greater  number  affirm  that  Caius  Laifeus  had 
charge  of  the  fleet,  while  there  are  some  who  assign  it  to 
Marcus  Junius  Silanus.  Valerius  Antias  tells  us,  that  it  was 
Armes  who  commanded  the^arthaginian  garrison,  and  who 
surrendered  to  the  Romans;  other  writers  assert  that  it  vras 
Mago.  They  vary  in  the  number  of  the  ships  taken,  in  the 
weight  of  the  gold  and  silver,  and  of  the  money  brought  into 
the  public  treasury.  If  we  are  not  to  remain  in  a  state  of  doubt, 
but  must  believe  some  or  other  of  their  accounts,  those  which 
hold  the  mean,  between  the  highest  and  the  lowest,  are  most 
likely  to  be  true.  Scipio,  ho%vever,  when  the  hostages  were 
called  before  him,  first  desired  them  not  to  be  dispirited;  for 
“  they  had  come  into  tHe  power  of  the  Roman  people,  w^hose 
wish  it  always  was  to  bind  all  to  them  by  kindness,  rather 
than  by  fear;  and  to  have  foreign  nations  united  to  them 
in  good  faith  and  amicable  alliance,  and  not  in  a  state  of  op¬ 
pression  and  gloomy  servitude.”  He  then  took  an  account  of 
the  prisoners,  distinguishing  the  number  belonging  to  the  se¬ 
veral  states,  to  each  of  which  he  sent  expresses,  desiring 
them  to  come  and  receive  their  respective  hostages:  some  of 
whom,  however,  as  their  ambassadors  happened  to  be  pre¬ 
sent,  he  restored  on  the  spot;  ordering  the  quaestor,  Caius 
Flaminius,  to  take  care  that  the  rest  should  be  kindly  treated. 
There  now  came  forward  from  among  the  crowd  of  hostages, 
a  woman  far  advanced  in  years,  the  wife  of  Mandonius,  bro¬ 
ther  to  Indibilis,  the  chieftain  of  the  Illergetians:  she  threw 
herself  at  the  general’s  feet,  and  with  tears  besought  him  to 
give  the  guards  more  strict  injunctions  respecting  the  care 
and  treatment  to  be  shown  to  the  women.  Scipio  assuring  her 

400 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  542, 

that  they  should  uot  want  any  kind  of  accommodation,  she 
replied,  Those  are  not  matters  about  which  we  are  much 
solicitous:  for  what  accommodation  can  be  considered  as  in¬ 
sufficient  for  persons  in  our  situation?  Anxiety  of  a  very  dif¬ 
ferent  kind  rends  my  heart,  when  I  consider  the  age  of  these 
young  persons;  for  as  to  myself,  I  am  now  beyond  any  dan¬ 
ger  of  those  injuries  to  which  our  sex  is  liable.”  On  each 
side  of  her  stood  the  daughters  of  Indibilis,  in  the  bloom  of 
youth  and  beauty^  and  several  others  of  equal  distinction,  by 
all  of  whom  she  was  revered  as  a  parent.  Scipio  answered, 
Out  of  regard  to  myself,  and  out  of  regard  to  the  Roman 
discipline,  I  should  take  care  that  no  right,  any  where  deemed 
sacred,  should  suffer  violation  from  us.  In  the  present  case, 
the  virtue  and  merit  of  women  of  such  distinction  as  you  are, 
who,  in  the  midst  of^  misfortunes,  forget  not  the  delicacy  of 
character  becoming  the  most  respectable  of  your  sex,  demand 
from  me  an  extraordinary  degree  of  attention.”  He  then  gave 
them  in  charge  to  a  person  on  whose  strict  regularity  of  con¬ 
duct  he  could  entirely  rely,  and  gave  him  a  particular  charge 
that  they  should  be  treated  with  all  the  respect  and  decenc\ 
due  to  the  wives  and  mothers  of  guests. 
L.  The  soldiers  afterwards  brought  to  him,  as*a  prisoner, 
a  damsel  of  such  exquisite  beauty,  that  she  attracted  the  eyes 
of  all.  Scipio,  on  making  inquiries  concerning  her  country 
and  parents,  discovered,  among  other  particulars,  that  she 
was  betrothed  to  a  young  prince  of  the  Celtiberians,  named 
Allucius.  He  therefore  immediately  summoned  from  home 
her  parents,  and  affianced  husband;  and  when  the  latter  ar¬ 
rived,  having,  in  the  mean  time,  heard  that  he  was  most  pas¬ 
sionately  enamoured  of  his  intended  bride,  he  addressed  Itis 
discourse  to  him  more  particularly  than  to  the  lady’s  parents: 
A  young  man  myself,”  said  he,  I  address  myself  to  a  young 
man,  that  there  may  be  the  less  reserve  in  our  conversation 
on  this  occasion.  When  your  mistress,  being  taken  by  our 
soldiers,  was  brought  to  me,  and  I  was  told  of  the  verv 

BOOK  XXVI, 

401 

B.C.  210.] 
gr^fet  affection  you  have  for  her,  which  indeed  her  beauty 
made  me  readily  believe,  I  considered  that,  in  my  own  case, 
if  my  thoughts  were  not  totally  engrossed  by  the  affairs  of 
the  public,  and  I  were  at  liberty  to  indulge  the  pleasurable 
pursuits  adapted  to  my  time  of  life,  especially  in  a  lawful 
and  honourable  love,  I  should  wish  that  my  affection  for  my 
intended  bride,  though  warm  even  to  a  degree  of  extrava¬ 
gance,  should  yet  be  viewed  with  an  indulgent  eye;  and  I 
therefore  resolved,  in  your  case,  where  no  tie  of  duty  con¬ 
fines  me,  to  do  all  in  my  power  in  favour  of  your  passion. 
Your  beloved,  while  in  my  care,  has  been  treated  with  as  re¬ 
spectful  an  attention  as  she  could  hitve  met  with,  had  she 
been  in  the  house  of  your  father  and  mother-in-law,  her 
own  parents.  She  has  been  preserved  in  perfect  safety,  that 
I  might  be  able  to  present  her  to  you,  her  purity  unspotted, 
a  gift  worthy  of  me  to  bestow,  and  of  you  to  receive.  The 
only  return  I  require  for  a  present  of  such  value,  is,  that  you 
be  a  friend  to  the  Roman  people;  and  that,  if  you  believe 
me  to  be  a  man  of  worth,  such  as  these  nations  have  hereto¬ 
fore  known  my  father  and  my  uncle,  you  be  assured  that 
there  are,  in  the  Roman  state,  great  numbers  of  men  like 
themselves;  and  that  no  nation  at  this  day  on  earth  can  be 
named,  which  you  ought  less  to  choose  as  an  enemy  to  you 
and  yours,  or  whose  friendship  you  ought  more  ardently  to 
desire.’’  The  youth,  overwhelmed  at  once  with  joy  and  diffi¬ 
dence,  and  holding  Scipio’s  right  hand,  invoked  all  the  gods 
to  recompense  on  his  behalf,  such  exalted  goodness;  since 
his  own  ability* was  utterly  dis proportioned,  either  to  his  own 
wishes,  or  his  benefactor’s  generosity.  Scipio  then  accosted, 
in  friendly  terms,  the  parents  and  relations  of  the  young  wo¬ 
man,  who,  having  brought  with  them  a  very  lat^e  weight  of 
gold  to  purchase  her  liberty,  on  her  being  restored  to  them 
without  ransom,  earnest!)"  besought  him  to  accept  it  from 
them,  assuring  him,  that  they  should  deem  themselves  as 
much  obliged  by  his  compliance,  as  by  the  restoration  of  then 
VOL.  HI.— 3  E 

402 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R,  542. 

child  in  safety.  Unwilling  to  reject  such  pressing  soli<Ata- 
tions,  be  ordered  it  to  be  laid  at  his  feet;  then,  calling,  Allu- 
cius  to  him,  he  said,  Besides  the  dowry  which  you  are  to 
receive  from  your  father-in-law,  you  must  take  also  this 
marriage-present  from  me,”  bidding  him  carry  away  the 
gold,  and  keep  it  to  himself*  Overjoyed  by  these  honours 
and  presents,  the  young  man  was  dismissed  to  his  home, 
where  he  filled  the  ears  of  his  countij^men  with  the  well-me¬ 
rited  praises  of  Scipio.  A  god-like  youth,”  he  said,  ‘‘  had 
come  among  them;  subduing  all,  not  by  the  power  of  his 
arms  only,  but  by  his  goodness  and  magnanimity.”  Full  of 
such  sentiments,  he  nlade  a  levy  among  his  dependents,  and, 
within  a  few  days,  returned  to  Scipio  with  one  thousand  four 
hundred  chosen  horsemen. 
LI.  Scipio  kept  Laelius  with  him  to  aswst  with  his  advice 
in  disposing  of  the  prisoi;^ers,  hostages,  and  booty;  and  when 
all  these  matters  were  prppcrly  adjusted,  he  gave  him  a 
quinquereme,  and,  ordering  him  to  take  on  board  Mago  and 
fifteen  senators  of  Old  Carthage,  who  had  been  made  prison¬ 
ers  at  the  same  time,  sent  him  to  Rome  with  the  news  of  his 
success.  The  few  days  which  he  had  resolved  to  pass  at  Car¬ 
thage  he  employed  in  exercising  both  his  land  and  naval 
forces.  On  the  first  day,  the  legions  made  excursions,  and 
evolutions  under  arms,  through  a  space  of  four  miles;  on  the 
second,  he  ordered  them  to  review  and  scour  their  arms 
before  their  respective  tents;  on  the  third,  forming  opposite 
parties,  they  engaged  each  other,  in  a  manner  representing  a 
regular  battle,  but  with  blunted  weapons,  and  throwing  the 
like  kind  of  darts.  On  the  fourth  they  were  allowed  to  rest, 
and,  on  the  fifth,  the  rovings  commenced  againi  This  regu¬ 
lar  succession  of  labour  and  rest,  they  kept  up  as  long  as  they 
remained  at  Carthage.  In  calm  weather,  the  rowers  and 
marines  pushing  out  to  sea,  made  trial,  in  mock  sea-fights, 
of  the  activity  of  their  ships.  Such  was  their  employment 
on  the  outside  of  the  w^alls,  and  these  exercises  on  land 
and  sea  qualified  both  their  minds  and  bodies  for  real 

BOOK  XXVi. 

403 

B.C.210.] 
action.  Within,  all  parts  of  the  city  resounded  with  warlike 
preparations,  workmen  bf  every  kind  being  collected  together 
in  a  public  arsenal.  The  general  attended  to  every  particu¬ 
lar  with  equal  care:  at  one  time  he  was  busy  in  the  fleet  and 
dock- yard;  at  another,  he  headed  the  legions  in  their  excur¬ 
sions;  again,  he  employed  his  time  in  overseeing  the  works, 
which  were  carried  on,  with  great  diligence  and  emulation, 
by  a  multitude  of  workmen  in  the  arsenals,  armory,  and  dock¬ 
yards,  and  great  numbers  of  necessary  articles  finished  every 
day.  Having  thus  set  on  foot  these  preparations,  repaired 
the  breaches  in  the  walls,  and  established  posts  for  the  guard 
of  the  city,  he  set  out  for  Tarraco,  «aQd,  on  his  way  thither, 
received  as  he  went  along  a  great  number  of  embassies. 
Some  of  these  he  answered  on  the  road,  and  dismissed; 
others  he  adjourned  to  Tarraco,  where  he  had  appcfinted  a 
general  meeting  of  all  the  allies  both  new  and  old.  Accord¬ 
ingly^  ^his  meeting  was  attended  by  sdmost  tvery  state  on 
the  hither-side  of  the  Iberus,  and  also  by  many  from  the 
farther  Spain.  The  Carthaginian  generals,  at  first,  carefully 
suppressed  the  intelligence  of  Carthage  being  taken;  after¬ 
wards,  when  that  event  became  too  notorious  to  be  any 
longer  concealed  or  dissembled,  they  affected  to  speak  of  it 
with  little  concern.  They  said,  that  by  an  unexpected  at¬ 
tack,  and  the  efforts  of  one  day,  one  city  in  Spain  had  been 
surprized  and  taken  in  a  manner  by  stealth:  that  an  inexpe¬ 
rienced  youth,  elated  by  the  acquisition  of  a  prize  of  but 
little  consequence,  had,  by  his  immoderate  joy,  imposed  on 
it  the  appearance  of  an  importapt  victory  ,*  but  as  soon  as  he 
should  hear  that  three  generals,  and  three  armies  of  his  ene¬ 
mies,  all  flushed  with  victory,  were  marching  towards  him, 
he  would  quickly  be  struck  with  the  recollection  of  the  deaths 
which  had  happened  in  his  family.”  Such  was  their  language 
in  public,  while  they  themselves  wxre  fully  sensible  how  great 
a  diminution  their  strength  had  suffered  in  every  particular 
by  the  loss  of  Carthage. 

THE 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

BOOK  XXVII. 
Cneius  Fulvius,  proconsul,  defeated  by  Hannibal,  and  slain;  the  consul 
Claudius  M^elfus,  engages  him,  with  better  success.  Hsnnlbal,  raising 
Jiis  caibp,  retires;  MarcelluS  pursues,  and  forces  him  to  an  engagement. 
They  fight  twice:  in  the  first  battle  Hannibal  gains  the  advantage;  in  the 
second,  Marcellus.  .  Tarentum^betrayed  to  Fabius  Ma:dmus,  the  ijpmilS. 
Scipio  engages  with  Hasdrubal,  the  son  of  Hamilcar,  at  Baetula,  in  Spain, 
and  defeats  Mm.  Among  other  prisoners,  a  youth  of  royal  race,  and  ex* 
quisite  beauty,  is  taken;  Scipio  sets  him  free,  and  sends  him,  enriched 
witl\  magnificent  presents,  to  his  uncle  Masinissa.  Marcellus  and  Quintus 
Crispinus,  consuls,  drawn  into  an  ambuscade  by  Hannibal:  Marcellus  is 
slain;  Crispinus  escapes.  Operations  by  Publius  Sulpicius,  praetor,  against 
Philip  and  the  Achseans.  A  census  held;  the  number  of  citizens  found 
to  amount  to  one  hundred  and  thirty-seven  thousand  one  hundred  and 
eight:  from  which  it  appears  how  great  a  loss  they  had  sustained  by  the 
number  of  unsuccessful  battles  they  had  of  been  engaged  in.  Has* 
dmbal,  who  had  crossed  Hie  Alps  with  a  reinforcement  for  Hannib^,  de¬ 
feated  by  the  consuls  Marcus  Livius  and  Claurhus  Nero,  and  slain;  with 
him  feU  fifty-six  thousand  men. 
« 
I.  SUCH  was  the  state  of  affairs  in  Spain,  In  the 
Y.R.  542.  consul  Marcellus,  after  regaining  possession  of 
B,C.  210.  Salapia,  which  was  betrayed  into  his  hands,  took, 
by  storm,  Maronea  and  Meles,  cities  belonging  to  the  Sam- 
nites.  He  made  prisoners  three  thousand  of  HannibaPs  Sol¬ 
diers,  left  in  garrison;  the  booty,  which  was  considerable, 
was  given  up  to  the  soldiers.  Here  were  found,  also,  two 

BOOK  XXVII. 

405 

B.C.  210.] 
hundred  and  ferty  thousand  pecks  of  wheat,  and  one  hundred 
and  ten  thousand  of  barley.  But  the  joy  occasioned  hereby 
was  much  less  than  the  grief  felt  for  anx>verthrow  a  few  days 
after,  near  the  city  of  Herdonea.  Cneius  Fulvius,  proconsul, 
lay  there  encamped,  in  hopes  of  recovering  that  city,  which, 
after  the  defeat  at  Cannse,  had  revolted  from  the  Romans; 
but  Kis  post  was  neither  strong  by  nature,  nor  secured  by 
proper  guards.  The  negligence  natural  to  that  commander’s 
disposition  was  increased  by  perceiving  that  the  inhabitants, 
as  soon  as  they  heard  that  Hannibal,  after  the  loss  of  Salapia, 
had  withdrawn  from  that  part  of  the  country  into  Bruttium, 
began  to  weaver  in  their  attachment  to  the  Carthaginians. 
Intelligence  of  all  these  particulars  was  conveyed  to  Han* 
nibal  by  private  messengers  from  Herdonea;  and,  while  it 
made  him  anxious  to  preserve  an  allied  city,  at  the  same 
time  inspired  hopes  of  attacking  the  enemy  unprepared.  With 
his  troops,  therefore,  lightly  equipped  for  expedition,  he  has¬ 
tened  to  Herdonea  by  such  long  marches,  that  he  almost  an¬ 
ticipated  the  report  of  his  approach;  and,  to  strike  the  greater 
terror,  he  advanced  in  order  of  battle.  The  Roman  com¬ 
mander,  fully  equal  to  him  in  boldness,  but  inferior  in  judg¬ 
ment  and  strength,  hastily  led  out  his  forces,  and  engaged 
him.  The  fifth  legion,  and  the  left  wing  of  allied  infantr\', 
commenced  the  fight  with  vigour.  But  Hannibal  gave  di¬ 
rections  to  his  cavalry,  that,  as  soon  as  the  lines  of  infantry 
should  have  their  thoughts  and  eyes  entirely  occupied  on  the 
contest  between  themselves,  they  should  ride  round;  that  one 
half  of  them  should  fall  on  the  enemy’s  camp,  and  the  other 
on  the  rear  of  their  troops  that  were  engaged.  With  a  sneer 
on  the  name  of  Fulvius,  he  assured  them,  that,  as  he  had  ut¬ 
terly  defeated  him  in  the  same  country-  two  years  before,  the 
present  battle  would  have  a  similar  issue.  Nor  was  this  ex¬ 
pectation  ill-grounded:  for,  after  many  of  the  Romans  had 
fallen,  in  the  close  conflict  between  the  lines  of  infantry  (the 
companies  and  battalions  nevertheless  still  maintaining  their 

406 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  542. 

ground),  the  tumult  raised  by  the  cavalry  ii>  the  rear,  and 
the  enemy’s  shout  from  the  camp,  which  was  heard  at  the 
same  time,  put  to  flight  the  sixth  legion,  which,  being  posted 
in  the  second  line,  was  thrown  into  disorder  by  the  Numi- 
dians;  as  were  afterwards  the  fifth,  and  those  in  the  van. 
Some  fled  in  hurry  and  confusion,  the  rest  were  surrounded 
and  slain;  among  whom  fell  Cneius  Fulvius  himself,  with 
eleven  military  tribunes.  How  many  thousands  of  the  Ro¬ 
mans  and  allies  were  slain  in  that  battle,  who  can  positively 
affirm,  when  I  find  in  some  historians  thirteen  thousand? 
The  conqueror  possessed  himself  of  the  camp  and  the  spoil. 
Having  discovered  that  Herdonea  was  disposed  to  revolt  to 
the  Romans,  and  would  not  continue  faithful  to  him  after  his 
departure,  he  removed  the  inhabitants  to  Metapontum  and 
Thurium,  and  burned  the  city  to  the  ground.  The  leaders 
of  the  party,  who  were  found  to  have  held  secret  conference 
with  Fulvius,  he  put  to  death.  The  Romans  who  escaped 
the  slaughter  of  this  disastrous  day,  fled,  half-armed,  by  dif¬ 
ferent  roads  into  Samnium,  to  the  consul  Marcellus. 
IJ.  Marcellus,  not  too  much  dismayed  by  so  great  a  dis¬ 
aster,  wrote  to  Rome  to  the  senate  an  account  of  the  general 
and  army  being  lost  at  Herdonea;  adding,  that,  notwithstand¬ 
ing  this  misfortune,  “  he,  who  had  quelled  the  haughty  spirit 
of  Hannibal,  when  his  confidence  was  at  the  highest,  in  con¬ 
sequence  of  his  victory  at  Cann«,  was  now  going  against  him, 
with  the  same  degree  of  resolution,  and  would  take  effectual 
care  that  his  present  joy  and  exultation  should  be  short.”  At 
Rome,  as  people’s  grief  fctr  the  past  w’as  great,  so  were  their 
fears  of  the  future.  The  consul,  passing  over  from  Samnium 
into  Lucania,  pitched  his  camp  at  Numistro,  on  level  ground, 
within  view  of  Hannibal,  who  was  posted  on  a  hill.  He  gave, 
besides,  another  proof  of  confidence  in  his  own  strength,  for 
he  was  the  first  to  offer  battle.  Nor  did  Hannibal,  on  seeing 
the  standards  advance  through  the  gates,  decline  the  chal¬ 
lenge.  However,  they  drew  up  their  fprees  in  such  a  manner. 

BOOK  XXVII. 

B.C.210.] 

4or 

that  the  right  wing  of  the  Carthaginians  stretched  up  the  hill, 
and  the  left  wing  of  the  Romans  was  brought  close  to  the 
town.  From  the  third  hour,  the  action  had  lasted  until 
night,  and  the  fatigue  of  fighting  for  such  a  length  of  time 
had  overpowered  the  foremost  lines,  consisting,  on  the  side 
of  the  Romans,  of  the  first  legion  and  the  right  wing  of 
allies  j  on  Hannibal’s  side,  of  the  Spanish  infantry,  Balea- 
rick  siingers,  and  the  elephants,  which,  at  the  beginning 
of  the  engagement,  had  been  brought  into  the  field.  And 
now  the  fight  flagged  for  a  considerable  time,  neither  party 
having  gained  any  advantage,  when  the  third  legion  advanc¬ 
ed  into  the  place  of  the  first,  and  the  left  wing  of  the  allies 
into  that  of  the  right;  on  the  side  of  the  enemy,  likewise,  the 
wearied  were  relieved  by  fresh  troops.  On  this,  both  parties 
being  in  full  spirits  and  vigour,  instead  of  the  former  languid 
efforts,  a  furious  conflict  at  once  arose  ;  but  night  separated 
the  combatants  before  the  victory  could  be  decided.  Next 
morning,  the  Romans  stood,  in  order  of  battle,  from  sunrise, 
during  a  great  part  of  the  day,  and  none  df  the  enemy  com¬ 
ing  out  to  face  them,  gathered  the  spoils  at  tlieir  leisure,  and 
collecting  the  bodies  of  the  slain  into  one  spot,  burned  them 
on  a  funeral  pile.  In  the  following  night,  Hannibal  decamped 
in  silence,  and  marched  off  towards  Apulia ;  but,  as  soon  as 
day-light  discovered  the  enemy’s  flight,  Marcellas,  leaving 
his  wounded  at  Numistro^  with  a  small  garrison,  the  com¬ 
mand  of  which  he  gave  to  Lucius  Furius  Purpureo,  a  mili¬ 
tary  tribune,  set  out  immediately  in  close  pursuit,  and  over¬ 
took  him  at  Venusia.  Here,  during  several  days,  many  skir¬ 
mishes  happened  between  parties  sallying  from  the  outposts, 
in  which  infaatry  and  cavalry  were  intermixed,  and  which 
produced  more  noise  and  tumult  than  real  advantage  to 
either  side ;  but  which,  in  general,  terminated  in  favour  of  the 
Romans.  From  thence  the  two  armies  marched  through 
Apulia  without  any  engagement  of  consequence  ;  for  Hanni¬ 
bal  seeking  opportunities  for  stratagems,  removed  always  b\' 
night,  Marcellus  never  following  but  in  clear  dav-lieht,  and 

4<^  *  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  542. 
after  having  carefully  examined  the  country  through  which 
he  was  to  pass. 
III.  Meanwhile,  as  Flaecus  was  spending  much  time  at 
Capua,  in  selling  the  property  of  the  nobility,  and  setting  to 
farm  the  forfeited  estates,  all  of  which  he  let  for  a  rent  of 
corn,  he  was  furnished  with  a  fresh  occasion  for  practising 
severity  on  the  Campanians;  for  he  received  certain  informa¬ 
tion  of  a  wicked  scheme,  of  an  extraordinary  nature,  which 
had  for  some  time  been  hatching  in  secret.  Having  removed 
the  soldiers  out  of  the  houses,  for  two  reasons,  first,  because 
he  chose  that  the  houses  of  the  city  should  be  held  along 
with  the  lands ;  and,  next,  because  he  feared  lest  excessive 
luxury  might  enervate  his  army,  as  it  had  that  of  Hannibal, 
he  had  made  them  build  huts  for  themselves,  in  the  military 
manner,  near  the  gates  and  walls.  Now  most  of  these  were 
formed  of  hurdles,  or  boards,  some  of  reeds  interwoven,  and 
all  of  them  covered  with  straw,  as  if  purposely  intended  for 
combustion.  One  hundred  and  seventy  Campanians,  at  the 
head  of  whom  were  two  brothers,  of  the  name  of  Blosius  had 
conspired  to  set  fire  to  all  these, -at  one  hour  of  the  night. 
But  the  design  was  discovered  by  some  slaves  belonging  to 
the  Blosii,  whereupon,  the  gates  being  instantly  shut  by  or¬ 
der  of  the  proconsul,  and  the  soldiers  having,  on  the  signal 
being  given,  assembled  under  arms,  all  who  were  concerned 
in  the  conspiracy  were  seized,  and  after  undergoing  a  severe 
examination  by  torture,  condemned  and  put*to  death.  The 
informers  were  rewarded  with  their  freedom,  and  ten  thou¬ 
sand  assts^  *  each.  The  Nucerians  and  Acerrans,havingc  om- 
plained  that  they  had  no  place  of  habitation,  as  Acerra  was 
partly  burned,  Nuceria  demolished,  Fulvius  sent  them  to 
Rome  to  the  senate.  Permission  was  granted  to  the  Acer- 
rans  to  rebuild  what  had  been  thus  destroyed ;  and  the  Nu- 
ccrians,  agreeably  to  their  own  choice,  were  transplanted  to 
Atella,  the  inhabitants  of  the  latter  being  ordered  to  remove 

32/.  5s,  lOd 

BOOK  XXVII. 

409 

B.C.  210.] 

to  Galatia.  Among  the  multiplicity  of  important  affairs, 
(some  prosperous,  others  adverse,)  which  occupied  the 
thoughts  of  the  public,  even  the  citadel  of  Tarentum  was 
not  forgotten:  Marcus  Ogulniiis  and  Publius  Aquilius,  be¬ 
ing  commissioned  for  the  purpose,  went  into  Etruria  to  pur¬ 
chase  com,  which  was  to  be  conveyed  to  Tarentum  ;  and,  to¬ 
gether  with  the  com,  were  sent  thither,  as  a  reinforcement  to 
the  garrison,  one  thousand  men  out  of  the  city  troops,  con¬ 
sisting  of  equal  numbers  of  Romans  and  allies. 
IV.  The  summer  was  now  nearly  elapsed,  and  the  time  of 
the  consular  election  drew  nigh:  but  a  letter  received  from 
Marccllus,  affirming  that  it  would  be  injurious  to  the  public 
interest,  if  Jie  were  to  depart  a  step  from  Hannibal,  who  was 
retreating  before  him,  while  he,  by  a  close  pursuit,  distressed 
him  materially,  threw  the  senate  into  some  perplexity,  as  they 
were  unwilling  either  to  call  home  the  consul,  at  a  time  when 
he  was  most  actively  employed  against  the  enemy,  or  to  let 
the  year  pass  without  consuls.  It  was  judged  most  advisable, 
though  the  other  consul  Valerius  was  abroad,  that  he  should 
rather  be  recalled,  and  even  from  Sicily.  Accordingly,  in 
pursuance  of  an  order  of  the  senate,  a  letter  was  sent  to  him 
by  Lucius  Manlius,  praetor  of  the  city,  and,  together  with  it, 
that  of  the  consul  Marcellus,  that  from  them  he  might  per¬ 
ceive  the  reason,  which  induced  the  senate  to  recall  him  from 
his  province,  rather  than  his  colleague.  About  this  time 
ambassadors  came  to  Rome  from  King  Syphax,  with  a  reci¬ 
tal  of  all  the  successful  battles  which  he  had  fought  against 
the  Carthaginians,  and  assurances  that  ‘‘  their  King  enter¬ 
tained  not  a  more  inveterate  enmity  to  any  nation  than  to  the 
Carthaginian,  nor  a  more  warm  friendship  for  any  than  for 
the  Roman;”  adding,  that  ^‘he  had  before  sent  embassies 
into  Spain,  to  the  Roman  generals,  Cneius  and  Publius  Cor¬ 
nelius  ;  and  that  he  now  wished  to  seek,  as  it  were  at  the 
fountain  head,  the  friendship  of  the  Romans.”  The  senate 
not  only  answered  his  ambassadors  with  kindness,  but  sent 
VOL.  III.—  3  F 

410 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  542. 

others  in  return,  charged  with  presents  to  the  King;  these 
were  Lucius  Genucius,  Publius  Poetelius,  and  Publius  Popi- 
lius.  The  presents  which  they  carried  were,  a  purple  gown 
and  vest,  an  ivory  chair,  and  a  golden  bowl  of  five  pounds 
weight.  They  received  orders  also  to  proceed  to  visit  other 
chieftains  of  Africa,  carying  with  them  donatives  of  gowns 
with  purple  borders,  and  golden  bowls  weighing  three  pounds 
each.  To  Alexandria,  also,  were  sent  Marcus  Atilius  and 
Manius  Acilius,  in  embassy  to  Kind  Ptolemy  Philopater  and 
Queen  Cleopatra,  to  revive  and  renew  the  former  treaty  of 
friendship;  bearing  with  them  a  purple  gown  and  vest,  with 
an  ivory  chair,  for  the  King;  an  embroidered  gown  and  a 
purple  robe  for  the  Queen.  During  this  summer ,^many  pro¬ 
digies  were  reported  from  the  neighbouring  cities  and  coun¬ 
try;  that  at  Tusculum,  a  lamb  was  yeaned  with  its  udder  full 
of  milk;  and  that  the  temple  of  Jupiter  was  struck  on  the 
roof  by  lightning,  and  almost  entirely  stripped  of  its  cover¬ 
ing:  that  at  Anagnia,  about  the  same  time,  the  ground  before 
one  of  the  gates  was  fired,  and  without  the  aid  of  any  com¬ 
bustible  matter  continued  burning  a  day  and  a  night;  that  at 
Compitum,  in  the  district  of  Anagnia,  the  birds  forsook  their 
nests  on  the  trees  in  the  grove  of  Diana;  that  near  the  mouth 
of  the  harbour  of  Tarracini,  snakes  of  wonderful  size  were 
seen  in  the  sea,  and  sporting  like  fishes;  that  at  Tarquinii,  a 
pig  was  littered  which  had  a  human  face;  and  that,  in  the 
district  of  Capena,  at  the  grove  of  Feronia,  four  statues 
sweated  blood  profusely  for  a  day  and  a  night.  These  evil 
omens  were  expiated  with  victims  of  the  greater  kind,  in 
conformity  to  the  order  of  the  pontiffs;  and  a  supplication 
was  ordered  to  be  performed  at  all  the  shrines,  one  day  at 
Rome,  and  another  in  the  district  of  Capena,  at  the  grove  oi 
Feronia. 
V.  The  consul  Marcus  Valerius,  on  receipt  of  the  letters 
by  which  he  was  summoned  home,  gave  up  the  command  of 
the  province  and  the  army  to  the  praetor  Cincius;  sent  Mar- 

BOOK  XXVIL 

411 

B.C.  210.] 
cus  Valerius  Messala,  commander  of  the  fleet,  with  half  of 
the  ships  to  Africa,  to  plunder  the  country,  and,  at  the  same 
time,  to  gain  intelligence  of  the  motions  and  intentions  of 
the  Carthaginians:  then  he  set  out  himself  with  ten  ships, 
and  arriving  at  Rome,  after  a  prosperous  voyage,  immedi¬ 
ately  convened  the  senate.  Here  he  recited  the  services 
which  he  had  performed;  that  after  hostilities  had  been 
carried  on  in  Sicily,  and  many  severe  losses  sustained  on 
land  and  sea  during  almost  sixty  years,  he  had  brought  the 
war  to  a  final  termination.  That  there  was  not  one  Carthagi*- 
nian  in  Sicily^  nor  one  Sicilian,  of  those  who  had  been  com¬ 
pelled  by  fear  to  fly  and  live  abroad,  who  was  not  then  at 
home;  that  all  had  been  reinstated  in  the  possession  of  their  own 
cities  and  estates,  and  were  employed  in  ploughing  and  sow¬ 
ing;  that  the  land,  after  having  been  long  deserted,  was  at  length 
filled  again  with  inhabitants,  and  in  a  condition  both  to  af¬ 
ford  plenty  to  its  occupiers,  and  the  most  certain  supplies  of 
provisions  to  the  Roman  people  either  in  peace  or  war.’'  Af¬ 
ter  this,  Mutines,  and  such  others  as  had  deserved  well  of 
of  the  Roman  people,  were  introduced  to  the  senate;  whq, 
to  fulfil  the  engagements  of  the  consul,  bestowed  rewards 
on  them  all.  Mutines  was  even  made  a  Roman  citi¬ 
zen,  an  order  for  that  purpose  being  proposed  to  the  com¬ 
mons  by  a  plebeian  tribune,  in  pusuance  of  directions  from 
the  senate.  While  these  matters  passed  at  R«me,  Marcus 
Valerius  Messala,  with  fifty  ships,  arriving  on  the  coast  of 
Africa  before  day,  made  an  unexpected  descent  on  the  lands 
of  Utica,  which  he  ravaged  to  a  great  extent;  and,  after  taking 
many  prisoners,  and  other  booty  of  every  kind,  reimbarked, 
set  sail  for  Sicily,  and  returned  to  Lilybaeum,  on  the  thirteenth 
dav  after  he  had  left  it.  On  examining  the  prisoners,  the 
following  particulars  were  discovered,  and  all,  in  order,  com¬ 
municated  by  letter  to  the  consul  Laevinus,  that  he  might 
know  the  real  state  of  affairs  in  Africa.  That  “  there  were 
at  Carthage  five  thousand  Numidians,  commanded  bv  Masi- 

412  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.542. 
nissa,  son  of  Gala,  a  young  man  of  a  very  enterprizing  spirit; 
and  that  people  were  employed  in  all  parts  of  Africa,  in  hir¬ 
ing  other  troops,  which  were  to  be  sent  to  Spain,  to  Hasdru- 
bal,  in  order  that,  with  the  most  numerous  army  which  he 
could  muster,  and  with  all  possible  expedition, he  might  pass 
over  into  Italy  and  join  Hannibal.  That  on  this  measure  the 
Carthaginians  placed  all  their  hopes  of  success.  That,  be¬ 
sides  this,  they  were  fitting  out  a  very  great  fleet  for  the  re¬ 
covery  of  Sicily,  and  that  the  prisoners  believed  it  would  sail 
thither  in  a  very  short  time.”  When  the  letter  containing 
this  information  was  read,  it  made  so  great  an  impression 
on  the  senate,  that  they  all  concurred  in  opinion,  that  the 
consul  ought  not  to  wait  for  the  elections,  but  to  nominate  a 
dictator  to  hold  them,  and  return  without  delay  to  his  pro¬ 
vince.  This  plan  was  obstructed  by  a  dispute  which  arose; 
for  the  consul  declared  that  he  would  nominate  dictator  Mar¬ 
cus  Valerius  Messala,  w  ho  was  then  in  Sicily,  commanding 
the  fleet;  but  the  senate  insisted,  that  a  dictator  could  not  be 
nominated  wdio  was  in  any  place  out  of  the  Roman  territory, 
which  extended  not  beyond  the  limits  of  Italy.  Marcus  Lu¬ 
cretius,  plebeian  tribune,  proposing  the  question  hereupon, 
the  senate  decreed  thus;  “  that  the  consul,  before  he  left  the 
city,  should  consult  the  people  as  to  who  they  wdshed  to  be 
appointed  dictator,  and  should  nominate  to  that  office  whom¬ 
soever  they  should  order.  That,  if  he  refused  this,  the  prae¬ 
tor  should  hold  the  meeting,  and  if  he  also  were  unwilling 
to  do  it,  that  then  the  tribunes  should  propose  the  question.” 
Valerius  declared,  that  he  w^ould  not  ask  the  judgment  of  the 
people  on  a  matter  properly  belonging  to  his  own  jurisdic¬ 
tion,  and  he  forbade  it  in  the  praetor;  on  which  the  plebeian 
tribunes  proposed  the  question,  and  the  commons  ordered, 
that  Quintus  Fulvius,  then  at  Capua,  should  be  created  dic¬ 
tator.  But  in  the  night  preceding  the  day  on  which  the  as¬ 
sembly  of  the  people  was  to  be  held,  the  consul  went  off  pri¬ 
vately  to  Sicily;  and  the  senate,  left  thus  unsupported,  took 

BOOK  XXVII. 

41B 

B.C.  210.] 
the  resolution  of  ordering  a  letter  to  be  sent  to  Marcus  Clau¬ 
dius,  desiring  him  to  give  assistance  to  the  commonwealth, 
which  his  colleague  had  deserted,  and  to  nominate  the  dic¬ 
tator  fixed  on  by  the  people.  Accordingly,  Quintus  Fulvius 
was  nominated  dictator  by  the  consul  Claudius;  and,  in  com¬ 
pliance  with  the  same  order  of  the  people,  the  dictator, 
Quintus  Fulvius,  named  Publius  Licinius  Crassus,  then  chief 
pontiff,  master  of  the  horse. 
VI.  The  dictator,  on  coming  to  Rome,  sent  Cneius  Sem- 
pronius  Blsesus,  who  had  been  a  lieutenant-general  under 
him  at  Capua,  into  the  province  of  Etruria,  to  take  the  com¬ 
mand  of  the  army  there,  in  the  room  of  the  praetor,  Caius 
Calpurnius,  whom  he  called  away  by  letter,  to  command  his 
own  army  at  Capua.  He  appointed  for  the  elections  the  ear¬ 
liest  day  on  which  they  could  be  held;  but  a  dispute  arising 
between  the  dictator  and  the  tribunes,  they  could  not  be 
finished  on  that  day.  The  younger  Galerian  century  having 
obtained  by  lot  the  privilege  of  voting  first,  named  as  con¬ 
suls,  Quintus  Fulvius  and  Quintus  Fabius;  and  the  centu¬ 
ries,  voting  in  their  course,  would  have  followed  them,  had 
not  two  plebeian  tribunes,  Caius  and  Lucius  Arennius,  in¬ 
terposed.  They  asserted  that  the  re-electing  of  the  same 
person  to  the  supreme  magistracy  was  not  easily  reconcile- 
able  to  the  principles  of  a  republic;  and  much  more  perni¬ 
cious  would  the  precedent  be,  if  the  very  person  who  presided 
at  the  election  were  himself  to  be  chosen.  If  therefore  the 
dictator  admitted  his  own  name  in  the  list  of  candidates, 
they  would  protest  against  the  election;  but,  if  he  received 
on  the  list  any  other  except  himself,  they  would  give  no  ob¬ 
struction  to  the  business.’’  The  dictator  maintained  the  pro¬ 
priety  of  the  proceedings  of  the  assembly,  on  the  grounds  oi 
a  vote  of  the  senate,  an  order  of  the  people,  and  several  pre¬ 
cedents.  For  in  the  consulate  of  Cneius  Servilius,  when 
the  other  consul  Caius  Flaminius  had  fallen  at  the  Trasime- 
nus,  the  question  was,  by  direction  of  the  senate,  proposed 

414 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R  .542. 

to  the  people,  and  the  people  ordered  that,  so  long  as  the 
war  continued  in  Italy,  it  should  be  lawful  for  them  to  re¬ 
elect  to  the  consulship,  and  that  as  often  as  they  should  see 
proper,  any  of  those  who  had  already  held  that  office.  As  to 
precedents  in  point,  he  had  one  of  ancient  date,  in  the  case 
of  Lucius  Postumius  Megellus,  who,  while  he  was  interrex, 
was,  in  the  assembly  where  he  himself  presided,  created  consul, 
with  Caius  Junius  Bubulcus;  and  a  recent  one,  in  the  case  of 
Quintus  Fabius,  who  certainly  would  never  have  suffered 
himself  to  be  re-elected,  if  it  were  inconsistent  with  the  pub¬ 
lic  good.”  After  long  dispute,  maintained  by  these  and  such 
arguments,  an  agreement  at  last  took  place  between  the  dic¬ 
tator  and  the  tribunes  to  abide  by  the  determination  of  the 
senate.  The  senators  were  of  opinion,  that  the  present  state 
of  the  commonwealth  was  such  as  required  that  the  adminis¬ 
tration  of  its  affairs  should  be  in  the  hands  of  experienced 
commanders,  skilled  in  all  the  arts  of  war;  and  they  there¬ 
fore  disapproved  of  any  opposition  to  the  proceedings  of  the 
assembly  of  election.  The  tribunes  then  acquiesced,  and  the 
election  proceeded.  Quintus  Fabius  Maximus  a  fifth  time, 
and  Quintus  Fulvius  Flaccus  a  fourth,  were  declared  con¬ 
suls.  The  following  persons  were  then  elected  prsetors:  Lu¬ 
cius  Veturius  Philo,  Titus  Quintus  Crispinus,  Caius  Hosti- 
lius  Tubulus,  Caius  Arunculeius.  As  soon  as  the  appoint¬ 
ment  of  magistrates  for  the  year  was  finished,  Quintus  Ful¬ 
vius  resigned  the  dictatorship.  Towards  the  end  of  this 
summer,  a  Carthaginian  fleet  of  forty  ships,  under  the  com¬ 
mand  of  Hamilcar,  sailed  over  to  Sardinia,  and  committed 
great  depredations  in  the  district  of  Olbia.  Afterwards,  on 
the  prsetor,  Publius  Manlius  Vulso,  appearing  there  with  an 
army,  they  proceeded  to  the  other  side  of  the  island,  and  ra¬ 
vaged  the  lands  of  Caralita,  from  whence  they  returned  with 
booty  of  all  kinds  to  Africa.  Several  Roman  priests  died  this 
year,  and  others  were  substituted  in  their  places.  Caius  Ser- 
vilius  was  made  a  pontiff,  in  the  room  of  Titus  Otacilius 

BOOK  XXVIL 

415 

B.C.  210,] 
Crassus;  Tiberius  Sempronius  Longus,  son  of  Tiberius,  an 
augur,  in  the  room  of  Otacilius  Crassus;  and  the  same  Ti¬ 
berius  Sempronius,  a  decemvir  for  directing  religious  rites, 
in  the  room  of  Tiberius  Sempronius  Loiigus,  son  of  Caius. 
Marcus  Marcius,  king  in  religious  matters,  and  Marcus 
iEmilius  Papus,  chief  curio,  died,  but  their  places  were  not 
filled  up  during  this  year.  Lucius  Veturius  Philo,  and  Pub¬ 
lius  Licinius  Crassus,  chief  pontiff,  were  created  censors  for 
the  year.  Licinius  Crassus  had  not,  before  this  appointment, 
been  either  consul  or  praetor,  but  was  advanced  at  one  step, 
from  the  aedileship  to  the  censorship.  However,  these  cen¬ 
sors  neither  chose  a  senate,  nor  transacted  any  public  busi¬ 
ness,  being  prevented  by  the  death  of  Lucius  Veturius,  on 
which  Licinius  abdicated  the  office.  The  curule  aediles,  Lu¬ 
cius  Veturius  and  Publius  Licinius  Varus,  repeated  the  exhi¬ 
bition  of  the  Roman  games  once.  The  plebeian  asdiles, 
Quintus  Catius  and  Lucius  Porcius  Licinius,  out  of  the 
money  accruing  from  fines,  erected  brazen  statues  in  the 
temple  of  Ceres,  and  exhibited  games  with  much  magnifi¬ 
cence  and  splendour,  considering  the  circumstances  of  those 
times. 
VII.  At  the  end  of  the  year,  Caius  Lselius,  Scipio’s  lieu¬ 
tenant-general,  on  the  thirty-fourth  day  after  he  set  sail  from 
Tarraco,  arrived  at  Rome,  and  passing  through  the  streets, 
with  the  train  of  prisoners  w^hom  he  brought,  attracted  a  vast 
concourse  of  people.  Next  day,  being  introduced  to  the  se¬ 
nate,  he  delivered  the  advices  with  which  he  was  charged, 
that  Carthage,  the  metropolis  of  Spain,  had  been  reduced  in 
one  day,  several  revolted  cities  brought  back  to  obedience, 
and  new  alliances  formed  with  others.  From  the  prisoners, 
information  was  gained,  corresponding,  in  general,  with  that 
contained  in  the  letter  of  Marcus  Valerius  Messala.  What 
gave  the  greatest  uneasiness  to  the  senate,  was  Hasdrubal’s 
intended  marcli  into  Italy,  which  was  scarcely  able  to  with¬ 
stand  Hannibal,  and  the  force  which  he  had  alreadv  w  ith  him 

416 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.542. 

LsbHus  also,  coming  out  into  the  general  assembly,  gave  a 
similar  account.  The  senate,  in  consideration  of  the  ser\  ices 
performed  by  Publius  Scipio,  decreed  a  supplication  for  one 
day;  and  then  ordered  Gains  Lselius  to  return  with  all  expe¬ 
dition  to  Spain,  with  the  ships  which  he  had  brought  thence. 
On  the  authority  of  a  great  many  historians,  I  have  fixed  the 
taking  of  Carthage  in  this  year,  although  I  am  not  ignorant 
that  several  have  placed  it  in  the  year  following;  but  it  ap¬ 
peared  to  me  very  improbable,  that  Scipio  should  have  passed 
a  whole  year  in  Spain  without  doing  any  thing.  The  consu- 
Y.K.  543.  Quintus  Fabius  Maximus,  a  fifth  time,  and 
B,C.  209.  Quintus  Fulvius  Flaccus,  a  fourth,  commencing  on 
the  ides  of  March,  a  decree  was  passed  on  the  same  day,  ap¬ 
pointing  Italy  the  province  of  both,  but  they  were  to  com¬ 
mand  separately  in  diiferent  quarters;  Fabius  to  conduct  the 
operations  of  the  war  at  Tarentum,  Fulvius  in  Lucania  and 
Bruttium.  Marcus  Claudius  was  continued  in  command  for 
a  year.  The  praetors  then  cast  lots  for  their  provinces:  Cains 
Hostilius  Tibullus  obtained  the  city  jurisdiction;  Lucius  Ve- 
turius  Philo,  the  foreign,  with  Gaul;  Titus  Quintus  Crispi- 
nus,  Capua;  and  Caius  Arunculeius,  Sardinia.  The  troops 
were  distributed  among  the  provinces  in  this  manner :  to 
Fulvius,  were  decreed  the  two  legions  which  Marcus  Vale¬ 
rius  Laevinus  had  in  Sicily;  to  Quintus  Fabius,  those  which 
Caius  Calpumius  had  commanded  in  Etruria;  the  city  troops 
were  to  replace  those  in  Etruria,  and  Caius  Calpumius  was 
to  command  the  same  province,  with  the  army;  Titus  Quin- 
tius  was  to  have  the  government  of  Capua,  with  the  army 
which  had  served  there  under  Quintus  Fulvius;  Lucius  Ve- 
turius  was  to  receive,  from  Caius  Laetorius  propraetor,  the 
province  of  Ariminum,  with  the  army  then  on  the  spot;  to 
Marcus  Marcellus  were  assigned  the  legions,  with  which  he 
had  in  his  consulate  acted  successfully;  to  Marcus  Valerius,  in 
conjunction  with  Lucius  Cincius,  (for  they  also  were  conti¬ 
nued  in  command  in  Sicily,)  the  troops  of  Cannae  were  g^ven. 

BOOK  XXVlI. 

417 

B*C.  209.] 
with  orders  to  complete  their  full  complement  out  of  the  sur¬ 
viving  soldiers  of  Cneius  Fulvius’s  legions.  These  were 
collected  together,  and  sent  by  the  consuls  into  Sicily,  being 
stigmatized  by  the  same  ignominious  order  under  which  the 
troops  of  Cannae  served,  and  those  of  the  army  of  the  praetor 
Cneius  Fulvius,  whom  the  senate,  through  resentment  at  the 
like  cowardice,  had  formerly  ordered  thither.  To  Caius 
Arunculeius  were  assigned,  for  Sardinia,  the  same  legions 
which  had  served  in  that  province  under  Publius  Manlius 
Vulso.  Publius  Sulpicius  was  continued  in  command  for  a 
year,  to  hold  the  province  of  Macedonia,  and  with  the  same 
legion  and  the  same  fleet  which  he  then  had.  Thirtv  quin- 
quereihes  were  ordered  to  he  sent  from  Sicily  to  Tarentum, 
to  Quintus  Fahins  the  consul;  and,  with  the  rest  of  the  fleet, 
Marcus  Valerius  Laevinus  was  either  to  sail  over  to  Africa 
himself,  to  ravage  the  country,  or  to  send  thither  Lucius 
Cincius,  or  Marcus  Valerius  Messala.  With  respect  to  Spain 
no  change  was  made,  only  that  Scipio  and  Siianus  were  con¬ 
tinued  in  command,  not  for  a  year,  but  until  they  should  be 
recalled  by  the  senate.  Such  was  the  distribution  made  of 
the  provinces,  and  of  the  commands  of  the  armies  for  that 
year. 
VIII.  Among  other  business  of  more  serious  importance, 
the  assembly,  convened  for  the  purpose  of  electing  to  the 
priesthood  a  chief  curio,  in  the  room  of  Marcus  iEmiiius,  re¬ 
vived  an  old  dispute  ;  for  the  patricians  insisted,  that  Caius 
Mamilius  Vitulus,  the  only  plebeian  candidate,  ought  not  to 
be  allowed  to  stand,  because  none  but  a  patrician  had  ever 
held  that  office  of  the  priesthood.  The  tribunes,  being  ap¬ 
pealed  to,  referred  the  business  to  the  senate.  The  senate 
voted,  that  the  people  might  act  therein  as  they  should  think 
proper.  Thus  Caius  Mamilius  Vitulus  was  elected  chief 
curio,  being  the  first  plebeian  admitted  into  that  Pub¬ 
lius  Licinius,  chief  pontiff,  compelled  Caius  Valerius  Flaccus, 
against  his  will,  to  be  inaugurated  flamen  of  Jupiter.  Caius 
VOL.  III.— 3  O 

418 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.54S. 
Laetorius  was  created  decemvir  for  the  performance  of  reli¬ 
gious  rites,  in  the  room  of  Quintus  Mucius  Scavola deceased. 
I  should  willingly  pass  over  in  silence  the  reason  of  the  fla- 
men  being  forced  into  the  office,  labouring,  as  he  then  did, 
under  a  bad  character,  had  he  not  afterwards  acquired  a  very 
good  one.  Caius  Flaccus  had  spent  his  youth  in  idleness 
and  debauchery,  and  his  vicious  courses  had  drawn  on  him 
the  displeasure  of  his  own  brother  Lucius  Flaccus,  and  of 
his  other  relations:  and  Publius  Lucius  was  in  hope  of  re¬ 
claiming  him.  Indeed,  when  his  thoughts  became  engaged 
in  the  care  of  the  sacrifices  and  religious  performances,  he 
quickly  made  such  a  complete  alteration  in  his  conduct,  from 
what  it  had  hitherto  been,  that,  among  all  the  young  lAen  of 
the  time,  no  one  was  held  in  higher  esteem,  or  more  entirely 
approved  by  the  principal  patricians,  by  his  own  family,  and 
by  alL  This  universal  good  character  inspiring  him  with  a 
proper  sense  of  his  own  tvorth,  he  asserted  a  privilege  which 
had  for  many  years  been  laid  aside,  on  account  of  the  un¬ 
worthiness  of  former  flamens,  that  of  having  a  seat  in  the 
senate.  On  his  coming  into  the  senate-house,  the  praetor, 
Lucius  Licinius,  led  him  out;  on  which  he  appealed  to  the 
tribunes  of  the  commons,  alleging  that  he  only  claimed  an 
ancient  privilege  of  his  priesthood,  which  was  conferred  on 
the  office  of  fiamen,  together  with  the  purple-bordered  robe 
and  the  curule  chair.  The  praetor  argued  that  such  a  right 
depended  not  on  the  copies  of  annals,  rendered  obsolete  by 
their  antiquity,  but  on  tlie  customary  practice  of  more  recent 
times;  and  that  in  the  memory  of  their  fathers  and  even 
grandfathers  no  fiamen  of  Jupiter  had  been  allowed  it.  The 
tribunes  thought  it  reasonable,  that,  as  the  right  had  been 
suffered  to  fall  into  disuse  through  the  inattention  of  former 
fiamens,  the  injury  ensuing  should  affect  only  themselves, 
and  not  the  office;  and  accordingly,  without  any  opposition 
from  the  praetor  himself,  and  with  the  universal  approbation 
of  the  senate  and  commons,  they  introduced  the  fiamen  to  a 

B.C.  209.] 

BOOK  XXVII. 

419 

seat  in  the  senate,  though  all  men  were  of  opinion  that  his 
having  attained  his  object,  was  owing  to  the  strict  integrity 
of  his  conduct  rather  than  to  any  privilege  of  the  priesthood. 
The  consuls,  before  they  departed  for  their  provinces,  raised 
two  city  legions,  and  such  a  number  of  soldiers  as  was  ne¬ 
cessary  to  make  up  the  complement  of  the  other  armies. 
The  force  which  hitherto  had  served  in  the  city,  the  consul 
Fulvius  gave  to  his  brother  Caius  Fulvius  Flaccus,  lieu¬ 
tenant-general,  with  orders  to  march  it  into  Etruria,  and  to 
bring  home  to  Rome  the  legions  then  in  that  province.  The 
other  consul,  Fabius,  having  collected  the  relics  of  Fulvius’s 
army,  which  amounted  to  three  thousand  three  hundred  and 
thirty-six  men,  ordered  his  son  Quintus  Maximus  to  con¬ 
duct  them  into  Sicily,  to  the  proconsul  Marcus  Valerius,  and 
to  receive  from  him  the  two  legions  and  thirty  quinqueremes. 
The  removal  of  these  legions  out  of  the  island  made  no  di¬ 
minution,  in  respect  either  of  strength  or  appearance,  in  the 
force  stationed  in  that  province.  For,  besides  two  veteran 
legions,  completely  recruited  to  their  full  complement,  the 
proconsul  had  a  great  multitude  of  Numidian  deserters,  both 
horse  and  foot,  and  he  also  enlisted  in  his  service  those  Si¬ 
cilians  who  had  served  in  the  army  of  Epicydes,  and  that  of 
the  Carthaginians,  men  well  experienced  in  war.  By  an¬ 
nexing  a  part  of  these  foreign  auxiliaries  to  each  of  the  Ro¬ 
man  legions,  he  preserved  the  appearance  of  two  armies;  with 
one  of  which  he  ordered  Lucius  Cincius  to  guard  that  part 
of  the  island  which  was  formerly  the  kingdom  of  Hiero;  and, 
with  the  other,  he  himself  took  charge  of  the  rest  of  it,  sepa¬ 
rated  formerly  by  the  boundaries  of  the  Roman  and  Cartha¬ 
ginian  dominions.  He  likewise  made  division  of  the  fleet, 
which  consisted  of  seventy  sail,  in  order  that  they  might  ex¬ 
tend  their  protection  of  the  coasts  round  the  whole  circum¬ 
ference  of  the  island.  Attended  by  the  cavalry  of  Mutines, 
he  went  in  person  through  every  part  of  the  province,  to  view 
the  lands,  observe  what  parts  were  cultivated,  and  what  were 

420 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y,R.  54:3, 

not,  commending  or  reproving  the  owners  accordingly.  In 
consequence  of  his  care  in  this  particular,  such  an  abundance 
of  corn  was  produced,  that,  besides  sending  a  quantity  to 
Rome,  he  conveyed  to  Catana  a  sufficient  supply  for  the  army, 
which  was  to  be  employed  during  the  summer  at  Tarentum. 
IX.  But  the  transportation  of  those  soldiers  into  Sicily, 
the  greater  part  of  whom  were  Latin es  and  allies,  was  very 
near  proving  the  cause  of  formidable  disturbances;  so  true  it 
is,  that  the  issues  of  great  affairs  often  depend  on  trival  cir¬ 
cumstances.  For  the  Latines  and  allies,  in  their  meetings, 
began  to  murmer,  that  they  had  now  for  ten  years  been 
drained  by  levies  and  contributions.  That,  generally  every 
3^ear,  they  suffered  great  losses  in  the  war.  Many  \vere  slain 
in  the  field,  many  were  cut  off  by  sickness;  and  that  every 
one  of  their  countrymen,  enlisted  as  a  soldier  by  the  Romans, 
was  more  effectually  lost  to  them,  than  if  he  were  taken  pri¬ 
soner  by  the  Carthaginians;  because  the  latter  was  sent  back, 
without  ransom,  to  his  country,  whereas  the  other  was  or¬ 
dered  by  the  Romans  out  of  Italy,  into  banishment  indeed, 
rather  than  to  military  service.  The  troops  of  Cannae  were 
now  growing  old  in  that  situation,  having  been  in  it  nearly 
eight  years,  and  would  end  their  lives  before  the  enemy, 
whose  strength  was  at  the  present  in  a  state  particularly 
flourishing,  would  retire  out  of  Italy.  If  veteran  soldiers 
were  not  to  return  home,  and  still  new  ones  to  be  enlisted, 
there  would  not,  in  a  short  time,  be  one  of  that  description 
remaining.  Wherefore  it  was  become  necessary,  before  they 
should  be  reduced  to  the  last  degree  of  desolation  and  want, 
to  deny  to  the  Romans  that  which  particular  circumstances 
alone  would  shortly  render  it  impossible  to  grant.  If  that 
people  saw  the  allies  cordially  uniting  in  such  a  measure,  they 
certainly  would  think  of  making  peace  with  the  Carthaginians: 
otherwise,  as  long  as  Hannibal  lived,  Italy  would  never  be 
free  from  war.’'  Thus  did  they  argue  in  their  assemblies. 
The  Roman  colonies  were,  at  this  time,  thirty  in  number:  all 

BOOK  XXVIL 

421 

B.C.  209.] 
of  whom  had  ambassadors  at  Rome;  and  twelve  of  them  pre¬ 
sented  a  remonstrance  to  the  consuls,  stating  that  they  had 
not  the  means  of  furnishing  the  supplies  of  men  and  money. 
These  were  Ardea,  Nepete,  Sutrium,  Alba,  Carseoli,  Cora, 
Suessa,  Circeii,  Setia,  Cales,  Narnia,  and  Interamna.  The 
consuls,  surprised  at  such  an  extraordinary  declaration,  and 
wishing  to  deter  them  from  the  meditated  secession,  to  which 
end  they  supposed  that  censure  and  reproof  would  be  more 
effectual  than  gentle  measures,  answered,  that  the  expres¬ 
sions,  which  they  had  dared  to  use  were  such  as  the  consuls 
could  not  prevail  on  themselves  to  repeat  in  the  senate.  For 
they  contained  not  a  refusal  of  military  duty,  but  an  open 
defection  from  the  Roman  people.  They  advised  them, 
therefore,  to  return  home  instantly  to  consult  with  their  re¬ 
spective  countrymen,  as  if  no  sfep  had  yet  been  taken;  since 
their  infamous  design,  though  disclosed  in  words,  had  not 
proceeded  to  action;  and  to  remind  them  that  they  were  not 
natives  of  Campania,  or  of  Tarentum,  but  of  Rome.  That 
from  thence  they  derived  their  origin,  and  from  thence  were 
sent  out  into  colonies,  into  lands  taken  from  enemies,  for  the 
purpose  of  increasing  population;  and  that,  consequently, 
^vhatever  duties  children  owe  to  parents,  these  they  owed  to 
the  Romans,  if  they  had  any  remains  of  natural  affection,  or 
anv  regard  for  their  mother  country.  They  desired  them, 
therefore,  to  confer  on  the  matter  anew;  for  that,  as  to  the 
measures  which  they  had  inconsiderately  mentioned,  their 
tendency  was  to  betray  the  Roman  empire,  and  to  give  up  the 
conquest  of  it  to  Hannibal.’’  Though  the  consuls,  one  after  the 
other,  reasoned  with  them  in  this  manner  for  a  long  time,  yet 
the  ambassadors  were  not  in  the  least  moved,  but  replied,  that 
they  had  nothing  new  to  represent  to  the  senate  at  home, 
neither  had  that  assembly  grounds  for  new  deliberation,  when 
they  neither  had  men  to  be  enlisted,  nor  money  to  pay  them/’ 
The  consuls,  finding  tliem  inflexible,  laid  the  affair  before  the 
-enater  and  here  it  excited  such  serious  apprehensions  in 

422 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  543. 

every  mind,  that  great  numbers  cried  out,  that  ‘^the  ruin  of 
the  empire  was  at  hand;  that  the  other  colonies  would  act  in 
the  same  manner;  so  would  the  allies;  that  all  had  conspired 
to  betiay  the  city  of  Rome  to  Hannibal.'^ 
X.  The  consuls  endeavoured  to  console  and  encourage  the 
the  senate,  telling  them,  that  the  other  colonies  would  main- 
tain  their  allegiance  and  duty  as  heretofore;  and  that  even 
these  which  had  swerved  from  their  duty,  if  ambassadors 
were  sent  round  among  them,  instructed  to  apply  reproofs, 
and  not  in  treaties,  would  be  impressed  with  respect  for  the 
sovereign  authority.”  Having  received  power  from  the  se¬ 
nate  to  act  and  manage  as  they  should  see  most  conducive  to 
the  public  good,  they  began  by  sounding  the  dispositions  of 
the  other  colonies;  and  then,  summoning  their  ambassadors, 
demanded  of  them  in  public,^  whether  they  had  their  contin¬ 
gents  of  soldiers  ready  according  to  the  regulation?  To  this 
Marcus  Sextilius,  of  Fregellee,  in  behalf  of  the  eighteen  co¬ 
lonies,  made  anstver,  that  ‘*the  soldiers  were  ready  according 
to  the  regulation;  that  if  a  greater  number  should  be  required, 
they  would  bring  them;  and,  that  whatever  else  the  Roman 
people  should  command  or  wish,  they  would  perform  with 
zeal  and  diligence.  That  they  wanted  not  sufficiency  of 
means,  and  had  more  than  a  sufficiency  of  inclination.”  On 
this  the  consuls,  after  premising  that  all  the  praises  which 
themselves  could  bestow  would  be  inadequate  to  their  merits, 
unless  they  were  joined  by  the  thanks  of  the  whole  body  of 
the  senate  in  full  assembly,  desired  them  to  accompany  them 
into  the  senate-house.  The  senate  complimented  them  by  a 
decree  conceived  in  the  most  honourable  terms  possible,  and 
then  charged  the  consuls  to  conduct  them  into  an  assembly 
of  the  people  also,  and  there,  among  the  many  other  import¬ 
ant  services  which  those  colonies  had  performed  to  them  and 
their  ancestors,  to  make  proper  mention  of  this  recent  in- 
‘^tance  of  their  meritorious  conduct  towards  the  common¬ 
wealth.  Even  now,  after  so  many  ages,  their  names  should 

BOOK  XXVIL 

423 

B.C.  209.] 
not  be  lost  in  silence,  nor  should  they  be  defrauded  of  their 
due  praise:  they  were  these — Signia,  Norba,  Saticulum, 
Brundusium,  Fregellae,  Luceria,  Venusia,  Adria,  Firma, 
Ariminum;  on  the  coast  of  the  other  sea,  Pontia,  Paestum, 
and  Cosa;  and  in  the  inland  parts,  Beneventum,  iEsernia, 
Spoletum,  Placentia,  and  Cremona.  Supported  by  these,  the 
Roman  empire  was  enabled  to  stand;  and  they  received 
every  mark  of  gratitude  both  in  the  senate,  and  in  the  assem¬ 
bly  of  the  people.  The  former  ordered,  that  no  mention  should 
be  made  of  the  other  twelve  dependencies,  which  had  re¬ 
fused  to  furnish  their  quota  for  the  war,  and  that  the  consuls 
should  neither  dismiss  nor  detain  their  ambassadors,  nor 
hold  any  communication  with  them:  such  a  tacit  proof  oi 
displeasure  was  judged  the  most  suitable  to  the  dignity  of 
the  Roman  people.  While  the  consuls  were  busy  in  expedit¬ 
ing  the  other  necessary  preparations  for  the  campaign,  it  was 
resolved  to  draw  out  of  the  treasury  the  vicesimary  gold, 
(that  is  to  say,  a  fund  formed  of  the  twentieth  part  of  the 
value  of  slaves  enfranchised,)  tvhich  was  reserved  for  exigen¬ 
cies  of  the  utmost  necessity.  There  was  drawn  out  accord¬ 
ingly  to  the  amount  of  four  thousand  pounds  weight  of  gold. 
Of  this  were  given  to  the  consuls,  to  Marcus  Marcellus  and 
Publius  Sulpicius,  proconsuls,  and  to  Lucius  Veturius,  the 
prseter,  to  whom  the  lots  had  given  the  province  of  Gaul, 
five  hundred  pounds  each;  and  besides  this,  there  were  given, 
in  particular  charge,  to  the  consul  Fabius,  one  hundred 
pounds  of  gold  to  be  carried  into  the  citadel  of  Tarentum. 
The  remainder  they  employed  in  making  contracts,  with 
ready  money,  for  clothing  the  army,  who  were  then  serving 
in  Spain,  with  so  much  honour  to  themselves  and  to  their 
commander. 
XL  It  was  also  resolved,  that,  before  the  consuls  set  out 
from  the  city,  they  should  expiate  several  prodigies  which 
had  happened.  On  the  Alban  mount,  a  statue  of  Jupiter,  and 
a  tree,  standing  near  the  temple;  at  Ostia^  a  grove;  at  Ca- 

424 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R,  545. 

pua,  a  wall,  and  the  temple  of  Fortune;  and,  at  Sinuessa,  a 
wall  and  gate,  were  struck  by  lightning.  Farther  it  was  re¬ 
ported,  that  the  Alban  water  flowed  in  a  bloody  stream;  that, 
at  Rome,  in  the  cell  of  the  temple  of  Fors  Fortuna,  an  image, 
which  was  in  the  crown  of  the  goddess,  fell  from  her  head 
into  her  hands:  that  an  ox  spoke  at  Privernum;  that  a  vul¬ 
ture,  \yhile  the  Forum  vyas  crowded,  flew  down  into  one  of 
the  shops;  and  that,  at  Sinuessa,  an  infant  was  born  \yhose 
sex  w'as  doubtful,  such  as  are  commonly  called  in  Greek  {a 
language  more  manageable  than  ours,  particularly  in  the 
compounding  of  words),  Androgynes;  that  a  shower  of  milk 
fell,  and  that  a  boy  was  born  with  the  head  of  an  elephant. 
These  prodigies  were  expiated  with  the  larger  kinds  of  vic¬ 
tims.  Orders  were  given  for  a  supplication  to  be  performed 
at  all  the  shrines,  and  prayers  to  be  offered  during  one  day, 
for  the  averting  of  misfortunes;  and  a  decree  passed,  that  the 
prsetor  Caius  Hostilius  should  vow  and  celebrate  the  games 
of  Apollo,  in  like  manner  as  they  had,  of  late  years,  been 
vowed  and  celebrated.  At  the  same  time,  the  consul  Quin¬ 
tus  Fulvius  held  an  assembly  for  the  election  of  censors. 
The  censors  chosen  were  men  who  had  never  yet  been  con¬ 
suls,  Marcus  Cornelius  Cethegus,  and  Publius  Sempronius 
Tuditanus.  By  direction  of  the  senate  the  question  was  pro¬ 
posed  to  the  people,  and  the  people  ordered,  that  these,  by 
their  censorial  authority,  should  let  to  farm  the  lands  of  Cam¬ 
pania.  The  choosing  of  the  senate  was  delayed  by  a  dispute 
between  the  censors  about  the  nomination  of  the  prince  of  it: 
the  making  the  choice  had  fallen,  by  lot,  to  Sempronius;  but 
Cornelius  alleged  that  he  ought  to  observe  the  practice  hand¬ 
ed  down  from  their  ancestors,  which  was  to  appoint  as  prince, 
the  person  who,  in  the  list  of  censors  stood  the  first  of  any 
then  living,  and  this  was  Titus  Manlius  Torquatos.  Sem¬ 
pronius  maintained,  that  when  the  gods  gave  a  person  the  lot 
of  appointing,  they  gave  him  at  the  same  time  full  freedom  gf 
choice:  that  he  would  act  in  this  case  agreeably  to  his  own 

B.C.  2Q9.] 

BOOK  XXVIL 

425 

judgment,  and  would  name  to  the  honour  contended  for, 
Quintus  Fabius  Maximus,  whom  he  could  prove  to  be  the 
first  of  the  whole  Roman  state,  even  in  Hannibal’s  opinion. 
After  a  long  dispute,  his  colleague  gave  up  the  point,  and 
Sempronius  chose  the  consul,  Quintus  Fabius  Maximus, 
prince  of  the  senate.  Then  the  list  of  the  new  senate  was 
read,  in  which  eight  were  left  out,  among  whom  was  Lucius 
Csecilius  Metellus,  infamous  for  having,  after  the  defeat  at 
Cannx,  advised  the  abandonment  of  Italy.  In  their  review 
of  the  equestrian  order  also,  they  censured  every  one  con¬ 
cerned  with  him;  but  the  number  disgraced  on  that  account 
was  very  small.  From  all  the  cavalr}^  of  the  legions  of  Can¬ 
nae  then  in  Sicily,  and  their  number  was  great,  their  horses 
were  taken  away.  To  this  they  added  another  punishment 
in  point  of  time,  ordering  that  the  campaigns  which  those 
men  had  served  on  horses  given  by  the  public,  should  not 
entitle  them  to  release,  but  that  they  should  serve  during  ten 
others  on  horses  of  their  own.  They  also  searched  for,  and 
discovered,  a  great  number,  who  ought  to  be  ranked  in  the 
cavaliy^,  and  all  of  these  who  had  been  seventeen  years  old  at 
the  beginning  of  the  war,  and  had  not  served,  they  disfran¬ 
chised.  They  then  contracted  for  the  repairs  of  the  buildings 
round  the  Forum,  which  had  been  destroyed  by  the  fire,— • 
seven  shops,  the  shambles,  and  the  royal  palace. 
XII.  Having  finished  the  necessary  business  at  Rome,  the 
consuls  set  out  for  the  campaign-  Fulvius,  first,  went  for- 
w’ard  to  Capua;  in  a  few  days  after,  Fabius  followed,  and  he 
earnestly  entreated  his  colleague  in  person,  and  Marcellus  by 
letter,  to  make  the  most  vigorous  efforts  to  keep  Hannibal 
employed,  while  he  should  carry  on  the  siege  of  Tarentum; 
observing  that,  when  that  cky  should  be  taken  from  the  ene¬ 
my,  who  was  already  repulsed  in  every  quarter,  and  would 
then  have  no  place  where  he  could  rest,  or  to  which  he  could 
retreat  for  safety,  he  would  not  have  even  a  pretence  for 
staying  longer  in  Italy.  He  likewise  sent  an  express  to 
voc.  HI.—  3H 

426 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  543. 
Rhegiutn,  to  the  commander  of  the  body  of  troops,  which 
the  consul  Laevinus  had  placed  there,  to  act  against  the  Brut- 
tians,  and  which  consisted  of  eight  thousand  men,  all  accus¬ 
tomed  to  live  by  plunder,  the  greater  part  of  whom  had  been 
brought  out  of  Sicily  from  Agathyma,  as  was  mentioned 
above.  To  these  were  joined  many  natives  of  the  country, 
who  deserted  from  the  Bruttians,  equally  daring,  and  under 
equal  necessity  to  dare  every  thing.  He  ordered  this  band 
to  be  led,  first,  to  ravage  the  lands  of  Bruttium,  and  after¬ 
wards  to  besiege  the  city  of  Caulon.  These  orders  they  exe¬ 
cuted,  not  only  with  diligence,  but  with  avidity;  and  after 
plundering  the  country,  and  dispersing  the  inhabitants,  at¬ 
tacked  the  city  with  their  utmost  vigour.  Marcellus,  incited 
by  his  colleague’s  letter,  and  also  by  an  opinion  which  he 
had  himself  conceived,  that  he  was  the  only  Roman  general 
able  to  cope  with  Hannibal,  quitted  his  winter-quarters  as 
soon  as  forage  could  be  found,  and  met  him  at  Canusium. 
The  Carthaginian  was,  at  this  time,  employed  in  endeavour¬ 
ing  to  entice  the  Canusians  to  a  revolt,  but,  on  hearing  of 
Marcellus’s  approach,  he  decamped  and  retired.  The  coun¬ 
try  was  open,  affording  no  cover  for  an  ambuscade,  for  which 
reason  he  resolved  to  draw  back  into  more  woody  tracts. 
Marcellas  pressed  close  on  his  steps,  encamped  within  view 
of  him,  and,  as  soon  as  the  trenches  were  finished,  drew  out 
his  legions  and  offered  battle.  Hannibal  sent  out  single  troops 
of  cavalry ,  and  the  light  spearmen  from  his  infantry,  to  skir¬ 
mish  with  the  enemy,  but  did  not  think  it  adviseable  to  risk 
the  issue  of  a  general  engagement.  He  was,  however,  drawn 
into  a  contest  of  that  sort  which  he  wished  to  avoid:  for  al¬ 
though,  by  marching  away  in  the  night,  he  gained  some 
ground  of  the  enemy,  yet  Marcellus  overtook  him  in  an  open 
country^,  and,  as  he  was  forming  his  camp,  put  a  stop  to  his 
works,  by  attacking  the  workmen  on  all  sides.  In  consequence 
of  this,  a  pitched  battle  ensued,  in  which  all  the  forces,  on 
both  sides,  were  engaged;  but  night  coming  on,  they  se- 

BOOK  XXVII. 

427 

B.C.  209.] 
parated,  without  any  advantage  being  gained  on  either  side. 
They  then  hastily,  before  it  grew  dark,  fortified  their  camps, 
at  a  very  little  distance  from  each  other.  Next  day,  as  soon 
as  light  appeared,  Marcellus  led  out  his  forces  to  the  field; 
nor  did  Hannibal  decline  the  contest,  but  in  a  long  speech 
exhorted  his  men  to  remember  Trasi menus  and  Cannae,  and 
to  crush  the  presumption  of  the  foe,  who  pressed  so  closely 
on  their  steps;  not  suffering  them  either  to  march  or  encamp 
in  quiet,  or  even  to  breathe,  or  look  about  them.  Every  day, 
the  rising  sun,  and  the  Roman  army,  appeared  together  on 
the  plains.  But  if  the  enemy  should  once  be  compelled  to 
quit  the  field,  especially  with  some  loss  of  blood,  they  would 
afterwards  conduct  their  operations  with  less  turbulence  and 
violence.’’  Irritated  by  such  expressions,  and  at  the  same 
time  vexed  at  being  continually  harrassed  on  quitting  their 
camp,  they  began  the  fight  with  great  fury.  The  battle  was 
maintained  for  more  than  two  hours;  then,  on  the  Roman 
side,  the  rig^t  wing  and  the  chosen  band,  called  extraordina¬ 
ries,  began  to  give  ground;  on  observing  which,  Marcellus 
brought  up  the  eighteenth  legion  to  the  front.  But,  while 
the  others  were  retiring  in  confusion,  and  these  advancing, 
with  but  little  alacrity,  into  their  place,  the  whole  line  was 
disordered  and  in  a  little  time  totally  broken:  at  last,  fear 
getting  the  better  of  their  shame,  they  fairly  turned  their 
backs.  In  this  battle,  and  the  flight  which  followed,  there 
fell  no  less  than  two  thousand  seven  hundred  of  the  Romans 
and  allies;  among  these  four  Roman  centurions,  and  two 
military  tribunes,  Marcus  Licinius  and  Marcus  Fulvius. 
Four  military  standards  were  lost  by  the  wing  which  first 
fled,  and  two  by  the  legions  which  advanced  in  the  place  of 
the  flying  allies. 
XIII.  After  the  army  had  retired  into  the  camp,  Marcel¬ 
lus  reprimanded  them  in  terms  so  harsh  and  bitter,  that  they 
felt  more  from  the  discourse  of  their  incensed  commander, 
than  from  all  they  had  suffered,  in  the  unsuccessful  fight, 

428 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R  543. 

through  the  whole  day.  He  said  to  themj  as  matters  have 
turned  out,  I  praise  and  thank  the  immortal  gods,  that  the 
victorious  enemy  did  not  assault  our  camp  itself,  while 
you  were  hurrying  into  the  gates,  and  over  the  rampart,  in 
such  utter  dismay.  You  would  certainly  have  abandoned 
that,  through  the  same  panic  that  made  you  give  up  the 
battle*  What  fright  is  this?  What  terror,  what  forgetful¬ 
ness  both  of  your  own  character  and  that  of  your  adversaries, 
has  at  once  seized  your  minds?  Surely  they  are  the  same 
enemies,  in  defeating  and  pursuing  of  whom  you  spent  the 
whole  of  the  last  summer;  who,  for  some  days  past,  have  fled 
before  you  night  and  day,  while  you  pressed  on  their  rear ; 
whom,  yesterday,  you  did  not  allow  either  to  continue  their 
march,  or  to  form  their  camp.  I  say  nothing  of  the  advan¬ 
tages  on  which  you  ought  to  pride  yourselves;  but  will  men¬ 
tion  what,  of  itself,  ought  to  fill  you  with  shame  and  remorse: 
yesterday  you  fought  it  out  to  the  end  on  equal  terms.  What 
alteration  has  last  night,  what  has  this  day  made?  Have  your 
forces  been  diminished;  have  theirs  been  augmented?  I  can¬ 
not  persuade  myself  that  1  am  speaking  to  my  own  army,  or 
to  Roman  soldiers.  The  arms  and  appearances  of  the  men 
are  such  as  usual.  But,  if  you  had  possessed  the  usual  spirit, 
would  the  enemy  have  seen  your  backs?  Would  he  have 
carried  off  a  standard  from  any  one  company  or  cohort? 
Hitherto,  he  has  boasted  of  putting  our  legions  to  the  sword; 
you,  this  day,  have  been  the  first  who  have  conferred  on  him 
the  glory  of  putting  a  Roman  army  to  flight.”  On  this  the 
troops,  universally,  besought  him  to  pardon  their  behaviour 
of  that  day;  and  entreated  him,  whenever  he  pleased,  to  make 
another  trial  of  the  courage  of  his  soldiers.  I  will  try  you, 
soldiers,”  said  he,  “and  to-morrow  will  lead  you  into  the 
field;  that  in  the  character  of  conquerors,  not  of  vanquished 
men,  you  may  obtain  the  pardon  which  you  desire,*’  He  then 
ordered,  that  the  cohorts  which  had  lost  their  standards 
should  receive  barley  for  their  allowance,  and  the  centurions 

BOOK  XXVII. 

429 

B.C.  209.] 
of  the  companies  whose  standards  had  been  lost,  he  deprived 
of  their  swords;  commanding  that  all,  both  infantry  and  ca* 
valry,  should  be  ready  under  arms  on  the  following  day.  The 
assembly  was  now  dismissed,  all  acknowledging  that  the  re¬ 
proofs  which  they  had  received  were  not  more  severe  than 
they  deserved;  for  that  no  person  in  the  Roman  army  had, 
that  day,  behaved  like  a  man,  except  the  general  alone,  to 
whom  they  ought  to  m^e  atonement,  either  by  their  death 
or  by  a  glorious  victory.  On  the  day  following  they  attended 
according  to  orders,  armed  and  accoutred.  The  general  then 
commended  them,  and  said,  that  ^‘'he  would  bring  forward, 
into  the  first  line,  those  who  had  fled  first  the  day  before,  and 
the  ccdiorts  which  had  lost  their  standards;  that  he  now  gave 
notice,  that  it  was  incumbent  on  them  to  fight  and  to  conquer, 
and  to  exert  themselves  vigorously,  one  and  all,  to  prevent 
the  news  of  yesterday’s  flight  reaching  Rome,  before  that  of 
the  present  day’s  triumph.’’  They  were  then  ordered  to  re¬ 
fresh  themselves  with  food,  that,  in  case  the  fight  should  last 
longer  than  usual,  they  might  have  strength  to  go  through  it. 
After  every  thing  had  been  said  and  done  to  rouse  the 
courage  of  the  soldiers,  they  marched  out  to  the  field. 
XIV.  When  this  was  told  to  Hannibal,  he  said,  ^‘we  have 
to  deal  with  an  enemy  who  can  neither  bear  good  fortune 
nor  bad:  if  he  gets  the  better,  he  pursues  the  vanquished 
with  presumption  and  vehemence;  if  he  is  worsted,  he  re¬ 
news  the  contest  with  the  victors.”  He  then  ordered  the  signal 
to  be  sounded,  and  led  out  his  forces.  Both  parties  fought 
now  with  much  more  vigour  than  the  day  before;  the  Car¬ 
thaginians  struggling  to  maintain  the  glory  acquired  yester¬ 
day,  the  Romans  to  remove  their  disgrace.  On  the  side  of 
the  Romans,  the  left  wing,  and  the  cohorts  which  had  lost 
their  standards,  fought  in  the  front  line;  while  the  twentieth 
legion  was  drawn  up  on  the  right  wing.  Lucius  Cornelius 
Lentulus,  and  Cat  us  Claudius  Nero,  lieutenant-generals, 
commanded  the  wings;  Marcellus  himself  took  the  charge  of 

430 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  543. 

the  centre,  that  he  might  animate  the  men  by  his  presence, 
and  be  an  immediate  witness  of  their  behaviour.  On  Han¬ 
nibal’s  side,  the  front  line  was  composed  of  the  Spanish 
troops,  who  were  the  main  strength  of  his  army.  When  the 
fight  had  long  continued  doubtful,  Hannibal  ordered  the 
elephants  to  be  brought  up  to  the  van,  hoping  by  their  means, 
to  occasion  fear  and  disorder.  At  first,  they  broke  the  ranks, 
and  by  treading  down  some,  and  terrifying  others,  on  either 
side,  so  as  to  put  them  to  flight,  made  an  opening  in  the  line 
in  one  part:  and  the  alarm  would  probably  have  spread  farther, 
had  not  Caius  Decimius  Flavus,  a  military  tribune,  snatching 
the  standard  of  the  first  band  of  spearmen,  ordered  that  com¬ 
pany  to  follow  him.  He  then  led  them  to  the  spot  where 
the  elephants  were  throwing  all  into  confusion,  with  direc¬ 
tions  to  discharge  their  javelins  at  them.  Every  weapon  took 
place,  for  there  was  no  difficulty  in  hitting,  at  a  small  distance, 
bodies  of  such  huge  bulk,  especially  as  they  were  crowded 
close  together.  But  though  they  were  not  all  of  them 
wounded,  yet  those,  in  whose  flesh  the  javelins  stuck,  as 
they  are  creatures  whose  motions  cannot  be  depended  on, 
betaking  themselves  to  flight,  drove  back  even  those  that 
were  unhurt.  And  now,  not  any  particular  company  alone, 
but  every  soldier  who  could  come  up  with  the  retreating 
elephants,  with  all  his  might  hurled  javelins  at  them.  Thus 
attacked,  the  more  violently  did  the  animals  rush  upon  their 
owners,  and  made  so  much  the  greater  carnage  of  them,  than 
they  had  made  of  the  enemy,  as  one  of  them,  when  frightened 
or  hurt,  is  hurried  on  more  forcibly  than  he  could  be  driven 
by  the  manager  sitting  on  his  back.  While  the  enemy’s  line 
was  in  this  great  disorder,  in  consequence  of  those  beasts 
breaking  through  it,  the  Romans  made  a  brisk  onset,  and 
without  much  opposition  from  troops  so  scattered  and  con¬ 
fused,  drove  them  off  the  ground.  Marcellus  ordered  his 
cavalry  to  charge  them  as  they  fled,  and  the  pursuit  did  not 
cease,  until  they  were  driven,  in  consternation,  into  their 

BX.  209.] 

BOOK  XXVII. 

431 

camp:  for,  besides,  other  circumstances  which  caused  terror 
and  tumult,  two  elephants  had  fallen  in  the  very  entrance  of 
the  gate,  so  that  the  men  were  obliged  to  make  their  way 
over  the  trench  and  rampart.  Here  the  slaughter  of  the 
enemy  was  the  gi  eatest.  There  were  killed  no  less  than  eight 
thousand  men,  and  five  elephants.  Nor  did  the  Romans  gain 
the  victory  without  loss  of  blood:  of  the  two  legions,  about 
one  thousand  seven  hundred  were  killed,  and  of  the  allies 
above  one  thousand  three  hundred.  Great  numbers,  both  of 
Romans  and  allies,  were  wounded.  In  the  following  night 
Hannibal  decamped,  and  though  Marcellas  wished  to  pursue 
him,  he  was  prevented  by  his  wounded,  which  were  in  great 
number.  Scouts,  who  were  sent  to  observe  his  march,  brought 
intelligence,  next  day,  that  Hannibal  had  taken  the  road  to¬ 
wards  Bruttium. 
XV.  About  the  same  time,  the  Hirpinians,  Lucanians, 
and  Volscians  surrendered  themselves  to  the  consul  Quintus 
Fulvius,  delivering  up  Hannibal’s  garrisons  which  they  had 
in  their  cities,  and  were  mildly  received  by  the  consul,  with 
only  a  verbal  reproof  for  their  past  errors.  Hopes  of  similar 
gentle  treatment  were  held  out  to  the  Bruttians  also,  through 
two  brothers,  Vibius  and  Pactius,  of  the  most  illustrious  fa¬ 
mily  of  any  in  that  nation,  who  came  to  request  the  same 
terras  of  capitulation  which  were  granted  to  the  Lucan ians. 
The  other  consul,  Quintus  Fabius,  took  by  assault,  Man- 
duria,  a  town  in  the  territory  of  Sallentum.  Here  he  made 
four  thousand  prisoners,  and  gained  much  booty  of  other 
kinds.  Proceeding  thence  to  Tarentum,  he  pitched  his 
camp  at  the  very  mouth  of  the  harbour.  Of  the  ships,  which 
Livius  had  kept  here  for  the  purpose  of  protecting  convoys, 
he  loaded  part  with  machines  and  implements  fit  for  assail¬ 
ing  walls,  the  rest  he  furnished  with  engines,  stones,  and 
missile  vxapons  of  eveiy^  kindj  the  store-ships  also,  not  con¬ 
fining  himself  to  such  only  as  were  moved  by  oars,  he  fitted 
out  in  the  same  manner,  in  order  that  some  might  bring 

432  HISTORY  OF  ROME .  [Y.R,  543. 
out  the  machines  and  ladders  to  the  walls,  while  the  others, 
from  their  ships  at  some  distance,  should  annoy,  with  mis¬ 
sile  weapons,  the  men  employed  in  defending  them.  These 
ships  were  thus  fitted  up  and  prepared,  for  the  purpose  of  an 
attack  on  that  side  of  the  city  which  is  washed  by  the  open 
sea,  which  was  now  clear  of  the  enemy;  for  the  Carthagi¬ 
nian  fleet  had  sailed  over  to  Corey ra,  at  the  time  when  Phi¬ 
lip  was  preparing  to  attack  the  iEtolians.  Meanwhile,  the 
p^rty  which  carried  on  the  siege  of  Caulon  in  Bruttium, 
hearing  of  Hannibal’s  approach,  and  fearful  of  being  over¬ 
powered,  retired  to  an  eminence,  which,  though  it  secured 
them  from  an  immediate  attack,  was  destitute  of  every  other 
convenience.  In  the  prosecution  of  the  siege  of  Tarentum, 
Fabius  received  very  great  assistance  towards  the  accom¬ 
plishment  of  that  important  business,  from  an  incident,  tri¬ 
vial  in  appearance:  the  Tarentines  had  in  the  city  a  party  of 
Bruttians,  given  to  them  by  Hannibal,  and  the  commander 
of  this  party  was  desperately  in  love  with  a.  young  woman, 
whose  brother  -was  in  the  army  of  the  consul  Fabius.  This 
man,  being  informed,  by  a  letter  from  his  sister,  of  her  new* 
acquaintance  with  a  stranger  of  so  great  wealth,  and  so 
highly  honoured  among  his  countrymen,  conceived  hopes 
that  by  means  of  his  sister,  her  lover  might  be  wrought  into 
any  scheme;  and  this  project  he  communicated  to  the  consul: 
his  reasoning  appeared  not  ill-founded,  and  he  was  ordered 
to  go  as  a  deserter  into  Tarentum.  Here  being  introduced 
by  his  sister  to  the  notice  of  the  commander,  he  began  by 
artfully  sounding  his  disposition,  and  having  satisfied  him¬ 
self  that  his  temper  was  as  fickle  as  he  could  wish,  by  the 
aid  of  female  blandishments  he  prevailed  on  him  to  betray 
the  post,  of  which  he  commanded  the  guard.  When  both 
the  method  and  the  time  for  the  execution  of  this  design 
were  settled,  the  soldier  was  let  out  of  the  town  privately, 
through  the  intervals  between  the  guards,  and  related  to  the 
consul  what  had  been  done,  and  what  was  further  intended. 

BOOK  XXVII. 

433 

B.C.  209.] 
At  the  first  watch,  Fabius,  after  giving  propef  directions  to 
the  troops  in  the  citadel,  and  to  those  who  had  the  guard  of 
the  harbour,  went  himself  quite  round  the  harbour,  and  sat 
down,  in  concealment,  on  the  side  of  the  city  facing  the  east. 
The  trumpets  then  began  to  sound,  at  once,  from  the  citadel, 
from  the  port,  and  from  the  ships  which  had  been  brought 
to  the  shore,  on  the  side  next  to  the  open  sea.  At  the  same 
time  a  shout  was  raised,  and  a  prodigious  tumult  purposely 
made,  on  every  side  where  there  was  veiy-  little  danger. 
Meanwhile  the  consul  kept  his  men  quiet  and  silent.  Demo- 
crates,  therefore,  who  had  formerly  commanded  the  fleet, 
and  who  happened  now  to  command  there,  perceiving  every 
thing  near  him  quiet,  while  other  parts  resounded  with  tu¬ 
mult  and  shouting  like  that  of  a  city  stormed,  fearful  lest, 
while  he  hesitated,  the  consul  might  force  a  passage,  and 
march  in  his  troops,  canded  off  his  party  to  the  citadel,  be¬ 
cause  the  most  alarming  noise  proceeded  from  that  quarter.. 
Fabius,  from  the  length  of  time,  and  likewise  from  the 
silence  which  prevailed,  (for,  where,  a  little  before,  there 
was  an  uproar  among  the  men  rousing  each  other,  and 
calling  to  arms,  now  not  a  word  was  heard,)  imagined 
that  the  guard  was  withdrawn;  he  therefore  ordered  the  lad¬ 
ders  to  be  brought  up  to  that  part  of  the  wall,  where,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  information  of  the  contriver  of  the  plot,  the 
cohort  of  Bruttians  held  the  guard.  In  this  place,  favoured 
and  assisted  by  the  Bruttians,  the  Romans  first  gained  pos¬ 
session  of  the  wall,  over  which  they  climbed  into  the  city; 
and  then  the  nearest  gate  w  as  broken  open,  that  the  troops 
might  march  through  in  a  body*  These  entering  the  town  a 
little  before  day,  raised  a  shout,  and,  without  meeting  any 
one  in  arms,  proceeded  to  the  Forum,  having  drawn  on 
themselves  the  attention  of  the  combatants  in  every  quarter, 
whether  at  the  citadel  or  the  harbour. 
XVI.  At  the  entrance  of  the  Forum,  a  vigorous  opposi¬ 
tion  was  made,  but  it  was  not  persevered  in.  A  Tarentine 
VOL.  III.— 3  I 

434 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  543 

was  no  match  for  a  Roman,  either  in  spirit,  in  arms,  in  war¬ 
like  skill,  nor  yet  in  vigour  or  bodily  strength.  They  onl)* 
discharged  their  javelins,  and  then  scarcely  waiting  till  the 
fight  began,  turned  their  backs;  and,  as  they  were  acquainted 
with  the  streets  of  the  city,  ran  different  ways  to  their  own 
houses,  or  those  of  their  friends.  Two  of  their  commanders, 
Nico  and  Dcmocrates,  fell,  fighting  courageously.  Philo- 
nus,  who  had  been  the  author  of  the  plot  for  betraying  the 
city  to  Hannibal,  rode  away  from  the  fight  at  full  speed;  his 
horse  was  not  long  after  seen,  straying  through  the  city 
without  a  rider,  but  his  body  was  never  found,  and  the  ge¬ 
neral  opinion  was,  that  he  fell  from  his  horse  into  an  open 
well.  Carthalo,  as  he  was  coming  to  the  consul  unarmed,  to 
remind  him  of  their  fathers  being  connected  by  an  intercourse 
of  hospitality,  was  slain  hy  a  soldier  who  met  him  in  the 
way.  The  rest  were  put  to  the  sword  without  distinction, 
armed  and  unarmed,  Carthaginians  and  Tarentines  alike. 
Many  even  of  the  Bruttians  were  killed,  either  through  mis¬ 
take,  or  through  the  inveterate  hatred  borne  towards  them 
by  the  Romans,  or  with  design  to  discountenance  the  report 
of  the  place  being  betrayed,  and  that  it  might  rather  appear 
to  have  been  taken  by  force  of  arms.  After  this  carnage,  the 
victors  proceeded,  in  several  parties,  to  plunder  the  citv 
We  are  told  that  there  were  taken  here  thir  ty  thousand  per¬ 
sons  in  a  state  of  servitude,  a  vast  quantity  of  silver  wrought 
and  coined,  eighty-seven  thousand  pounds  weight  of  gold, 
together  with  statues  and  pictures  in  such  numbers,  as  al¬ 
most  to  rival  the  decorations  of  Syracuse.  But  Fabius,  with 
more  greatness  of  mind  than  was  shown  by  Marcellus,  re¬ 
frained  from  meddling  with  booty  of  that  sort;  and  when 
his  secretary  asked  him  what  he  would  have  done  with  the 
statues  of  their  gods,  which  were  of  gigantic  size,  and  ha¬ 
bited  like  warriors,  he  ordered  him  to  “  let  the  Tarentines 
keep  their  angry  gods  to  themselves.’^  Then  the  wall,  which 
separated  the  citadel  from  the  town,  was  demolished  and 

BOOK  XXVIL 

435 

B.C.  209.] 
rased.  Amid  these  transactions,  Hannibal,  having  made  pri¬ 
soners  the  party  employed  in  the  siege  of  Caulon,  who  capi¬ 
tulated,  hearing  of  the  siege  of  Tarentum,  marched  night 
and  day  with  all  expedition  to  relieve  it;  but  while  he  was 
hastening  thither,  he  received  the  news  of  its  being  taken.  On 
this  he  observed,  the  Romans,  too,  have  their  Hannibal; 
we  have  lost  Tarentum  through  the  same  arts  by  which  we 
acquired  it.”  That  he  might  not,  however,  seem  to  have 
turned  back  as  in  flight,  he  encamped  on  the  spot  where  he 
had  halted,  about  five  miles  from  the  city;  and,  after  staying 
there  a  few  days,  retreated  to  Metapontum.  From  hence  he 
sent  to  Tarentum  two  Metapon tines,  with  letters  from  the 
principal  men  in  that  state  to  Fabius,  to  receive  his  promise 
of  impunity  for  what  was  past,  on  condition  of  their  deliver¬ 
ing  Metapontum  and  the  Carthaginian  garrison  into  his 
hands.  Fabius,  supposing  the  offer  to  be  made  with  sin¬ 
cerity,  appointed  a  day  on  which  he  would  come  to  Meta¬ 
pontum,  and  gave  letters  in  answer,  which  were  delivered 
to  Hannibal,  who,  overjoyed  at  the  success  of  his  stratagem, 
and  at  finding  that  even  Fabius  was  not  proof  against  arti¬ 
fice,  formed  an  ambuscade  at  a  small  distance  from  Meta* 
pontum.  As  Fabius  was  taking  the  auspices,  previous  to  his 
departure  for  I'arentum,  the  birds  repeatedly  refused  the  fa¬ 
vourable  signs;  also,  when  he  consulted  the  gods  by  sacrifice, 
the  aruspex  warned  him  to  beware  of  treachery  and  plots. 
As  he  did  not  come  on  the  appointed  day,  the  two  Meta- 
pontine  s  were  sent  back,  to  remove  any  scruple  that  retarded 
him,'  but  being  suddenly  seized,  and  dreading  an  examina¬ 
tion  by  torture,  they  disclosed  the  whole  plot. 
XVI L  In  Spain,  in  the  beginning  of  the  summer,  there 
came  over  to  Scipio,  w^ho  had  spent  all  the  preceding  winter 
in  conciliating  the  affections  of  the  barbarians,  partly  by  pre¬ 
sents,  and  partly  by  sending  home  their  hostages  and  pri¬ 
soners,  a  person  named  Edesco,  a  distinguished  commander 
among  the  Spaniards.  This  man’s  wife  and  children  were  in 

436 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  543> 

the  hands  of  the  Romans;  but,  besides  this  motive,  he  was 
also  actuated  by  that  almost  unaccountable  propension  which 
had  brought  over  all  Spain  from  the  Carthaginian  interest 
to  that  of  the  Romans.  Led  by  the  same  motive,  Indibilis 
and  Mandonius;  unquestionably  the  two  first  men  in  Spain, 
with  the  whole  body  of  their  countrymen,  deserted  Hasdru- 
bai,  and  withdrew  to  an  eminence  overlooking  his  camp, 
from  whence,  along  a  continued  ridge  of  hills,  they  could 
retire  with  safety  to  the  Romans.  When  Hasdrubal  saw  the 
enemy’s  strength  increasing  by  such  large  accessions,  while 
his  own  was  daily  diminished,  and  would  probably,  unless 
by  a  bold  effort  he  effected  something,  continue  to  decay,  in 
the  same  manner  as  it  had  begun,  he  resolved  to  bring  on  a 
battle  as  soon  as  possible.  Scipio  was  even  more  desirous  of 
an  engagement;  as  well  because  his  hopes  were  strong,  in 
consequence  of  the  success  which  had  hitherto  attended  his 
affairs,  as  because  he  wished  to  engage  with  a  single  general 
and  his  forces,  rather  than  with  all  together,  which  he  would 
perhaps  be  forced  to  do,  were  they  to  unite.  However,  should 
he  be  under  a  necessity  of  fighting  more  than  one  army  at 
once,  he  had  taken  a  judicious  method  to  augment  his 
strength:  for,  perceiving  that  there  would  be  no  employment 
for  his  marine,  as  the  coast  of  Spain  was  entirely  clear  of 
a,ny  Carthaginian  fleet,  he  hauled  up  the  ships  on  land  at 
Tarraco,  and  joined  the  marines  to  his  land  forces-  As  to 
arms  for  them,  he  had  abundance,  between  those  taken  in 
Carthage,  and  those  which  had  been  afterwards  made  by  the 
great  number  of  workmen  whom  he  employed.  With  this 
force,  Scipio,  in  the  beginning  of  spring,  by  which  time  he 
was  rejoined  by  Laelius,  who  had  returned  from  Rome,  and 
without  whom  he  undertook  no  enterprize  of  any  extraordi¬ 
nary  moment,  set  out  from  Terraco,  and  advanced  towards 
the  enemy.  On  his  march,  during  which  he  found  every 
place  well  affected,  the  allies  showing  him  all  respect,  and 
escorting  him  as  he  passed  through  each  of  dieir  states,  be 

BOOK  XXVIL 

437 

B.C.  209.] 

was  itiet  by  Indibilis  and  Mandonius,  with  their  armies. 
Indibilis  spoke  for  both,  not  with  the  ignorance  and  temerity 
of  a  barbarian,  but  with  a  modest  gravity,  appearing  rather 
to  apologise  for  their  changing  sides,  as  a  measure  of  neces¬ 
sity,  than  to  boast  of  it,  as  if  it  had  been  greedily  embraced 
on  the  first  opportunity;  for  “  he  knew,”  he  said,  that  the 
term  deserter  was  deemed  dishonourable  by  a  man^s  old 
associates,  and  held  in  suspicion  by  the  new.  Nor  did  he 
blame  men  for  this  manner  of  thinking;  provided  only,  that 
the  merits  of  the  case,  and  not  the  mere  name,  were  made 
the  grounds  of  this  double  aversion.”  He  then  enumerated 
his  services  to  the  Carthaginian  generals;  and,  on  the  other 
hand,  their  avarice,  t}Tanny,  and  ill-treatment  of  every  kind 
heaped  on  him  and  his  countrymen.  “  For  these  reasons,” 
he  said,  his  body  only  had,  hitherto,  been  on  their  side;  his 
mind  had  long  been  on  that  side  where,  he  believed,  that 
respect  was  paid  to  laws  divine  and  human.  To  the  gods 
themselves,  people  have  recourse  with  supplications  for  re¬ 
dress,  when  they  can  no  longer  endure  the  violence  and  in¬ 
justice  of  men.  He  entreated  Scipio  not  to  consider  their 
conduct  as  deserving  either  punishment  or  reward;  but  to 
form  his  judgment  on  a  trial  of  them  from  that  day  forward; 
and  by  that  standard  to  estimate  the  recompense  which  they 
might  hereafter  be  thought  to  deserve.”  The  Roman  an¬ 
swered,  that  he  wpuld  comply  with  their  desire  in  every 
particular;  and  would  not  consider  them  in  the  light  of  de¬ 
serters,  because  they  had  not  thought  themselves  bound  to 
adhere  to  such  an  alliance,  when  the  other  party  scrupled 
not  to  violate  every  obligation  divine  and  human.  Then  their 
wives  and  children,  being  brought  into  the  assembly,  were 
restored  to  them,  and  received  with  tears  of  joy.  That  day 
they  were  entertained  in  lodgings  prepared  for  them;  and, 
on  the  next,  the  terms  of  association  were  ratified,  and  they 
were  dismissed  to  bring  up  their  forces;  afterwards  they  en- 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

438 

[Y.R.  543, 

camped  in  conjunction  with  the  Romans,  until  they  con¬ 
ducted  them  to  the  spot  where  the  enemy  lay, 
XVIIL  The  nearest  army  of  Carthaginians  was  that  com¬ 
manded  by  Hasdrubal,  which  l&y  near  the  city  of  Baecula.  In 
the  front  of  this  camp  he  had  posted  advanced  guards  of  ca¬ 
valry.  On  these,  the  Roman  light  infantry,  the  front  rank,  and 
those  who  composed  the  van  guard,  instantly,  as  they  arriv¬ 
ed,  and  without  waiting  to  choose  ground  for  a  camp,  made 
an  attack,  and  with  such  apparent  contempt,  as  plainly  de¬ 
monstrated  what  degree  of  spirit  each  party  possessed.  The 
cavalry  were  driven  within  their  works,  whither  they  fled  in 
confusion,  pressed  almost  to  the  very  gates.  The  action  of 
that  day  having  only  whetted  their. ardour  for  a  contest,  the 
Romans  pitched  their  camp.  Hasdrubal,  during  the  night, 
drew  back  his  army  to  a  hill,  the  summit  of  which  ^vas  spread 
out  into  a  level  plain;  on  the  rear  of  the  hill  was  a  river,  and 
on  the  front  and  on  either  side  it  was  encircled  by  a  kind  of 
steep  bank :  at  some  distance  below  this,  lay  another  plain, 
sloping  downwards,  the  circumference  of  which  was  likewise 
bounded  by  another  bank  of  equally  difficult  ascent.  Into 
this  lower  plain,  Hasdrubal,  next  day,  on  seeing  the  enemy’s 
line  formed  in  front  of  their  camp,  sent  down  his  Numidian 
cavalry,  and  the  light-armed  Balearians  and  Africans.  Sci- 
pio,  riding  round  the  companies  and  battalions,  desired  them 
to  observe,  that  “  the  enemy,  renouncing  at  once  all  hope  of 
being  able  to  oppose  them  on  plain  ground,  endeavoured  to 
secure  themselves  on  hills  ;  waiting  within  sight,  and  confid¬ 
ing  in  the  strength  of  their  posts,  not  in  their  valour  and  their 
arms.  But  Roman  soldiers  had  mounted  the  higher  defences 
of  Carthage.  Neither  hills,  nor  a  citadel,  nor  the  sea  itself 
had  stopped  the  progress  of  their  arms.  Those  heights,  which 
the  enemy  had  seized,  would  answer  no  other  purpose  than 
that  of  compelling  them,  in  their  flight,  to  leap  down  craggs 
and  precipices  ;  but  he  would  prevent  their  escaping,  even  in 
that  way.’^  Accordingly,  he  gave  orders  to  two  cohorts,  that 

BOOK  XXVIL 

439 

B.C.  209.] 

one  of  them  should  secure  the  entrance  of  the  valley,  through 
which  the  river  ran;  and  that  the  other  should  block  up  the 
road,  which  led  from  the  city  into  the  country,  across  the  de¬ 
clivity  of  the  hill.  He  then  put  himself  at  the  head  of  the 
light  troops,  which  had,  the  day  before,  beaten  the  enemy’s  ad¬ 
vanced  guards,  and  led  them  against  the  light-armed  forces  post¬ 
ed  on  the  brink  of  the  lower  descent.  For  some  time  they  pro¬ 
ceeded  over  rough  ground,  without  meeting  any  other  obstacle 
than  the  difEculty  of  the  way;  afterwards,  when  they  came  with¬ 
in  reach,  vast  quantities  of  weapons  of  every  sort  were  poured 
down  upon  them ;  while,  on  their  side,  not  only  the  soldiers, 
but  a  multitude  of  servants  mixed  among  the  troops,  assail¬ 
ed  the  enemy  with  stones,  which  they  found  every  where  scat¬ 
tered,  and  which,  in  general,  were  of  such  a  size  as  that  they 
could  be  thrown  by  the  hand.  But,  though  the  ascent  was 
difficult,  and  they  were  almost  overwhelmed  with  darts  and 
stones,  yet,  through  the  skill  which  they  had  acquired  by 
practice  in  climbing  walls,  and  the  obstinacy  of  their  cou¬ 
rage,  the  foremost  gained  the  summit.  When  they  got  upon 
ground  that  was  any  way  level,  and  where  they  could  stand 
with  firm  footing,  they  soon  beat  back  the  enemy  ;  who, 
though  light  and  fit  for  skirmishing,  and  able  enough  to  de¬ 
fend  themselves  at  a  distance,  while  an  uncertain  kind  of  fight 
was  waged  with  missive  weapons,  yet,  %vhen  the  matter  came 
to  close  fighting,  were  quite  deficient  in  steadiness  ;  so  that 
they  were  driven  wnth  great  slaughter  into  the  line  of  troops 
posted  on  the  higher  eminence.  On  this,  Scipio,  ordering 
the  conquerors  to  press  forward  against  their  centre,  divided 
the  rest  of  the  forces  with  Lselius,  whom  he  ordered  to  go 
round  the  hill  to  the  right,  until  he  should  find  a  gentler  as¬ 
cent,  while  he  himself,  making  a  small  circuit  to  the  left, 
charged  the  enemy  in  flank.  This,  at  once,  threw  their  line 
into  disorder,  though  they  attempted  to  change  the  position 
of  their  wings,  and  face  about  their  ranks  towards  the  several 
shouts,  which  assailed  their  ears  from  every  quarter.  During 

440 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  543, 

this  confusion,  Laelius  also  came  up,  and  the  enemy,  by  re¬ 
treating,  through  fear  of  being  wounded  from  behind,  broke 
their  front  line,  and  left  an  opening  for  the  Roman  centre* 
who  never  could  have  made  their  way  up  against  ground  so 
disadvantageous,  had  the  ranks  remained  entire,  and  the  ele¬ 
phants  kept  their  posts  in  the  front  of  the  battalions*  While 
numbers  were  slain  in  every  quarter,  Scipio,  who  with  his  left 
wdng  had  charged  the  right  of  the  enemy,  continued  the  attack 
with  the  greatest  fury  against  their  naked  flank.  And  now  the 
Carthaginians  had  not  even  a  passage  open  for  flight ;  for  the 
Roman  detachments  had  ta'ken  possession  of  the  roads  both 
on  the  right  and  left ;  add  to  this,  that  their  commander  and 
principal  officers,  in  endeavouring  to  make  their  escape,  filled 
up  the  gate  of  the  camp,  while  the  disorderly  route  of  the 
frightened  elephants  were  as  terrible  to  them  as  were  the  en¬ 
emy.  There  were  slain  therefore  not  less  than  eight  thousand 
men. 
XIX.  Hasdrubal  had,  before  the  battle,  hastily  sent  off 
his  treasure;  and  now,  forwarding  the  elephants,  he  collected 
the  flying  troops,  directing  his  course  along  the  river  Tagus, 
toward  the  Pyrenees.  Scipio  took  possession  of  the  Cartha¬ 
ginian  camp,  and  having  bestowed  on  the  soldiers  all  the 
booty,  except  the  persons  of  free  condition,  he  found,  on 
taking  an  account  of  the  prisoners,  ten  thousand  foot,  and 
two  thousand  horse.  Of  these,  he  sent  home  all  the  Spaniards 
without  ransom,  the  Africans  he  ordered  the  quaestor  to  sell. 
On  this,  the  multitude  of  Spaniards  who  stood  around,  both 
those  who  had  formerly  surrendered,  and  those  taken  the 
day  before,  unanimously  saluted  him  by  the  title  of  king. 
But  Scipio,  ordering  the  crier  to  command  silence,  told  them, 
that  “  to  him  the  highest  title  was  that  of  general,  which  his 
soldiers  had  conferred  upon  him.  That  the  dtle  of  king,  in 
other  places  highly  respected,  was,  at  Rome,  deemed  odious. 
They  might,  indeed,  within  their  own  breasts,  judge  of  him 
as  possessing  the  spirit  of  a  king,  if  they  deemed  that  the 

BOOK  XXVIL 

441 

B.C.  209.] 

most  honourable  perfection  in  a  human  mind,  but  they  must 
refrain  from  the  application  of  the  name.”  Even  these  bar¬ 
barians  were  sensibly  effected  by  the  greatness  of  his  mind^ 
that  could  look  down  contemptuously  on  a  title,  which  from 
the  rest  of  mankind  attracts  wonder  and  admiration.  He 
then  distributed  presents  among  the  petty  princes  and  chief¬ 
tains  of  the  Spaniards,  desiring  Indibilis  to  choose,  out  of 
the  great  number  of  horses  taken,  three  hundred,  such  as  he 
liked.  While  the  quaestor,  in  pursuance  of  the  general’s 
order,  was  selling  off  the  Africans,  he  observed  among  them 
a  boy  of  extraordinary  beauty;  and,  hearing  that  he  was  of 
royal  blood,  he  sent  him  to  Scipio.  Scipio,  asking  him, 
who,  and  of  what  country  he  was;  and  why,  at  that  early 
age,  he  had  been  found  in  a  camp?”  He  told  him,  that  ‘‘  he 
was  a  Numidian,  called  by  his  countrymen  Massiva;  that 
being  left  an  orphan  by  the  death  of  his  father,  he  was  edu¬ 
cated  in  the  family  of  his  maternal  grandfather,  Gala,  King 
of  Numidia.  That  he  had  come  over  into  Spain  with  his 
uncle  Masinissa,  who  had  lately  brought  a  body  of  cavalry 
to  the  assistance  of  the  Carthaginians.  That  he  had  never 
before  been  in  a  battle,  having  been  prohibited  by  Masinissa 
on  account  of  his  youth;  but  that,  on  the  day  of  the  engage¬ 
ment  with  the  Romans,  he  had  privately  taken  a  horse  and 
arms,  and,  unknown  to  his  uncle,  gone  out  into  the  field, 
where,  by  his  horse  falling,  he  w^as  thrown  to  the  ground,  and 
made  a  prisoner  by  the  Romans.”  Scipio,  ordering  the  boy 
to  be  taken  care  of,  finished  what  business  was  to  be  done 
at  the  tribunal;  then,  retiring  into  his  pavilion,  he  called  the 
youth,  and  asked  him,  whether  he  wished  to  return  to  Masi¬ 
nissa?  To  which  the  other,  his  eyes  suffused  with  tears  of 
joy,  replied,  that  above  all  things  it  was  what  he  wished. 
He  then  gave  as  presents  to  him,  a  gold  ring,  a  vest  with  a 
broad  purple  border,  a  Spanish  cloak  with  a  golden  clasp, 
likewise  a  horse  fully  accoutred;  and,  ordering  a  party  of 
horsemen  to  escort  him  as  far  as  he  chose,  sent  him  away* 
VOL.  III. — 3  K 

442 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  543. 
XX.  He  then  held  a  council,  to  settle  a  plan  of  operations; 
when  many  advised  him,  without  delay,  to  go  in  pursuit  of 
Hasdrubal :  but  such  a  step  he  thought  too  hazardous,  lest 
Hasdrubal,  son  of  Gisgo,  and  Mago  should  unite  their  forces 
with  those  of  that  commander.  Contenting  himself,  therefore, 
with  sending  some  troops  to  occupy  the  passes  of  the  Pyre¬ 
nees,  he  passed  the  remainder  of  the  summer  in  receiving  the 
submissions  of  the  Spanish  states.  Not  many  days  after  the 
battle  fought  at  Baecula,  when  Scipio,  on  his  return  to  Tar- 
raco,  had  just  got  clear  of  the  pass  of  Castulo,  the  two  gene¬ 
rals,  from  the  Farther  Spain,  Hasdrubal,  son  of  Gisgo,  and 
Mago,  joined  Hasdruba— a  reinforcement  too  late,  the  bat¬ 
tle  being  lost :  but  their  coming  was  very  seasonable  in  ano¬ 
ther  respect,  as  it  ^ve  him  the  assistance  of  their  counsel,  res¬ 
pecting  the  measures  to  be  taken  for  the  farther  prosecution 
of  the  war.  On  this  occasion,  when  they  compared  accounts 
of  the  dispositions  of  the  Spaniards  in  each  of  their  several 
provinces,  Hasdrubal,  son  of  Gisgo,  alone,  made  a  favourable 
report ;  giving  his  opinion,  that  the  remote  tract  of  Spain, 
which  lies  on  the  ocean  and  about  Gades,  was,  as  yet,  unac¬ 
quainted  with  the  Romans,  and  therefore  sufficiently  well  af¬ 
fected  to  the  Carthaginians.  The  other  Hasdrubal  and  Mago 
agreed  in  pronouncing,  that  the  affections  of  all,  both  in 
their  public  and  private  capacities,  were  attached  to  Scipio 
by  the  kind  treatment  which  he  gave  them  ;  and  that  there 
would  be  no  end  of  desertions,  until  all  the  Spanish  soldiers 
were  either  removed  into  the  remotest  parts  of  Spain,  or  car¬ 
ried  away  into  Gaul.  Therefore,  though  the  Carthaginian 
senate  had  passed  no  order  for  the  purpose,  yet  it  was  neces¬ 
sary  that  Hasdrubal  should  go  into  Italy,  where  the  principal 
stress  of  the  war  lay,  and  where  the  final  decision  of  it  must 
be  expected  ;  in  order,  at  the  same  time,  to  carry  away  all  the 
Spanish  soldiers  out  of  Spain,  and  out  of  the  way  of  hearing 
the  name  of  Scipio  :  that  the  Carthaginian  army,  being  great¬ 
ly  reduced,  as  well  by  desertions  as  by  the  late  unfortunate 

BOOK  XXVII. 

443 

BX.  209.] 
battle,  should  be  filled  up  with  Spanish  recruits :  that  Mago, 
giving  up  his  forces  to  Hasdrubal,  son  of  Gisgo,  should  go 
over  in'  person  to  the  Balearick  islands,  with  a  large  sum  of 
moneys  to  hire  auxiliaries :  that  Hasdrubal,  son  of  Gisgo, 
should,  with  the  remainder,  retire  into  Lusitania,  and  by  no 
means  come  to  an  engagement  with  the  Romans  :  that  out  of 
all  their  effective  horsemen,  a  body  of  three  thousand  cavalry 
should  be  made  up  for  Masinissa,  to  make  excursions  through 
what  they  called  Hither  Spain,  succour  their  allies,  and  carry 
depredations  through  the  towns  and  lands  of  the  enemy. 
Having  determined  on  these  measures,  the  commanders  se¬ 
parated,  to  put  their  resolves  in  execution.  Such  were  the 
transactions  of  this  year  in  Spain.  At  Rome,  the  reputation 
of  Scipio  rose  higher  every  day.  The  taking  of  Tarentum, 
though  effected  by  artifice  rather  than  by  courage,  yet  gave 
some  degree  of  glory  to  Fabius.  The  lustre  of  Fulvius’s 
character  began  to  fade.  Marcellus  was  even  spoken  of  with 
displeasure,  because,  besides  the  failure  in  his  first  battle,  he 
had  in  the  middle  of  summer,  while  Hannibal  was  carrying 
his  excursion  through  various  parts  of  Italy,  drawn  off  his 
army  to  Venusia,  to  lodge  them  in  houses.  He  had  a  bitter 
enemy  in  Caius  Publius  Bibulus,  a  plebeian  tribune  :  this  man, 
ever  since  the  battle  which  proved  unfortunate,  had,  in  fre¬ 
quent  harangues,  represented  Claudius  in  a  dishonourable 
light,  endeavouring  to  render  him  odius  to  the  commons ; 
and  he  now  proposed  to  deprive  him  of  the  command.  The 
friends  of  Claudius  nevertheless  procured  an  order,  that 
Marcellus,  leaving  at  Venusia  a  lieutenant-general,  should 
come  home  to  Rome,  to  clear  himself  of  those  charges,  on 
which  his  enemies  founded  the  resolutions  which  they  pro¬ 
posed  ;  and  that,  during  his  absence,  no  step  should  be  taken 
towards  divesting  him  of  the  command.  It  so  happened  that 
Marcellus  canie  to  Rome,  to  rescue  his  character  from  dis¬ 
grace,  and  the  consul  Quintus  ♦Fulvius  to  hold  the  elections, 
at  the  same  time. 

444 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  543 

XXI.  The  business  respecting  Marcellus’s  commission  was 
debated  in  the  Flaminian  circus,  amidst  a  vast  concourse  of 
plebeians,  and  people  of  all  ranks.  The  tribune  of  the  com¬ 
mons  brought  forward  heavy  charges,  not  only  against  Mar- 
cellus,  but  against  the  whole  body  of  the  nobles.  To  their 
treacherous  and  dilatory  conduct,  ”  he  said,  it  was  owing, 
that  Hannibal  now  held  possession  of  Italy,  as  his  province, 
for  the  tenth  year,  and  passed  more  of  his  life  there  than  in 
Carthage.  The  Roman  people  now  enjoyed  the  fruits  of  con¬ 
tinuing  Marcellas  in  command ;  his  army,  after  being  twice 
routed,  was  spending  the  summer  at  Venusia,  and  dwelling 
in  houses  instead  of  the  camp.’’  These,  and  such  like  invec¬ 
tives  of  the  tribune,  Marcellus  so  thoroughly  refuted,  by  a 
recital  of  the  services  which  he  had  performed,  that  not  only 
the  question  concerning  the  annulling  of  his  commission  was 
negatived,  but,  on  the  day  following,  every  one  of  the  cen¬ 
turies,  with  the  greatest  unanimity,  concurred  in  electing  him 
consul.  The  colleague  joined  with  him,  was  Titus  Quintius 
Crispinus,  then  a  praetor.  Next  day  were  elected  praetors, 
Publius  Licinius  Crassus  Dives,  then  chief  pontiff,  Publius 
Licinius  Varus,  Sextus  Julius  Caesar,  Quintus  Claudius,  fla- 
men.  During  the  very  time  of  the  elections,  the  public  were 
much  disturbed  with  apprehensions  of  a  revolt  in  Etruria. 
That  some  scheme  of  that  kind  had  been  set  on  foot  by  the 
Arretians  was  asserted  in  a  letter  of  Caius  Calpurnius,  who, 
in  the  character  of  propraetor,  held  the  government  of  that  pro¬ 
vince.  Wherefore  Marcellus,  consul  elect,  was  immediately 
despatched  thither,  with  orders  to  inquire  into  the  affair,  and, 
if  he  should  see  occasion,  to  send  for  his  army,  and  remove 
the  war  from  Apulia  to  Etruria.  The  fear  of  this  gave  the 
Etrurians  such  a  check,  as  kept  them  quiet.  Ambassadors  from 
the  Tarentines  came  to  solicit  a  treaty  of  peace,  requesting 
that  they  might  be  allowed  to  live  in  freedom  under  their 
own  laws  ;  but  the  senate  doeired  them  to  come  again,  when 
the  consul  Fabius  would  have  returned  to  Rome.  Both  the 

BOOK  XXVII. 

445 

B.C.  209,] 
Roman  and  plebeian  games  were  this  year  repeated  for  one 
day.  The  curule  sediles  were  Lucius  Cornelius  Caudinus, 
and  Servius  Sulpicius  Galba;  the  plebeian^  Caius  Servilius 
and  Quintus  Caecilius  Metellus.  Many  people  insisted  that 
Servilius  could  not  legally  have  held  the  office  of  tribune, 
nor  could  now  hold  that  of  aedile,  because  it  was  well  known 
that  his  father,  who,  for  ten  years,  was  supposed  to  have  been 
killed  by  the  Boians  near  Mutina,  when  Triumvir  for  the 
distribution  of  lands,  was  still  living,  and  in  the  hands  of 
the  enemy. 
XXIL  In  the  eleventh  year  of  the  Punic  war  commenced 
Y.R.  544.  consulate  of  Marcus  Marcellas,  a  fifth  time, 
B.C.  208,  (reckoning  the  consulship,  which,  because  of  an 
irregularity  in  the  election,  he  did  not  hold,)  and  Titus 
Quintus  Crispinus.  It  was  decreed,  that  both  the  consuls 
should  be  employed  in  Italy,  as  their  province  ;  and  that 
out  of  the  two  consular  armies  of  the  preceding  year,  with  a 
third,  which  was  at  Venusia,  and  had  been  under  the  com¬ 
mand  of  Marcellas,  the  consuls  were  to  choose  whatever  two 
they  liked  ;  and  the  third  was  to  be  assigned  to  the  comman¬ 
der,  to*  whose  lot  the  province  of  Tarentum  and  Sallentum 
should  fall.  The  other  provinces  were  distributed  in  this 
manner  :  with  regard  to  the  prsetors,  the  city  jurisdiction  was 
assigned  to  Publius  Licinius  Varus;  the  foreign,  with  such 
other  employment  as  the  senate  should  direct,  to  Publius  Lici- 
nius  Crassus,  chief  pontiff;  Sicily  to  Sextus  Julius  Caesar,  and 
Tarentum  to  Quintus  Claudius,  flamen.  Quintus  Fulvius  Flac- 
cus  was  continued  in  command  for  the  year,  and  ordered,  with 
one  legion,  to  hold  the  government  of  the  province  of  Capua, 
which  had  been  held  by  Titus  Quintus  when  praetor.  Caius  Hos- 
tilius  Tubulus  was  likewise  continued,  that,  as  propraetor,  he 
might  succeed  Caius  Calpurnius  in  the  command  of  the  twoic- 
gions  in  Etruria;  and  Lucius  Veturius  Philo  was  continued, that 
he  might,  in  quality  of  propraetor,  retain  the  government  of  his 
present  province  of  Gaul,  with  the  same  two  legions  which  he 

446 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[  Y.R.  544. 

had  there  when  praetor.  With  regard  to  Calus  Auranculeius, 
who,  in  his  praetorship,  had,  with  two  legions,  held  the  govern • 
ment  of  the  province  of  Sardinia,  the  senate  passed  a  decree  in 
the  same  terms  with  that  respecting  Lucius  Veturius,  but,  for 
the  defence  of  that  province,  an  additional  force  was  assign¬ 
ed  him  of  fifty  ships  of  war,  which  Scipio  was  to  send  from 
Spain.  The  business  of  continuing  all  these  officers  in  com¬ 
mand  was  laid  before  an  assembly  of  the  people.  To  Publius 
Scipio  and  Marcus  Silanus,  their  present  province  of  Spain, 
and  the  armies  at  present  with  them,  were  decreed  for  the 
year.  An  order  was  sent  to  Scipio,  that,  out  of  eighty  ships 
which  he  then  had, -—some  brought  with  him  from  Italy, 
some  taken  at  Carthage,— he  should  send  fifty  over  to  Sar- 
diniaj  because  a  report  prevailed  that  great  naval  preparations 
were  going  on  at  Carthage,  where  the  intention  was  to  over¬ 
spread  the  whole  coasts  of  Italy,  Sicily,  and  Sardinia  with  a 
fleet  of  two  hundred  sail.  The  business  of  Sicily  was  divid¬ 
ed  thus :  the  troops  of  Cannae  were  given  to  Sextus  Caesar  : 
Marcus  Valerius  Laevinus  (for  he  also  was  continued  in  au¬ 
thority  )  was  to  have  the  fleet  of  seventy  ships,  which  lay  on 
the  coast  of  that  island.  To  these  were  joined  th6  thirtv 
ships  which  had  been  at  Tarentum  the  year  before;  and  with 
this  fleet  of  one  hundred  sail,  if  he  thought  proper,  he  was  to 
pass  over  and  make  depredations  on  Africa.  Publius  Sulpi- 
cius,  also,  was  continued  in  command  for  the  year,  that  he 
might  hold  the  province  of  Macedonia  and  Greece,  with  the 
same  fleet  which  he  had  before.  With  respect  to  the  two 
legions  which  remained  in  the  city  of  Rome,  no  alteration 
was  made.  Leave  was  given  for  the  consuls  to  raise  recruits, 
to  complete  the  troops  wherein  there  was  any  deficiency  of 
numbers.  Twenty-one  legions  were  employed  this  year  in 
the  service  of  the  Roman  empire.  A  charge  was  given  to 
Publius  Licinius  Varus,  city  prsetor,  to  repair  thirty  old  ships 
of  war,  which  lay  at  Ostia,  and  to  furnish  twenty  new  ones, 
with  their  full  complement  of  men,  that  he  might  have  a  fleet 

BOOK  XXVII. 

447 

B.C.  208,] 
of  fifty  sail  to  guard  the  sea  coasts  in  the  neighbourhood  ol 
Rome.  Caius  Calpumius  was  forbidden  to  remove  his  army 
from  Arretium,  before  the  arrival  of  his  successor.  Both  he 
and  Tubero  were  ordered  to  be  particularly  watchful  on  that 
side,  lest  any  new  schemes  might  be  formed. 
XXIII.  The  praetors  went  to  the  provinces,  but  the  con^ 
suls  were  detained  by  business  respecting  religion;  for  they 
could  not  readily  effect  the  expiation  of  several  prodigies 
which  had  been  reported.  From  Campania,  accounts  were 
brought,  that  two  temples  at  Capua,  those  of  Fortune  and 
Mars,  and  several  tombs,  were  struck  by  lightning;  and  at 
Cumae,  mice  gnawed  some  gold  In  the  temple  of  Jupiter,  so 
apt  is  superstitious  weakness  to  introduce  the  deities  into  the 
most  trivial  occurrences;  that  at  Casinum,  a  very  large  swarm 
of  bees  settled  in  the  Forum;  at  Ostia,  a  wall  and  gate  were 
struck  by  lightning;  at  Caere,  a  vulture  flew  into  the  temple 
of  Jupiter;  and  that  at  Vulsinii  blood  flowed  from  a  lake. 
On  account  of  these  portents,  there  was  a  supplication  per¬ 
formed  of  one  day’s  continuance.  During  many  successive 
ones,  sacrifices  were  offered  of  victims  of  the  larger  kinds, 
and  yet  no  favourable  omens  appeared,  nor,  for  a  long  time, 
was  there  any  indication  of  the  gods  becoming  propitious. 
The  baneful  events,  thus  forboded,  affected  not  immediately 
the  safety  of  the  state,  but  fell  on  the  persons  of  the  consuls. 
The  Apollinarian  games  had  been  first  celebrated  by  the 
citv  praetor,  Cornelius  Sulla,  in  the  consulate  of  Quintus 
Fulvius,  and  Appius  Claudius;  and,  thenceforward,  all  the 
city  praetors,  in  succession,  had  performed  them;  but  they 
vowed  them  only  for  one  year,  and  fixed  no  particularly  day 
for  their  observance.  This  year,  a  grievous  epidemic  disor¬ 
der  fell  both  on  the  city  and  country;  however,  the  sickness 
was  rather  tedious  than  mortal.  On  account  of  this  malady, 
a  supplication  was  performed  in  all  the  streets  of  Rome,  the 
city  praetor,  Publius  Licinius  Varus,  .being  at  the  same  time 
ordered  to  propose  to  the  people  to  enact  a  law,  that  a  \o\^ 

448 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  544. 
should  be  made  for  the  perpetual  celebration  of  those  games 
on  a  stated  day.  Accordingly  he  himself  first  engaged  for 
it,  holding  the  games  on  the  third  day  of  the  nones  of  July, 
which  day  has  ever  since  been  observed  as  an  anniversary 
festival. 
XXIV.  The  rumours  concerning  the  Arretians  grew 
ever\^  day  more  and  more  alarming,  and  greatly  increased 
the  anxiety  of  the  senate;  wherefore  orders  were  despatched 
to  Caius  Hostilius,  not  to* defer  taking  hostages  from  that 
people;  and  Caius  Terentius  Varro  was  sent  with  a  commis¬ 
sion  to  receive  them  from  him,  and  conduct  them  to  Rome. 
On  his  arrival,  Hostilius  immediately  ordered  one  legion^ 
which  was  encamped  before  the  gates,  to  march  into  the  city; 
and  then,  having  posted  guards  in  proper  places,  he  sum¬ 
moned  the  senate  to  attend  him  in  the  Forum,  and  made  a 
demand  of  hostages.  The  senate  requested  two  days  time 
to  consider  of  the  matter;  but  he  insisted  that  they  should, 
give  them  instantly,  or  he  would,  next  day,  take  all  the  chil¬ 
dren  of  the  senators.  He  then  directed  all  the  military  tri¬ 
bunes,  praefects  of  the  allies,  and  centurions,  to  guard  the 
gates  carefully,  that  no  one  might  go  out  of  the  city  in  the 
night.  This  was  not  performed  with  proper  care  and  dili¬ 
gence;  for,  before  the  guards  were  posted  at  the  gates,  or 
night  came  on,  seven  principal  senators  made  their  escape 
with  their  children.  At  the  first  light,  on  the  day  following, 
the  senate  being  summoned  into  the  Forum,  they  were  mis¬ 
sed,  and  their  property  was  sold.  From  the  rest  of  the  sen¬ 
ators,  one  hundred  and  twenty  hostages  were  received,  who 
were  their  own  children,  and  they  were  delivered  to  Cai¬ 
us  Terentius  to  be  conducted  to  Rome.  He  represented 
every  thing  to  the  senate,  in  such  a  light  as  greatly  increased 
their  suspicions:  wherefore,  as  if  the  hostile  intentions  of  the 
Etrurians  were  no  longer  to  be  doubted,  an  order  was  given 
to  Caius  Terentius  himself,  to  lead  one  of  the  city  legions  to 
Aretium,  and  keep  it  there,  as  a  garrison  to  the  city-  It  was 

BOOK  XXVII. 

449 

BX.  208.] 

at  the  same  time  determined  that  Caius  Hostilius,  with  the 
rest  of  the  troops,  should  make  a  circuit  through  the  whole 
province;  that  those  who  wished  to  excite  disturbances  might 
have  no  opportunity  of  putting  their  designs  in  execution. 
When  Caius  Terentius,  with  the  legion,  arrived  at  Arretium, 
and  demanded  from  the  magistrates  the  keys  of  the  gates, 
they  told  him  that  they  were  not  to  be  found;  but  he,  believ¬ 
ing  rather  that  they  had  been  put  out  of  the  way  through 
some  evil  design,  than  lost  through  negligence,  put  on  new 
locks,  making  use  of  every  precaution  to  keep  all  things  ful¬ 
ly  under  his  own  power.  He  earnestly  cautioned  Hostilius 
not  to  expect  to  retain  the  Etrurians  in  quiet  by  any  other 
means  than  by  putting  it  out  of  their  power  to  stir. 
XXV.  About  this  time,  the  business  of  the  Tarentines  oc¬ 
casioned  a  warm  debate  in  the  senate,  where  Fabius  was 
present,  exerting  himself  in  favour  of  those  whom  he  had 
subdued  by  arms,  while  others  spoke  of  them  with  much  as¬ 
perity,  charging  them  as  equal  in  guilt  and  deserving  equal 
punishment  with  the  Campanians.  The  senate  resolved,  con¬ 
formably  to  the  opinion  of  Manius  Acilius,  that  the  town 
should  be  secured  by  a  garrison,  and  all  the  Tarentines  con¬ 
fined  within  the  walls,  and  that  the  business  should  be  taken 
under  consideration  at  a  future  time,  and  when  Italy  should 
be  in  a  state  of  greater  tranquility.  The  case  of  Marcus 
Livius,  governor  of  the  citadel  of  Tarentum,  was  also  de¬ 
bated  with  no  less  warmth  :  some  advised  to  pass  a  vote  of 
censure  on  him,  because  that,  in  consequence  of  his  indolence, 
Tarentum  had  been  betrayed  to  the  enemy ;  while  others 
thought  hhn  deserving  of  reward,  for  having  defended  the 
citadel  for  five  years,  and  for  having,  singly,  been  the  prin¬ 
cipal  cause  of  the  recoverv  of  Tarentum.  IVIoderate  people 
affirmed,  that  the  cognizance  of  his  conduct  belonged  to  the 
censors,  not  to  the  senate  ;  and  of  this  opinion  was  Fabius; 
nevertheless  adding  — “  Livius  was,  no  doubt,  the  cause  of 
Tarentum  beingrecovered,  as  his  fi  lends  have  so  often  boasted 
VOL.  III.—  3  L 

450 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[YJl.  544. 

in  the  senate  ;  but  it  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  it  could 
not  have  been  recovered,  if  it  had  not  l^en  lost.”  The  con¬ 
sul,  Titus  Quintus  Crispinus,  marched  with  a  reinforcement 
into  Lucania,  to  join  the  army  formerly  commanded  by  Quin¬ 
tus  Fulvius  Flaccus.  Marcellas  was  detained  by  several  ob¬ 
stacles  respecting  religion,  which  occurred,  in  quick  succes¬ 
sion,  to  disturb  his  mind :  one  of  which  was,  that,  having  in 
the  battle  with  the  Gauls  at  Clastidium  vowed  a  temple  to 
Honour  and  Virtue,  he  had  been  hindered,  by  the  pontiffs, 
from  dedicating  it ;  for  they  insisted,  that  one  shrine  could 
not,  with  propriety,  be  consecrated  to  more  than  one  deity: 
because,  if  it  should  be  struck  with  lightning,  or  any  kind  of 
prodig}^  happen  in  it,  the  expiation  would  be  difficult,  as  it 
could  not  be  determined  to  which  of  the  deities  sacrifice  ought 
to  be  made  ;  for  one  victim  could  not,  properly,  be  offered  to 
two  divinitias,  unless  they  were  known  to  be  two  to  whom 
such  victim  mi^t  be  acceptable.  Wherefore  a  separate  tem¬ 
ple  was  erected  to  Virtue,  and  the  work  pushed  forward  with 
haste  ;  nevertheless  these  temples  were  not  dedicated  by  him. 
At  lengtfr  he  set  out,  with  a  number  of  recruits,  to  join  the 
army,  which  he  had  left  the  year  before  at  Venusia.  Crispi¬ 
nus,  observing  the  great  degree  of  fame  which  the  taking  of 
Tarentum  had  procured  to  Marcellus,  prepared  to  lay  siege  to 
Locri  in  Bruttium,  sending  to  Sicily  for  engines  and  machines 
of  all  sorts,  and  calling  over  a  fleet  from  thence,  to  attack  that 
quarter  of  the  city  which  stretched  down  to  the  sea.  But  he 
laid  aside  his  design  of  the  siege,  because  Hannibal  had  ad¬ 
vanced  to  Llcinium;’he  heard,  too,  that  his  colleague  had  led 
out  his  army  from  Venusia,  which  made  him  wish  to  unite 
their  forces.  Crispinus  therefore  withdrew  from  Bruttium 
into  Apulia,  and  the  two  consuls  sat  down  in  separate  camps, 
distant  from  each  other  less  than  three  miles,  between  Venu¬ 
sia  and  Bantia.  Hannibal  also  returned  into  the  same  coun¬ 
try,  as  soon  as  he  had  saved  Locri  from  a  siege.  And  now 
the  consuls,  being  both  impatient  for  action,  offered  battle 

BX.  20a.] 

BOOK  XXVII. 

451 

almost  every  day;  not  doubting  but  that,  if  the  enemy  would 
hazard  an  engagement  with  the  two  consular  armies  united, 
they  might  effectually  put  an  end  to  the  war. 
XXVI.  As  Hannibal,  of  the  two  battles  which  he  had 
fought  with  Marcellus  the  year  before,  had  gained  one  and 
lost  the  other,  he  might  now,  in  case  of  an  engagement  with 
the  same  antagonist,  find  reasonable  grounds  both  of  hope 
and  fear;  but  he  could,  by  no  means,  believe  himself  equal  to 
a  contest  with  the  two  consuls  together.  Applying  himself, 
therefore,  wholly  to  his  old  artifices,  he  watched  an  opportu¬ 
nity  for  an  ambuscade.  However,  several  skirmishes  were 
fought  betw^een  the  camps  with  various  success,  and  the  con¬ 
suls  began  to  think  that  the  summer  might  be  spun  out  in 
this  manner.  They  were  of  opinion,  how  ever,  that  the  siege 
of  Locri  might,  nevertheless,  be  prosecuted;  and  they  wTOte 
to  Lucius  Cincius  to  come  over,  with  the  fleet,  from  Sicily 
to  that  place;  and,  to  carry  on  the  siege  on  the  land  side, 
they  ordered  half  the  troops  in  garrison  at  Tarentum  to  march 
thither.  Hannibal,  having  received  previous  intimation  from 
some  Thurians  of  these  intended  measures,  sent  a  party  to 
lie  in  ambush  on  the  road  from  Tarentum.  There  under  the 
hill  of  Petellia,  three  thousand  horsemen  and  two  thousand 
foot  were  placed  in  concealment;  and  the  Romans,  marching 
carelessly,  without  having  examined  the  road,  fell  into  the 
snare,  where  no  less  than  two  thousand  soldiers  were  killed, 
and  about  tw'elve  hundred  taken  prisoners:  the  rest  flying 
different  ways,  through  the  fields  and  tvoods,  returned  to  Ta¬ 
rentum.  Between  the  Roman  and  Carthaginian  camps,  stood 
a  hill,  interspersed  with  trees,  which  neither  party  at  first 
had  occupied,  because  the  Romans  knew  not  the  nature  of 
the  ground  on  the  side  which  faced  the  camp  of  theenemy,and 
Hannibal  had  judged  it  to  be  better  fitted  for  an  ambush  than 
for  a  camp:  accordingly  he  sent  thither,  for  the  purpose,  a 
strong  detachment  of  Numidians,  whom  he  concealed  in  the 
middle  of  a  thicket;  not  one  of  whom  stirred  from  his  post 

452 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[YJl.  544 
in  the  day,  lest  either  their  arms  or  themselves  might  be  ob¬ 
served  from  a  distance.  There  ran  a  general  murmer  through 
the  Roman  camp,  that  this  hill  ought  to  be  seized,  and  se¬ 
cured  by  a  fort,  lest,  if  Hannibal  should  get  possession  of  it, 
they  should  have  the  enemy,  as  it  were,  over  their  heads. 
The  observation  struck  Marceilus,  and  he  said  to  his  col¬ 
league,  Why  not  go  ourselves  with  a  few  horsemen,  and 
take  a  view  of  the  place?  After  examining  the  matter  with 
our  own  eyes,  we  shall  be  able  to  judge  with  more  certainty.” 
Crispinus  assenting,  they  proceeded  to  the  spot,  attended  by 
two  hundred  and  twenty  horsemen,  of  whom  forty  were  Fre- 
gellans,  the  rest  Etrurians:  they  were  accompanied  by  two 
military  tribunes,  Marcus  Marceilus,  the  consul’s  son,  and 
Aulus  Manlius,  and  by  two  praefects  of  the  allies,  Lucius 
Arennius  and  Marcus  Aulius.  Some  writers  have  recorded, 
that  the  consul  Marceilus  offered  sacrifice  on  that  day,  and 
that,  on  the  first  victim  being  slain,  the  liver  was  found  with¬ 
out  its  head:  in  the  second,  all  the  usual  parts  appeared,  but 
there  was  a  swelling  observed  on  the  head  of  the  liver;  the 
aruspex  also  observing,  that,  in  the  second  case,  the  entrails, 
being  imperfect  and  foul,  afforded  no  very  happy  presages. 
XXVII.  But  the  consel  Marcehus  was  possessed  with  such 
a  passionate  desire  for  a  trial  of  strength  with  Hannibal,  that 
he  never  thought  his  own  camp  close  enough  to  his;  and  on 
this  occasion,  as  he  was  passing  the  rampart,  he  left  directions 
that  every  soldier  should  be  ready  in  his  place,  in  order  that, 
if  the  hill  which  they  were  going  to  examine,  should  be 
approved  of,  the  whole  might  strike  their  tents,  and  follow 
them  thither.  In  front  of  the  camp  was  a  small  plain,  and 
the  road,  leading  thence  to  the  hill,  was  open  on  all  sides,  and 
exposed  to  view.  A  watchman  whom  the  Numidians  had 
posted,  not  in  expectation  of  an  opportunity  so  important  as 
this,  but  with  the  hope  of  cutting  off  any  party  that  might 
straggle  too  far  in  search  of  wood  or  forage,  gave  them  the 
signal  to  rise  at  once  from  their  concealments.  Those  who 

BOOK  XXVII. 

453 

B.C,  2O8.3 
were  to  come  forth  from  the  summit  and  meet  the  enemy  in 
front  did  not  show  themselves,  until  the  others,  who  were  to 
enclose  them  on  the  rear,  had  got  round.  Then  all  sprung 
forward  from  eveiy^  side,  and,  raising  a  shout,  made  a  furious 
onset.  Though  the  consuls  were  so  situated  in  the  valley 
that  they  could  neither  force  their  way  up  the  hill,  which  was 
occupied  by  .the  enemy,  nor,  surrounded  as  they  were,  effect 
a  retreat,  the  dispute  might  nevertheless  have  been  protracted 
for  a  longer  time,  had  not  the  Etrurians  begun  to  fly,  and 
thereby  filled  the  rest  with  disraa}’'.  However,  the  Fregel- 
Ians,  though  abandoned  by  the  Etrurians,  did  not  give  up  the 
contest,  as  long  as  the  consuls  remained  unhurt;  who,  by  their 
exhortations,  and  their  own  personal  exertions,  supported  the 
spirit  of  the  fight:  but,  afterwards,  seeing  both  the  consuls 
wounded,  and  Marcellus  pierced  through  with  a  lance,  and 
falling  lifeless  from  his  horse,  then  the  few  betook  themselves 
to  flight,  carrying  with  them  Crispinus,  who  had  received  two 
wounds  from  javelins,  and  young  Marcellus,  who  was  also 
hurt.  One  of  the  military  tribunes,  A  ulus  Manlius,  was 
slain:  of  the  two  prael'cets  of  the  allies,  Marcus  Aulius  was 
killed,  and  Lucius  Arennius  taken:  of  the  lictors  of  the  con¬ 
suls,  five  fell  alive  into  the  enemy’s  hands;  of  the  rest,  some 
were  slain,  the  others  fled  with  the  consul.  Forty-three 
horsemen  fell  in  the  fight  and  pursuit,  and  eighteen  were 
made  prisoners.  The  troops  in  camp  had  taken  the  alarm, 
and  were  going  to  succour  the  consuls,  when  they  saw  one 
consul,  and  the  other  consul’s  son,  both  wounded,  and  the 
small  remains  of  the  unfortunate  party  on  their  return.  The 
death  of  Marcellus,  unhappy  in  other  respects,  was  no  less  so 
in  this,  that  by  a  conduct,  ill-becoming  either  his  age  (for  he 
was  now  above  sixty  years  old),  or  the  prudence  of  a  veteran, 
commander,  he  had  so  improvidently  precipitated  himself, 
his  colleague,  aud,  in  some  measure,  the  whole  common¬ 
wealth  into  such  desperate  hazard.  I  should  engage  in  too 
many  and  too  long  discussions  on  a  single  event,  if  I  were 

454 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R  544. 

to  recite  all  the  various  relations  given  by  different  writers 
of  the  death  of  Marcellus.  To  omit  other  authors,  Lucius 
Caelius  presents  us  with  three  different  narratives  of  that  oc¬ 
currence:  one  received  by  tradition;  another  written,  and 
contained  in  the  funeral  panegyric,  delivered  by  his  son,  who 
was  present  in  the  action;  and  a  third,  which  he  produces  as 
the  real  state  of  the  fact,  discovered  by  his  own  inquiries. 
But  how  much  soever  reports  vary,  most  of  them,  notwith¬ 
standing,  concur  in  stating,  that  he  went  out  of  his  camp  to 
view  the  ground,  and  all,  that  he  was  slain  in  an  ambuscade. 
XXVIII.  Hannibal,  supposing  that  the  enemy  must  be 
greatly  dismayed  by  the  death  of  one  of  their  consuls,  and 
the  wounds  of  the  other,  and  wishing  not  to  lose  any  advan¬ 
tage  which  a  juncture  so  favourable  might  afford,  removed 
his  camp  immediately  to  the  hill  on  which  the  battle  had 
been  fought.  Here  he  found  the  body  of  Marcellus,  and  in¬ 
terred  it.  Crispinus,  disheartened  by  his  colleague’s  death 
and  his  own  wounds,  decamped  in  the  silence  of  the  follow¬ 
ing  night,  and,  on  the  nearest  mountains  that  he  could  reach, 
pitched  his  camp  in  an  elevated  spot,  secure  on  all  sides.  On 
this  occasion,  the  two  commanders  displayed  great  sagacity 
in  their  proceedings,  while  one  endeavoured  to  effect,  the 
other  to  guard  against  deception.  Hannibal  had,  with  Mar- 
cellus’s  body,  gotten  possession  of  his  ring,  and  Crispinus, 
fearing  lest  mistakes  occasioned  by  means  of  this  signet  might 
give  room  to  the  Carthaginian  for  practising  some  of  his 
wiles,  sent  expresses  round  to  all  the  neighbouring  states  to 
inform  them,  that  ‘^his  colleague  had  been  slain,  that  the 
enemy  w^as  in  possession  of  his  ring,  and  that  they  should, 
therefore,  give  no  credit  to  any  letters  written  in  the  name 
of  Marcellus.”  This  message  from  the  consul  had  but  just 
arrived  at  Salapia,  when  a  letter  was  brought  thither  from 
Hannibal,  written  in  the  name  of  Marcellus,  intimating,  that 
‘‘  he  would  come  to  Salapia  on  the  night  which  was  to  fol- 
•  low  that  day;  and  directing  that  the  soldiers  of  the  garrison 

B.C.  308.] 

BOOK  XXVIL 

455 

should  be  ready  in  case  he  should  have  occasion  to  employ 
them.’’  The  Salapians  were  aware  of  the  fraud;  and  judging 
that  Hannibal,  whom  they  had  incensed,  not  only  by  their 
defection  from  his  p^rty,  but  by  killing  his  horsemen,  was 
seeking  an  opportunity  for  revenge,  sent  back  his  messenger, 
who  was  a  Roman  deserter,  in  order  that  the  soldiers  might 
act,  as  should  be  thought  proper,  without  being  watched  by 
him;  they  then  placed  parties  of  the  townsmen  on  guard  along, 
the  walls,  and  in  the  convenient  parts  of  the  city,  forming  the 
guards  and  watches  for  that  night  with  more  than  ordinart^ 
care.  On  each  side  of  the  gate,  through  w^hich  they  expected 
the  enemy  to  come,  they  placed  the  main  strength  of  the  gar¬ 
rison.  About  the  fourth  watch  Hannibal  approached  the 
city:  his  van-guard  was  composed  of  Roman  deserters,  armed 
also  in  the  Roman  fashion.  These,  when  they  came  to  the 
gate,  as  they  all  spoke  the  Latin  language,  called  up  the 
watchmen,  and  ordered  them  to  open  the  gate,  for  the  consul 
was  at  hand.  The  watchmen,  as  if  awakened  by  their  call, 
were  all  in  a  hurry  and  bustle,  striving  to  open  the  gate, 
which  had  been  shut  by  letting  down  the  portcullice:  some 
raised  this  with  levers,  others  pulled  it  up  with  ropes  to  such 
an  height,  that  men  might  come  in  without  stooping.  Scarcely 
w^as  the  passage  sufficiently  opened,  when  the  deserters  rushed 
in  eagerly  through  the  gate;  and,  when  about  six  hundred 
had  entered,  the  rope,  by  which  it  was  kept  suspended,  being 
Joosened,  the  portcullice  fell  down  with  a  great  noise.  Part 
of  the  Salapians  now  attacked  the  deserters,  who,  as  if  among 
friends  carried  their  arms  carelessly  on  their  shoulders,  as  on 
a  march;  while  the  rest,  from  the  tower  adjoining  the  gate 
and  from  the  walls,  beat  off*  the  enemy  with  stones,  and  pikes, 
and  javelins.  Thus  Hannibal,  ensnared  by  an  artifice  worth)' 
of  himself,  was  obliged  to  retire,  and  went  thence  to  raise 
the  siege  of  Locri,  which  Cincius  was  pushing  forward  with 
the  utmost  vigour,  having  constructed  various  w^orks,  and 
being  supplied  with  engines  of  even’  kind  from  Sicily.  Mago, 

456 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.544. 

who  almost  despaired  of  being  able  to  hold  out  and  maintain 
the  defence  of  the  city,  received  the  first  gleam  of  returning 
hope  from  the  news  of  Marcellus’s  death.  This  was  soon 
followed  by  an  express,  acquainting  him  that  Hannibal,  hav¬ 
ing  sent  forward  the  Numidian  cavalry,  was  hastening  after, 
at  the  head  of  the  main  body  of  infantry,  with  all  the  speed 
he  could  make.  As  soon,  therefore,  as  he  understood,  by 
signals  made  from  the  watch-towers,  that  the  Numidians 
were  drawing  nigh,  he,  with  his  own  forces,  suddenly  throw¬ 
ing  open  a  gate,  rushed  out  furiously  on  the  besiegers.  The 
suddenness  of  his  attack,  rather  than  inequality  of  strength, 
at  first  made  the  dispute  doubtful;  but  afterwards,  when  the 
Numidians  came  up,  the  Romans  were  struck  with  such  dis¬ 
may,  that  they  fled  in  confusion  towards  the  sea  and  their 
ships,  leaving  behind  their  works  and  machines  which  the}^ 
used  in  battering  the  walls.  In  this  manner  did  the  approach 
of  Hannibal  raise  the  siege  of  Locri. 
XXIX.  \^Tien  Crispinus  learned  that  Hannibal  had  gone 
into  Bruttium,  he  ordered  Marcus  Marcellus,  military  tri¬ 
bune,  to  lead  away  to  Venusia  the  army  which  had  been  under 
the  command  of  his  colleage;  and  he  himself,  wtih  his  own 
legions,  set  out  for  Capua,  being  scarcely  able  to  endure  the 
motion  of  a  litter,  his  wounds  were  so  very  painful.  But  he 
first  despatched  a  letter  to  Rome,  w  ith  an  account  of  Mar- 
cellus’s  death,  and  of  his  own  dangerous  situation.  **  It  was 
not  in  his  power,”  he  said,  to  go  to  Rome  to  attend  the 
elections,  because  he  was  sure  he  should  not  be  able  to  bear 
the  fatigue  of  the  journey;  and  besides,  that  he  was  uneasy 
about  Tarentum,  lest  Hannibal  might  march  thither  from 
Bruttium.  It  was  therefore  necessary  that  some  persons 
should  be  commissioned  to  come  to  him  in  his  quarters,  men 
of  prudence,  to  whom  he  could  with  freedom  speak  his 
thoughts  on  the  present  state  of  affairs.”  The  reading  of  this 
letter  caused  great  sorrow  for  the  death  of  one  consul,  and 
apprehensions  for  the  safety  of  the  other.  The  senate,  there- 

BOOK  XXVU. 

B,C.  208.] 

4a  r 

fore,  sent  Quintus  Fabius  the  younger  to  Venusia,  to  take 
the  command  of  the  army  there;  and  deputed  three  persons 
to  wait  on  the  consul,  Sextus  Julius  Caesar,  Lucius  Licinius 
Pollio,  and  Lucius  Cincius  Alimentus,  who  had  a  few  days 
before  come  home  from  Sicily.  These  were  ordered  to  deli¬ 
ver  a  message  to  the  consul,  that  if  he  could  not  come  himself 
to  Rome,  to  hold  the  elections,  he  would,  within  the  Roman 
territories,  nominate  a  dictator  for  that  purpose;  and  direc¬ 
tions  were  given,  that  in  case  the  consul  should  have  gone  to 
Tarentum,  then  Quintus  Claudius,  the  praetor,  should  lead  the 
army  from  its  present  quarters  into  that  part  of  the  country 
where  he  could  afford  protection  to  the  greatest  number  of 
the  cities  of  the  allies.  In  the  course  of  this  summer  Marcus 
Valerius  passed  from  Sicily  to  Africa  with  a  fleet  of  one  hun¬ 
dred  sail,  and  making  a  descent  near  the  city  of  Clupea,  ra¬ 
vaged  the  country  to  a  great  extent,  meeting  scarcely  any 
one  in  arms.  After  which,  the  troops  employed  in  these  de^ 
predations  made  a  hasty  retreat  to  their  ships,  in  consequence 
of  a  sudden  feport  that  the  Carthaginian  fleet  was  approach¬ 
ing.  This  fleet  consisted  of  eighty -three  ships,  with  which 
the  Roman  commander  came  to  an  Engagement  not  far  from 
Clupea,  and  gained  a  complete  victory.  After  taking  eighteen 
ships,  and  dispersing  the  rest,  he  returned  to  Lilybseum  with 
abundance  of  booty,  acquired  both  on  land  and  sea. 
XXX.  Philip,  during  this  summer,  brought  assistance  to 
the  Ach^ans,  in  compliance  with  their  earnest  entreaties;  for, 
on  one  side,  Machanidas,  tyrant  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  ha¬ 
rassed  them  continually  by  irruptions  from  his  territories, 
which  lay  contiguous  to  theirs;  and  on  another,  the  ^Ttolians, 
transporting  an  army,  in  ships,  through  the  streight  which 
runs  between  Naupactus  and  Patrae,  called  b)'  the  neighlmur- 
ing  inhabitants  Rhios,  had  spread  devastations  through  the 
country.  A  report  also  prevailed,  that  Attains,  king  of  Asia, 
intended  to  come  over  into  Europe,  because  the  iEtolians,  in 
their  last  general  council,  had  constituted  him  chief  niagis- 
VOL.  HI. — 3  M 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  544. 

458 

trate  of  their  state.  While  Philip  was,  for  all  these  reasons, 
inarching  down  into  Greece,  he  was  met  at  the  city  of  Lamia 
by  the  JEtolians,  under  the  command  of  Pyrrhias,  who  had 
been  created  praetor  for  that  year,  conjointly  with  Attains, 
on  account  of  the  latter’s  absence.  Besides  their  own  forces, 
they  had  a  body  of  auxiliaries  sent  by  Attains,  and  about  one 
thousand  men  from  the  Roman  fleet  of  Publius  Sulpicius. 
Against  this  commander,  and  these  forces,  Philip  fought 
twice  with  success;  and,  in  each  battle,  slew  at  least  one 
thousand.  The  iEtolians,  being  so  greatly  dismayed,  as  to 
keep  themselves  close  under  the  walls  of  Lamia,  Philip  led 
back  his  army  to  Phalara.  This  place,  being  situated  on  the 
Malian  bay,  was  formerly  thickly  inhabited,  on  account  of 
its  excellent  harbour,  the  safe  anchorage  on  either  side,  with 
other  commodious  circumstances,  to  which  both  the  sea  and 
the  land  contributed.  Hither  came  ambassadors  from  Ptole¬ 
my  king  of  Egypt,  the  Rhodians,  Athenians,  and  Chians, 
with  intent  to  compose  the  differences  between  Philip  and 
the  iEtolians.  The  ^Etolians  also  invited  a  mediator  from 
among  their  neighbours,  Amynander,  king  of  Athamania. 
But  the  concern  of  all  was  engaged,  not  so  much  by  dieir 
regard  for  the  ^tolians,  who  were  remarkable  for  an  arro¬ 
gance  unbecoming  a  Grecian  state,  as  by  their  wishes  to  pre¬ 
vent  Philip  from  interfering  in  any  of  the  affairs  of  Greece; 
an  interference  which  would  be  highly  dangerous  to  the  ge¬ 
neral  liberty.  The  deliberations  concerning  a  pacification 
were  adjourned  to  the  meeting  of  the  council  of  the  Achaeans, 
and  a  certain  time  and  place  were  fixed  for  that  assembly. 
In  the  mean  time,  a  truce  for  thirty  days  was  obtained.  The 
king,  proceeding  thence  through  Thessaly  and  Bceotia,  came 
to  Chalcis  in  Euboea,  with  design  to  exclude  Attalus  from 
the  harbours  and  coasts,  for  intelligence  had  been  received 
that  he  intended  to  come  to  Euboea  with  a  fleet.  Afterwards, 
leaving  there  a  body  of  troops  to  oppose  Attalus,  in  case  he 
ihould  happen  to  arrive  in  the  mean  time;  and  setting  out 

BOOK  XXVII. 

459 

B.C,  208.] 
himself  with  a  few  horsemen  and  light  infantr}^,  he  came  to 
Argos.  Here  the  superintendance  of  the  games  of  Hserean 
Juno  and  Nemsean  Hercules  being  conferred  on  him  by  the 
suffrages  of  the  people,  because  the  kings  of  the  Macedoni¬ 
ans  affect  to  derive  the  origin  of  their  family  from  that  city, 
he  performed  those  in  honour  of  Juno;  and,  as  soon  as  they 
were  finished,  went  off  instantly  to  iEgium,  to  the  council 
summoned  some  time  before.  In  this  assembly  several 
schemes  were  proposed  for  putting  an  end  to  the  iEtolian 
war,  that  neither  the  Romans  nor  Attains  might  have  any 
pretence  for  entering  Greece.  But  every  measure  of  the  kind 
w^  defeated  at  once  by  the  jEtolians,  when  the  time  of  the  truce 
had  scarcely  expired,  on  their  hearing  that  Attains  was  ar¬ 
rived  at  iEgina,  and  that  the  Roman  fleet  lay  at  Naupactus. 
For  being  called  into  the  council  of  the  Achaeans,  where  were 
likewise  present  the  same  ambassadors  who  had  treated  of  a 
pacification  at  Phalara,*  they  at  first  complained  of  some  tri¬ 
fling  acts  committed  during  the  truce,  contrary  to  the  faith  of 
the  convention,  at  last  declaring  that  the  War  could  not  be 
terminated  on  any  other  terms  .than  by  the  Achaeans  giving 
back  Pyius  to  the  Messenians,  Atintania  to  the  Romans,  and 
Ardyaea  to  Scerdilaedus  and  Pleuratus.  Philip,  conceiving 
the  utmost  indignation  at  the  vanquished  party  presuming  to 
prescribe  teyns  to  their  conqueror,  said,  that  in  listening  be¬ 
fore  to  proposals  of  peace,  or  in  agreeing  to  a  truce,  he  had 
not  been  led  by  any  expectation  that  the  JEtolians  would  re¬ 
main  quiet,  but  by  his  wish  to  have  all  the  confederates  wit¬ 
nesses  that  the  object  of  his  pursuits  was  peace;  of  theirs^ 
war.’^  Thus,  without  any  thing  being  effected  towards  an  ac¬ 
commodation,  he  dismissed  the  assemblv,  left  five  thousand 
soldiers  to  protect  the  Achaeans,  receiving  from  them  five 
ships  of  war,  with  which,  added  to  a  fleet  lately  sent  to  him 
from  Carthage,  and  some  vessels  then  on  their  way  from 
Bithynia,  sent  by  king  Prusias,  he  had  resolved,  if  he  could 
effect  the  junction,  to  try  his  strength  in  a  naval  engagement 

460 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[y.R.  544. 
with  the  Romans,  who  had  long  been  masters  of  the  sea  in 
that  part  of  the  world.  After  dissolving  the  council,  he  went 
back  to  Argos,  because  the  time  of  the  Nemsean  games  was 
approaching,  and  he  wished  to  give  them,  by  his  presence, 
an  additional  degree  of  splendour. 
XXXI.  While  the  king  was  employed  in  the  celebration 
of  the  games,  and,  during  that  season  of  festivity,  indulging 
his  mind  in  relaxation  from  military  operations,  Publius  Sul- 
picius  setting  sail  from  Naupactus,  arrived  on  the  coast  be¬ 
tween  Sicyon  and  Corinth,  making  violent  depredations  on 
that  fine  and  fertile  country.  The  news  of  this  event  called 
away  Philip  from  the  exhibition.  He  marched  off  with  ra¬ 
pidity  at  the  head  of  his  cavalry,  leaving  orders  for  the  in-« 
fantry  to  follow;  and,  "while  the  Romans  were  straggling  at 
random,  and  heavily  laden  with  booty,  not  apprehending 
any  danger  of  the  kind,  he  attacked  and  drove  them  to  their 
ships.  Thus  the  Roman  fleet  returned  to  Naupactus  with 
little  cause  of  triumph  for  the  booty  which  they  had  taken. 
On  the  other  side,  Philip,  by  the  fame  of  a  victory^  whatever 
might  be  its  real  importance,, gained  however  ov^  Romans, 
added  greatly  to  the  lustre  of  the  remaining  part  of  the 
games;  and  the  festival  was  celebrated  with  extraordinary 
rejoicings,  to  w'hich  he  contributed  also  by  his  popular  be¬ 
haviour:  for,  laying  aside  his  diadem,  purple  rob^,  and  other 
royal  apparel,  he  set  himself,  with  respect  to  appearance,  on 
a  level  with  the  rest;  than  which  nothing  can  be  more  grate¬ 
ful  to  the  people  of  free  states.  This  conduct  would  have 
afforded  very  strong  hopes  of  general  liberty,  had  he  not  de¬ 
based  and  dishonoured  all  by  intolerable  debauchery^:  for, 
night  and  dav,  with  one  or  two  attendants,  he  ranged  through 
the  houses  of  married  people.  He  had  lowered  his  dignity  to 
the  common  level,  consequently  the  less  conspicuous  he  ap¬ 
peared,  the  less  restraint  he  was  under;  and  thus  the  liberty' 
of  which  he  had  given  others  an  empty  prospect,  he  stretch¬ 
ed  to  the  utmost  in  the  gratification  of  his  own  libidinous 

BOOK  XXVII, 

461 

B.C,  208.] 

desires.  Money  and  seductive  discourses  were  not  always 
sufficient  for  his  purposes;  he  even  employed  violence  in  aid 
of  them,  and  dangerous  was  it  for  husbands  and  parents  to 
show  inflexible  strictness  in  obstructing  the  lustful  passions 
of  the  king.  He  took  from  Aratus  (a  man  of  distinction 
among  the  Achseans)  his  wife,  named  Polycratia,  and  delud* 
ing  her  with  the  hope  of  being  married  to  a  sovereign  prince, 
carried  her  into  Macedonia.  After  spending  the  time  of  the 
celebration  of  the  games,  and  several  days  after  they  were 
finished,  in  this  scandalous  manner,  he  marched  to  Dymse, 
with  design  to  dislodge  a  garrison  of  the  ^tolians,  who  had 
been  invited  by  the  Eleans,  and  received  into  that  city.  At 
Dymse  he  was  joined  by  the  Achasans,  under  Cycliades  their 
chief  magistrate,  who  were  Inflamed  with  hatred  against  the 
Eleans,  because  they  refused  to  unite  with  the  other  states  of 
Achaia,  and  highly  incensed  against  the  -/Etoiians,  whom 
they  believed  to  be  the  authors  of  the  war  carried  on  against 
them  by  the  Romans.  Leaving  Dymse,  and  uniting  their 
forces,  they  passed  the  river  Larissus,  which  separates  the 
territory  of  Elis  from  that  of  Dymae. 
XXXI L  The  first  day  on  which  they  entered  the  enemy’s 
borders,  they  spent  in  plundering.  On  the  next,  they  ad¬ 
vanced  to  the  city  in  order  of  battle,  having  sent  forward  the 
cavalry,  to  ride  up  to  the  gates,  and  provoke  the  ^Etolians, 
who  were  ever  well  inclined  to  embrace  an  opportunity  of 
sallying  out  from  their  works.  They  did  not  know  that  Sul- 
picius,  with  fifteen  ships,  had  come  over  from  Naupactus  to 
Cyllene,  and  landing  four  thousand  soldiers,  had,  in  the  dead 
of  night,  lest  his  march  should  be  observed,  thrown  himself 
into  Elis.  When  therefore  they  perceived,  among  the  .^to- 
lians  and  Eleans,  the  Roman  standards  and  arms,  an  appear¬ 
ance  so  unexpected  filled  them  wdth  the  greatest  terror.  At 
first,  the  king  had  a  mind  to  order  a  retreat,  but  the  ^tolians 
being  already  engaged  with  the  Trallians,  a  tribe  of  Illyrians 
so  called,  and  bis  party  appearing  xo  have  the  worst  of  the 

462 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  544. 

contest,  he  himself,  at  the  head  of  his  cavalry,  made  a  charge 
on  a  Roman  cohort.  Here  the  horse  of  Philip,  being  pierced 
through  with  a  spear,  threw  him  forward,  over  his  head,  to 
the  grdund,  which  gave  rise  to  a  furious  conflict  between  the 
contending  parties;  the  Romans  pressing  hard  on.  the  king, 
and  his  own  men  protecting  him.  His  own  behaviour  on  the 
occasion  was  remarkably  brave,  although  he  was  obliged  to 
fight  on  foot,  among  squadrons  of  cavalry.  In  a  short  time, 
the  dispute  becoming  unequal,  great  numbers  being  killed  and 
wounded  near  him,  he  was  forced  away  by  his  soldiers,  and, 
mounting  another  horse,  fled  from  the  field.  He  pitched  his 
camp  that  day  at  the  distance  of  five  miles  from  the  city  of 
Elis;  and,  on  the  next,  led  all  his  forces  to  a  fort  called  Pyr- 
gus,  where,  as  he  had  heard,  a  multitude  of  the  country  peo¬ 
ple,  with  their  cattle,  had  run  together  through  fear  of  being 
plundered.  This  irregular  and  unarmed  crowd  were  so  utterly 
dismayed  at  his  approach,  that  he  at  once  made  himself  mas¬ 
ter  of  the  whole,  and  by  this  seizure  gained  compensation 
for  whatever  disgrace  he  had  sustained  at  Elis.  While  he  was 
distributing  the  spoil  and  prisoners,  the  latter  amounting  to 
four  thousand  men,  and  the  cattle  of  all  kinds  to  twenty  thou¬ 
sand,  news  arrived  from  Macedonia,  that  a  person  called 
Eropus,  had,  by  bribing  the  commander  of  the  garrison  and 
citadel,  gained  possession  of  Lychnidus;  that  he  had  also  got 
into  his  hands  some  towns  of  the  Dassaretians,  and  was,  be¬ 
sides,  endeavouring  to  persuade  the  Dardanians  to  take  arms. 
In  consequence  of  this  intelligence,  dropping  the  prosecution  of 
the  war  between  the  Achaeans  and  ./Etolians,  but  leaving,  how¬ 
ever,  two  thousand  five  hundred  soldiers,  of  one  sort  or  other, 
under  the  command  of  Menippus  and  Polyphantas,  to  assist 
his  allies,  he  marched  away  from  Dymae,  through  Achaia, 
Bceotia,  and  Ebcea,  and  on  the  tenth  day  arrived  at  Deme- 
trias  in  Thessaly.  Here  he  was  met  by  other  couriers,  with 
accounts  of  still  more  dangerous  commotions;  that  the  Dar¬ 
danians,  pouring  into  Macedonia,  had  already  seized  on 

BOOK  XXVIL 

463 

B.C.  208,] 

Orestis,  and  marched  down  into  the  plain  of  Argestse,  and 
that  a  report  prevailed  among  the  barbarians,  that  Philip  had 
been  slain.  This  rumour  was  occasioned  by  the  following 
circumstance.  In  his  expedition  against  the  plundering  par¬ 
ties  near  Sicyon,  being  carried  by  the  impetuosity  of  his 
horse  against  a  tree,  a  projecting  branch  broke  off  one  of 
the  side  ornaments  of  his  helmet,  which  being  found  by  an 
iEtolian,  and  carried  into  iEtolia  to  Scerdilsedus,  who  knew 
it  to  be  the  cognizance  of  the  king,  it  was  supposed  that  he 
was  killed.  After  Philipps  departure  from  Achsea,  Sulpicius, 
sailing  to  ^gina,  joined  his  fleet  to  that  of  Attains.  The 
Achaeans  gained  the  victory  in  a  battle  with  the  .fitolians  and 
Elcans,  fought  near  Messene.  King  Attalus  and  Publius 
Sulpicius  wintered  at  >Egina. 
XXXIII.  Towards  the  close  of  this  year,  the  consul  Titus 
Quin ti us  Cri spinas,  after  having  nominated  Titus  Manlius 
Torquatus  dictator,  to  preside  at  the  elections,  and  solemnize 
the  games,  died  of  his  wounds,  according  to  some  writers,  at 
Tarentum;  according  to  others,  in  Campania.  Thus  was 
there  a  concurrence  of  events,  such  as  had  never  been  expe¬ 
rienced  in  any  former  war,  while  the  two  consuls  being  slain, 
without  having  fought  any  memorable  battle,  left  the  com¬ 
monwealth,  as  it  were,  fatherless.  The  dictator  Manlius  ap¬ 
pointed  Caius  Servilius,  then  curule  sedile,  his  master  of  the 
horse.  The  senate,  on  the  first  day  of  its  meeting,  ordered 
the  dictator  to  celebrate  the  great  games,  which  Marcus 
iEmilius,  city  praetor,  had  exhibited  in  the  consulate  of  Caius 
Flaminius  and  Cneius  Servilius,  and  had  vowed  to  be  re¬ 
peated  at  the  end  of  five  years.  Accordingly,  he  not  only 
performed  them  now,  but  vowed  them  for  the  next  lustrum. 
But  as  the  two  consular  armies,  without  commanders,  were 
so  near  the  enemy,  both  the  senate  and  people,  laying  aside 
all  other  concerns,  made  it  their  chief  and  only  care  to  have 
consuls  elected  as  soon  as  possible,  and  especially  that  they 
should  he  men  whose  courage  was  so  tempered  by  prudence 

464' 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

fY.R.  544. 

as  to  guard  them  sufficiently  against  Carthaginian  wiles:  for 
it  was  considered,  that,  as  through  the  whole  course  of  the 
present  war,  the  too  warm  and  precipitate  tempers  of  their 
generals  had  been  productive  of  great  losses,  so,  in  that  very 
year,  the  consuls,  through  excessive  eagerness  to  engage  the 
enemy,  had  fallen  unguardedly  into  their  snares;  that  the 
gods,  however,  compassionating  the  Roman  nation,  had 
spared  the  troops,  who  were  guiltless  of  the  fault,  and  had 
decreed  that  the  penalty  incurred  by  the  rashness  of  the  com¬ 
manders  should  fall  on  their  own  heads^  When  the  senate 
looked  round  for  proper  persons  to  be  appointed  to.  the  con¬ 
sulship,  Caius  Claudius  Nero  at  once  met  their  view  as  emi¬ 
nently  qualified  beyond  aU  others.  They  then  sought  a  col¬ 
league  for  him.  They  well  knew  him  to  be  a  man  of  extraor¬ 
dinary  abilities,  but,  at  the  same  time,  of  a  temper  more  san¬ 
guine  and  enterprising  than  was  expedient  in  the  present  exi¬ 
gencies  of  the  war,  or  against  such  an  opponent  as  Hannibal; 
and,  therefore,  they  thought  it  necessary  to  qualify  his  dis- 
position^by  joining  with  him  a  man  of  moderation  and  pru¬ 
dence. 
XXXIV.  Many  years  before  this,  Marcus  Livius,  on  the 
expiration  of  his  consulship,  had  been  judged  guilty  of  mis¬ 
conduct  by  the  sentence  of  the  people;  and  he  was  so  deeply 
affected  by  this  disgrace,  that  he  retired  into  the  country,  and, 
for  a  long  time,  avoided  not  only  the  city,  but  all  intercourse 
with  mankind.  About  eight  years  afterwards,  Marcus  Clau¬ 
dius  Marcellas,  and  Marcus  Valerius  Laevinus,  then  consuls, 
brought  him  back  into  Rome;  but  still  he  appeared  in  a 
squalid  dress,  and  suffered  his  hair  and  beard  to  grow,  dis¬ 
playing  in  his  countenance  and  garb  a  more  than  ordinarj’ 
sensibility  of  the  censure  passed  on  him.  When  Lucius  Ve- 
turius  and  Publius  Licinius  were  censors,  they  compelled 
him  to  be  shaved,  to  lay  aside  his  sordid  apparel,  to  attend 
the  meetings  of  the  senate,  and  perform  other  public  duties. 
But,  after  all  this,  he  used  to  give  his  vote  either  by  a  single 

BOOK  XXVII. 

465 

B.C.  208.] 
word,  or  by  going  to  the  side  of  the  house  which  he  approved, 
until  a  trial  came  on  in  the  cause  of  Marcus  Livius  Macatus, 
a  man  to  whom  he  was  related,  and  whose  character  was  at 
stake;  and  this  obliged  him  to  deliver  his  sentiments  at  large 
in  the  senate-  The  speech  which  he  made,  after  so  long  an 
interval  of  silence,  drew  on  him  all  eyes,  and  became  the 
subject  of  much  conversation:  it  was  asserted,  that  ‘Hhe  peo¬ 
ple  had  treated  him  with  great  injustice,  and  that  the  conse¬ 
quences  of  this  undeserved  ill-treatment  had  been  highly  in¬ 
jurious  to  that  very  people;  as,  during  a  war  of  such  im¬ 
portance  and  danger,  the  state  had  been  deprived  both  of  the 
services  and  counsels  of  so  great  a  man.  With  Cains  Nero, 
neither  Quintus  Fabius,  nor  Marcus  Valerius  Lsevinus  could 
be  joined  in  office;  because  the  law  did  not  allow  the  election 
of  two  patricians.  The  same  objection  lay  against  Titus 
Manlius,  besides  that  he  had  before  refused  the  offer  of  the 
consulship,  and  would  again  refuse  it.  But  if  the  election  of 
Marcus  Livius,  in  conjunction  with  Caius  Nero,  could  be 
effected,  then  they  would  have  such  consruls  as  could  scarcely 
be  equalled.”  Nor  where  the  commons  disinclined  to  the 
proposal,  although  it  took  its  rise  from  the  patricians.  One 
only  person  in  the  state,  the  person  to  whom  the  honour  was 
offered,  objected  to  the  measure;  charging  the  people  w  ith  le¬ 
vity  and  inconstancy,  he  said,  that  when  he  appeared  be« 
fore  them  in  the  situation  of  a  defendant,  in  a  mourning  habit, 
they  refused  him  their  compassion;  yet  now  they  forced  upon 
him  the  white  gown  against  his  will,  heaping  punishments 
and  honours  on  the  same  object.  If  they  deemed  him  an 
honest  man,  w^hy  had  they  condemned  him  as  w  icked  and 
guilty?  If  they  had  discovered  proofs  of  his  guilt,  after  see¬ 
ing  such  reason  to  repent  of  having  trusted  him  with  the 
consulship  once,  why  entrust  him  w  ith  it  a  second  time?” 
While  he  uttered  these,  and  such  like  reproaches  and  com* 
plaints,  he  was  checked  by  the  senators,  w*ho  bade  him  re¬ 
collect,  that  Camillus,  though  exiled  by  his  country,  yet 
vox..  iii.~  3  N 

466 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  544, 

returned  at  its  call,  and  re-established  it,  when  shaken  from 
the  very  foundations;  that  it  was  the  duty  of  a  man  to  mollify 
by  patience,  and  to  bear  with  resignation,  the  severity  of  his 
country,  like  that  of  a  parent.”  By  the  united  exertions  of 
all,  Marcus  Livius  was  elected  consul  with  Caius  Claudius 
Nero. 
XXXV .  Three  days  after,  the  election  of  prsetors  was  held, 
and  there  were  chosen  into  that  office,  Lucius  Porcius  Lici- 
nus,  Caius  Mamilius  Aulus,  and  Caius  Hostilius  Cato.  As 
soon  as  the  elections  were  concluded,  and  the  games  cele¬ 
brated,  the  dictator  and  master  of  the  horse  resigned  their 
offices.  Caius  Tarentius  Varro  was  sent,  as  propraetor,  into 
Etruria,  in  order  that  Caius  Hostilius  might  go  from  that 
province  to  Tarentum,  to  take  the  command  of  the  army 
which  had  acted  under  the  late  consul,  Titus  Quintius  ;  and 
that  Titus  Manlius  might  go  beyond  sea,  in  the  character  of 
ambassador,  to  observe  what  business  was  going  on  abroad; 
and  also,  as,  during  that  summer,  the  Olympic  games  were 
to  be  exhibited,  which  were  always  attended  by  the  greatest 
concourse  of  the  people  of  Greece,  that  he  might  go  to  that 
assembly,  if  not  prevented  by  the  enemy,  and  inform  any 
Sicilians  whom  he  should  find  driven  there,  and  any  citizens 
of  Tarentum,  banished  by  Hannibal,  that  they  might  return 
to  their  homes,  and  might  be  assured  that  the  Roman  people 
meant  to  restore  to  them  the  whole  of  the  property  which 
they  possessed  before  the  war  began.  As  the  approaching 
year  seemed  to  threaten  the  greatest  dangers,  and  there  were, 
as  yet,  no  magistrates  for  the  administration  of  public  affairs, 
all  men  directed  their  attention  to  the  consuls  elect,  and 
wished  them,  as  speedily  as  possible,  to  cast  lots  for  their 
provinces,  that  each  of  them  might  know  beforehand  what 
province  and  what  antagonist  he  was  to  have*  Measures 
were  also  taken  in  the  senate,  on  a  motion  made  by  Quintus 
Fahius  Maximus,  to  reconcile  them  to  each  other;  for  there 
subsisted  between  them  an  avowed  enmity^  which  on  the  side 

BOOK  XXVII. 

467 

B.C.  208.] 
of  Livius,  was  the  more  inveterate,  as,  during  his  misfor¬ 
tunes,  he  had  felt  himself  treated  with  contempt  by  the  other. 
He  was  therefore  the  more  obstinately  implacable,  and  in¬ 
sisted,  that  ‘‘  there  was  no  need  of  any  reconciliation:  for  they 
would  conduct  all  business  with  the  greater  diligence  and 
activity,  while  each  should  be  afraid,  lest  a  colleague,  who 
was  his  enemy,  might  find  means  of  exalting  his  own  cha¬ 
racter  at  the  other’s  expence-”  Nevertheless  the  influence  of 
the  senate  prevailed  on  them  to  lay  aside  their  animosity,  and 
to  act  with  harmony  and  unanimity  in  the  administration  of 
the  government.  The  provinces  allotted  to  them  were  not, 
as  in  former  years,  a  joint  command  in  the  same  districts, 
but  quite  separate,  in  the  remotest  extremities  of  Italy;  to  one, 
Bruttium  and  Lucania,  where  he  was  to  act  against  Hanni¬ 
bal;  to  the  other,  Gaul,  where  he  was  to  oppose  Hasdrubal, 
who  was  now  said  to  be  approaching  to  the  Alps.  It  was 
ordered  that  the  consul  to  whose  lot  Gaul  fell,  should,  of  the 
two  armies,  (one  of  which  was  in  Gaul,  and  the  other  in 
Etruria,)  choose  whichever  he  thought  proper,  and  join  to  it 
the  city  legions;  and  that  he  to  whom  the  province  of  Brut¬ 
tium  fell,  should,  after  enlisting  new  legions  for  the  city, 
take  his  choice  of  the  armies  commanded  by  the  consuls  of 
the  preceding  year;  and  that  the  army  left  by  the  consul 
should  be  given  to  Quintus  Fulvius,  proconsul,  and  that  he 
should  continue  in  command  for  a  year.  To  Caius  Hostilius, 
to  whom  they  had  assigned  the  province  of  Tarentum,  in  ex¬ 
change  for  Etruria,  they  now  gave  Capua  instead.  One  le¬ 
gion  was  ordered  for  him,— that  which  Fulvius  had  com¬ 
manded  the  year  before. 
XXXVI.  The  public  anxiety  respecting  Hasdrubal’s  march 
into  Italy  increased  daily.  At  first,  envoys  from  the  Mas- 
silians  brought  information,  that  he  had  passed  into  Gaul, 
and  that  the  inhabitants  of  that  country’  were  in  high  spirits 
on  the  occasion;  because  it  was  reported,  that  he  had  brought 
a  vast  quantity  of  gold  for  the  purpose  of  hiring  auxiliaries. 

468 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R  544. 

In  company  with  these  envoys,  on  their  return,  were  sent 
from  Rome,  Sextus  Antistius  and  Marcus  Retius,  to  inquire 
into  the  matter;  who  brought  back  an  account,  that  they  had 
sent  persons  with  Massilian  guides,  who,  by  means  of  some 
Gallic  chieftains,  connected  in  friendship  with  the  Massilians, 
might  procure  exact  intelligence  of  every  particular;  and  that 
they  had  discovered,  with  certainty,  that  Hasdrubal,  having 
already  collected  a  very  numerous  army,  intended  to  pass 
the  Alps  in  the  following  spring,  and  that  nothing  prevented 
his  doing  it  immediately,  but  the  passes  of  those  mountains 
being  shut  up  by  the  winter.  Publius  iElius  Paetus  was 
elected  and  inaugurated  into  the  office  of  augur,  in  the  room 
of  Marcus  Marcellas;  and  Cneius  Cornelius  Dolabella  into 
that  of  king  in  religious  matters,  in  the  room  of  Marcus 
Marcius,  who  had  died  two  years  before.  In  this  year,  the 
first  time  since  Hannibal’s  coming  into  Italy,  the  lustrum  was 
closed  by  the  censors,  Publius  Sempronius  Tuditanus  and 
Marcus  Cornelius  Cethegus.  The  number  of  citizens  rated 
was  one  hundred  and  thirty-seven  thousand  one  hundred  and 
eight,  a  number  much  smaller  than  it  had  been  before  the 
wan  It  is  recorded  that,  in  this  same  year,  the  Comitium 
was  covered,  and  the  Roman  games  once  repeated  by  the 
curule  sediles,  Quintus  Metellus  and  Caius  Servilius;  and  the 
plebeian  games  twice,  by  the  plebeian  aediles,  Quintus  Mami- 
lius  and  Marcus  Caecilius  Metellus.  These  also  erected 
three  statues  in  the  temple  of  Ceres,  and  there  was  a  feast  of 
Y.R  545.  occasion  of  the  games.  Then  entered 
B.C-  207.  on  the  consulship  Caius  Claudius  Nero  and  Mar¬ 
cus  Livius,  a  second  time;  and  as  they  had  already,  when 
consuls  elect,  cast  lots  for  their  provinces,  they  now  or¬ 
dered  the  praetors  to  do  the  same.  To  Caius  Hostilius  fell 
the  city  jurisdiction,  to  which  the  foreign  was  added,  in  or¬ 
der  that  three  praetors  might  go  abroad  to  the  provinces.  To 
Aulus  Hostilius  fell  Sardinia;  to  Caius  Mamilius,  Sicily;  and 
and  to  Lucius  Porcius,  Gaul.  The  whole  of  the  legions, 

B.C.  207.] 

BOOK  XXVIL 

469 

amounting  to  twenty-three,  were  distributed  in  such  manner, 
that  each  of  the  consuls  should  have  two,  Spain  four,  the 
three  praetors,  in  Sicily,  Sardinia,  and  Gaul,  two  each;  Caius 
Terentius,  in  Etruria,  two;  Quintus  Fulvius,  in  Bruttium, 
two;  Quintus  Claudius,  about  Tarentum  and  Sallentum, 
two;  Caius  Hostilius  Tubulus,  at  Capua,  one;  and  two  were 
ordered  to  be  raised  for  the  city.  For  the  first  four  legions, 
the  people  elected  tribunes;  for  the  rest,  they  were  appointed 
by  the  consuls. 
XXXVI 1.  Before  the  consuls  left  home,  the  nine  days  so¬ 
lemnity  was  performed,  on  account  of  a  shower  of  stones 
having  fallen  from  the  skv'  at  Vcii.  The  mention  of  one 
prodigy  was,  as  usual,  followed  by  reports  of  others:  that  the 
temple  of  Jupiter  at  Minturnae,  a  grove  at  Marica,  a  wall  and 
a  gate  of  A  tell  a,  had  been  struck  by  lightning.  The  people 
of  Minturnae  added,  what  was  still  more  terrifying,  that  a 
stream  of  blood  had  flowed  in  at  one  of  their  gates:  at  Capua, 
too,  a  wolf  came  into  one  of  the  gates,  and  tore  the  centinel. 
These  prodigies  were  expiated  with  victims  of  the  greater 
kinds;  and  a  supplication,  of  one  day’s  continuance,  was  or¬ 
dered  by  the  pontiffs.  The  nine  days  solemnity  was  after- 
\vards  performed  a  second  time,  on  account  of  a  shower  of 
stones  seen  to  fall  during  the  armilustrum.  The  people’s 
minds  were  no  sooner  freed  from  religious  apprehensions, 
than  they  were  again  disturbed  by  an  account,  that,  at  Fru- 
sino,  an  infant  was  born  of  a  size  equal  to  that  of  a  child 
four  years  old,  and  wonderful,  not  only  for  its  bulk,  but  for 
its  sex  being  doubtful;  as  had  been  the  case  of  the  one  born, 
two  years  before,  at  Sinuessa.  Aruspices,  sent  for  from 
Etruria,  denounced  this  to  be  a  portent  particularly  horrid, 
that  ought  to  be  exterminated  from  the  Roman  territories, 
and  without  being  suffered  to  touch  the  earth,  drowned  in 
the  sea.  Accordingly,  they  shut  it  up  alive  in  a  chest,  and 
threw  it  into  the  deep.  The  pontiffs  likewise  issued  a  man¬ 
date,  that  thrice  nine  virgins  should  go  in  procession  through 
the  city,  singing  a  hymn,  thev  were  employed,  in  the 

470 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  545. 

temple  of  Jupiter  Stator,  learning  this  hymn,  which  was 
composed  by  the  poet  Livius,  the  temple  of  Imperial  Juno, 
on  the  Aventine,  was  struck  by  lightning.  The  aruspices, 
having  delivered  their  judgment  that  this  prodigy  had  respect 
to  the  matrons,  and  that  the  goddess  ought  to  be  appeased 
b}’’  an  offering,  the  curule  sediles,  by  an  edict,  summoned  to¬ 
gether  into  the  Capitol  all  those  matrons  who  had  houses  in 
the  city  of  Rome,  or  within  ten  miles  of  it;  and  from  this 
number  they  chose  twenty-five,  to  whom  they  paid  in  a  con¬ 
tribution  out  of  their  own  effects.  With  this  money  a  golden 
bason  was  made,  and  carried  to  the  Aventine,  where  the  ma¬ 
trons,  with  every  demonstration  of  purity  and  sanctity,  im¬ 
molated  to  the  goddess.  Immediately  after,  the  decemvirs, 
by  proclamation,  appointed  a  day  for  another  sacrifice  to  the 
same  divinity,  which  was  conducted  in  the  following  order:— 
From  the  temple  of  Apollo,  two  white  heifers  were  led  into 
the  city,  through  the  Carmcntal  gate;  after  them  were  carried 
two  cypress  images  of  Imperial  Juno;  then  followed  the 
twenty-seven  virgins,  clad  in  long  robes,  singing  the  hymn 
in  honour  of  that  deity.  This  hymn  might  perhaps,  to  the 
uninformed  judgments  of  those  times,  appear  to  have  merit, 
but,  if  repeated  at  present,  it  would  seem  barbarous  and  un¬ 
couth.  The  train  of  virgins  was  followed  by  the  decemvirs, 
crowned  with  laurel,  and  dressed  in  purple-bordered  robes. 
From  the  gate  they  proceeded  through  the  Jugarian  street 
into  the  Forum:  here  the  procession  halted,  and  a  cord  was 
given  to  the  virgins,  of  which  they  all  took  hold,  and  then 
advanced,  beating  time  with  their  feet  to  the  music  of  their 
voices.  Thus  they  proceeded  through  the  Tuscan  street,  the 
Velabrum,  the  cattle- market,  and  up  the  Publician  hill,  until 
they  arrived  at  the  temple  of  Imperial  Juno.  There,  two 
victims  were  offered  in  sacrifice  by  the  decemvirs,  and  the 
cypress  images  were  placed  in  the  temple. 
XXXVIII.  After  due  expiations  were  offered  to  the  gods, 
the  consuls  began  to  enlist  soldiers;  and  this  business  they 

BOOK  XXVII. 

B.C.  207.] 

471 

enforced  with  more  strictness  and  severity  than  had  been 
formerly  practised  within  the  memory  of  any  then  living;  for 
the  new  enemy,  advancing  towards  Italy,  made  the  war  doub¬ 
ly  formidable.  As  the  number  of  young  men  capable  of  serving, 
was  considerably  diminished,  they  resolved  to  compel  even 
the  maritime  colonies  to  furnish  soldiers,  although  they  were 
said  to  enjoy,  under  a  solemn  grant,  an  immunity  from  ser¬ 
vice.  At  first,  they  refused  compliance;  on  which  the  consuls 
published  orders,  that  each  state  should,  on  a  certain  day, 
produce  before  the  senate  the  title  on  which  it  claimed  such 
exemption.  On  the  day  appointed,  the  following  states  ap¬ 
peared  before  the  senate;  Ostia,  Alsia,  Antium,  Anxur, 
Minturnse,  Sinuessa;  and,  from  the  coast  of  the  upper  sea, 
Sena.  These  recited  their  several  claims;  but  none  of  them 
were  allowed,  except  those  of  Antium  and  Ostia;  and  even 
in  these  two  colonies  the  young  men  were  obliged  to  swear, 
that,  while  the  enemy  remained  in  Italy,  they  would  not  lodge 
out  of  the  walls  of  their  colonies  longer  than  thirty  days.  Al¬ 
though  it  was  the  opinion  of  all,  that  the  consuls  ought  to 
open  the  campaign  as  early  as  possible,  as  it  would  be  ne¬ 
cessary  to  oppose  Hasdrubal  immediately  on  his  decent  from 
the  Alps,  lest  he  might  seduce  the  Cisalpine  Gauls  and  Etru¬ 
ria,  which  latter  already  entertained  sanguine  hopes  of  effect¬ 
ing  a  revolt;  also,  that  it  would  be  necessary  to  give  Hanni¬ 
bal  full  employ  in  his  own  quarters,  lest  he  might  extricate 
himself  from  Bruttium,  and  advance  to  meet  his  brother:  yet 
Livius  delayed,  not  being  satisfied  with  the  forces  destined 
for  his  provinces,  while  his  colleague  had  a  choice  of  two  ex¬ 
cellent  consular  armies,  and  a  third  which  Quintus  Claudius 
commanded  at  Tarentum;  he  therefore  introduced  a  proposal 
of  recalling  the  volunteer  slaves  to  the  standards.  The  sen¬ 
ate  gave  the  consuls  unlimited  power  to  fill  up  their  compa¬ 
nies  with  any  men  whom  they  approved;  to  choose  out  of  all 
the  armies  such  ss  they  liked,  and  to  exchange  them,  and  re¬ 
move  them  from  one  province  to  another,  as  thev  should 

4T2 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  545. 
judge  best  for  the  public  service.  In  the  management  of  all 
these  matters,  the  greatest  harmony  prevailed  between  the 
consuls;  and  the  volunteer  slaves  were  enrolled  in  the  nine¬ 
teenth  and  twentieth  legions.  Some  writers  say,  that  on  this 
occasion  powerful  reinforcements  were  also  sent  from  Sp^in 
by  Publius  Scipio  to  Marcus  Livius;  eight  thousand  Spani¬ 
ards  and  Gauls,  two  thousand  legionary  soldiers,  and  a  bo¬ 
dy  of  cavalry  composed  of  Numidians  and  Spaniards,  in 
number  one  thousand  eight  hundred;  that  Marcus  Lucretius 
brought  these  forces  by  sea,  and  that  Gains  Mamilius  sent 
from  Sicily  four  thousand  archers  and  slingers. 
XXXIX.  The  disquietude  at  Rome  was  increased  by  a 
letter  brought  out  of  Gaul  from  the  praetor  Lucius  Porcius; 
the  contents  of  which  were,  that  Hasdrubal  had  moved  out 
of  winter-quarters,  and  was  now  on  his  passage  over  the 
Alps;  that  eight  thousand  of  the  Ligurians  were  embodied 
and  armed,  and  would  Join  him  as  soon  as  he  arrived  in 
Italy,  unless  an  army  were  sent  into  Liguria  to  attack  them 
beforehand:  as  to  himself,  he  would  advance  as  far  as  he 
should  think  it  safe  w  ith  his  small  force.”  This  letter  oblig¬ 
ed  the  consuls  to  finish  the  levies  with  haste,  and  to  set  out 
for  their  respective  provinces  earlier  than  they  had  intended; 
for  their  purpose  was,  that  each  should  keep  his  antagonist 
employed  in  his  own  province,  so  as  not  to  suffer  the  two  to 
combine  their  forces  into  one  body.  An  opinion,  formed  by 
Hannibal,  helped  to  further  their  design:  for  though  he  be¬ 
lieved  that  his  brother  w^ould  make  good  his  way  into  Italy 
during  the  course  of  that  summer,  t^et,  when  he  reflected  on 
the  difficulties  with  which  he  had  himself  struggled,  first  in 
the  passage  of  the  Rhone,  then  in  that  of  the  Alps,  fighting 
against  men,  and  against  the  nature  of  the  places,  for  five 
successive  months,  he  had  not  the  least  expectation  that  the 
other  would  be  able  to  effect  his  purpose  with  so  much  more 
ease  and  expedition;  and,  for  this  reason,  he  was  the  later  in 
quitting  his  winter-quarters.  But  Hasdrubal  found  even' 

BOOK  XXVII. 

473 

B.C.  207.] 

thing  to  proceed  more  easily  and  expeditiously  than  either 
himself  or  others  had  even  ventured  to  hope:  for  the  Arver- 
nians,  and  afterwards  the  other  Gallic  and  Alpine  tribes, 
not  only  gave  him  a  friendly  reception,  but  even  accompa¬ 
nied  him  to  the  war.  Then,  in  most  parts  of  the  country 
through  which  he  marched,  roads  had  been  made  by  his 
brother  in  places  until  then  impassable;  besides  which,  as  the 
Alps  had,  for  twelve  years,  been  a  constant  route  for  divers 
people,  he  found  the  disposition  of  the  inhabitants  much  im¬ 
proved.  For  in  former  times,  being  never  visited  by  foreign¬ 
ers,  or  accustomed  to  see  a  stranger  in  their  country,  they 
were  unsociable  towards  all  the  human  race.  Being  ignorant 
at  first  of  the  destination  of  the  Carthaginian,  they  had  ima¬ 
gined  that  his  object  was  their  rocks  and  forts,  and  to  make 
prey  of  their  men  and  cattle:  but  the  accounts  which  they 
heard  of  the  Punic  war,  and  by  which  Italy  had  so  long 
been  harassed,  by  this  time  fully  convinced  them,  that  the 
Alps  were  only  used  as  a  passage,  and  that  two  overgrown 
states,  separated  by  vast  tracts  of  sea  and  land,  were  con¬ 
tending  for  power  and  empire.  These  causes  opened  the 
Alps  to  Hasdrubal.  But  whatever  advantage  he  gained 
from  the  celerity  of  his  march,  he  lost  it  all  by  dela}dng  at 
Placentia,  where  he  carried  on  a  fruitless  blockade,  rather 
than  an  attack.  He  had  supposed  that  the  reduction  of  a 
town,  standing  in  a  plain,  would  be  easily  accomplished; 
and  being  a  colony  of  great  note,  he  was  persuaded  that,  by 
destroying  this  city,  he  should  fill  the  rest  with  terror.  That 
siege,  however,  not  only  impeded  his  own  progress,  but  also 
stopped  Hannibal  when  he  was  just  setting  out  from  his  win¬ 
ter-quarters,  in  consequence  of  hearing  that  his  brother  had 
reached  Italy  so  much  more  quickly  than  he  had  expected. 
For  he  considered  not  only  how  tedious  the  siege  of  a  city 
is,  but  also  how  ineffectually  he  himself,  going  back  victori¬ 
ous  from  the  Trebia,  had  attempted  that  same  colony, 
XL.  The  consuls,  taking  different  routes,  when  setting  out 
VQL.  III. — 3  O 

4T4 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  545. 
to  open  the  campaign,  drew  the  anxiety  of  the  public  in  op¬ 
posite  directions,  as  if  to  two  distinct  wars  at  once:  for,  be¬ 
sides  their  recollection  of  the  heavy  calamities  which  Hanni¬ 
bal’s  first  coining  had  brought  upon  Italy,  people  were  farther 
distressed  by  doubts  of  the  issue.  What  gods,”  said  they 
to  themselves,  “  would  be  so  propitious  to  the  city,  and  to 
the  empire,  as  to  grant  success  to  their  arms  in  both  quarters 
at  the  same  time?  Hitherto,  the  business  had  been  protract¬ 
ed  by  a  counterpoise  of  successes  and  misfortunes.  When 
in  Italy,  at  the  Trasimenus  and  Cannae,  the  Roman  power 
had  been  crushed  to  the  earth,  a  number  of  successful  efforts 
in  Spain  had  raised  it  up  from  its  fallen  state:  when  after¬ 
wards,  in  Spain,  a  succession  of  defeats,  in  which  two  excel¬ 
lent  commanders  were  lost,  had,  in  a  great  measure,  ruined 
the  two  armies,  the  many  advantages  gained  by  the  Roman 
arms  in  Italy  and  Sicily,  had  afforded  shelter  to  the  shattered 
vessel  of  the  state.  Besides,  even  the  distance  of  place,  one 
war  being  then  carried  on  in  the  remotest  extremity  of  the 
world,  allowed  room  to  breathe:  but  now,  two  wars  had  pe¬ 
netrated  into  the  vety'  heart  of  Italy;  two  commanders,  of 
the  most  distinguished  reputation,  stood  on  the  opposite  sides 
of  the  city  of  Rome;  and  the  whole  mass  of  danger,  the  en¬ 
tire  burthen,  pressed  upon  one  spot.  Whichever  of  these 
commanders  should  first  gain  a  battle,  he  would,  in  a  few 
days  after,  join  his  camp  with  the  other.”  The  preceding 
year,  also,  having  been  saddened  by  the  deaths  of  the  two 
consuls,  served  to  augment  the  general  apprehensions.  Such 
were  the  melancholy  forebodings  which  perplexed  the  minds 
of  the  people,  as  they  escorted  the  commanders  on  their  de¬ 
parture  to  their  provinces.  Historians  have  mentioned,  that 
Marcus  Livius,  when  setting  out  for  the  campaign,  being 
still  full  of  resentment  against  his  countrymen,  and  warned 
by  Quintus  Fabius  not  to  come  to  a  battle  hastily,  or  be¬ 
fore  he  was  well  acquainted  with  the  kind  of  enemy  whom  he 
had  to  encounter;*’  answered  that  the  first  moment  that 

BOOK  XXVIL 

475 

B.C.  207.] 

he  should  get  a  sight  of  that  enemy,  he  would  fight  him;” 
being  asked  the  reason  of  such  eagerness,  he  replied,  I 
will  acquire  either  extraordinary  glory  from  the  defeat  of 
the  foe,  or  joy  from  that  of  my  countrymen;  and  though  the 
latter  might  not  perhaps  redound  to  my  honour,  yet  it  is 
certainly  what  they  have  deserved  at  my  hands.”  Before  the 
consul  Claudius  arrived  in  his  province,  as  Hannibal  was 
leading  his  army  towards  Sallentum,  through  the  veiy^^  bor¬ 
ders  of  the  Larinatian  frontiers,  Cains  Hostilius  Tubuius, 
with  some  lightly  accoutred  cohorts,  attacked  him,  and 
caused  dreadful  confusion  among  his  unmarshalled  troops, 
killing  four  thousand  men,  and  taking  nine  military'  standards. 
Quintus  Claudius,  who  had  his  forces  cantoned  through  the 
towns  in  the  territory  of  Ssdientum,  on  being  apprised  of  the 
enemy’s  motions,  marched  out  of  his  winter  quarters:  where¬ 
fore,  Hannibal,  lest  he  should  be  obliged  to  encounter  the 
two  armies  at  once,  decamped  in  the  night,  and  withdrew 
from  the  Tarentine  territory  into  Bruttium.  Claudius  fell 
back  to  the  country  adjoining  Sallentum.  Hostilius,  on  his 
march  towards  Capua,  met  the  consul  Claudius  at  Venusia; 
and  here  were  selected,  out  of  both  armies,  forty  thousand 
foot,  and  two  thousand  five  hundred  horse,  with  which  the 
consul  was  to  act  against  Hannibal.  The  rest  of  the  forces, 
Hostilius  w  as  ordered  to  lead  to  Capua,  that  he  might  deliver 
them  up  to  Quintus  Fulvius,  proconsul. 
XL  I.  Hannibal,  having  drawn  together  his  forces  from  all 
quarters,  both  those  which  he  had  hitherto  kept  in  winter 
quarters,  and  those  which  were  in  garrison  in  the  Bruttian 
territoiys  came  into  Lucania,  to  Grumentum,  in  hope  of  re¬ 
gaining  the  towns,  which  through  fear,  had  joined  the  Ro¬ 
mans.  To  the  same  place  came  the  Roman  consul,  from  Ve¬ 
nusia,  carefully  examining  the  roads  as  he  went,  and  pitched 
his  camp  at  the  distance  of  about  fifteen  hundred  paces  froin 
the  enemy.  From  hence  the  rampart  of  the  Carthaginians 
seemed  to  be  almost  close  to  the  wall  of  Grumentum;  the 

476 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  545. 

actual  distance,  however,  was  five  hundred  paces.  Between 
the  Carthaginian  and  Roman  camps  the  ground  was  level: 
and  on  the  left-hand  side  of  the  Carthaginians,  and  right  of 
the  Romans,  stood  some  naked  hills,  from  which  neither 
party  apprehended  any  mischief,  because  there  were  no 
woods,  nor  any  covering  for  an  ambuscade.  Parties,  sallying 
from  the  advanced  posts,  fought  several  skirmishes  of  little 
consequence.  It  appeared  plainly  that  the  Roman  general 
had  no  other  object  in  view  than  to  hinder  the  enemy  from 
quitting  the  place;  while,  Hannibal,  wishing  to  get  away, 
frequently  drew  out  his  whole  strength,  and  offered  battle. 
On  this  occasion,  the  consul  adopted  the  crafty  genius  of  his 
adversary^;  and,  as  there  could  be  little  apprehension  of  a 
surprize,  the  hills  being  open,  and  having  been  examined  by 
his  scouts,  he  ordered  five  cohorts,  with  five  additional  com¬ 
panies,  to  pass  over  their  summit  in  the  night,  and  conceal 
themselves  in  the  valleys  on  the  other  side.  The  time  when 
they  were  to  rise  from  their  ambush  he  settled  with  Tiberius 
Claudius  Asellus,  military  tribune,  and  Publius  Claudius, 
praefect  of  the  allies,  whom  he  sent  at  their  head.  He  himself, 
at  the  dawn  of  day,  drew  out  all  his  forces,  both  foot  and 
horse,  into  the  field.  In  a  short  time  after,  Hannibal  also,  on 
his  side,  displayed  the  signal  for  battle,  and  a  great  noise 
ensued  in  his  camp,  while  the  men  ran  hastily  to  arms. 
Then  all,  both  horse  and  foot,  rushed  eagerly  out  of  the 
gates,  and  scattering  themselves  over  the  plain,  advanced 
hastily  to  attack  the  enemy.  The  consul,  observing  them  in 
this  diorder,  commanded  Caius  A urunculeius,  tribune  of  the 
third  legion,  to  naake  his  cavalry  charge  them  with  all  pos¬ 
sible  fury,  remarking,  that  “  they  had  spread  themselves  like 
cattle  over  the  plain,  and  in  such  confusion  that,  before  they 
could  be  formed,  they  might  be  rode  down,  and  trodden 
under  foot.” 
XLII.  Hannibal  had  not  yet  come  out  of  his  camp,  when 
he  heard  the  shouts  of  the  troops  engaged:  alarmed  at  this, 

BOOK  XXVII, 

477 

B.C.  207.] 
he  led  his  forces  with  all  speed  towards  the  enemy.  The 
charge  of  the  Roman  cavalry  had  already  distressed  his  van, 
and,  of  their  infantry,  the  first  legion  and  the  right  wing 
were  coming  into  action,  while  the  Carthaginians,  without 
any  regular  order,  began  the  fight  just  as  chance  threw  each 
in  the  way  of  either  horseman  or  footman.  The  combatants, 
on  both  sides,  were  sustained  by  reinforcements^  and  Hanni¬ 
bal,  in  the  midst  of  the  terror  and  tumult,  would  have 
formed  his  line  while  fighting,  which  is  no  easy  matter,  un¬ 
less  to  a  veteran  commander,  and  in  the  case  of  veteran 
troops,  but  that  the  shout  of  the  cohorts  and  companies, 
running  down  from  the  hills,  and  which  was  heard  on  their 
rear,  struck  them  with  the  fear  of  being  cut  off  from  their 
camp:  and  had  it  not  been  near,  (seized  as  they  were  with  a 
panic,  and  flying  in  every  part,)  very  great  numbers  would 
have  been  slain;  for  the  cavalry  stuck  close  to  their  rear,  and 
the  cohorts,  running  down  the  declivity  of  the  hills,  over 
clear  and  lovel  ground,  assailed  them  in  flank.  However,  up¬ 
wards  of  eight  thousand  men  were  killed,  more  than  seven 
hundred  men  made  prisoners,  and  nine  militaiy’  standards 
were  taken.  Even  of  the  elephants,  which  in  such  a  sudden 
and  irregular  action  had  been  of  no  use,  four  were  killed,  and 
two  taken.  Of  the  Romans,  and  their  allies,  there  fell  about 
five  hundred.  Next  day  the  Carthaginian  kept  himself  quiet. 
The  Roman  brought  his  army  into  the  field,  and  when  he 
saw  that  none  came  out  to  meet  him,  he  ordered  the  spoils 
of  the  slain  to  be  collected,  and  the  bodies  of  his  own  men 
to  be  brought  together,  and  buried.  After  this,  for  several 
successive  days,  he  pushed  up  so  close  to  the  enemy’s  gates, 
that  he  seemed  to  intend  an  assault;  but,  at  length,  Hanni¬ 
bal  decamped,  at  the  third  watch  of  the  night,  and  made 
towards  Apulia,  leaving  a  great  number  of  fires  and  tents  on 
the  side  of  the  camp  which  faced  the  enemy,  and  a  few  Nu- 
tnidians,  who  were  to  show  themselves  on  the  ramparts  and 
at  the  gates.  As  soon  as  day  appeared,  the  Roman  arm\ 

4TB 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.545. 

came  up  to  the  trenches,  the  Numidians,  as  directed,  show¬ 
ing  themselves  for  some  time  on  the  ramparts;  having  im¬ 
posed  on  the  enemy  as  long  as  possible,  they  rode  off  at  full 
speed,  until  they  overtook  the  body  of  their  army.  The  con¬ 
sul,  perceiving  the  camp  perfectly  silent,  and  no  longer  seeing 
any  where  even  the  small  number  who  had  paraded  in  view, 
at  the  dawn  of  day  despatched  two  horsemen  to  examine  the 
state  of  the  works;  and  when  he  learned,  with  certainty,  that 
all  was  safe,  he  ordered  his  army  to  march  in.  Here  he  de¬ 
layed  no  longer  than  while  his  men  collected  the  plunder; 
then,  sounding  a  retreat,  long  before  night,  he  brought  back 
his  forces  into  their  tents.  Next  day,  at  the  first  light,  he  set 
out,  and  following  by  long  marches  the  tracks  of  the  Cartha¬ 
ginians,  by  such  intelligence  as  he  could  procure,  overtook 
them  not  far  from  Venusia.  Here  likewise  an  irregular  kind 
of  battle  was  fought,  in  which  above  two  thousand  of  the  fu¬ 
gitives  fell.  From  thence,  Hannibal,  marching  in  the  night, 
and  taking  his  way  through  mountains,  that  he  might  not  be 
forced  to  an  engagement,  proceeded  towards  Metapontum: 
from  which  place  Hanno,  who  commanded  the  garrison  of 
the  town,  was  sent,  with  a  small  party,  into  Bruttium,  to 
raise  fresh  forces;  while  Hannibal,  with  the  addition  of  the 
garrison  to  his  own  troops,  went  back  to  Venusia  by  the  same 
roads  through  which  he  had  come,  and  thence  toCanusium, 
Nero  had  never  quitted  the  enemy’s  steps,  and  when  he  was 
going  himself  to  Metapontum,  had  sent  orders  to  Quintus 
Fulvius  to  come  into  Lucania,  lest  that  country  should  be 
left  without  defence. 
XLIII.  In  the  mean  time,  Hasdrubal,  having  raised  the 
siege  of  Placentia,  sent  four  Gallic  horsemen,  and  two  Nu¬ 
midians,  with  a  letter  for  Hannibal;  these,  after  traversing 
almost  the  whole  length  of  Italy,  through  the  midst  of  ene¬ 
mies,  in  order  to  follow  him  on  his  retreat  to  Metapontum, 
mistook  the  road,  and  went  towards  Tarentum,  where  they 
were  seized  by  some  Roman  foragers,  roving  through  the 

BOOK  XXVII. 

479 

BX.  2or.] 

country,  and  conducted  to  the  propraetor  Quintus  Claudius. 
At  first  they  eluded  his  inquiries  by  evasive  answers ;  but, 
on  being  threatened  with  torture,  fear  compelled  them  to  own 
the  truth,  and  they  confessed  that  they  were  charged  with  a 
letter  from  Hasdrubal  to  Hannibal.  With  this  letter,  sealed 
as  it  was,  the  prisoners  were  given  in  charge  to  Lucius  Vir- 
ginius,  military  tribune,  to  be  conducted  to  the  consul  Clau¬ 
dius,  and  two  troops  of  Samnite  horse  were  sent  to  escort 
them.  Claudius  caused  the  letter  to  be  read  to  him  by  an 
interpreter,  and  having  examined  the  prisoners,  he  concluded 
that  the  present  conjuncture  of  affairs  was  not  of  such  a  na¬ 
ture  as  to  require  that  the  consuls  should  carry  on  the  war 
according  to  regular  plans,  each  within  the  limits  of  his  own 
province,  by  means  of  his  own  troops,  and  against  an  anta¬ 
gonist  pointed  out  by  the  senate;  but  that  some  extraordinaiy 
and  daring  stroke  should  be  struck,  such  as  could  not  be 
foreseen  or  thought  of,  which,  at  its  commencement,  might 
cause  no  less  dread  among  their  countrymen  than  among  the 
enemy ;  but,  when  accomplished,  would  convert  their  great 
fears  into  as  great  exultation.  Wherefore,  sending  Hasdru- 
bal’s  letter  to  Rome,  to  the  senate,  he  at  the  same  time  ac¬ 
quainted  the  Conscript  Fathers  with  his  intentions,  advising 
that,  as  Hasdrubal  had  written  to  his  brother  that  he  would 
meet  him  in  Umbria,  they  should  immediately  call  home  the 
legion  then  at  Capua,  raise  new  levies,  and  post  the  city 
army  at  Narnia,  to  intercept  the  enemy.  Such  were  the  con¬ 
tents  of  his  letter  to  the  senate:  for  himself,  he  sent  on  mes¬ 
sengers,  through  the  districts  of  Larina,  Marrucia,  Frentana, 
and  Pratutia,  along  the  road  which  he  intended  to  take  with 
his  army;  giving  directions,  that  all  the  inhabitants  should 
bring  down  from  their  towns  and  farms,  victuals  ready-dres¬ 
sed  for  the  soldiers,  and  that  they  should  furnish  horses  and 
other  beasts  of  burthen,  so  that  the  weary  might  be  accom¬ 
modated  with  easy  transports.  He  then  selected  from  the 
Romans  and  allies  the  flower  of  their  armies^  consisting  of  six 

480 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.545. 

thousand  foot  and  one  thousand  horse;  and  giving  out  that 
he  meant  to  seize  on  the  nearest  town  in  Lucania  and  the 
Carthaginian  garrison  therein,  he  ordered  them  ail  to  be 
ready  for  a  remove.  Having  set  out  in  the  night,  lie  turned 
off  towards  Picenum,  and,  making  the  longest  possible 
marches,  proceeded  directly  towards  his  colleague,  having 
left  the  command  of  the  camp  to  Quintus  Catius,  lieutenant- 
general. 
XLIV.  At  Rome  there  was  no  less  fright  and  consterna¬ 
tion  than  had  been  felt  two  years  before,  when  the  Carthagi¬ 
nian  camp  was  brought  close  to  the  walls  and  gates  of  the 
city:  nor  could  people  well  determine  whether  they  should 
commend  or  blame  the  consul  for  his  boldness  in  undertaking 
such  an  adventurous  march.  It  was  evident  that  his  reputa¬ 
tion  would  depend  upon  the  issue,  though  there  is  not  per¬ 
haps  a  more  unfair  method  of  judging.  People  considered, 
with  alarming  apprehensions,  that  ‘‘  the  camp,  in  the  neigh¬ 
bourhood  of  sucTi  a  foe  as  Hannibal,  had  been  left  without  a 
general,  and  under  the  guard  of  an  army,  the  strength  of 
which  had  been  carried  away;  that  the  consul,  pretending  an 
expedition  into  Lucania,  when  in  fact  he  was  going  to  Pice¬ 
num  and  Gaul,  had  left  his  camp  destitute  of  any  other 
means  of  safety  than  merely  the  enemy’s  want  of  information, 
as  to  the  general  and  a  part  of  his  army  having  quitted  it. 
What  would  be  the  consequence  if  this  should  be  discovered, 
and  if  Hannibal  should  resolve,  either  with  his  whole  army 
to  pursue  Nero,  whose  entire  force  was  but  six  thousand 
men,*  or  to  assault  the  camp,  which  was  left  as  a  prey,  with¬ 
out  strength,  without  command,  without  auspices?”  The 
past  disasters  of  this  war,  and  the  deaths  of  the  two  consuls 
in  the  last  year,  served  also  to  increase  these  terrible  fears. 
Besides,  they  reflected,  that  all  those  misfortunes  had  hap¬ 
pened  while  there  was  but  one  general  and  one  army  of  the 
enemy  in  Italy;  whereas,  at  present,  there  were  two  Punic 
wars  there,  two  numerous  armies,  and,  in  a  manner,  two 

BOOK  XXVIL 

481 

BX.  20r.] 

Hannibals.  For  Hasdrubal  was  a  son  of  the  same  father; 
Hamilcar  was  a  commander  equally  enterprizing,  trained  to 
making  war  against  the  Romans  during  many  campaigns  in 
Spain )  and  rendered  famous  by  a  double  victory  over  them^ 
by  the  destruction  of  two  of  their  armies,  and  two  of  their 
ablest  commanders.  With  respect  to  the  speedy  accomplish¬ 
ment  of  his  march  from  Spain,  and  his  address  in  rousing 
the  Gallic  clans  to  arms,  he  had  much  more  reason  to  boast 
than  Hannibal  himself ;  because  he  had  collected  a  body  of 
auxiliaries  in  those  very  places  where  the  other  had  lost  the 
greater  part  of  his  soldiers  by  hunger  and  cold,  the  two  most 
miserable  ways  in  which  men  can  perish,”  To  all  this,  peo¬ 
ple,  acquainted  with  the  transactions  in  Spain,  added,  that 
^  in  Nero  he  would  meet  an  antagonist  with  whom  he  was 
not  unacquainted,  one  whom,  formerly,  when  caught  acci¬ 
dentally  in  a  dangerous  defile,  he  had  baffled,  just  as  he 
would  a  child,  by  fallacious  terms  of  peace.”  Seeing  every 
thing  through  the  medium  of  fear,  which  always  represents 
objects  in  the  worst  light,  they  judged  all  the  resources  of 
the  enemy  greater,  and  their  own  less,  than  they  were  in 
reality. 
XLV.  When  Nero  had  attained  to  such  a  distance  from 
the  enemy  that  his  design  might  be  disclosed  with  safety,  he 
addressed  his  soldiers  in  a  few  words,  telling  them,  that  “  no 
general  had  ever  formed  a  design  more  daring  in  appearance, 
and  yet  more  safe  in  the  execution  than  his.  That  he  was 
leading  them  to  certain  victory.  For  as  his  colleague  had 
not  mm-ched  against  that  enemy  until  the  senate  had  given 
him  such  a  force,  both  of  infantry  and  cavalry,  as  fully  satis¬ 
fied  his  utmost  wishes,  and  those  troops  more  numerous  and 
better  provided  than  if  he  were  to  go  against  Hannibal  him¬ 
self,  the  addition  thus  made  to  it,  whatever  might  be  its  in¬ 
trinsic  weight,  would  certainly  turn  the  scale  in  their  favour. 
As  soon  as  the  foe  should  hear,  in  the  field  of  battle,  (and  he 
would  take  care  that  they  should  not  hear  sooner,)  that 
VOL.  III.— 3  P 

482 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  545. 

another  consul,  and  another  army,  had  arrived,  this  single 
circumstance  would  insure  success.  A  war  was,  sometimes, 
happily  concluded  by  the  spreading  of  a  report;  and  incidents, 
of  light  moment,  frequently  impelled  men’s  minds  to  hope  or 
fear*  That  themselves  would  reap  almost  the  whole  fruits 
of  the  glory  acquired  by  success:  for,  in  all  cases,  the  last 
addition  made  to  the  acting  force,  is  supposed  to  be  most 
decisive  of  the  business.  That  they  saw  by  the  concourse  of 
people  attending,  with  what  admiration,  and  with  what  warm 
attachment  of  all  ranks,  their  march  was  honoured.”  And, 
in  fact,  all  the  roads  through  which  they  passed  were  lined 
with  men  and  women,  who  crowded  thither  from  all  parts  of 
the  country,  uttering  vows  and  pravers  for  their  success;  in¬ 
termixing  praises  of  their  glorious  enterprize,  calling  them 
the  safeguard  of  the  commonwealth,  the  champions  of  the 
city,  and  of  the  empire  of  Rome;  on  whose  arms,  and  on 
whose  valour,  were  reposed  the  safety  and  liberty  of  them¬ 
selves  and  of  their  children.  They  prayed  to  all  the  gods 
and  goddesses  to  grant  them  a  prosperous  march,  a  success¬ 
ful  battle,  and  speedy  victory:  that  they  themselves  might  be 
bound,  by  the  event,  to  pay  the  vows  they  offered  in  their 
behalf,  and  that,  as  they  now,  wdth  minds  full  of  solicitude, 
accompanied  them  on  their  way,  so  they  might,  in  a  few  days, 
go  out  with  hearts  overflowing  with  joy,  to  meet  them  in 
triumph.  Every  one  gave  them  warm  invitations,  offered 
them  every  accommodation,  and  pressed  them,  with  the  most 
earnest  entreaties,  to  take  from  him  rather  than  from  another, 
whatever  was  requisite  for  themselves,  or  their  cattle;  in  a 
word,  every  thing  that  was  wanted,  they  with  cheerfulness 
supplied  in  abundance.  Their  kindness  was  equalled  by  the 
moderation  of  the  soldiers,  who  would  not  accept  of  any 
matter  whatever  beyond  their  necessary  occasions.  They 
never  halted  on  any  account,  nor  quitted  their  ranks  to  take 
their  victuals,  but  marched  day  and  night,  scarcely  allowing 
themselves  rest  enough  to  answer  the  calls  of  nature.  Cou- 

BOOK  XXVII. 

483 

B.C.  207.] 

riers  were  sent  forward  to  the  other  consul,  to  give  notice  of 
their  coming;  and  to  know  from  him,  whether  he  chose  that 
they  should  approach  secret!}",  or  openly,  by  night,  or  by 
day;  whether  they  should  lodge  in  the  same  camp  with  him, 
or  in  another.  It  was  judged  best,  that  they  should  join  him 
secretly  in  the  night. 
XLVI.  Orders  were  previously  given  by  the  consul  Livius, 
that,  on  their  arrival,  each  tribune  should  be  accommodated 
with  lodging  by  a  tribune,  each  centurion  by  a  centurion, 
each  horseman  by  a  horseman,  and  each  footman  by  a  foot¬ 
man.  He  considered  that  it  would  not  be  prudent  to  enlarge 
the  camp,  lest  the  enemy  might  discover  the  coming  of  the 
second  consul,  while  the  crowding  together  of  additional 
numbers,  into  lodgings  in  a  narrow  space,  would  be  attended 
with  the  less  inconvenience,  as  the  troops  of  Claudius  had 
brought  with  them,  hardly  any  thing,  except  their  arms. 
Claudius  had  augmented  his  army  with  a  number  of  volun¬ 
teers:  for  many,  both  veteran  soldiers  discharged  from  ser¬ 
vice,  and  young  men,  offered  themselves  on  his  march;  and, 
as  they  eagerly  pressed  to  be  employed,  he  enlisted  such  of 
them  as,  from  their  personal  appearance,  seemed  fit  for  the 
service.  The  camp  of  Livius  was  near  Sena,  and  Hasdrubal 
lay  about  fiv'e  hundred  paces  beyond  it.  Wherefore,  Nero, 
to  avoid  entering  it  before  night,  halted  when  he  came  nigh, 
and  where  he  was  concealed  behind  mountains.  As  darkness 
came  on,  his  men,  marching  silently,  were  conducted  into 
tents,  each  by  a  person  of  his  own  rank,  where  they  were 
hospitably  entertained,  amid  mutual  congratulations,  and  un¬ 
bounded  joy.  Next  day  a  council  was  held,  at  which  was  also 
present,  the  prsetor,  Lucius  Porcius  Licinus.  At  this  time, 
his  camp  was  joined  to  that  of  the  consuls.  It  should,  how¬ 
ever,  be  noticed,  that  before  their  coming,  he  had  often  baf¬ 
fled  and  perplexed  the  enemy,  leading  his  troops  along  the 
high  grounds;  sometimes  seizing  narrow  defiles  to  arrest  his 
march,  sometimes  harassing  him  by  attacks  on  his  rear  or 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

4<8‘4 

[Y.R.  545. 

Hankie;  and  putting  in  practice,  indeed,  every  art  of  war. 
He  now  assisted  at  the  council.  Many  were  of  opinion,  Aat 
an  engagement  should  be  deferred  until  Nero  might  refresh 
his  men,  who  were  fatigued  by  their  long  march,  and  want 
of  sleep;  and  also,  that  he  should  take  a  few  days  to  himself, 
to  gain  some  knowledge  of  the  enemy.  Nero,  with  the  ut¬ 
most  earnestness,  entreated  them  not,  by  delays,  to  render 
his  enterprize  rash  in  effect,  when  despatch  would  ensure  its 
success.  In  consequence  of  a  deception,  which  could  not  last 
long,  Hannibal  lay  yet,  in  a  manner,  motionless;  he  neither 
assailed  his  camp,  left,  as  it  was,  without  its  contra ander,  nor 
moved  a  step  in  pursuit  of  him.  Before  he  should  stir,  Has- 
drubal’s  army  might  be  cut  off,  and  he  himself  might  return 
into  Apulia.  Whoever,  by  procrastination,  allowed  time  to 
the  enemy,  would  thereby  betray  the  other  camp  to  Hanni¬ 
bal,  and  open  for  him  a  road  into  Gaul,  so  as  to  enable  him, 
at  his  leisure,  to  effect  a  junction  with  Hasdrubal,  and  when¬ 
ever  he  pleased.  They  ought  to  give  the  signal,  instantly; 
march  out  to  battle,  and  take  every  advantage  of  the  delusion 
under  ^vhich  the  enemy  lay;  both  the  party  in  their  neigh¬ 
bourhood,  and  the  other  at  a  distance,  while  the  latter  knew 
not  that  their  opponents  were  decreased  in  number,  nor  the 
former,  that  their’s  were  become  more  numerous  and  power¬ 
ful.’’  Accordingly  the  council  was  dismissed,  the  signal  of 
battle  was  displayed,  and  the  troops  immediately  marched 
out  to  the  field. 
XL VII.  The  Carthaginians  were  already  drawn  up  in  or¬ 
der  of  battle  before  their  camp.  The  only  thing  that  pre¬ 
vented  an  immediate  engagement  was,  that  Hasdrubal  hav¬ 
ing,  with  a  few  horsemen,  advanced  before  the  line,  remarked 
among  the  enemy  some  old  shields,  which  he  had  not  seen 
before,  and  horses  leaner  than  any  he  had  hitherto  observed: 
their  number  also  seemed  greater  than  usual.  On  which, 
suspecting  what  was  the  case,  he  hastily  sounded  a  retreat; 
sent  a  party  to  the  watering-place  at  the  river,  with  orders 

BOOK  XXVIL 

485 

B.c.  2or.] 

to  pick  up,  if  possible,  some  prisoners,  also  to  observe  atten¬ 
tively,  whether  there  were  any  whose  complexions  were 
more  sun-bumed  than  usual,  as  from  a  journey  lately  made; 
at  the  same  time,  ordering  another  party  to  ride  round  the 
camp,  at  a  distance,  to  mark  whether  the  rampart  had  been 
extended  on  any  side,  and  to  watch  whether  the  signal  was 
sounded  a  second  time.  Though  he  received  accounts  of  all 
these  particulars,  yet  the  circumstance  of  the  camps  not 
being  enlarged,  led  to  a  false  conclusion:  they  were  two,  as 
before  the  arrival  of  the  second  consul;  one  belonging  to 
Marcus  Livius,  the  other  to  Lucius  Porcius,  and  no  addi¬ 
tion  had  been  made  to  the  trenches  of  either,  to  make  more 
room  for  tents  within.  One  thing  particularly  struck  that 
veteran  commander,  long  accustomed  to  act  against  Roman 
armies,  which  was,  that  according  to  the  information  of  his 
scouts,  the  signal  was  sounded  once  in  the  prse tor’s  camp, 
and  twice  in  the  consul’s.  Hence  he  concluded,  that  the  two 
consuls  must  be  there;  but  how  to  account  for  Nero’s  having 
left  Hannibal  behind,  perplexed  him  extremely.  Of  all 
things  he  could  the  least  suspect  what  had  really  happened, 
that  Hannibal  could  be  so  blinded,  and  in  a  business  of  such 
magnitude,  as  not  to  know  where  the  general  was,  and 
where  the  army,  whose  camp  stood  facing  his  own.  He  sup¬ 
posed  that  some  disaster,  of  no  ordinary  kind,  must  have  hin¬ 
dered  him  from  following;  and  he  began  to  fear  greatly,  that 
he  himself  had  come  too  late  with  succour,  that  his  affairs 
were  too  desperate  to  be  retrieved,  and  that  the  same  fortune 
which  the  Romans  had  met  in  Spain,  awaited  them  now  in  Italy. 
He  even  conjectured,  that  his  letter  had  not  reached  his  brother, 
and  that,  in  consequence  of  its  being  intercepted,  the  consul 
had  hastened  thither  to  overpower  him.  Distracted  by  these 
doubts  and  fears,  he  extinguished  all  his  fires,  and,  at  the 
first  watch,  ordered  his  troops  to  strike  their  tents  in  silence, 
and  to  march.  In  the  hurry  and  confusion  of  a  movement  b\ 
night,  the  guides  were  not  watched  with  the  necessary  care 

486 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  US. 

and  attention^  one  of  them,  thei^fore,  stopped  in  a  place  of 
concealment,  which  he  had  before  fixed  upon  in  his  mind, 
and  the  other  swam  across  the  river  Metaurus,  at  a  pass 
with  which  he  was  acquainted.  The  troops,  thus  left  desti¬ 
tute  of  conductors,  strayed  for  some  time  through  the  coun¬ 
try;  and  many,  overcome  by  drowsiness  and  fatigue,  stretch¬ 
ed  themselves  on  the  ground  in  various  places,  leaving  the 
standards  thinly  attended.  Hasdrubal,  until  day-light  should 
discover  a  road,  ordered  the  army  to  proceed  along  the 
bank  of  the  river;  and,  as  he  wandered  along  the  turnings 
and  windings,  with  which  that  river  remarkably  abounds,  he 
made  but  little  progress,  still  intending,  however,  to  cross  it, 
as  soon  as  the  day  enabled  him  to  find  a  convenient  passage. 
But  the  farther  he  removed  from  the  sea,  the  higher  did  he 
find  the  banks,  so  that  not  meeting  with  a  ford,  and  wasting 
the  day  in  the  search,  he  gave  the  enemy  time  to  overtake 
him. 
XL VIII.  First,  Nero,  with  all  the  cavalr}^,  came  up;  then 
Porcius,  with  the  light  infantry.  While  they  harassed  his 
wearied  army  by  frequent  assaults  on  eveiy^  side,  and  while 
the  Carthaginian,  now  stopping  his  march,  or  rather  flight, 
had  a  mind  to  encamp  on  a  high  spot  of  ground,  on  the 
bank  of  the  river,  Livius  arrived  with  the  main  body  of  in¬ 
fantry,  armed  and  marshalled  for  immediate  action.  When 
the  Romans  had  united  all  their  forces,  and  the  line  was 
drawn  out  in  array,  Claudius  took  the  command  of  the 
right  wing,  Livius  of  the  left;  that  of  the  centre  was  given 
to  the  prsetor.  Hasdrubal,  laying  aside  the  design  of  fortify¬ 
ing  a  camp,  when  he  saw  the  necessity  of  fighting,  placed 
his  elephants  in  front,  before  the  battalions,  and,  beside 
them,  on  the  left  wing,  he  opposed  the  Gauls  to  Claudius; 
not  that  he  had  much  confidence  in  them,  but  thinking  that 
they  were  much  dreaded  by  the  enemy.  The  right  wing, 
which  was  to  oppose  Livius,  he  took  to  himself,  together 
with  the  Spaniards,  on  whom,  as  being  veteran  troops,  he 

BOOK  XXVII. 

48r 

B.C.  sor.] 
placed  his  principal  reliance.  The  Ligurians  were  posted  in 
the  centre,  behind  the  elephants;  but  the  line  was  too  long 
in  proportion  to  its  depth.  A  rising  ground,  in  their  front., 
protected  the  Gauls;  and  while  that  part  of  the  line,  which 
was  composed  of  the  Spaniards,  engaged  the  left  wing  of  the 
Romans,  their  right  wing,^  stretching  out  beyond  the  extent 
of  the  fight,  stood  idle,  for  the  eminence  between  them  and 
the  enemy  prevented  their  making  an  attack,  either  on  their 
front  or  flank.  Between  Livius  and  Hasdrubal,  a  furious 
conflict  began,  and  dreadful  slaughter  was  made  on  both 
sides:  for  here  were  both  the  generals,  here  the  greater  part 
of  the  Roman  infantry  and  cavalry,  here  the  Spaniards,  vete- 
ran  troops,  and  acquainted  with  the  Roman  manner  of  fight¬ 
ing,  and  the  Ligurians,  a  race  of  hardy  warriors.  To  the 
same  part  the  elephants  were  driven,  which,  at  the  first  on¬ 
set,  disordered  the  van,  and  made  even  the  battalions  give 
ground;  but  afterwards,  the  contest  growing  hotter,  and  the 
shouts  louder,  they  soon  became  disobedient  to  the  direc¬ 
tions  of  their  riders,  rambling  up  and  down,  between  the 
two  lines,  without  distinguishing  their  own  party,  and  ranging 
to  and  fro,  not  unlike  ships  without  rudders.  Claudius  in 
vain  attempted  to  advance  up  the  hill,  often  calling  out  thus 
to  his  men, — “  To  what  purpose,  then,  have  w^e,  with  so 
much  speed,  marched  over  such  a  length  of  way?’’  However, 
seeing  it  impracticable  to  reach  the  enemy’s  line  in  that  quar¬ 
ter,  he  drew  away  some  cohorts  from  his  right  wing,  where 
the  troops  would  not  be  able  to  act,  and  led  them  round  be¬ 
hind  the  line.  Then,  to  the  surprise,  not  only  of  the  enemv, 
but  of  his  friends  also,  he  made  a  brisk  attack  on  their  right 
flank;  and,  so  quick  were  his  motions,  that  almost  at  the 
same  instant  when  his  men  appeared  on  the  flank,  they  like¬ 
wise  attacked  the  rear.  Thus  the  Spaniards  and  Ligurians 
were  cut  to  pieces  on  all  sides,  in  front,  and  flank,  and  rear, 
and  the  havoc  in  a  short  time  reached  the  Gauls,  These 
made  very  little  opposition:  for  great  numbers  of  them  were 

48S 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  545. 

absent  from  their  poste,  having  slipped  away  in  the  n%ht, 
and  lain  down  in  the  fields;  while  those  who  were  present, 
being  exhausted  by  fatigue  and  want  of  sleep,  and  being  na-* 
turally  ill  qualified  to  endure  toil,  had  scarcely  strength  re¬ 
maining  sufficient  to  support  their  armour.  By  this  time  it 
was  mid-day;  and  while  they  were  panting  with  heat  and 
thirst,  they  were  slain  or  taken  at  the  will  of  the  Romans. 
XLIX.  Of  the  elephants,  more  were  killed  by  their  guides, 
than  by  the  enemy.  These  carried  a  knife,  like  that  used  by 
shoemakers,  with  a  mallet:  and  when  the  animals  began  to 
grow  furious,  and  to  rush  on  their  own  party^  the  manager 
of  each,  fixing  this  instrument  between  its  ears,  on  the  joint 
which  connects  the  head  with  the  neck,  drove  it  in  with  the 
strongest  blow  that  he  could  give.  This  had  been  found  the 
speediest  method  of  killing  animals  (rf  that  great  size,  when 
they  become  so  unruly  as  to  leave  no  hope  of  managing 
them;  and  it  had  been  first  brought  into  practice  by  Hasdru- 
bal,  whose  conduct  in  the  command  of  an  array,  as  on  many 
other  occasions,  so  particularly  in  this  battle,  merited  very 
high  encomiums.  By  his  exhortations,  and  by  taking  an 
equal  share  in  the  dangers,  he  supported  the  spirits  of  his 
men;  and  at  one  time,  by  entreaties,  at  another  by  reproofs, 
he  reanimated  the  wearied,  when  from  the  length  and  labour 
of  the  action,  they  were  disposed  to  lay  down  their  arms. 
He  called  back  the  flying,  and  restored  the  battle  in  many 
places,  where  it  had  been  given  up.  At  last,  when  fortune 
evidently  declared  for  the  Romans,  unwilling  to  survive  so 
great  an  army,  which  had  followed  his  standard  on  the  cre¬ 
dit  of  his  reputation,  he  set  spurs  to  his  horse,  and  plunged 
himself  into  the  midst  of  a  Roman  cohort;  where,  as  became 
the  son  of  Hamilcar,  and  the  brodier  of  Hannibal,  he  fell 
fighting.  In  no  one  action,  during  that  war,  were  so  great 
numbers  of  the  enemy  slain;  so  much  so,  indeed,  that  the 
damage  retorted  on  him,  was  deemed  equivalent  to  that  sus¬ 
tained  at  Cannse.  Fifty-six  thousand  of  them  were  killed,  five 

BOOK  XXVIL 

489 

B.C.  5H>7.^ 
thoimnd  four  hundred  taken.  The  other  booty  was  great  of 
e^fry  kind,  as  well  as  of  gold  and  silver.  Besides  which, 
there  were  recovered  above  four  thousand  Roman  citizens, 
prisoners,  which  was  some  consolation  for  the  soldiers  lost 
in  the  battle;  for  the  victory  was  far  from  a  bloodless  one, 
n^rly  eight  thousand  of  the  Romans  ami  allies  being  killed. 
And  so  far  were  even  the  victors  satiated  with  blood  and 
slaughter,  that  next  day,  when  the  consul  Livius  was  told, 
that  the  Cisalpine  Gauls  and  Ligurians,  who  had  either  not 
been  present  in  the  battle,  or  had  made  their  escape  from  the 
general  carnage,  were  marching  off  in  a  body,  without  any 
certain  leader,  without  standards,  without  order  or  subordi¬ 
nation,  and  that  they  might  all  be  cut  off,  if  one  squadron  of 
horse  were  sent  against  them,  he  answered,  let  some  be 
left  alive,  to  carry  home  accounts  of  the  enemv’s  losses,  and 
of  our  valour.’^ 
L.  On  the  night  which  followed  the  battle,  Nero  set  out 
on  his  return,  and,  by  marches  even  speedier  than  he  had 
made  in  coming,  on  the  sixth  day  after,  reached  his  former 
post,  opposite  the  enemy.  The  crowds  of  people  attending 
him  were  less  than  before,  because  no  messenger  had  pre¬ 
ceded  him;  but  these  exhibited  such  demonstrations  of  joy, 
as  to  seem  transported  almost  beyond  their  reason.  It  is  im¬ 
possible  to  express  or  describe  the  emotions  that  agitated 
the  minds  of  all  persons  at  Rome,  either  while  waiting  in 
doubtful  expectation  of  the  event,  or  when  they  received  the 
news  of  the  victory.  The  senators  never  quitted  the  senate- 
house,  nor  the  magistrates,  nor  the  people,  the  Forum,  from 
the  rising  to  the  setting  sun,  during  the  whole  of  Claudius’s 
march;  so  eager  were  they  to  greet  him.  The  matrons,  in- 
cajole  themselves  of  contributing  aid,  had  recourse  to 
prayers  and  supplications;  and  going  about  from  one  temple 
to  another,  wearied  the  gods  with  thvir  entreaties  and  their 
vows.  While  the  public  were  in  this  painful  suspense,  first 
an  unauthcnticated  rumour  spread,  that  two  Narnian  horse- 
voL.  III.—  3  Q 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

4W 

£y*R.  m. 

mea  had  come  from  the  field  of  battle  to  the  camp,  is^ch 
atood  on  the  frontiers  of  Umbria,  with  intelligence,  that  the 
enemy  were  utterly  defeated.  For  some  time,  this  news, 
though  listened  to,  was  but  little  credited,  as  being  too  great, 
and  too  joyful,  for  people’s  minds  to  admit,  or  readily  believe; 
and  even  the  quickness  of  the  conveyance  was  urged  as  an 
objection  to  the  truth  of  it:  as  the  account  said,  that  the  bat¬ 
tle  was  fought  only  two  days  before.  Soon  after  this  a  letter 
was  brought  from  the  camp  by  Lucius  Manlius  Acidinus, 
confirming  the  arrival  of  the  Narnian  horsemen*  This  le^r 
being  carried  through  the  Forum  to  the  praetor’s  tribunal, 
brought  out  the  senate  from  their  house,  and  the  people 
thronged  together  with  such  impatience  and  tumult  to  tjie 
door,  that  the  messenger  could  not  approach,  but  was  drag^ 
ged  about  amid  a  multitude  of  questions,  and  all  demandii^, 
with  much  vociferation,  that  the  letter  should  be  read  from 
the  rostrum  even  before  it  was  submitted  to  the  senate.  At 
length  they  %vere  reduced  to  order  by  the  magistratcs^aaid 
obliged  to  make  room,  that  the  joyful  tidings  might  be  regu¬ 
larly  imparted  to  the  public,  who  were  unable  to  govern 
their  transports.  The  despatch  was  accordingly  read,  &rst 
in  the  senate,  then  in  the  assembly  of  the  people;  some  em¬ 
bracing  the  joyful  news  as  certain,  while  others  refused  to 
credit  any  thing  until  they  should  hear  it  from  the  deputies, 
or  the  letters  of  the  consuls. 
LI*  After  some  time  an  account  was  brought,  that  depu¬ 
ties  were  really  coming,  and  not  far  off.  On  this,  people  of 
all  ages  ran  out  eagerly  to  meet  them,  each  coveting  to  re¬ 
ceive,  from  his  own  eyes  and  ears,  convincing  proofs  of  the 
reality  of  such  a  happy  event.  One  continued  train  readied 
all  the  way  to  the  Mulvian  bridge:  the  deputies  were,  Li^dus 
Veturius  Philo,  Publius  Licinius  Varus,  and  Quintus  Casci- 
lias  Metellus.  Surrounded  by  a  vast  multitude  of  every 
sort  they  went  on  to  the  Forum,  while  some  inquired  of 
them,  others  of  their  attendants,  concerning  what  had  beim 

BOOK  XXVIL 

BX.  m.} 

dtmt;  and  as  soon  as  any  one  heard  that  the  enemy’s  general 
and  army  had  been  cut  off,  that  the  Roman  legions  were 
safe,  and  the  consuls  unhurt,  he  immediately  communicated 
his  own  joy  to  others.  ^Vhen  the  deputies  had  with  much 
difficulty,  reached  the  senate-house,  and  the  crowd  was  with 
much  greater  difficulty,  obliged  to  retire,  that  they  might 
not  mix  with  the  senators,  the  letters  were  read  in  the  senate; 
and  dien  the  deputies  were  brougjit  out  into  the  general  as¬ 
sembly.  Lucius  Veturius,  after  reading  the  despatches^ 
gave  in  his  own  words^  a  fuller  detail  of  all  that  had  passed, 
which  was  heard  with  the  greatest  delight,  and  was  at  last 
followed  by  an  universal  shout  from  the  whole  assembly, 
who  were  unable  to  restrain  the  effusions  of  their  joy-  They 
then  separated;  some  hastening  to  the  temples  of  the  gods  to 
return  thanks^  some  to  their  own  houses,  to  impart  the  happy 
news  to  their  wives  and  children.  The  senate,  in  considera¬ 
tion  of  the  consuls,  Marcus  Livius  and  Caius  Claudius, 
having  cut  off  the  general  and  the  legions  of  the  enemy,  de¬ 
creed  a  supplication  for  three  days;  which  supplication  the 
praetor,  Caius  Hostilius,  proclaimed  in  the  assembly,  and  it 
was  performed  with  great  devotion  by  all,  both  men  and 
women.  During  the  whole  three  days,  all  the  temples  were 
equally  filled  with  crowds,  whose  numbers  never  diminished; 
whilst  the  matrons,  dressed  in  the  most  splendid  manner, 
and  accompanied  by  their  children,  being  now  delivered 
from  every  apprehension,  just  as  if  the  war  were  at  an  end, 
offered  thanksgivings  to  the  immortal  gods.  This  victory 
produced  also  a  powerful  effect  on  the  internal  business  of 
the  state,  insomuch  that  people  immediately  took  courage  to 
bold  commerce  with  each  other  as  in  time  of  peace,  buying, 
sdttng,  lending,  and  paying  money  due.  The  consul  Clau- 
dtus,  on  returning  to  his  camp,  ordered  the  head  of  Hasdru- 
bal,  which  he  had  carefully  kept  and  brought  with  him,  to  be 
thrown  before  the  advanced  guards  of  the  enemy:  and  the 
African  prisoners,  chained  as  they  were,  to  be  exposed  to 

3i,^t)FROME.  ■^;R545. 
their  view.  Two  of  these  he  also  unbound,  and  sent  to  Han¬ 
nibal,  with  orders  to  inform  him  of  what  had  happened.  We 
are  told  that  Hannibal,  deeply  struck  by  a  disaster  so  fatal 
to  his  country,  and  his  house,  said  that  he  felt  now  the  for¬ 
tune  of  Carthage.  He  then  decamped,  and  retired  thence, 
designing  to  draw  together,  into  Bruttium,  the  remotest  cor¬ 
ner  of  Italy,  all  those  confederates,  whom,  while  scattered 
at  wide  distances,  he  could  not  protect;  and  he  removed 
from  their  OAvn  habitations,  and  carried  away  into  Bruttium, 
all  the  Metapontines,  and  such  of  the  Lucanians  as  acknow¬ 
ledged  his  authority- 

UND  OF  THE  THIRD  VOLUME- 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

TITUS  LIVIUS. 

VOL.  IV. 

THB. 

HISTORT  OF  ROMII, 
BY 
TITUS  MVIUS, 

TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  OBiaiNAL» 
wita  irotBS  ijn>  xuvsTiuTxoirfy 
BY  GEORGE  BAKER,  A.  M. 

CKstory  ift  Piulosophy  teftchkig  by  exM&plai. 
BOIJa^ftBRORX, 

FIRST  AHERICtAN)  FROM  THE  LAST  LONDON  EDITION. 
IN  SIX  VOLUMES.~VpL.  IV, 

NEW  YORK: 
BVBUSBBB  BT  PBTBB  A«  VBSIBBy  COX^UNfl  &  €0,,  T.  &.  SWORBS,  A,  T,  fM»OB- 
BICH,  BtBBBT  I.  XKGABT,  R.  &  W.  A.  BABTOW,  S.  «OOU»,  W.  B.  GIIXBT5  7AR1M 
BASTBFBN,  BBOBeS  1.0BB,  PBIOB  &C  BfTXBIirB,  SAXUBL  CAXPBBLL  8c  BOBy  B. 
BUttS  R  B.  WBITBy  A«  BVBBU  R  CO.  ABB  JARXS  T.  SBAXAB, 
1828. 

PHUPtRTY  OF  COLLtGE  lir,-.A.h'Y 
HAMPDEN-SYDNEY,  ViRG’NlA 

CONTENTS 

OF 
THE  FOURTH  VOLUME. 

BOOK  XXVIII.  ...  1 
BOOK  XXIX.  ...  86 
BOOK  XXX.  .  .  .  148 
BOOK  XXXI.  ...  218 
BOOK  XXXII.  .  .  .284 
BOOK  XXXIII.  .  .  840 
BOOK  XXXIV.  .  .  *  400 

]S296 

THE 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

BOOK  XXVIII. 
:^[i€Ceftsful  operations  agsunat  the  Carthagii^s,  in  Spun,  under  SHanus, 
Seipio's  Heutenant,  and  !•,  llcipio,  his  brother ;  of  Sulpicius  and  Attains, 
agunst  Philip  King  of  Miice(h>ma«  Scipio  finally  vanquishes  the  Cartha¬ 
ginians  in  Spun,  and  reduces  that  whole  country ;  passes  over  into  Af- 
nca ;  forms  an  alliance  with  Syphax  King  of  Numidia ;  represses  and 
punishes  a  mutiny  of  a  part  of  his  army ;  concludes  a  treaty  of  fnendship 
with  Masinissa ;  returns  to  Rome,  and  is  elected  consul ;  solicits  AfHca 
for  his  province,  which  is  opposed  by  Quintus  Fabius  Maximus ;  is  ap¬ 
pointed  governor  of  Sicily,  with  permission  to  pass  over  into  Africa. 

I,  AT  tbe  time  when,  in  consequence  of  Hasdrubars  re** 
moving  his  forces,  Spain  seemed  to  be  relieved  of 
so  much  of  the  burden  of  the  war  as  had  been  n*!n*f^* 
thrown  upon  Italy,  hostilities  suddenly  revived 
there  with  the  same  violence  as  before.  The  possessions  of 
the  Romans  and  Caithaginians  in  at  that  time,  were 
thus  situated  :  Hasdrubal,  son  of  Gisgo,  had  withdrawn  quite 
to  the  ocom  and  Gades  ;  the  coast  of  our  sea,  and  almost  all 
that  of  Sfmin  which  lies  to  the  eastward,  was  under  the 
pcwer  of  Scipio,  and  the  dominion  of  the  Romans.  Hanno, 
VOL.  IV. — B 

4 

^ISTOm  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  545. 
m  4e  tenth  day  to  Hasdndial  in  die  province'  of  Gades : 
the  Celtiberian  soldiers,  being  newly  levied,  dispersed  into 
the  neighbouring  woods,  and  then06  escaped  to  their  respec¬ 
tive  homes.  By  this  seasonable  victory,  was  suppTe^ed  a 
war,  which  was  not  of  so  much  importance  on  account  of  its 
present  magnitude,  as  of  its  being  a  foundation  from  which 
one  much  more  €onsidcrsd)le  might  have  arisen,  had  the  ene¬ 
my  been  allowed,  after  having  rou^d  the  Celtiberians  to 
arms,  to  persuade  the  other  states  to  jcdti4i|  ^  same  cause. 
Scipio,  therefore,  Imving  bestowed  Ubersdi  ^Mimendations  on 
Silanus,  and  seeing  reason  to  hope  that  he  might  be  able  to 
finish  the  dispute  at  once,  by  exerting  himself  with  proper 
activity,  advanced  into  Farther  Spain  against  Hasdrubal.  The 
Carthaginian,  (who  happened  at  that  time  to  have  his  army 
in  Bsetica,  for  the  purpose  of  securing  the  fidelity  of  his  allies 
in  that  country,)  decamping  hastily,  led  it  away,  in  a  manner 
much  more  resembling  a  flight  than  a  mmrch,  quite  to  the 
ocean  and  Gades.  He  was  fearful,  however,  that  as  long  as 
he  kept  his  forces  together,  he  should  be  considered  as  the 
primary  object  of  the  enemy’s  operations.  Before  he  passed 
over  the  streight  to  Gades,  he  therefore  dispersed  them  into 
the  different  cities  ;  in  the  view,  likewise,  that  they  might 
provide  for  their  own  safety  by  help  of  walls,  and  for  that  of 
the  towns  by  their  arms. 
III.  When  Scipio  found  that  the  enemy’s  troops  were  thus 
widely  scattered,  and  that  the  carrying  about  his  own  to  each 
of  the  seversd  dries  would  be  a  very  tedious  if  not  difficult 
work,  he  marched  back  his  army.  Unwilling,  however,  to 
leave  die  possession  of  all  that  country  to  the  Carthaginians, 
he  sent  his  brother,  Lucius  Scipio,  with  ten  thousand  fcKtt 
and  cmc  thousand  horse,  to  lay  siege  to  the  most  considerable 
city  in  those  parts,  called  by  the  barbarians  Orinx,  situate  cm 
the  borders  of  the  Milesians,  a  Spanish  nation  so  called— a 
desirable  spot,  the  adjacent  parts  affording  mines  of  silver. 

BOOK  XXVIfL 

B.C.  20f .] 

M 

and  the  8o3  being  fniitiU  Thk  place  ^rvtA  Hasdrubal 
a  fortf^^  whence  he  mvA  to  make  incmaio^  on  the  stSitcB 
arcnnd*  Bctpio  ^ar  to  h.  B^bre  raising  Im 
works  irf*  circimivdia^Q%  ^wever,  he  sent  some  person  to 
the  ganes  to  ^  of  the  inhabitants  in  a  cmifo*- 
ence,  and  to  recommmid  to  them  rad^r  to  make  trial  of  the 
friendship  tlm^the  power  of  the  Ronmns.  As  their  answers 
showed  no  incllna^st  to  peace,  he  sorrounded  the  city  with 
a  trench  and  a  doiiile^amfnnft ;  breaking  his  sntny  into  three 
parts,  in  order  mm  division  might  always  carry  on  the 
attack  whHe  iSm  o&er  two  rested.  When  the  first  of  these 
began  die  assault,  the  contest  was  farious  and  desperate :  it 
was  with  the  greatest  difficulty  that  they  could  approach,  or 
bring  up  the  ladders  to  the  walls^  on  accoimt  of  the  showers 
of  weapons  which  fell  upon  them  ;  and  ev^  of  thorn  who 
had  raised  them,  some  were  tumbled  down  with  forks  made 
for  the  purpose,  odiers  found  themselves  in  danger  of  being 
caught  by  iron  ^apples,  and  of  being  drag^d  up  cm  the  wall. 
When  Scipio  saw  that  his  men  were  too  few  to  make  an  rm« 
pressien,  and  that  the  enemy,  from  the  advantage  c€  their 
works,  had  even  the  better  of  the  dispute,  he  called  crfF  the 
first  division,  and  attacked  with  the  two  others  at  once.  Tim 
struck  such  terror  into  the  besieged,  already  fatigued,  that  not 
cmly  the  townsmen  quickly  forsook  the  walk,  but  the  Car¬ 
thaginian  garrison,  fearing  that  the  town  had  been  betrayed, 
likewise  left  their  posts  and  collected  diemselves  into  a  body. 
The  inhabitants,  upon  this,  were  seized  with  apprehemions 
lest  the  enemy,  if  they  broke  into  the  town,  should  put  to  the 
sword  every  one  they  met  without  distinetbn,  wh^er  Car¬ 
thaginian  or  Spaniard.  They  instantly,  therefore,  thrmv^open 
one  of  the  gates,  and  rushed  out  of  the  town  in  crowds,  feed¬ 
ing  their  shields  before  them,  lest  any  weapom  shouM  be 
cast  at  them,  and  stretching  out  their  right  b^ds  expsmded, 
to  show  that  they  had  thrown  away  thchr  smnrds.  Whether 

HISTOSY  OF  ROIfE. 

latter  circum^9UK:e  was  tmch^&r^td  m  wxmset  ci  the 
balance,  sc^e  stratagem  ws^  su^eeted,  b  ttncer^ 
Hun ;  blit  die  deserters  wete  attacked  as  eneaues,  and  put  to 
death.  Through  dils  ^te  the  trbo^  marcbed  into  the  city 
in  hostile  mray.  The  other  gates  were  broke  open  with  axes 
wi  ^e<%es^  mid  m  soon  as  die  horsemen  entered,  they  gal* 
levied '£(^^afd  to  sb:are  tim  Fonun,  for  such  were  the  or* 
ders  I  the  vetetwas  also  were  jotmd  to  the  horse  to  support 
dwm.  The  legionary  scUiers  spread  thean^iees  di  over  the 
mtfy  bait,  neithi^  slew  nor  phmdeted  any,  concept  diose  who 
smod  <m  their  defimee.  All  ^e  Carthagimans  were  put  into 
confin^ent,  with  above  ^ee  hundred  of  the  inhabitants  who 
had  shut  die  gates ;  die  rest  had  the  town  delivered  up  to 
th^i,  and  their  ^ects  remored.  There  fell  in  the  assault,  <rf 
tbs  enemy,  diout  tmo  thousand  ;  of  the  Romans,  not  more 
than  nmety. 
IV.  As  the  captiure  of  diis  <ity  a^orded  mi^r  of  much 
exukatton  to  tbewe  engaged  m  k,  so  ti  r^d^ed  their  ap* 
proach  tx)  the  camp  a  magnificent  spet^cle  to  the  general  and 
the  rest  of  the  army,  on  account  of  the  immewse  crowd  of 
prtsot^rs  which  they  drove  before  them.  having  de¬ 
clared  his  approbation  of  his  brother’s  asnduct,  and  in  the 
htfl^est  strains  extolled  his  tak^g  of  Orkx  as  e^md  to  his 
own  taking  of  Carthage,  led  back  his  forces  into  iiither 
^pam.  The  approach  of  winter  put  it  out  of  his  power 
ekher  to  make  an  attempt  on  Gades,  or  to  pursue  the  army 
of  Hasdrubal,  now  dispersed  in  all  pai:^  of  the  province. 
Dismissing,  dierefore,  the  to  d^  winter  quarteta, 
and  sending  his  brother,  louriwi  Scipto,whh  Hanmi, 
mwmy’s  general,  and  other  prisoners  of  diiftiiK:tk}xi,  to  Rome, 
he  Inmself  retired  to  Tarracou  During  the  ^ae  y^r,  die 
Roman  fieet,  under  Marcus  Vskrius  Lfevinus,  proconsid, 
miiiing  over  from  Sicily  to  Africa,  made  extensive  devasta* 
d<M»  m  die  territories  of  Udea  and  Carthage,  carrying  oflF 

r 

«07.]  mOK  OTTBEt, 
{>luiid<?r  from  ^  remotest  boimSs  ef  ^e  Caithi^izi^  ferric 
tory,  ewB  from  under  the  very  ipriAs  ©f  Utioi.  0»  llieir 
retnm  to  Sicily,  they  were  met  hf  ©  Cart^^iimm 
sisting  of  seventy  ship^  of  war ;  seventeen  of  diese  they 
took,  and  sunk  four ;  the  rest  were  beaten  and  dispersed. 
The  Romans,  victorious  fay  laml  mid  sea,  i^tmwed  W>  L3y» 
bieum,  with  immense  booty  of  every  l^id.  The  sea  bemg 
thus  cleared  tX  the  enemy,  abumim^c©  of  provision  was 
brought  to  Iflotfl^. 
V.  In  the  b^;itining  of  the  summer,  danng  which  these 
transactiems  passed,  PiMius  Sidfdcius,  pro*^mssul,  and 
Attalos,  after  having  wintered  at  i£|^iia  zb  mantled  above, 
united  their  fleets,  consisting  c(  twenty-tfaree  Roman  flve- 
banked  galltes,  and  diirty-flve  bdonging  to  the  King,  mid 
sailed  from  thence  to  Lemnos.  Phffip  also,  that  be  mi^ 
be  prepared  for  every  scat  of  exertion,  wheth^  he  shoeld 
have  occasion  to  oppose  tke  enemy  on  land  or  came 
down  to  the  coast  of  Demetrias,  mid  appointed  a  day  for 
his  army  to  assemble  at  Larksa>  On  the  news  of  the  King’s 
arrival,  embasries  from  his  allies  came  to  Demetrias  from  all 
sides :  for  iht  ^tdiians,  elated  both  by  dieir  allismce  with 
the  Rommis,  smd  ky  the  af^roach  of  Attains,  were  ravagmg 
the  neighbouring  ^ates.  Kot  only  the  Acamanians,  Boeo¬ 
tians,  and  Euboeans,  were  tmder  violent  apprehensiems,  but 
the  Achseans  also  were  kept  in  terror,  as  well  by  the  hosltli- 
lics  of  the  uEtolians,  as  by  Machanidas,  tyrant  of  Li^edw* 
mon,  who  had  pitched  lus  camp  at  a  small  distance  from  the 
borders  of  the  Argives.  AB  Aese,  representing  the  dangers 
both  m  land  and  sea,  widt  wUch  their  several  possessions 
were  threatened,  implored  the  King’s  assistance.  Philip, 
even  from  his  own  kingdom,  received  accounts  that  idFairs 
there  were  not  in  a  state  of  tranqudlity ;  that  both  Scerdliae^ 
dus  and  Pleunrtos  were  in  motion ;  and  that  Some  ©f  the 
Thracians,  particularly  the  Msedians,  would  certekily  make 

s 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  54S, 

incursions  into  the  adjoining  provinces  of  Macedonia,  if  the 
King  should  be  employed  in  a  distant  war.  The  Boeotians, 
indeed,  and  the  people  of  the  inland  parts  of  Greece,  inform¬ 
ing  him  that,  in  order  to  prevent  them  from  passing  to  the 
assistance  of  the  allied  states,  the  streights  of  Thermopylae, 
where  the  road  is  confined,  and  contracted  to  a  very  narrow 
breadth,  had  been  shut  up  by  the  iEtolians  with  a  ditch  and 
a  rampart.  Such  a  number  of  disturbances  on  all  sides  were 
sufficient  to  rouse  even  an  indolent  leader :  he  dismissed  the 
ambassadors  with  promises  of  assisting  them  all,  as  time 
and  circumstances  would  permit.  He  sent  to  Peparethus  a 
garrison  for  the  city,  a  business  which  required  the  utmost 
despatch,  accounts  having  been  received  from  thence,  that 
Attains  had  sailed  over  from  Lemnos,  and  was  ravaging  all 
the  country  round.  He  despatched  Polyphantas,  with  a 
small  number  of  forces  to  Bceotia ;  and  likewise  Menippus, 
one  of  the  officers  of  his  guards,  with  one  thousand  target- 
eers,  (the  target  is  not  unlike  the  common  buckler,)  to  Cal- 
chis.  Agrianum  was  reinforced  with  five  hundred  men,  that 
all  parts  of  the  island  might  be  secured.  He  himself  went  to 
Scotussa,  ordering  the  Macedonian  troops  to  be  brought  over 
thither  from  Larissa.  He  was  there  informed  that  the  .^to- 
lians  had  been  summoned  to  an  assembly  at  Heraclea,  and 
that  King  Attains  was  to  come  to  consult  with  them  on  the 
conduct  of  the  war.  Resolving  to  disturb  this  meeting  by 
his  sudden  approach,  he  led  his  army  by  forced  marches  to 
Heraclea,  and  arrived  there  just  after  the  assembly  had  been 
dismissed.  However,  he  destroyed  the  crops,  which  were 
almost  ripe,  particularly  round  the  iEnian  bay.  He  then  led 
back  his  forces  to  Scotussa,  and  leaving  there  the  body  of 
his  army,  retired  with  the  royal  guards  to  Demetrias,  That 
he  might  be  in  readiness  to  meet  every  effort  of  the  enemy, 
he  sent  people  from  hence  to  Phocis,  and  Euboea,  and  Pepa¬ 
rethus,  to  choose  out  elevated  situations,  where  fires  being 

BOOK  XXVIII. 

9 

B.C.  207.] 

lighted,  might  be  seen  from  afar.  He  fixed  a  beacon  on  Ti- 
sseum,  a  mountain  whose  summit  is  of  an  immense  height, 
that  by  means  of  lights  on  these  eminences,  whenever  the 
enemy  made  any  attempt,  he  might,  though  distant,  receive 
instant  intelligence  of  it.  The  ‘Roman  general  and  King 
Attains  passed  over  from  Peparethus  to  Nicsea,  and  from 
thence  sailed  to  the  city  of  Orcus,  which  is  the  first  city  of 
Eubcea,  on  the  left,  on  the  way  from  the  bay  of  Demetrias  to 
Chalcis  and  the  Euripus. 
VI.  It  was  concerted  between  Attains  and  Sulpicius,  that 
the  Romans  should  assault  the  town  on  the  side  next  the  sea, 
and  at  the  same  time  make  an  attack  on  the  King’s  forces  on 
the  land  side.  Four  days  after  the  arrival  of  the  fleet,  the 
operations  began.  The  intermediate  time  had  been  spent  in 
private  conferences  with  Plator,  who  had  been  appointed  by 
Philip  to  the  command  of  the  place.  There  are  two  citadels, 
one  hanging  over  the  coast,  the  other  in  the  middle  of  the 
town,  and  from  this  there  is  a  subterraneous  passage  to  the 
ocean,  the  entrance  of  which,  next  to  the  sea,  is  covered  with 
a  strong  fortification,  a  tower  five  stories  in  height.  Here 
the  contest  first  commenced,  and  that  with  the  utmost  vio¬ 
lence,  the  tower  being  well  stored  with  all  kinds  of  weapons ; 
these,  with  engines  and  machines  for  the  assault,  having  been 
landed  from  the  ships.  While  the  attention  and  eyes  of  all 
were  drawn  to  that  side,  Plator,  opening  one  of  the  gates,  re¬ 
ceived  the  Romans  into  the  citadel  next  the  sea,  of  which 
they  became  masters  in  a  moment.  The  inhabitants,  driven 
thence,  fled  to  the  other  citadel  in  the  middle  of  the  city ; 
but  troops  had  been  posted  there,  to  keep  the  gates  shut 
against  them,  so  that,  being  thus  excluded  and  surrounded, 
they  were  all  either  slain  or  taken  prisoners.  In  the  mean 
time  the  Macedonian  garrison,  making  no  resistance,  stood 
in  a  compact  body  under  the  walls.  These  men  Plator 
(having  obtained  leave  from  Sulpicius)  embarked  in  some 
VOL.  IV. — C 

10 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  545. 

ships,  and  landed  them  at  Demetrias  in  Phthiotis  ;  he  him¬ 
self  withdrew  to  Attains.  Sulpicius,  elated  by  his  success 
at  Oreum,  so  easily  obtained,  proceeded  with  his  victorious 
fleet  to  Chalcis,  where  the  issue  by  no  means  answered  his 
expectations.  The  sea,  from  being  pretty  wide  at  each  side, 
is  here  contracted  into  a  streight  so  very  narrow,  that  at  first 
view  the  whole  appears  like  two  harbours  facing  the  two  en¬ 
trances  of  the  Euripus.  A  more  dangerous  station  for  a 
fleet  can  hardly  be  found  ;  for  besides  that  the  winds  rush 
down  suddenly,  and  with  great  fury,  from  the  high  moun¬ 
tains  on  each  side,  the  streight  itself  of  the  Euripus  does  not 
ebb  and  flow  seven  times  a  day  at  stated  hours,  as  report 
says  ;  but  the  current,  changing  irregularly,  like  the  wind, 
from  one  point  to  another,  is  hurried  along  like  a  torrent 
tumbling  from  a  steep  mountain  ;  so  that,  night  or  day,  ships 
can  never  lie  quiet.  But,  besides  the  perilous  situation  in 
which  his  fleet  lay,  he  found  that  the  town  was  firm  and  im¬ 
pregnable  ;  surrounded  on  one  side  by  the  sea,  extremely 
well  fortified  by  land  on  the  other  ;  secured  by  a  strong  gar¬ 
rison,  and,  above  all,  by  the  fidelity  of  the  commanders  and 
principal  inhabitant? ;  which  character  those  at  Oreum  had 
not  supported  with  honour  or  steadiness.  The  Roman,  in  a 
business  rashly  undertaken,  acted  so  far  prudently,  that,  when 
he  had  seen  all  the  difficulties  attending  it,  not  to  waste  time, 
he  quickly  desisted  from  the  attempt,  removing  with  his  fleet 
from  thence  to  Cynus  in  Locris,  the  landing-place  for  the 
city  of  Opus,  which  lies  at  a  distance  of  a  mile  from  the 
sea. 
VII.  Philip  had  received  notice  from  Oreum  by  the  sig¬ 
nal  fires  ;  but,  through  the  treachery  of  Plator,  it  was  too 
late  when  they  were  raised  on  the  beacons,  and,  as  he  was 
not  a  match  for  the  enemy  at  sea,  it  was  difficuU  for  him  to 
approach  the  island  ;  he  hesitated,  therefore,  and  took  no  part 
in  that  business.  To  the  relief  of  Chalcis  he  flew  with 

BOOK  XXVIII. 

11 

BX.  207.] 
alacrity,  as  soon  as  he  perceived  the  signal.  For  though 
Chalcis  stands  on  the  same  island,  yet  the  streight  which 
separates  it  from  the  continent  is  so  narrow,  that  there  is  a 
communication  between  them  by  a  bridge,  and  the  approach 
to  it  is  easier  by  land  than  by  water.  Philip,  therefore,  hav¬ 
ing  gone  from  Demetrias  to  Scotussa,  and  setting  out  thence 
at  the  third  watch,  dislodged  the  guard,  routed  the  iEtolians 
who  kept  possession  of  the  pass  of  Thermopylae,  and  drove 
the  dismayed  enemy  to  Heraclea,  accomplishing  in  one  day 
a  march  of  above  sixty  miles  to  Elatia  in  Phocis.  About 
the  same  time  the  city  of  Opus  was  taken  and  plundered  by 
Attains.  Sulpicius  had  given  it  up  to  the  King,  because 
Oreum  had  been  sacked  a  few  days  before  by  the  Roman 
soldiers,  and  his  men  had  received  no  share.  After  the  Ro¬ 
man  fleet  had  retired  to  Oreum,  Attains,  not  apprised  of 
Philip’s  approach,  wasted  time  in  levying  contributions  from 
the  principal  inhabitants ;  and  so  unexpected  was  his  coming, 
that,  had  not  some  Cretans,  who  happened  to  go  in  quest  of 
forage  farther  from  the  town  than  usual,  espied  the  enemy, 
he  might  have  been  surprised.  Without  arms,  and  in  the 
utmost  confusion,  he  fled  precipitately  to  his  ships.  Just  as 
they  were  putting  off  from  the  land,  Philip  came  up,  and 
though  he  did  not  advance  from  the  shore,  yet  his  arrival 
caused  a  good  deal  of  confusion  among  the  mariners.  From 
thence  he  returned  to  Opus,  inveighing  against  gods  and 
men  for  his  disappointment  in  having  the  opportunity  of 
striking  so  important  a  blow  thus  snatched  from  him,  and 
when  almost  within  reach  of  his  arm.  The  Opuntians,  also, 
he  rebuked  in  angry  terms,  because,  although  they  might 
have  prolonged  the  siege  until  he  arrived,  yet  they  had  im¬ 
mediately,  on  sight  of  the  enemy,  made  almost  a  voluntary 
surrender.  Having  put  affairs  at  Opus  in  order,  he  proceed¬ 
ed  thence  to  Thronium.  On  the  other  side.  Attains  at  first 
retired  to  Oreum,  but  having  heard  there,  that  Prusias,  King 

12 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  545. 

of  Bithynia,  had  invaded  his  kingdom,  he  laid  aside  all  at¬ 
tention  to  the  affairs  of  the  Romans  and  the  -fitolian  war, 
and  passed  over  into  Asia.  Sulpicius,  too,  withdrew  his 
fleet  to  iEgina,  from  whence  he  had  set  out  in  the  beginning 
of  spring.  Philip  found  as  little  difficulty  in  possessing  him¬ 
self  of  Thronium,  as  Attalus  had  met  at  Opus.  This  city 
was  inhabited  by  foreigners,  natives  of  Thebes  in  Phthiotis, 
who,  when  their  own  was  taken  by  the  Macedonian,  had  fled 
for  protection  to  the  iEtoIians,  and  had  obtained  from  them 
a  settlement  in  this  place,  which  had  been  laid  waste  and  de¬ 
serted  in  the  former  war  with  the  same  Philip.  After  reco« 
vering  Thronium  in  the  manner  related,  he  continued  his 
route  ;  and  having  taken  Tritonos  and  Drymae,  inconsidera¬ 
ble  towns  of  Doris,  he  came  thence  to  Elatia,  where  he  had 
ordered  the  ambassadors  of  Ptolemy  and  the  Rhodians  to 
wait  for  him.  While  they  were  deliberating  there,  on  the 
method  of  putting  an  end  to  the  iEtolian  war,  (for  the  am¬ 
bassadors  had  been  present  at  the  late  assembly  of  the  Ro¬ 
mans  and  iEtolians  at  Heraclea,)  news  was  brought  that  Ma- 
chanidas  intended  to  attack  the  people  of  Elis  while  they 
were  busied  in  preparations  for  solemnizing  the  Olympic 
games.  Judging  it  incumbent  on  him  to  prevent  such  an 
attempt,  he  dismissed  the  ambassadors  with  a  favourable  an¬ 
swer,  that  “  he  had  neither  given  cause  for  the  war,  nor 
would  give  any  obstruction  to  a  peace,  provided  it  could  be 
procured  on  just  and  honourable  terms then,  proceeding 
through  Boeotia  by  quick  marches,  he  came  down  to  Megara, 
and  from  thence  to  Corinth  ;  and,  receiving  there  supplies  of 
provision,  repaired  to  Phlius  and  Pheneus.  When  he  had 
advanced  as  far  as  Heraea,  intelligence  was  brought  him  that 
Machanidas,  terrified  at  the  account  of  his  approach,  had 
retreated  to  Lacedaemon  ;  on  which  he  withdrew  to  iEgium, 
where  the  Achaeans  were  assembled  in  council,  expecting  at 
the  same  time  to  meet  there  a  Carthaginian  fleet  which  he 

BOOK  XXVIII. 

13 

B.C.20r.] 
had  sent  for,  in  order  that  he  might  be  able  to  undertake 
some  enterprise  by  sea.  But  the  Carthaginians  had  left  that 
{dace  a  few  days  before,  and  were  gone  to  the  Oxean  islands  j 
and  from  thence,  (on  hearing  that  the  Romans  and  Attains 
had  left  Oreum,)  to  the  harbours  of  the  Acamanians^  for 
they  apprehended  that  an  attack  was  intended  against  them- 
aelves,  and  that  they  might  be  overpowered  while  within  the 
heights  of  Rhios  (so  the  entrance  of  the  Corinthiaii  bay  is 
called.) 
VIII.  Philip  was  filled  with  grief  and  vexation  when  he 
found  that,  although  he  had  on  all  occasions  made  the  most 
spirited  and  speedy  exertions,  yet  fortune  had  baffled  his 
activity,  by  snatching  away  every  advantage  when  he  had  it 
within  his  view.  In  the  assembly,  however,  concealing  his 
chagrin,  he  spoke  with  great  confidence,*  appealing  to  gods 
and  men,  that  at  no  time  or  place  had  he  ever  been  remiss ; 
that  wherever  the  sound  of  the  enemy’s  arms  was  heard, 
thither  he  had  instantly  repaired ;  but  that  it  could  hardly 
be  determined,  whether,  in  the  management  of  the  war,  his 
forwardness  or  the  enemy’s  cowardice  was  more  conspicu-  ^ 
ous ;  in  such  a  dastardly  manner  had  Attains  slipped  out  of 
his  hands  from  Opus  ;  Sulpicius  from  Chalcis  ;  and  in  the 
same  way,  within  these  few  days,  Machanidas.  That  flight, 
however,  did  not  always  succeed ;  and  that  a  war  should  not 
be  ^counted  difficult,  in  which  victory  would  be  certain  if 
the  foe  could  be  brought  to  a  regular  engagement.  One  ad¬ 
vantage,  however,  and  that  of  the  first  magnitude,  he  had 
already  acquired  ;  the  confesmon  of  the  enemy  themselves, 
that  they  were  not  a  match  for  him ;  in  a  short  time,”  he 
said,  he  should  have  to  boast  of  undoubted  conquest ;  for 
whenever  the  enemy  would  meet  him  in  the  field,  they  should 
find  the  issue  no  better  dian  they  seemed  to  expect.”  This 
discourse  of  the  King  was  received  by  the  allies  with  great 
pleasure.  He  then  gave  up  to  the  Achaeans  Herasa  and  Triphy- 

14 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  545* 

lia.  Aliphera  he  restored  to  the  Megalopolitans,  they  hav- 
ing  produced  sufficient  evidence  that  it  belonged  to  their 
territories.  Having  received  some  vessels  from  the  Achae- 
ans,  three  gallies  of  four,  and  three  of  two  banks  of  oars,  he 
sailed  to  Anticyra  ;  from  thence,  with  seven  ships  of  five 
banks,  and  above  twenty  barks,  which  he  had  sent  to  the  bay 
of  Corinth  to  join  the  Carthaginian  fleet,  he  proceeded  to 
Erythrae,  a  town  of  the  iEtolians  near  Eupalium,  and  there 
made  a  descent.  He  was  not  unobserved  by  the  iEtolians  ; 
for  all  who  were  either  in  the  fields,  or  in  the  neighbouring 
forts  of  Apollonia  and  Potidania,  fled  to  the  woods  and 
mountains.  The  cattle,  which  they  could  not  drive  off  in 
their  hurry,  were  seized  and  put  on  board.  With  these,  and 
the  other  booty,  he  sent  Nicias,  prsetor  of  the  Achaeans,  to 
iEgium ;  and,  going  to  Corinth,  he  ordered  his  army  to 
march  by  land  through  Bceotia,  while  he  himself,  sailing  from 
Cenchrea,  along  the  coast  of  Attica,  round  the  promontory 
of  Sunium,  reached  Chalcis,  after  passing  almmt  through 
the  middle  of  the  enemy’s  fleet.  Having  highly  commended 
the  fidelity  and  bravery  of  the  inhabitants,  in  not  suffering 
either  fear  or  hope  to  influence  their  minds,  and  having  ex¬ 
horted  them  to  persevere  in  maintaining  the  alliance  with  the 
same  constancy,  if  they  preferred  their  present  situation  to 
that  of  the  inhabitants  of  Oreum  and  Opus,  he  sailed  to 
Oreum  ;  and  having  there  conferred  the  direction  of  affairs, 
and  the  command  of  the  city,  on  such  of  the  chief  inhabi¬ 
tants  as  had  chosen  to  fly  rather  than  surrender  to  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  he  sailed  over  from  Eubcea  to  Demetrias,  from  whence 
he  had  at  first  set  out  to  assist  his  allies.  Soon  after,  he  laid 
the  keels  of  one  hundred  ships  of  war  at  Cassandria,  collecting 
a  great  number  of  ship-carpenters  to  finish  the  work  ;  and, 
as  the  seasonable  assistance  which  he  had  afforded  his  allies 
in  their  distress,  and  the  departure  of  Attalus,  had  restored 
tranquillity  in  the  affairs  of  Greece,  he  withdrew  into  his 

BOOK  XXVIII. 

15 

B.c.  2or.] 
own  kingdom,  with  an  intention  of  making  war  on  the  Dar- 
danians. 
IX.  Towards  the  end  of  the  summer,  during,  which  these 
transactions  passed  in  Greece,  Quintus  Fabius,  son  of  Max¬ 
imus,  who  served  as  lieutenant-general,  brought  a  message 
from  Marcus  Livius,  the  consul,  to  the  senate  at  Rome,  in 
which  he  gave  it  as  his  opinion,  that  Lucius  Porcius  with  bis 
legions  was  sufficient  to  secure  the  province  of  Gaul,  and 
that  he  himself  might  depart  thence,  and  the  consular  army 
be  withdrawn.  On  which  the  senate  ordered  not  only  Mar¬ 
cus  Livius,  but  his  colleague  also,  Caius  Claudius,  to  return 
to  the  city.  In  their  decree,  they  made  only  this  difference, — 
that  Marcus  Livius’s  army  be  withdrawn,  but  that  Nero’s 
legions  remain  in  the  province  to  oppose  Hannibal.  It  had 
been  concerted  between  the  consuls,  by  letter,  that  as  they 
had  been  of  one  mind  in  the  management  of  affairs,  so  they 
should  arrive  together  at  one  time  in  the  city,  though  they 
were  to  come  from  different  quarters  ;  whichever  came  first 
to  Praeneste  being  directed  to  wait  there  for  his  colleague. 
It  so  happened  that  they  both  arrived  at  that  town  on  the 
same  day  ;  and  then,  having  sent  forward  a  proclamation, 
requiring  a  full  meeting  of  the  senate  in  the  temple  of  Bel- 
lona,  on  the  third  day  after,  they  advanced  towards  the  city, 
from  whence  the  whole  multitude  poured  out  to  meet  them. 
The  surrounding  crowds  were  not  satisfied  with  saluting 
them,  though  but  at  a  little  distance ;  each  pressed  eagerly 
forward  to  touch  the  victorious  hands  of  the  consuls ;  some 
congratulating,  others  giving  them  thanks  for  having,  by  their 
valour,  procured  safety  to  the  state.  In  the  senate,  having 
given  a  recital  of  their  exploits,  according  to  the  usual  prac¬ 
tice  of  commanders  of  armies,  they  demanded  that,  on 
account  of  their  bravery  and  success  in  the  conduct  of  affairs, 
due  honours  might  be  paid  to  the  immortal  gods ;  and  they 
themselves  allowed  to  enter  the  city  in  triumph.”  To  which 

16 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.545. 

the  senate  answered,  that  they  decreed  with  pleasure  the 
matters  contained  in  their  demand,  as  a  proper  return,  due, 
first  to  the  gods,  and  after  the  gods,  to  the  consuls.’’  A 
thanksgiving  in  the  name  of  both,  and  a  triumph  to  each,  had 
been  decreed ;  the  consuls,  however,  wishing  that,  as  their 
sentiments  had  been  united  during  the  course  of  the  war, 
their  triuinphs  should  not  be  separated,  came  to  this  agree* 
ment  between  themselves, — that,  **  inasmuch  as  the  business 
had  been  accomplished  within  the  province  of  Marcus  Li- 
vius,  and  as,  on  the  day  whereon  the  battle  was  fought,  it 
happened  to  be  his  turn  to  command,  and  as  the  army  of 
Livius  had  been  withdrawn,  and  was  now  at  Rome,  while 
Nero’s  could  not  be  withdrawn  from  the  province  ;  it  should 
on  all  these  accounts  be  ordered  that  Marcus  Livius  make 
his  entry  in  a  chariot,  drawn  by  four  horses,  attended  by  the 
troops  ;  Gains  Claudius  Nero,  on  horseback,  withoiu  troops.” 
As  the  uniting  of  their  triumphs  in  this  manner  enhanced  the 
glory  of  both  the  consuls,  so  it  reflected  peculiar  honour  on 
him  who  condescended  to  appear  in  the  procession,  as  much 
inferior  to  his  colleague  in  magnificence,  as  he  was  superior 
to  him  in  merit.  People  said,  that  ‘‘  the  commander  on 
horseback  had,  in  the  space  of  six  days,  traversed  the  extent 
of  Italy,  and  had  fought  a  pitched  battle  with  Hasdrubal  in 
Gaul,  on  the  very  day  when  Hannibal  imagined  he  was  lying 
in  his  camp  opposite  to  him  in  Apulia ;  that  thus  this  single 
consul  (equal  to  the  defence  of  both  extremities  of  Italy 
against  two  armies  and  two  generals)  had  opposed  against 
one,  his  skill ;  against  the  other,  his  person.  That  the  very 
name  of  Nero  had  been  sufficient  to  confine  Hannibal  to  his 
camp ;  and  as  to  Hasdrubal,  by  what  other  meaum  than  by  the 
arrival  of  Nero  had  he  been  overwhelmed  and  cut  off?  The 
other  consul,  therefore,  might  proceed  in  his  stately  chaoiot  ; 
he  was  drawn,  indeed,  by  a  number  of  horses,  but  the  real 
triumph  belonged  to  him  who  had  only  one  ;  and  that  Nero, 

BOOK  xxvin. 

B.C.  20r.] 

17 

though  he  should  go  on  foot,  deserved  to  be  for  ever  cele¬ 
brated,  both  for  having  acquired  so  much  glory  in  the  war, 
and  shown  so  much  indifference  to  the  pompous  display  of  it 
in  the  present  procession.”  With  such  encomiums  did  the 
spectators  attend  Nero  through  his  whole  progress  to  the 
Cs^toL  Then:onsul8  carried  to  the  treasury  three  hundred 
thousasid  sesterces'*'  in  money,  and  eighty  thousand  of 
brass*;  to  the  soldiers,  Marcus  Livius  distributed  fifty-six 
assesj;^  each.  Caiusr  Claudius  promised  the  same  sum  to  his 
absent  troops,  as  soon  as  he  should  return  to  the  army.  It 
was  remarked,  that  the  soldiers,  on  that  day,  directed  more 
of  their  military  songs  and  verses  to  Caius  Claudius  than  to 
their  own  commander ;  that  the  horsemen  dtsth^^iri^  Lu¬ 
cius  Veturius  and  Quintus  Csecilius,  lieutensnt-generals,  by 
extraordinary  praises,*  exhorting  the  commons  to  appoint 
them  consuls  for  the  next  year  ;  and  that  both  Livius  airf 
Nero  added  their  authority  to  this  recommendation,  respre- 
senting  next  day  in  the  assembly  the  bravery  and  fidelity 
which  the  said  lieutenant-generals  had  manifested  in  the  ser¬ 
vice. 
X.  When  the  time  of  the  elections  arrived,  as  it  l»d  been 
determined  that  they  should  be  held  by  a  dictator,  the  con¬ 
sul  Caius  Claudius  nominated  his  coB^agne  Marcus  Livius  to 
that  office.  Livius  appointed  Quintm  CseciKus  master  of  the 
horse.  By  Marcus  Livius  were  elected  ^nsuls,  Lucim  Ve- 
tmim  and  Quintus  Caecilius,  who  was  then  master  of  the 
horse.  The  election  of  praetors  was  next  held  ;  there  were 
appointed  Caius  Servilius,  Marcus  Caecilius  Metellus,  Tibe¬ 
rius  Cbudius  Asellus,  and  Quintus  Mamilius  Turinus,  at 
that  time  pfeheian  sedile«  When  the  elections  were  finished, 
Ae  dktatm',  having  laid,  down  his  office,  and  dismissed  his 
army,  .mt  ©ut  for  his  province  of  Etruria,  in  pursuance  of  a 

*  34,21m.  life.  Od. 
VOL.  IV.— D 

t  2581.  63.  8d. 

1  3s.  7id. 

18 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

(T.R.  546, 

decree  of  the  senate,  in  order  to  make  inquiries,  indtat  stiles 
of  the  Tuscans  or  Umbrians  had,  on  the  approach  of  Has^ 
drubal,  formed  schemes  of  revolting  to  him  from  the  Romans ; 
or  who  had  afforded  him  men,  provisions,  or  any  kind  of  aid. 
Such  were  the  transactions  of  that  year  at  home  and  abroad. 
The  Roman  games  were  thrice  repeated  by  the  curule  sedijes, 
Cneius  Servilius  Csepio  and  Servius  Cornelius  Lentulus. 
The  plebeian  games  also  were  once  repeated  entire  by  the 
plebeian  aediles,  Manius  Pomponius  Matho,  and  Quintus 
Mamilius  Thurinus.  In  the  thirteenth  year  of  the 
Y  R  546 
B  C  206  Vf2ir^  when  Lucius  Veturius  Philo, .  and 
Quintus  Caecilius  Metellus,  were  consuls,  they 
were  both  appointed  to  the  province  of  Bruttium,  to  conduct 
the  war  against  Hannibal.  The  praetors  then  cast  lots  for 
their  provinces  ;  the  business  of  the  city  fell  tO  Marcus  Cae¬ 
cilius  Metellus  ;  the  jurisdiction  in  relation  to  foreigners,  to 
Quintus  Mamilius  ;  Sicily,  to  Caius  Servilius  ;  and  Sardinia, 
to  Tiberius  Claudius.  The  armies  were  thus  distributed : 
to  one  of  the  consuls,  that  which  had  been  under  Caius  Clau¬ 
dius,  the  consul  of  the  former  year  ;  to  the  other,  that  which 
had  been  under  Quintus  Claudius,  propraetor  ;  they  consisted 
each  of  two  legions.  It  was  decreed  that  Marcus  Livius,  pro- 
consul,  whose  command  had  been  prolonged  for  a  year, 
should  receive  two  legions  of  volunteer  slaves  from  Caius 
Terentius,  propraetor  in  Etruria  ;  and  that  Quintus  Mamilius 
should  transfer  his  judicial  employment  to  his  colleague,  and 
take  the  command  In  Gaul  with  the  army  which  had  belong¬ 
ed  to  Lucius  Porcius,  propraetor  ;  orders  "at  the  same  time 
being  given  him  to  lay  waste  the  lands  of  the  Gauls,  who  had 
revolted  on  the  approach  of  Hasdrubal.  The .  protection  of 
Sicily  was  given  in  charge  to  Caius  Servilius,  with  the  two 
legions  of  Cannae,  as  Caius  Mamilius  had  held  it.  From  Sar¬ 
dinia,  the  old  army  which  had  served  under  Aulus  Hostilius, 
was  brought  home  ;  and  the  consuls  levied  a  new  legion, 
which  Tiberius  Claudius  was  to  carry  with  him.  Quintus 

BGQK  XXVIII. 

19 

B.C.  206.] 

Cbiiictiusand  Caius  Hostilius  Tubulus  were  continued  in 
command  for  a  year,  that  the  former  might  hold  Tarentum  as 
his  province,  the  latter  Capua.  Marcus  Valerius,  proconsul, 
who  had  been  entrusted  with  the  defence  of  the  sea  coasts 
round  Sicily,  was  ordered  to.  deliver  thirty  ships  to  Caius 
Servilius,  and  to  return  home^  with  all  the  rest  of  the  fleet. 
XI.  While  the  public  was  under  .much  anxiety,  on  account 
of  the  great  danger  and  importance  of  the  war,  and  ever  apt 
to  refer  to  the  gods  the  causes*  of  all  their  successes  and  dis¬ 
appointments,  accounts  were  propagated  of  a  number  of  pro¬ 
digies  :  that,  at  Tarracina,  the  temple  of  Jupiter  ;  at  Satri- 
cum,  that  of  Mother  Matuta,  had  been  struck  by  lightning  ; 
the  people  being  also  greatly  terrified  by  two  snakes  creeping 
into  the  former  unperceived  through  the  very  door.  From 
Antium  it  was  reported,  that  ears  of  com  had  appeared  bloody 
to  the  reapers.  At  Caere,  a  pig  had  been  littered  with  two 
heads,  and  a  lamb  yeaned  which  was  of  both  sexes.  It  was 
said  ^Iso,  that  two  sut^  had  been  seen  at  Alba,  and  that  light 
had  burst  forth  on  a  sudden  during  the  night  time  at  Fre- 
gellae.  An  ox,  it  was  asserted,  had  spoken  in  the  neighbour¬ 
hood  of  Rome  ;  and  a  profuse  sweat  had  flowed  from  the  al¬ 
tar  of  Neptune,  in  the  Flaminian  Circus  ;  and  also,  that  the 
temples  of  Ceres,  Safety,  and  Romulus,  were  struck  by  light¬ 
ning.  These  prodigies  the  consuls  were  ordered  to  expiate 
with  the  greater  victims,  and  to  perform  a  solemn  supplica¬ 
tion  to  the  gods  during  one  day  ;  all  which  was  strictly  ob¬ 
served  in  pursuance  of  a  decree  of  the.  senate.  But  what 
struck  more  terror  into  men’s  minds  than  all  these  ominous  and 
preternatural  appearances,  at  home  or  abroad,  was  the  ex¬ 
tinction  of  the  fire  in  the  temple  of  Vesta,  and  for  which  the 
vestal  who  had  the  watch  for  that  night  was  whipped  to  death, 
by  order  of  the  pontiff  Publius  Licinius.  Although  this  ex* 
tinction  was  occasioned,  not  by  the  gods  directing  it  as  a  por¬ 
tent,  but  by  the  negligence  of  a  human  being,  yet  it  was 
drought  proper  that  it  should  be  expiated  by  the  greater  vie- 

20 

HISTORY  OR  ROME. 

[Y.R.  546, 

tims,  and  that  a  supplication  should  be  solemnized  at  the  tem¬ 
ple  of  Vesta.  Bi^fore  the  consuls  set  out  to  the  campaign, 
they  received  directions  from  the  senate,  to  ‘‘  take  measures 
to  make  the  common  people  return  to  their  lands  in  the  coun¬ 
try,  where  they  might  now  reside  in  safety,  as,  by  the  favour 
of  the  gods,  the  war  had  been  removed  to  a  distance  from  the 
city  of  Rome,  and  from  Latium  ;  for  it  was  quite  inconsist¬ 
ent  to  pay  more  attention  to  the  cultivation  of  Sicily  than  to 
that  of  Italy.”  It  was,  however,  no  easy  matter  to  obtain  a 
compliance  with  this  injunction :  the  labourers  of  f|ree  con¬ 
dition  were  most  of  them  lost  in  the  war,  slaves  were  scarce, 
the  cattle  had  been  carried  off  in  booty,  and  their  dwellings 
thrown  down  or  burnt.  Nevertheless  a  great  number,  com¬ 
pelled  by  the  authority  of  the  consuls,  returned  as  directed. 
The  mention  of  this  affair  had  been  occasioned  by  deputies 
from  Placentia  and  Cremona,  who  complained  that  incursions 
were  made  on  them  by  the  neighbouring  Gauls  ;  that  a  great 
part  of  their  settlers  had  dispersed  ;  that  their  cities  Were 
thinly  inhabited,  and  their  territory  waste  and  deserted.  A 
charge  given  to  the  prsetor  Mamilius,  to  protect  the  co¬ 
lonies  from  the  enemy.  The  consuls,  in  pursuance ^f  the 
decree  of  the  senate,  issued  an  edict,  that  all  the  citizens  of 
Cremona  and  Placentia  should  return  before  a  certain  day  to 
those  colonies  ;  and  then,  in  the  beginning  of  the  spring,  they 
set  out  to  carry  on  the  war.  Quintus  Caecilius,  consul,  re¬ 
ceived  his  army  from  Caius  Nero  ;  Lucius  Veturius,  his 
from  Quintus  Claudius,  propraetor,  he  filling  it  up  with  the 
new  levies  which  himself  had  raised.  They  led  their  forces 
into  the  territory  of  Consent! a.  Here,  having  made  great 
ravages,  the  troops,  now  loaded  with  spoil,  were  thrown  into 
sudi  confusion,  in  a  narrow  pass,  by  some  Bruttians  and  Nu- 
midian  spearmen,  that  not  only  that  spoil,  but  themselves 
were  in  extreme  danger.  However,  there  was  more  tumult 
than  fighting ;  the  booty  was  sent  forward,  and  the  legions 

BOOK  XXVIII. 

21 

B.C.  206.] 
without  loss  made  their  way  to  places  of  safety.  From  thence 
they  advanced  against  the  Lucanians,  which  whole  nation  re¬ 
turned,  without  a  contest,  into  subgecdon  to  the  Roman  peo- 
ple. 
XII.  No  action  took  place  during  that  year  between  them 
and  Hannibal ;  for  the  Carthaginian,  after  the  deep  wound 
so  lately  given  both  to  his  own  private,  mid  to^the  public 
welfare,  cautiously  avoided  throwing  himself  in  their  w^ay  ; 
and  the  Romans  did  not  choose  to  rouse  him  from  his  inac¬ 
tivity :  such  powers  did  they  suppose  that  leader  possessed^ 
of,  in  his  single  person,  though  all  things  round  him  were 
falling  into  ruin.  In  truth,  I  know  not  whether  he  wasm6re 
deserving  of  admiration  in  adversity  or  in  prosperity  ;  cc«i- 
sidering,  that,  though  he  carried  on  war  for  thirteen  years, 
and  that  in  an  enemy’s  territory  so  far  from  home,  with 
various  success,  with  an  army,  not  composed  of  his  own 
countrymen^  but  made  up  of  the  refuse  of  all  nations, 
who  had  neither  law,  nor  custom,  nor  language  in  com¬ 
mon;  who  were  of  different  stature,  had  different  garb, 
different  arms,  different  rites,  and  almost  different  gods  j 
yet  he  so  bound  them  together  by  some  common  tie,  that 
neither  among  themselves  nor  against  their  commander, 
did  any  sedition  ever  appear,  although,  in  a  hostile  coun¬ 
try,  he  often  wanted  both  money  to  pay  them,  and  pro¬ 
visions  also, — wants  which,  in  the  former  Punic  war,  had 
occasioned  many  distressful  scenes  between  the  generals  and 
their  men.  But,  after  the  destruction  of  Hasdrubal  and  his 
army,  on  whom  he  had  reposed  all  his  hopes  of  victory;  and 
when  he  had  given  up  the  possession  of  all  the  rest  of  Italy, 
and  withdrawn  into  a  corner  of  Bruttium,  must  it  not  appear 
wonderful  to  all,  that  no  di^urhance  arose  in  his  camp  ?  For 
there  was  this  afflicting  circumstance  in  addition  to  all  his 
other  difficulties,  that  he  had  no  hope  of  being  able  even  to  pro* 
cure  food  for  his  soldiers,  except  from  the  lands  of  Bruttium ; 
which,  if  they  were  entirely  under  tillage,  were  too  small  for 

22 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  546. 

the  support  of  so  large  an  army.  Besides,  the  war  had  em¬ 
ployed  a  great  part  of  the  young  men,  and  carried  them  away 
from  the  cultivation  of  the  grounds  j  a  base  practice  likewise 
prevailing  through  the  whole  nation,  of  making  plundering 
excursions  on  every  side  j  nor  were  there  any  remittances 
made  him  from  home,  where  the  whole  attention  of  the  pub¬ 
lic  was  engaged  in  endeavouring  to  keep  possession  of  Spain, 
as  if  affairs  in  Italy  were  ail  in  a  state  of  prosperity.  In  the 
former,  the  fortune  of  the  parties  was,  in  one  respect,  the 
same ;  in  another,  widely  different ;  the  same  so  far,  that  the 
Carthaginians,  being  defeated*  in  battle,  and  having  lost  their 
general,  had  been  driven  to  the  remotest  coast  of  the  coun¬ 
try,  even  to  the  ocean  ;  but  .different  in  this,  that  Spain,  in 
the  nature  both  of  the  ground  and  of  the  inhabitants,  affords 
greater  conveniences  for  reviving  a  war,  not  only  than  Italy, 
but  than  any  other  part  of  the  world  ;  and  that  was  the  rea¬ 
son,  that  although  this  was  the  first  of  all  the  provinces  on 
the  continent  in  which  the  Romans  got  footing,  yet  it  was 
the  last  subdued  ;  and  that  not  until  the  present  age,  under 
the  conduct  and  auspices  of  Augustus  Csesar.  In  this  coun¬ 
try  Hasdrubal,  son  of  Gisgo,  a  general  of  the  greatest  abili¬ 
ties  and  character  next  to  the  Barcine  family,  returning  now 
from  Gades,  and  being  encouraged  to  a  renewal  of  the  war 
by  Mago,  the  son  of  Hamilcar,  armed  to  the  number  of  fifty 
thousand  foot,  and  four  thousand  five  hundred  horse,  by 
levies  made  in  the  Farther  Spain,  In  the  number  of  his  ca¬ 
valry  authors  are  pretty  well  agreed  ;  of.  the  infantry,  ac¬ 
cording  to  some,  there  were  seventy  thousand  led  to  the  city 
of  Silpia.  There  the  two  Carthaginian  generals  sat  down  in 
an  extensive  plain,  determined  not  to  avoid  a  battle. 
XIII,  When  Scipio  received  the  account  of  this  army  be¬ 
ing  assembkd,  he  saw  plrinfy,  that,  with  the  Roman  legions 
alone,  he  could  not  oppc»e  so  great  a  multitude ;  nor  without 
using  the  auxiliary  troops  of  the  barbarians,  at  least  for  the 

BOOK  xxvm. 

B.C.  206.] 
purpose  of  making  a  show  of  strength ;  but  that,  at  the 
same  time,  it  was  highly  improper  that  they  should  compose 
such  a  proportion  of  his  force  as  might  enable  them,  by 
changing  sides,  to  produce  consequences  of  importance — an 
event  which  had  caused  the  destruction  of  his  father  and  un¬ 
cle.  Sending  forward,  therefore,  Silanus  to  Colca,  who  was 
sovereign  of  twen^-eight  towns,  to  receive  from  him  the 
horse  and  foot  which  he  had  engs^ged  to  raise  during  the 
winter;  he  set  out  himself  from  I'arraco,  and  collecting 
small  bodies  of  auxiliaries  from  the  allies  who  lay  near  his 
road,  proceeded  to  Castulo.  Hither  Silanus  brought  three 
thousand  auxiliary  foot,  and  five  hundred  horse.  From 
thence  he  advanced  to  the  city  of  Bscula,  his  army  aiftount- 
ing,  in  the  whole  of  his  countrymen  and  allies,  horse  and 
foot,  to  forty-five  thousand.  While  they  were  forming  their 
camp,  Mago  and  Masinissa,  with  the  whole  of  their  cavalry', 
made  an  attack  on  them,  and  would  have  dispersed  the  work¬ 
men,  had  not  some  horsemen  whom  Scipio  had  concealed 
behind  a  hill,  conveniently  situated  for  the  purpose,  suddenly 
rushed  out  as  they  advanced  tb  the  charge.  .  These,  at  the 
first  onset,  routed  all  who  had  pushed  on  foremost  against 
the  men  employed  in  the  fortification.  The  contest  with  the 
rest,  who  advanced  on  their  march  drawn  up  in  regular  or¬ 
der,  was  longer  and  for  some  time  doubtful.  But  the  light 
cohorts  from  the  outposts,  the  soldiers  called  off  from  the 
works,  and  afterwards  greater  numbers,  who  were  ordered 
to  take  arms,  came  up  fresh,  and  engaged  the  wearied  ene¬ 
my*  At  the  same  time,  a  large  bo^  rushed  in  arms  from 
the  camp  to  battle.  The*  Carthaginians  md  Numidians  then 
fairly  turned  their  backs ;  and  thou^  at  fimt  they  retreated 
in  troops,  and  without  breaking  their  ranks^  yet  when  the 
Romans  fell  furiously  bn  their  rear^  they  thought  no  more  of 
order,  but  fled  precipitately,  and  dispemed  into  such  places 
as  each  found  convenient,  by  this  battle  the  spirits 

2f4  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  {Y.R.  546. 
irf  ribe  Romaiis  wca’e  aoipaewhat  tubed ,  and  those  of  the  ene¬ 
my  depres»^«  ye^  far  severaV  following  days  the  horsemen 
amd  ti^t  troops  were  continually  engaged  in  skirmishes. 
XIV •  After  making  trial  of  their  strength  in  these  slight 
engagements^  Hasdiubal  led  his  forces  to  the  field  j  then  the 
Romans  marched  out.  Both  armies  stocd  in  order  of  battle 
under  their  respective  ramparts,  neither  party  choosing  to  be¬ 
gin  the  atock ;  when  it  was  near  sunset,  the  Carthaginians 
first,  and  then  the  Romans,  marched  back  into  camp.  They 
acted  in  the  same  manner  for  several  days,  the  Carthaginian 
always  drawing  out  his  troops  first,  and  first  giving  the  sig¬ 
nal  of  retreat,  when  they  were  fatigued  with  standing.  Nei¬ 
ther  ^e  advanced -in  the  least,  nor  was  a  weapon  discharged, 
i  nor  a  word  uttered.  The  centre  divisions  of  their  lines  were 
composed,  on  one  side,  of  Romans ;  on  the  other,  of  Cartha¬ 
ginians  and  African  auxiliaries ;  the  wings  were  formed  by 
the  allies,  who  on  both  sides  were  Spaniards.  In  front  of  the 
Carthaginian  line,  the  elephants  at  a  distance  appeared  like 
castles.  It  was  now  generally  said  in  both  camps,  that  they 
were  to  engage  in  the  same  order  in  which  they  had  stood 
before  ;  and  that  their  centres,  consisting  of  Romans  and 
Carthaginians,  who  were  principals  in  the  war,  would  no 
doubt  encounter  each  other  with  equal  courage  and  strength 
of  arms.  When  Scipio  understood  that  this  opinion  was 
firmly  entertained,  he  took  care  to  alter  the  whole  plan  against 
the  day  on  which  he  intendecl  to  fight.  On  the  preceding 
evening,  therefore,  he  gave  out  orders  through  the  camp, 
that  the  men  and  horses  should  be  refreshed  and  accoutred 
before  day ;  and  that  the  horsemen,  ready  armed,  should 
keep  their  horses  bridled  and  saddled.  Before  it  was  clear 
day,  he  despatched  all  the  cavalry  and  light  infantry,  with 
orders  to  charge  the  Carthaginian  outposts ;  and  immediate¬ 
ly  advanced  himself  with  the  heavy,  body  of  the  legions,  hav¬ 
ing,  contrary  to  the  expectation  both  of  his  own  men  and 

BOOK  xxvrn. 

25 

B.C.  206.] 
the  enemy,  strengthened  tte  wings  with  \m  ftnmm  ^roc^, 
and  drawn  the  allies  into  the  centre.  Hasdruha!  wm  iSmtned 
by  the  shout  of  the  cavalry,  and,  springing  out  from  hla  ^t, 
saw  a  bustle  before  the  rampart,  his,  men  in  hurry  and  confu¬ 
sion,  the  glittering  standards  of  the  legions  at  a  distance,  and 
the  plain  filled  with  troops.  ^  He  immediately  despatched  all 
his  cavalry  against  that  of  the  enemy,  marching  himself  from 
out  the  camp  with  the  body  of  infantry  ;  but,  in  drawing  up 
his  line,  he  made  no  alteration  in  the  original  disposition. 
The  contest  between  the  horsC  had  continued  a  long  time 
doubtful,  nor  could  they  decide  it  by  their  own  efforts,  be¬ 
cause,  when  either  were  repulsed,  which  happened  to  hoth 
in  turn,  they  found  a  safe  refuge  among  the  infantry.  But, 
when  the  armies  had  approached  within  five  hundred  paces 
of  each  other,  Scipio,  giving  the  ’Signal  for  retreat,  and  open¬ 
ing  his  files,  recei\red  all  the  cavalry  and  light  troops  through 
them  j  and,  forming  them  in  two  divisions,  placed  them  in 
reserve  behind  the  wings.  When  he  saw  that  it  was  time  to 
begin  the  engagement,  he  ordered  the  Spaniards,  who  com¬ 
posed  the  centre,  to  advance  with  a  slow  pace,  and  sent  di¬ 
rections  from  the  right  wing,  where  he  commanded  in  per¬ 
son,  to  Silanus  and  Marcius,  to  extend  their  wing  on  the  left, 
in  the  same  manner  as  they  should  see  him  stretching  on 
the  right,  and  attack  the  enemy  with  the  light-armed  forces 
of  horse  and  foot  before  the  centres  could  close.  The  wings 
extending  in  this  manner,  three  cbhorts  of  foot,  and  three 
troops  of  horse  from  each,  together  with  the  light  infantry, 
advanced  briskly  against  the  enemy,  while  the  rest  followed 
them  in  aU  oblique  direction.  There  was  a  bending  in  the 
centre,  because  the  battalions  of  Spaniards  advanced  slower 
than  the  wings,  and  the  wings  had  already  encountered,  while 
the  principal  strength  of  the  enemy’s  line,  the  Carthaginian 
veterans  and  Africans,  were  still  at  such  a  distance,  tlutt  lliey 
could  not  throw  their  javelins  with  effect,  nor  did  dsure 
voi„  IV. — E 

HISTORY  OF  HOME. 

(Y.R.  546. 

^6 
to  make  detachments  to  the  wings,  to  supjmrt  dbose  who  were 
lingaged,  for  fear  of  opening  the  centre  to  the  forces  advan- 
cing  against  it.  The  Carthaginian  wings  were  hard  pressed, 
being  attacked  on  all  sides  ;  for  the  horse  and  foot,  together 
w4A  the  light  infantry,  wheeling  round,  fell  in.  upon  their 
flanks,  while  the  cohorts  pressed  on  them  in  front,  in  order 
^o  separate  the  wings  from  the  rest  of  the  line* 
XV.  The  battle  was  now  very  unequal  in  all  parts  ;  not 
only  because  an  irregular  multitude  of  Balearians  and  undis¬ 
ciplined  Spanish  recruits  were  opposed  to  the  Roman  nnd 
Latine  troops,  but,  as  the  day  advanced,  HasdrubaFs  troops 
began  to  grow  faint,  having  been  surprised?  by  the  alarm  in 
the  morning,  and  obUged  to  hasten  out  to  the  field  before  they 
could  take  food  to  support  their  strength.  With  a  view  to 
this,  Scipio  had  taken  care  to  create  delay,  for  it  was  not  until 
the  seventh  hour  that  the  battalions  of  foot  fell  upon  the 
wings,  and  the  battle  reached  the  centre  somewhat  later ;  so 
that,  before  the  enemy  began  r^egularly  to  engage,  they  were 
enfeebled  by  the  Heat  of  the  meridian  sun,  the  labour  of 
standing  under  arms,  and  by  hunger  and  thirst,  distressing 
them  at  once.  They  stood,  therefore,  leaning  on  their  shields ; 
for,  in  addition  to  their  other  misfortunes,  the  elephants,  ter¬ 
rified  at  the  desultory  manner  of  fighting  used  by  the  horse 
and  the  light  infantry,  had' thrown  themselves  from  the  wings 
upon  the  centre.  Harassed  thqs  greatly,  both  in  body  and 
mind,  they  began  to  give  way,  but  still  preserved  their  ranks, 
as  if  the  whole  army  were  retreating  by  order  of  the  general. 
The  victors,  perceiving  the  superiority  which  they  had  gain¬ 
ed,  redoubled  the  fury  of  their  assault  on  all  sides,  so  that 
the  shock  could  har^y  be  sustained.  Hasdrubal,  however, 
endeavoured  to  stop  bis  men,  crying  out  that  ^  the  hilb  in 
the  rear  would  s^ord  a  safe  refuge,  if  they  would  but  retreat 
without  hurry  yet  fear  overcame  their  shame,  and  altbou^ 
such  as  were  nearest  the  enemy  still  continued  to  fight,  they 

BOOK  XXVIIL 

B.C.206.] 

sr 

quickly  turned  backs,  and  all  betook  tbemselves  to  a 
hasty  flight.  They  halted,  however^  for  a  time,  at  the  foc^ 
of  the  hills,  endeavouring  to  restore  order,  while  the  Romans 
hesitated  to  advance  their  line  against  the  opposite  sb^« 
But,  when  they  saw  the  battalions  pressing  forward  Iwiskly, 
they  renewed  their  flight,  ^nd  were  driven  in  a  panic  wtthm 
their  works.  Hie  Romans  were  not  fer  from  the  rampart ; 
and,  continuing  their  efforts,  had  nearly  surmounted  it,  when 
such  a  quantity  of  rain  poured  suddenly  down,  that  it  was 
with  difficulty  they  regained  their  camp.  The  sun  too,  had 
been  excessively  hot,  as  is  usually  the  case  when  shining  forth 
from  among  clouds  surcharged  with  water;  which  added 
greatly  to  the  fatigues  of  the  day.  Some  were  even  seia^ 
with  a  religious  scruple  agfdhst  attempting  any  thing  faiflier 
at  that  time.  Though  both  night  and  the  rain  invited  die 
Carthaginians  to  take  the  repose  so  necessary  to  them,  yet 
fear  and  the  impending  danger  would  not  admit  of  it ;  and 
as  they  had  reason  to  expect  an  assault  from  the  enemy  at 
the  first  light,  they  raised  the  height  of  the  rampart  with 
stones  collected '  from  the  adjacent  vailies,  endeavouring  to 
secure  themselves  by  fortifications,  since  they  found  no  pro¬ 
tection  in  their  arms.  But  the  desertion  of  their  allies  soon 
gave  them  reason  to  think,  that  it  was  the  safer  way  to  fly. 
The  beginning  of  this  revolt  arose  from  Attanes,  printe  of 
the  Turdetans,  who  deserted  with  a  great  number  Of  his 
countrymen  ;  and  afterwards,,  two  fortified  towns,  with  their 
garrisons,  were  delivered  to  the  Romani  by  their  command¬ 
ers.  Hasdrubal,  dreading,  since  a  disposition  to  throw  off 
the  Carthaginian  yoke  had  once  seized  their  minds,  that  the 
evil  might  spread  farther,  decamped  during  the  silence  of  the 
ensuing  liight. 
XVI.  At  the  first  light,  the  outguards  having  brought  in¬ 
telligence  of  the  enemy’s  departure,  Scipio,  sending  forward 
the  cavalry,  gave  orders  to  the  army  to  march ;  and  these 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

28 

tY.R.  546. 

were  executed  with  such  expedition,  that,  had  they  directly 
'pursued  the  track  of  the  fugitives,  they  had  certainly  overta¬ 
ken  them  i  but  they  were  persuaded  by  their  guides,  that 
there  was  another  and  a  shorter  road  to  the  river  Baetis,  and 
where,  it  was  said,  they  might  attack  them  in  Bieir  passage. 
Hasdrubal,  finding  the  ford  in  possession  of  enemy, 
changed  his  course,  directing  it  towards  the  ocean  his  army 
now  retreating  with  precipitancy,  so  that  the  Roman  legions 
were  left  at  some  distance  behind.  However,  the  horse  and 
the  light  infantry  harassed  and  delayed  them,  by  attacking 
sometimes  their  rear,  sometimes  their  flanks;  and  as  they 
were  obliged  to  halt  frequently,  on  occasion  of  these  inter¬ 
ruptions,  and  to  support  the  attacks,  at  onetime  of  the  horse, 
at  another  of  the  infantry  and  auxiliary  foot,  they  were  over¬ 
taken  by  the  legions.  The  consequence  was,  not  a  fight, 
but  a  carnage,  as  of  cattle  ;  until  at  length  the  general  him¬ 
self,  setting  the  example  of  a  flight,  made  his  escape  to  the 
adjacent  hills  with  about  six  thousand  men  half  armed  :  the 
rest  were  either  slain  or  taken  prisoners.  The  Carthaginians 
hastily  fortified  an  irregular  camp  on  the  highest  part  of  the 
ground,  and  defended  themselves  there  without  difficulty,  the 
enemy  in  vain  attempting  to  climb  so  difficult  an  ascent.  But 
a  blockade,  in  a  place  naked  and  destitute,  was  hardly  to  be 
supported,  eveO  for  a  few  days :  desertions  to  the  Roman, 
therefore,  were  frequent.  Hasdrubal  having  at  length  pro¬ 
cured  some  sbipa,  and  the  sea  being  not  far  distant,  left  his 
army  in  the  night,  and  fled  to  Gades.  When  Scipio  was  in¬ 
formed  of  the  flight  of  the  general,  leaving  ten  thousand  foot 
and  one  thousand  horse  with  Silanus  for  the  blockade  of  the 
camp,  he  returned  himself  with  the  rest  of  the  forces  to  Tar- 
raco,  where  he  arrived  after  a  march  of  seventy  days;  during 
which  he  was  employed  in  examining  into  the  conduct  of  the 
petty  princes  and  states,  in  order  that  their  rewards  might 
be  proportioned  according  to  a  just  estimate  of  their  merits. 

B&OK  XXVIII. 

29 

B.C.  206.] 

After  bis  departure,  Masinissa  having  held  a  private  confer¬ 
ence  with  Silanus,  passed  over  with  a  few  of  his  countiymen 
into  Africa,  in  order,  to  bring  his  own  n^on  to  participate 
in  the  design  which  he  had  newly  formed.  The  cause  of  his 
sudden  change  was  not  at  that  time  weM  kdown ;  but  the  in¬ 
violable  fidelity  which  he  ever  afterwards  preserved  towards 
Rome,  through  the  whole  course  of  a  very  long  .life,  is  sufii- 
cient  proof  that  he  did  not,  even  then,  act  ,  without  a  reason^ 
able  motive.  Mago  went, to  Gades  in  the  ships  which  had 
been  sent  back  by  Hasdrubal.  Of  the  rest  (thus  abandoned 
by  theur  generals,)  some  deserted,  others  fled  and  dispersed 
through  the  neighbouring  states  ;  no  detachment  remaining, 
considerable  either  for  number  or  strength.  These  were  the 
principal  events,  in  consequence  of  which,  under  the  conduct 
and  auspices  of  Publius  Scipio,  the  Carthaginians  were  com¬ 
pelled  to  relinquish  all  footing  in  Spain,  in  the  thirteenth  year 
from  the  commencement  of  hostilities,  the  fifth  from  Scipio^s 
having  received  the  command  of  the  province  and  of  the  ar¬ 
my.  Not  long  after,  Silanus  returned  to  Scipio  at  Tarraco, 
with  information  that  the  war  was  at  an  end. 
XVIL  Lucius  Scipio  was  employed  in  conveying  to  Rome 
a  great  many  prisoners  of  distinction,  and  in  carrying  the 
news  of  the  reductiop  of  Spain.  While  this  was  considered 
by  all  others  as  a  most  joyful  and  glorious  event,  he  alone, 
by  whose  means  it  been  accomplished,  insatiable  in  his 
pursuit  of  glory,  considered  it  as  a  trifle  in  comparison  with 
those  designs  which  his  aspiring  mind  and  sanguine  hopes 
prompted  him  to  conceive.  He  now  directed  his  views  to 
Africa,  regarding  the  subjugation  of  Carthage,  in  all  lier 
grandeur,  as  the  consutnmation  of  his  renown.  Deeming  it 
necessary,  therefore,  to  conciliate  the  friendship  of  the  sct«- 
ral  African  kings  and  people,  he  resolved  to  make  die  first 
trial  of  Syphax,  King  of  the  Masssesylians, — a  nation  border¬ 
ing  on  Mauritania,  and  lying  opposite  to  that  part  of  Spain, 

30 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  546. 

particularly^  where  New  Carthag^e  stands.  There  was  an 
alliance  at  that  time  subsisting  betaken  this  monarch  and  the 
Carthaginian^.  Supposing  him,  however,  not  more  firmly 
attached  than  barbarians  usually  are,  whose  fidelity  always 
depends  oh  fortune,  Scipio  despatched  Lseiius  to  him  as  en¬ 
voy,  with  proper  presents.  Syphax,  highly  delighted  with 
these,  and  considering  that  the  Rotnm^  were,  at  that  time, 
every  where  successful,  the  CartMgsmans  unfortunate  in 
Italy,  ahd  quite  cscluded  from  Spain,  consented  to  eihbrace 
the  friendship  of  the  Romans,  but  refused  to  exchange  the 
ratification  of  the  treaty  except  with  the  Romah  general  in 
persem.  LaeHus  then  returned  to  Scipio,  having  obtained 
from  the  King  an  engagement  merely  of  safe  condutt  for 
him.  To  him,  who  aihied  at  conquests  in  Africa,  the  friend¬ 
ship  of  Syphax  was,  in  every  respect,  of  the  Utmost  impor¬ 
tance  ^  he  was  the  most  powerful  prince  in  that  part  erf  the 
world,  had  already  opposed  even  the  Carthaginians  in  war, 
while  his  dominions  lay  very  conveniently  with  respect  to 
Spain,  from  which  they  ate  separated  by  k  narrow  straight. 
Scipio  thought  the  affair  of  such  moment  as  to  warrant  the 
attempt,  though  attended  with  considerable  danger  ;  since 
otherwise  it  could  not  be  accomplished.  Leaving,  therefore, 
for  the  security  of  Spain;  Lucius  Matcius  at  Tarraco,  and 
Marcus  Silanus  at  New  Carthage  (to  which  place  he  himself 
had  made  a  hasty  journey  by  land,)  and  setting  sail  from 
Carthage  with  Caius  Lalius,  in  tWo  galhes  of  five  banks,  he 
passed  over  to  Africa,  while  the  sea  was  so  calm,  that  they 
generally  used  their  oars,  though  sometimes  they  were  as¬ 
sisted  by  a  gentle  breexe.  It  happened,  that  HaSdrubal,  at 
the  very  same  time,  after  having  been  driven  out  of  Spain, 
had  entered  the  harbour  with  seven  galties  of  three  banks, 
and  having  cast  anchor,  was  mooring  his  ships.  On  sight  of 
these  two  five -banked  ships,  although  no  one  doubted  that 
they  belonged  to  the  Romans,  and  inight  be  overpowered  by 

BOOK  xxvm. 

31 

B.C.206,] 
superior  nunibcrs  before  they  entered  the  harbour,  yet  nothing 
ensued  except  tumult  ami  confusion  among  the  soldiers  and 
sailors,  endeavouring  to  no  purpose  to  get  their  arms  and 
ships  in  readiness  j  for  the  quinqueremes,  having  their  sails 
filled  by  a  brisk  firom  the  sea,  were  carried  into  the  bar* 
hour  before  the  Cardm^imis  could  weigh  their  anchors,  and 
afterwards,  they  dmred  not  to  raise  a  disturbance  in  the  King^s 
port.  Haring  landed,  therefore,  they  proceeded,  (Hasdrur 
bal  first,  then  Scipio  and  Laelius,)  on  their  way  to  the  King. 
XVII L  Syphax  considered  this  as  a  very  honourable  cir¬ 
cumstance  (as  it  really  was),  that  the  generals  of  the  two  most 
powerful  states  of  the  age,  should  come,  on  the  same  day,  to 
solicit  peace  and  friendship  with  him.  He  invited  them  both 
to  his  palace,  and  .as  chance  had  so  ordered  that  they  were 
under  the  same  roof,  and  in  the  protection  of  the  same  house¬ 
hold  gods, he  endeavoured  to  bring  them  to  a  ccmfcrence,  for 
the  purpose  of  putting  an  end' to  the  enmity  subsisting  be¬ 
tween  them.  Scipio  declared,  'that,  in  his  private  capacity, 
he  had  not  the  least  ill  will  to  the  Carthaginian,  which  might 
require  a  conference  to  remove  it ;  and  with  regard  to  public 
affairs,  he  could  not*^nter  into  any  negociation  with  an  enemy 
without  orders  from  the  senate.  However,  the  King  show¬ 
ing  an  earnest  desire  that  be  should  come  to  the  same  table, 
so  that  neither  of  his  guests  might  seem  to  be  excluded,  he  did 
not  refuse  ;  mui  they  there  supped  together.  Scipio  and  Has- 
drubal,  perceiving  that  it  would  be  agreeable  to  their  enter¬ 
tainer,  even  recHned  upon  the  same  couch  during  the  repast ; 
and  so  pleasing  were  the  manners  of  the  former,  such  his 
pliability  on  every  occasion,  and  such  his  engaging  conver^- 
tion,  that  he  acquired  the  esteem  not  cmly  of  Syphax,  a  bar¬ 
barian  unacquainted  widi*  Roman  habits,  but  even  of  his 
inveterate  enemy,  who,  declared  publicly,  that  **  he  appeared, 
on  acquaintance,  more  worthy  of  admiration  for  his  powers 
in  conversation,  than  for  his  exploits  tn  war  j  that  he  made 

32 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R,  &40. 

no  doubt,  but  Syphax  and  his  kingdom  #ould  soon  be  under 
the  direction  of  the  Romans,  Such  addresi  that  man 
possessed  of,  in  acquiring  an  ascendancy  minda, 
that  the  Carthaginians  were  not  more  intent,  at  present,  in 
inquiring  how  Spain  had  been  lost,  than  how  they  were  to 
retain  possession  of  Africa.  That  it  was  not  for  the  sake  of 
travelling,  or  in  the  pursuit  of  pleasure,  that  so  great  a  gene¬ 
ral,  quitting  a  province  but  lately  subdued,  and  leaving  his 
armies,  had  passed  over  into  Africa  with  only  two  ships,  en¬ 
trusting  himself,  in  an  enemy’s  country,  to  the  power  of  the 
King,  and  to  his  fidelity,  as  yet  untried.  Scipio  bad  formed 
the  scheme  of  subduing  their  people,  had  long  entertained 
this  desi^,  and  had  openly  expressed  his  regret,  that  he  was 
not  carrying  on  war  in  Africa,  as  Hannibal  was  in  Italy.” 
The  league,  however,  being  ratified  with  Syphax,  Scipio  set 
sail ;  and  after  being  tossed  a  good  deal  during  the  voyage, 
by  variable  and  generally  boisterous  winds,  he  made  the  har¬ 
bour  of  New  Carthage  on  the  fourth  day. 
XIX.  As  Spain  had  now  rest  from  the  Cmhaginian  war, 
so  it  was  manifest  that  some  states  remained  quiet  rather 
through  fear,  arising  from  the  consciousness  of  misbehaviour, 
than  through  sincere  attachment.  The  most  remarkable  of 
these,  both  in  greatnesis  and  in  guilt,  were  Illiturgi  and  Cas- 
tulo.  The  Inhabitants  of  Castulo,  allies  of  the  Romans  while 
they  were  successful,  had,  on  the  destruction  of  the  first 
Ssipio’s  and  their  armies,  revolted  to  the  Carthaginians. 
Those  of  Illiturgi,  by  betraying  and  killing  such  as  had  ftcd 
to  them  after  that  calamity,  had  added  barbarity  to  revolt. 
To  have  executed  severe  vengeance  on  those  states,  at  Scipio’s 
first  coming,  when  affairs  in  Spain  were  in  a  precarious  state, 
would  have  been  more  suited  to  their  demerits  than  agreea¬ 
ble  to  principles  of  sound  policy ;  but  now,  when  affairs  were 
in  a  state  of  tranquillity,  the  proper  time  for  inflicting  pun¬ 
ishment  seemed  to  have  arrived.  He  therefore  sent  for  Lu- 

BOOK  xxvni. 

3S 

cilss  Marcim  fram  Tamico,  and  des{Kitching  him  with  a  third 
psrt  af  lip  foi^s  to  besiege  Castulo,  he  went  himself  with 
the  against  lllitnrgi,  where  he  arrived  on 
fifidi  day,  .  The  gates  there  had  been  already  shut,  and 
every  precaution  taken,  and  preparation  made  for  repelling 
an  attack.  So  far  had  theii  consciousness  of  what  they  merit¬ 
ed  served  them  instead  of  a  declaration  of  war.  Hence  Scipio 
took  occasion  to  represent,  in  an  exhortation  to  his  soldiers, 
that  “  the  Spaniards  themselves,  by  shutting  their  gates,  had 
shown  what,  in  justice,  diey  had  reason  to  apprehend  ;  that 
they  ought,  therefore,  to  entertain  a  much  greater  animosity 
against  them  than  against  the  Carthaginians :  for,  with  the 
latter,  the  contest  was  for  empire  and  glory,  almost  without 
resentment,  but  the  former  they  were  called  upon  to  punish 
both  for  perfidy  and  cruelty.  That  the  time  was  now  come 
when  they  were  to  take  vengeance  for  the  horrid  murder  of 
their  fellow-soldiers,  and  for  the  treachery  ready  to  be  ex¬ 
ecuted  on  themselves  also,  had  they  happened  to  fly  to  the 
same  place  ;  and,  by  a  severe  example,  to  establish  it  as  a 
maxim  to  all  future  ages,  that  no  Roman  citizen  or  soldier,  in 
any  state  of  fortune,  should  be  injured  with  impunity.”  Their 
rage  being  excited  by  this  harangue,  they  distributed  the 
scaling-ladders  to  chosen  men  in  each  company;  and  the 
array  being  divided  into  two  parts,  one  of  which  Laelius, 
lieutenant-general,  was  to  command,  they  assaulted  the  city 
in  two  places  at  once,  striking  terror  into  the  assailed  by  the 
two-fold  danger  to  which  they  were  exposed.  It  was  not  one 
leader,  or  a  number  of  chiefs,  but  their  own  violent  appre¬ 
hensions,  in  consequence  of  their  guilt,  that  induced  the  in¬ 
habitants  to  make  a  vigoto^s  defence  :  they  were  fully  sen¬ 
sible,  and  they  reminded  •each  other,  that  their  punishm,ent, 
not  a  victory,  was  the  object  aimed  at ;  that  the  matter  for 
present  consideration  was,  where  they  should  choose  to  meet 
death,  whether  in  the  field  and  in  fight,  where  the  chance  of 
VOL.  IV, - F 

u 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y,R.544. 

war,  equal  to  hoik  patties,  often  raises  the  vanquished,  and 
puUs  down  the  ccmqueror  ;  or  whether,  after  seeing  their  city 
burned  and  demolished,  and  after  suffering  every  indignity 
and  di^ace,  they  should  expire  among  chains  and  stripes, 
in  the  presence  of  their  captive  wives  and  children.”  There¬ 
fore,  not  only  those  who  were  of  m  age  to  bear  arms,  or  the 
men  sdone,  but  women  and  boys  added  exertions  beyond  the 
strength  of  their  minds  or  bodies,  supplying  with  weapons 
who  were  engaged  in  the  fight,  and  cairying  stones  to 
tfie  wdis  for  others  who  were  strengthening  the  works  ;  for 
beside  that  their  liberty  Was  at  stake,  and  by  which  the  brave 
powerfully  excited,  the  extreme  severity  of  punishment 
which  they  must  all  expect,  with  a  disgra^ful  death,  were 
before  their  eyes.  F urther,  their  courage  was  inflamed  by 
mutual  emulation  in  toil  and  danger,  and  even  by  the  sight 
of  each  other.  Thus  animated,  they  opposed  the  enemy  with 
such  determined  bravery,  that  the  army  which  had  subdued 
all  Spain  was  often  repulsed  from  the  walls  ;  and  began,  in  a 
contest  with  the  youth  of  a  single  town,  not  much  to  their 
honour,  to  abate  of  their  ardour.  Scipio  perceiving  this,  and 
dreading  lest,  by  these  unsuccessful  attempts,  the  courage  of 
the  enemy  should  be  raised,  and  his  own  men  dispirited, 
thought  it  necessary  to  exert  himself  in  person,  and  take  a 
share  in  the  danger.  Whereupon,  reprimanding  the  troops 
for  their  want  of  spirit,  he  ordered  ladders  to  be  brought  to 
him,  threatening  to  mount  the  wall  himself,  since  the  rest 
were  backward ;  and,  accordingly,  he  had  already  advanced 
near  it,  and  not  without  danger,  when  a  shout  was  raised  on 
all  sides  by  the  soldiers,  alarmed  at  the  situatbnof  the  gene¬ 
ral,  and  the  scalade  was  attempted  at  once.  Laelius,  too, 
pressed  on  at  the  other  side.  The  inhabitants  were  then  no 
longer  able  to  make  opposition,  and  those  who  defended  the 
walls  being  beaten  off,  the  Romsms  took  possession  of  themt- 

BOOK  XXVIII. 

B.C.  206.] 

US 

XX.  The  citadel,  too,  during  the  tumult,  atta^ed 
on  diat  side  where  it  was  thought  impregnable,  was  taken. 
While  the  inhabitants  were  engaged  in  defence  of  those  places 
where  the  danger  appeared,  and  the  Romans  in  making  great¬ 
er  approaches  where  they  found  it  practicable,  some  African 
deserters,  who  were  then  among  the  Roman  auxiliaries,  ob¬ 
served,  that  the  most  elevated  part  of  the  town,  though  pro¬ 
tected  by  a  very  high  rock,  was  neither  secured  by  any  works 
nor  provided  with  men  for  its  defence.  As  they  wer^i  ^ht 
of  body,  and  very  active  from  constant  exercise,  carryic^  iron 
spears  along  with  thena,  they  climbed  up,  by  means  of  th^  ir¬ 
regular  prominences  of  the  rock,  and  when  they  met  with 
cliff  too  high  and  smooth,  by  driving  in  the  spikes  at  mig¬ 
rate  distances,  they  formed  a  kind  of  steps.  In  this  manner, 
the  foremost  drawing  up  by  the  hand  those  who  followed, 
and  the  lundmost  lifting  up  those  before  them,  they  made 
their  way  to  the  summit ;  and  from  thence,  with  loud  shouts, 
poured  down  into  the  city,  which  had  been  already  taken  by 
the  Romans.  'Fhen  it  plainly  appeared,  that  resentment  and 
hatred  h^d  been  the  motives  of  the  assault :  no  one  thought 
of  taking  prisoners,  no  one  thought  of  booty,  though  the  ob¬ 
jects  lay  before  their  eyes.  The  armed  and  unarmed  were 
slain  without  distinction,  women  and  men  promiscuously  ; 
the  cruel  rage  of  the  soldiers  proceeded  even  to  slaying  of 
infants.  They  then  set  fire  to  the  houses,  and  what  could 
not  be  thus  destroyed,  they  levelled  to  the  ground  ;  so  earn¬ 
est  were  they  to  erase  every  trace  of  the  city,  and  to  polish 
every  mark  of  the  enemy’s  residence.  Scipio  from  thence  led 
his  army  to  Castulo,  which  was  defended  by  a  great  con¬ 
course  of  Spaniards,  and  also  by  the  remains  of  the  Cartha¬ 
ginian  arn^y,  collected  from  the  places  whither  they  had  dis¬ 
persed  in  their  flight.  But  the  news  of  the  calamities  of  the 
llliturgians  had  preceded  the  arrival  of  Scipio,  and  thrown 
the  garrison  into  fright  and  despair ;  and  as  they  were  dif- 

36 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[y.R.  546* 

fefently  circumstanced,  while  each  party  wished  to  provide 
for  their  own  safety,  without  regard  to  the  rest,  at  first  silent 
suspicion,  afterwards  open  discord,  ensued,  and  caused  a  se* 
paration  between  the  Carthaginians  and  Spaniards.  Cerdu- 
beUus  openly  advised  the  latter  to  surrender.  Himilco  com¬ 
manded  the  Carthaginian  garrison  auxiliaries,  who,  together 
with  the  city,  were  delivered  up  to  the  Romans  by  Cerdubel- 
lus,  after  he  had  privately  made  terms  for  himself.  This  victo¬ 
ry  was  not  followed  with  so  much  severity ;  the  guilt  of  this 
people  not  having  been  so  great  as  that  of  the  former,  tod 
their  voluntary  surrender  mitigating,  in  some  degree,  the  re¬ 
sentment  against  them. 
XXI.  Marcius  proceeded  from  thence,  in  order  to  reduce 
to  obedience  such  of  the  barbarians  as  had  not  been  complete¬ 
ly  subdued.  Scipio  returned  to  New  Carthage,  in  order  to 
pay  his  vows  to  the  gods,  and  to  exhibit  a  show  of  gladiators, 
whkh  he  had  prepared  in  commemoration  of  the  death  of 
his  father  and  uncle.  The  combatants  exhibited  on  this  oc- 
cs^ion  were  not  of  that  sort  wWch  the  Lanistse  are  wont  to 
procure,  a  collection  of  slaves,  or  such  free  men  as  are  base 
enough  to  set  their  blood  to  s^e.  Every  champion  here 
gave  his  service  voluntarily,  and  without  reward ;  for  some 
were  sent  by  the  princes  of  the  country,  to  show  a  specimen 
of  the  bravery  natural  to  their  nation ;  some  declared  that 
they  would  fight  to  oblige  the  general ;  some  were  led  by 
emulation,  and  a  desire  of  superiority  to  send  challenges ; 
and  those  who  were  challenged,  from  the  same  motive,  did 
not  decline  them  ;  some  decided,  by  the  sword,  controversies 
which  they  could  not,  or  would  not,  determine  by  arbitra¬ 
tion,  having  agreed  between  themselves  that  the  matter  in 
dispute  should  be  the  property  of  the  conqueror.  Not  only 
people  of  obscure  condition,  but  men  of  character  and  dis¬ 
tinction;  Corbis  and  Orsua  for  instance,  cousin-germans, 
having  a  dispute  about  the  sovereignty  of  a  city  called  Ibis, 

BOOK  xxvni. 

B;C,  206.] 

sr 

determined  to  decide  it  with  the  sword.  Corbis  had  the  ad¬ 
vantage  in  regard  to  years.  The  father  of  Orsua,  however, 
had  been  last  on  the  throne,  having  succeeded  to  it  on  the 
death  of  his  elder  brother.  Scipio  endeavoured  to  accommo¬ 
date  the  matter  by  csdm  discussion,  and  to  assuage  their  re¬ 
sentment  ;  but  they  both  affirmed  Aat  they  had  refused  to 
submit  it  to  their  common  relations,  and  that  they  would 
have  no  other  judge,  either  god  or  man,  but  Mars.  They 
severally  preferred  death  in  fight  to  a  submission  to  the  other’s 
authority fAe  elder  confident  in  his  strength,  Ae  younger  in 
his  activity ;  and  so  determined  was  their'  rage,  that  it  was 
impossible  to  reconcile  them;  They  afforded  an  extraordi¬ 
nary  spectacle  to  the  army,  and  a  striking  example  of  the 
evils  occasioned  by  ambition.  Tha  elder,  by  experience  in 
arms  and  superior  skill,  easily  van(|aished  Ac  iff^^managed 
valour  of  the  younger.  To  Ais  eaAibition  of  gladiatms^  weie 
added  funeral  games,  conducted  with  as  much  magnificence 
as  the  province  and  the  camp  could  supply. 
XXII.  While  Scipio  was  thus  employed,  operations  were 
carried  on  by  his  lieutenant  Marcius,  who,  having  passed  Ae 
river  Baetis,  which  the  natives  call  Certis,  got  possesion  of 
two  wealthy  dries,  by  surrender,  without  a  contest.  There 
was  another  called  Astapa,  which  had  always  .taken  part 
with  the  Carthaginians ;  but  that  circumstance  did  not  so 
much  call  for  resentment,  as  from  their  having  acted  towards 
the  Romans  With  an  extraordinary  degree  of  animosity,  be¬ 
yond  what  the  exigencies  of  Ae  war  could  warrant.  This 
was  the  more  surprising,  as  they  had  na  city  sa  secured, 
either  by  situation  or  fortification,  as  that  it  might  encourage 
such  fierceness  of  temper  ;  but  Ae  disposition  of  the  inhabi¬ 
tants  delighting  in  plunder,  led  them  to  make  incursions  into 
the  neighbouring  lands  belonging  to  the  allies  of  Ae  Roman 
people,  and  even  to  seize  on  small  parties  of  soldiers,  toge- 
Aer  with  the  sutlers  and  traders.  A  large  detachment,  also. 

sa.  m  muE.  cy.it  sm. 
wbich  was  alt^mpticg  to  pm  :#?swagh  their  was 
s^m-ounded  by  an  ai^  put  to  des^h  in  a  fdace 
wliere  they  could  mrt  ik£^  tfamaalv^s.  As  soon  as  the  ar-^ 
my  appi^acl^d  to  besiege  die  inhabit^ts,  conscious 
of  didr  Crimea,  saw  no  proopect  of  safety  in  surrendering  to 
a  highly  provoked  i  mA  as  their  fordhearions  were 
in  amch  a  sta^  riiat  ccadd  not  ^eady  hope  to  defend 
theinaelv^  bf  mm§  contrived  a  plan  of  the  most  slmirii* 
ing  and  savs^  ^Mre,  whkh  tl^y  agreed  to  «ec%te  m 
themselves  and  dieir  famiHes*  They  f imd  on  a  pott  of 
Forum,  into  which  they  teou^t  together  all  their  mo^ 
valuable  effects^  and  having  made  their  wives  and  children 
seat  themselves  on  this  heap,  they  ^led  up  rimber  all  round 
it,  and  threw  on  it  almndance  of  faggi^.  l%ey  then  gave  a 
charge  to  fifty  young  men  in  arms,  that  **  m  long  as  the  issue 
of  the  fight  should  be  uncertain,  they  slmuld  carefully  guard 
in  that  spot  the  fortunes  of  all,  and  the  persons  of  those  who 
were  dearer  to  them  than  their  fortunes.  Should  they  per¬ 
ceive  that  iheir  friends  were  worsted,  and  that  the  city  was 
likely  to  be  taken,  that  then  they  might  be  assured,  that  every 
one  whom  they  saw  going  out  to  battle  would  meet  ip 
the  engagement.  They  then  besought  them,  by  the  dcirips 
c^esttsd  and  infernal,  that  mindful  of  their  liberty,  which 
mrust  terminate  on  that  day  either  in  an  honourable  death  qr 
disgraceful  slavery,  they  would  leave  no  object  on  which  the 
enraged  enemy  could  vent  their  fury.  That  they  had  fire 
and  swmrds  at  .their  command  ;  and  that  it  were  better  that 
their  friendly  and  faithful  hsmds  should  cemume  those  things 
which  must  necessarily  peririi,  than  .that  the  fee  itould  insult 
over  them  with  haughty  scorm^’  To  thc^  exhenrtations  they 
added  dreadful  imprecatiom  against  any  one  prho  should  be 
diverted  from  their  purpose,  cither  by  ht^  or  tenderness  j 
and  then  with  rapid  speed  and  violent  impetuosity,  they 
rushed  out  through  the  open  gates.  There  was  none  of  the 

B.c  ^4  ^ 
outpofl^  enough  because  nothing 
couM  have  been  less  that  they  ^ould  dare 
to  come  out  of  the  irery  few  troops  of  horse^ 
and  the  light  infancy,  de^fa^bed  In  haste  feotn  die  caaap^ 
threw  themselves  in  their  way.  The  enoooi^er  wm  fhibms, 
owing  more  to  their  impetuo^ly  md  resciulit^,  tiM  to  imy 
regular  disposition.  The  femse,  had  fiirst 
engaged,  being  disccmiited^  commuldai^ed  ^  feimr  to  die 
light  hdsmtry ;  and  the  iKUde  would  have  reai^ed  to  the  very 
rampmty  had  not  the  main  body  of  the  le^^omi  drawn  mxt 
their  Une,  though  tbare  was  very  little  time  sdiowed  them  for 
ibnning.  Even  among  then*  battalitm  theie  was  some  con¬ 
fusion  ;  while  Astapans,  blinded  with  fury,  rushed  on 
against  and  weapons  with  “te  most  dmring  insensibility 
of  danger.  But  in  a  short  time  the  veteran  soldiers,  too 
steady  to  be  disturbed  by  such  rash  attacks,  by  killing  the 
foremost,  stopped  the  advance  of  the  next.  Afterwards, 
when  they  endeavoured  to  gain  upon  them,  finding  that  not 
a  man  gave  way,  but  that  they  were  dbstinatel^  determined 
t4>  die,  they  extended  their  line,  which  tiieir  numl^rs  enabled 
them  to  do  with  ease ;  they  then  surrounded  the  flanks  of 
these  desperates,  who,  forming  into  a  circle,  and  ccmthmkig 
the  %ht,  were  slain  to  a  man, 
XXill.  This  severity,  executed  by  an  enraged 
those  who  opposed  them  in  arms,  especially  as  they  were  at 
the  time  engaged  in  hostilities  with  another  people,  was  not 
imomistent  with  the  laws  of  war.  But  the  more  shocking 
havock  was  in  the  city,  where  a  weak  unarmed  crowd  of  wo¬ 
men  and  chiMien  were  assailed' by  their  own  countrymen, 
who  tossed  tiieir  ^most  lifeless  bodies  on  the  burning  pile, 
while  streams  of  blood  kept  down  the  rising  flames,  and  who 
at  last,  wearied  with  the  wretched  slaughter  of  their  friends, 
cast  themselves  with  their  arms  into  the  midst  of  the  fire. 
Just  as  ^e  was  ^mpleted,  the  victorious  Rom^5% 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  S4&. 

40 
arrived.  On  the  first  sight  of  such  a  horrid  transaction,  they 
were  for  a  time  struck  motionless  with  astonishment,  j  but 
afterwards,  on  seeing  the  gold  and  silver  glittering  between 
the  heaps  of  other  matters,  with  the  greediness  natural  to 
mankind,  they  wished  to  snatch  them  out  of  the  burning  heap. 
In  attempting  this,  some  were  caught  by  the  flames,  others 
scorched  by  blasts  of  the  heat,  the  foremost  finding  it  im¬ 
practicable  to  make  a  retreat  against  the  press  of  so.  great  a 
crowd.  Thus  was  Astapa  utterly  destroyed  by  fire  and 
sword,  and  without  enriching  the  soldiers  with  booty,  AU 
the  other  inhabitants  of  that  district,  terrified  at  this  event, 
made  their  submissions.  Marcius  led  back  his  victorious 
army  to  join  Scipio  at  Carthage.  Just  at  the  same 
some  deserters  arrived  from  Gadcs,  who  promised  to  dcRvcr 
up  the  city,  the  Carthaginian  garrison,  and  the  commai^er 
of  the  garrison,  together  with  the  fleet.  Mago  had 
there  after  his  flight ;  and  having  collected  a  few  ships  from 
the  ocean  adjoining,  and,  with  the  assistance  of  Hsmno  his 
lieutenant,  assembled  others  from  the  nearest  j^rts  of  Spam, 
had  brought  some  supplies  from  the  coast  of  Africa.  Terms 
being  adjusted  with  the  deserters,  and  ratified  on  both  sides, 
Marcius  was  despatched  thither,  with  some  cohorts  equipped 
for  expedition,  and  Lselius  also,  with  seven  three-banked  and 
one  five-banked  galley,  that  they  might  act  in  concert  both 
by  land  and  sea,  in  the  execution  of  the  business. 
XXIV.  Scipio  was  seized  with  a  severe,  fit  of  sickness  f 
and  the  danger  being  magnified  by  report,  (every  one,  through 
the  natural  propensity  to  exaggeration,  adding  something  to 
what  he  had  heard,)  the  whole  province,  more  especially  the 
distant  parts  of  it,  were  thrown  into  disorder:  which  showed  , 
what  important  ctmseqi^nces  must  fesive  attended  the  teal 
loss  of  him,  when  the  rumour  of  bis  illness  alcme  could 
excite  such  storms.  Neidier  the  sdlies  continued  faithful, 
nor  the  army  obedient  to  omunand.  Mias^^uus  and  Indi- 

41 

BX,  206.]  l^KXXVm. 
bUb,  who  had  entei^bed  ci^fident  expectations  tb^,  m  the 
^|>ulsion  of  the  Cartha^ians,  the  dommion  of  Spain  would 
£41  into  their  ha^ads,  being  entirely  disapj^inted  in  all  their 
hopes,  called  together  their  countrymen  of  Laoeta  and  IIU* 
turgi ;  sent  for  the  young  men  of  Celtiberia  to  assist  them, 
and  carried  hostilides  and  devastation  into  the  territories  of 
the  Suesaetmihm  imd  Sedetanians,  allies  of  the  Roman  peo¬ 
ple.  Aa<^her  commotion  arose  in  the  camp  at  Sucro,  where 
there  were  eight  thousand  Romans  statimied  to  secure  the 
obedience  of  the  nations  bordering  on  the  Iberus.  -  Their 
disposition  to  mutiny  did  not  take  its  rise  from  the  uncertain 
accounts  of  the  gei^rars  life  being  in  danger  |  it  had  sprung 
up  time  before,  from  the  licentiousness  incident  to  a 
sute  of  iniicticm,  and  partly  from  their  circumstances 
being  straitened  during  peace,  having  been  accustomed  during 
the  war  to  live  more  plentifully  on  plunder.  At  first,  they* 
only  expressed  their  dissatisfaction  in  private  di^ourses; 
if  there  was  a  war  in  the  province,  what  business  had  they 
tl^re,  among  people  who  were  at  peace?  If  the  war  was  al¬ 
ready  ended,  why  were  they  not  carried  back  to  Italy  ?” 
They  also  demanded  their  pay  with  a  peremptoriness  unbe¬ 
coming  the  condition  of  soldiers,  while  those  bn  guard  used, 
to  throw  out  abuse  on  the  tribunes, as  they  went  their  nightly 
rounds.  Favoured  by  the  darkness,  some- had  even  gone  out 
and  plundered  the  peaceable  country  round;  and  at  length 
they  used  to  quit  their  standards  without  leave^^openly,  and 
in  the  day-time.  In  a  word,  every  thing  was  directed 
the  licentious  humour  of  the  soldiery,  noth%  by  the  rules 
and  ifeipime  of  war,  or  the  comipands^f  the  officers.  The 
form,  however,  of  a  Roman  camp  was  preserved,  merely  on 
awmnt  of  ^  whhdi  they  entertained,  that  the  tribunes 
wmihl  be  infected  with  ^leir  madness,  wad  become  sharers 
in  their  mutiny  and  revolt.  They  therefore  permitte4^em 
to  htdd  Aw  courts  ^  the  tribumds ;  Aey  applied  to  Aeid 
VOL.  IV.— G  # 

42 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  546. 

fot  the  watch^rd,  and  mauntefl  gnaxds  and  wi^ehes  in  their 
turn ;  and  aa  they  had  taken  away  aU  the  iK>wer  of  com* 
mand,  so,  by  submijCring  from  choice  to  the  usual  duties, 
they  tept  up  the  appearance  of  obedience  to  orders*  But 
when  they  found  that  the  tribunes  disapproved  and  blamed 
their  proceedings,  that  they  endeavoured  to  put  a  stop  to 
them,  and  openly  refused  to  assist  in  their  designs,  the  mud- 
ny  then  burst  out ;  and  having,  by  violence^  driven  the  tribu¬ 
nals  from  their  stands,  and  soon  afoir,  from  the  camp,  with 
the  unanimous  approbation  of  the  whole  body  diey  bestowed 
the  supreme  command  oii  Caius  AlblUs  of  Cales,  and  Catus 
Atrius  of  Umbria,  common  soldiers,  who  were  the  principal 
movers  of  the  sedition.  These  men,  not  satisfied  with  the 
ornaments  used  by  tribunes,  had  the  assurance  to  lay  hold  of 
the  badges  of  supreme  command,  the  rods  and  axes ;  never 
considering  that  their  own  backs  and  necks  were  in  danger 
from  those  very  rods  and  axes,  which  they  carried  before 
them  to  strike  terror  into  others.  Their  groundless  belief 
of  Scipio^s  death  blinded  their  Understandings ;  ahd  they  en¬ 
tertained  not  a  doubt  that,  oh  the  news  of  that  event,  which 
would  soon  be  ^nerally  known,  the  flames  of  war  would 
break  out  in  every  part  of  Spain :  that  during  this  confusion 
money  might  be  exacted  from  the  allies,  and  the  neighbour¬ 
ing  cities  plundered ;  and  that  the  disturbances  being  general, 
and  all  men  acting  without  restraint,  their  own  behaviour 
would  be  the  less  liable  to  observation. 
XXV.  No  accounts  of  the  death  of  Scipia  being  received, 
the  rumour  whfch  bad  been  inconsiderately  propagated,  be¬ 
gan  to  die  away  ;  They  then-  began  to  enquire  for  the  first 
authors  it ;  but  every  one  threw  it  off  from  himself,  that 
he  might  appear  rather  to  have  believed  rashly,  than  to  have 
been  the  contriver  of  the  fiction.  The  leaders,  now  forsaken, 
b^an  ,to  dread  even  their  own  badges  of  office,  and  consider¬ 
ed  with  terror  the  real  and  just  authority  which  was  about 

TOOK  XXVIII. 

BX;.  »6.] 

4S 

to  take  fdace  erf  em^  show  of  cooimaiid  ^hkh  Aey 
pc^sessed,  and  wl^ch  would  *doul^^  be  exerted  to  their 
destruction.  While  the  mutiny  wa«  ^  a  stand  through  dwj 
amazement  of  the  TOldiers,  on  receiving  undoubted  inteiU<» 
gence,  first  that  Scipio  was  and  afterwmds  diat  he  was 
in  good  healthy  seven  military  tribunes,  despatcl^  by  him¬ 
self,  arrived  in  the  camp. .  On  their  coming,  tte  mutineers 
were  at  first  exasperated,  but  they  Were  soon  sclkned  by  dm 
mild  and  soc^hing  language  in  which  dicse  addressed  such 
of  their  acqumntances  as  they  met.  For,  at  first  going  round 
the  tents,  and  then  in  the  public  tribotuds,  and  m  die  praeito- 
rium,  wlmrever  they  observed  circles  <rf  adidiers  engaged  in 
conversadon,  dicy  accosted  them  in  such  a  manner,  m  tm* 
ried  the  app^ance  rsUhtm*  of  an  enqidry  into  the  cmise  of 
their  resentn^t  and  sudden  disorder,  dian  of  tfarcnrmg  maj 
blame  on  what  had  passed.  The  reasom  genetady  i^ged 
were,  that  “  they  had  not  recrivrf  their  pi^  regulariy  f  ri- 
though  at  the  time  irf  die  horrid  tran^ction  at  lQitur|p,  aBd 
after  the  utter  destruction  of  the  two  generak  mid  their  two 
armies,  it  was  by  their  biavery  that  the  Romsm  name  bad 
been  supported,  and  the  province  seated.  That  die  peo^e 
of  llliturgi  had  indeed  met  with  the  punishment  due  to  dieir 
guilt,  but  theirmeritorious  ccsiduct  had  remained  unrewarded.’’ 
The  tribunes  answered,  that  ^  in  these  remonstiances  their 
requests  were  founded  in  justice,  and  should  be  laid  before 
the  general ;  that  they  were  highly  pleased  to  find  that  there 
was  nothing  in  their  case  more  grievous  or  incurable ;  and 
that,  by  die  favour  of  the  gods,  they  had  both  Publius  Scipio 
and  the  state  to  reward  their  merit.”  Scipio,  well  practised 
in  wars,  but  utteriy  unacquainted  with  the  storms  of  intes^ 
tine  commotions,  was  filled  with  anxiety  on  the  occasion  ; 
fearing  lest  die  army  should  exceed  sll  bounds  in  tramgress- 
ing,  or  himself  in  For  die  present,  he  resolv^ 
to  preareed  as  he  hi^  by  gen^  measures ;  having, 

44 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.546. 

therefor,  despatdied  collectors  through  Ae  txibutary  ^tes, 
he  received  reason  to  hope  to  be  soon  able  to  discharge  the 
arrears.  An  order  was  then  published^  that  the  troops  should 
a^me  Carthage  to  receive  their  pay,  either  in  separate  di» 
vkions  or  in  one  body,  as  they  should  choose.  The  mutiny^ 
o£  itself  abating  in  violence  ^ong  the  Romans,  was  reduced 
to  a  state  of  perfect  tranquillity  by  the  measures  which  the 
rebellious  Spaniards  suddetdy  adopted.  Mandonius  and  In- 
dibilis,  on  receiving  information  tha^  Scipto  was  alive,  de¬ 
sisted  from  .their  undertaking,  and  ,  returned  into  their  own 
cotmiry ,  as  there  was  now  remaining  neither  countrymen  nor 
foreigner,  to  whom  they  could  look  up  for  a  concurrence  in 
their  desp^nte  scheme.  The  soldiers,  after  evolving  every 
plan, were  of  opinion  that  they  had  nothing  left,  except  (what 
is  not  always  the  safest  retreat  from  had  counsels)  the  sub¬ 
mitting  themselves  either  to  the  just  anger  of  the  general, 
or  to  his  clemency,  of  which.it  was  thought  ^hey  need  not 
despair.  He  had  pardoned  even  enemies,  with  whom  he 
had  been  engaged  in  battle :  their  mutiny  had  net  been  at¬ 
tended  with  any  serious  consequences ;  no  lives  had  been 
lost,  nor  had  any  blood  been  shed :  therefore,  as  it  had  not 
in  itself  been  violent,  it  merited  not  a  violent  punishment.’’ 
Men’s  minds  are  generaMy  ingenious  in  palliating  guilt  in 
themselves; .  They  only  hesitated  then,  whether  they  should 
go  and -demand  their  pay  in  single  cohorts,  or  in  a  body. 
The  majority  voted,  that,  as  the  safer  way,  diey  should  pro¬ 
ceed  in  a  body.  .  v 
XXVI.  Whilst  focy  were  employed  in  these  deliberations, 
a  council  was  held  at  Carthage  concerning  them  ;  the  mem- 
h^s  of  whirfj  were  divided  in  ©pinion,  whether  the  autheu's 
cmly  of  tl^  mutiny,  who  were  not  more  than  thirty-five, 
should  be  punished  ;  or  whether  it  was  not  necessary,  that 
what  ought  to  be  called  a  revolt  rather  than  a  mutiny,  and 
afforded  such  a  dangerous  example,  ^lould  be  expiated  by 

BOOK  XXVIII. 

45 

B.C.  206.] 
the  puabhmeiit  of  a  greater  aumber.  Hie 
prevailed,  that  the  puniahment  shtmld  be  confiai^  m  those 
who  were  the  instigators  to  it,  and  that,  for  tibe  muMtude,  a 
reprimand  was  sufficient.  As  soon  as  die  council  was  dis¬ 
missed,  orders  were  issued  to  the  army  which  was  in  Car- 
tharge,  to  prepare  for  sin  expedition  against  Mandonius  and 
Indibilis,  and  to  get  ready  provisions  for  several  days ;  in 
order  that  people  might  foiidt  diat  this  had  been  the  business 
of  the  meeting.  Then,  die  seven  tribunes,  who  had  before 
gone  to  Sucro  to^.  quell  the  disturbance,  were  again  sent  out 
to  gather  furtl^r  information  on  the  matter,  when  each  of 
them  made  a  return  of  five  names  of  the  leaders  of  it ;  with 
the  intent  that  proper  persons,  appointed  for  the  purpose, 
should  invite  these,  with  friendly  countenance  and  discourse, 
to  their  lodgings,  and  that  there,  when  stupified  with  wine, 
th^  might  be  secured  in  chains*  When  they  came  nesu* 
Carthage,  they  heard,  frmn  some  persons  on  the  roiui,  that 
the  whole  army  was  to  set  out,  next  day,  with  Manxus  Sila- 
nus,  against  the  Lacetanians,  which  not  only  freed  the  dis^ 
affected  from  the  apprehensions  which,  though  concealed,  la}" 
heavy  on  their  minds,  but  occasioned  great  joy  amongst  them  ; 
as  they  supfmsed  that  the  general  would  be  left  alone,  in  their 
power,  instead  of  their  being  in  his.-  A  litdc  before  sunset, 
they  entered  the  city,  and  saw  the  other  army  busy .  in  pre¬ 
parations  for -a  march :  they  were  received  with  discourses 
framed  for  the  purpcKe,  ttet  their  comings  was  hi^y 
agreeable  and  convenient  to  the  geneial,  as  it  had  happened 
just  before  the  departure  of  the  other  army after  which 
they  retired  to  refresh  themselves.  .The  authors  of  the  mu¬ 
tiny,  having  been  conducted  to  lodgings  by  llto  persons  ap¬ 
pointed,  were,  without  any  tumult,  appreh^si^id  by  the  tri¬ 
bunes,  and  thrown  into  chains.  At  the  fourth  wrateb,  the 
of  that  army  which,  as  pretended,  was  to  march, 
began  to  set  out.  A  little  before  day  the  troops  moved  also, 

46 

HISTORY  OT  ROME. 

[YR.  ,^46. 

at  the  gate,  whence  g\uirda  were  sent 
wsm&d  ta^l  the  other  avenues,  to  prevent  any  oite  gmng.  out 
of  the  dty*  Those  who  bad  drived  day  befc^,  were 
then  summoned  to  an  assembly,  and  they  ran  te^^er tmo  tl^ 
Foriun  to  the  general’s  tribunal  in  die  mo^  uirtolte  wmnar^ 
intending  to  excite  terror  by  their  tumultuous  shoi^  Jii«t 
as  the  general  was  taking  his  seat,  the  troops,  who  had  been 
recalled  from  the  gates,  spread  them^dves  round,  under  arms, 
behind  the  unarmed  assembly.  On  this,  all  the  arrogance  of 
the  latter  sunk  at  once,  and,  as  they  afterwards  confessed^ 
nothing  terrihed  them  much  as  the  unexpected  vi^m* 
and  complexion  of  the  general,  whom  they  hsd  expected  to 
see  in  a  sickly  state— his  countenance  showing  more  stern¬ 
ness,  they  said,  than  they  had  ever  remembered  to  have  seen, 
even  in  battle.  He  silent  for  a  short  time,  tmdl  he  was 
told  that  the  authors  of  the  mutiny  were  brought  into  the  Fo¬ 
rum,  and  that  all  things  were  prepared. 
XXVII,  Then,  a  herald  having  commanded  silence,  he 
began  thus  :  ^  Never  did  I  imagine  that  I  should  be  in  want 
of  language  to  address  my  own  army  i  not  diat  I  ever  gave 
more  attention  to  words  than  to  business  ;  for,  having  lived 
in  camps  almost  from  my  childhood,  1  was  ever  well  ac¬ 
quainted  with  the  soldier’s  way  of  thinking.  But,  with  what 
sentiments,  or  in  what  terms,  1  should  speak  to  you,  I  lam  en¬ 
tirely  at  a  loss.  I  know  not  even  what  appellation  I  ought  to 
give  you.  Can  I  call  you  co^itrymCn,  who  have, revolted 
from  your  country  ;  or  soldiers,  who  have  renounced  obedi¬ 
ence  to  command,  and  broke  through  the  obligation  of  your 
oath  j  or  enemies  ?  I  behold,  indeed,  the  persons,  faces,  habit, 
mien  of  my  fellow-citizens  ;  l5Ut  I  perceive  the  actions,  words, 
schemes,  dispositions  of  foes.  For  what  other  object  did 
your  hopes  and  wishes  aim  at,  diati  the  same  which  was  pro¬ 
posed  by  the  IllcrgetiaUs  and  Lacetans?  They,  however, 
chose  for  leaders  m  their  mad  enterprise,  Mtmdonius  and  In- 

BOOK  xxvm. 

B.C.2G6.] 

4r 

dibilis,  fdrcftd  diatkictkm ;  ^yoU  canf&tjmd 
thority  and  comm^id  4m  the  Umbrhm,  Atrii»,  ^  C«^ 
lenimi,  Attnis.  Soldiers,  deny  that  H  was  die  act  of  ycmtifl, 
or  that  yoo  lA  i^i|i?oved  of  it :  assert  that  it  was  die  mad^ 
ness  aM  df  a  few.  I  shall  willingly  give  credit  to  your 
disavowal ;  for  the  crimes  committed  are  of  such  a  nature, 
that  did  the  guilt  of  them  extend  to  the  whole  army,  it  could 
not  be  expiated  without  very  extraordinary  atonements.  I 
unwillingly  touch  those  moders,  as  I  should  wounds  ;  but 
unless  such  are  touched  and  handled,  they  cannot  be  xured* 
After  the  Cardiaginians  were  expelled  frenn  Spain^  I  really 
believed  that  there  was  not,  ttf  the  whole  province,  any  one 
place,  or  any  description  of  men,  to  whom-  my  life  was  not  a 
matter  of  concern  :  such  had  been  my  conduct,  not  only  to¬ 
wards  the  allies,  but  even  towards  the  enemy.  And  yet,  even 
in  my  own  camp,  so  much  was  I  deceived  in  my  opinion,  the 
report  of  my  death  was  not  . only  readily  believed,  but  longed 
for.  Not  that  I  wish  this  behaviour  should  be  imputed  to 
you  all :  i  assure  you,  if  I  could  believe  that  my  whole  army 
wished  my  death,  I  would  here,  this  h^ltant,  die  before  your 
eyes  ;  :nor  could  life  afford  me  any  pleasure  if  it  were  dis¬ 
pleasing  t(j  my  countrymen  and  soldiers.  But  eveiy  multi¬ 
tude,  like  the  sea,  is  iucapable  of  moving  itself ;  the  winds 
and  gales  put  it  In  motion  :  thus,  when  either  calms  or  stxwms 
appear  in  you,  all  the  madnisss  lies  in  the  first  advisers.  This 
you  have  caught  by  infection ;  ami  even  this  day,  you  do  not 
seem  to  me  to  be  sensible  to  what  a  pitch  of  folly  you  have 
proceeded,  or  hoW  heinpus  your  attempts  have  been  wiffi 
respect  to  me,  how  heinous  with  respect  to  your  country,  your 
parents  and  your  children ;  how  heinous  with  respeCt  to  the 
gods,  who  were  witnesses  of  your  oath  ;  how  heinous  against 
the  auspices  under  which  you  serve  ;  how  heinous  against 
the  practice  of  the  service,  the  discipline  of  your  ancestors, 
and  the  majesty  of  the  supreme  authority  and  rule  ?  With 

4B 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[YJR.  546, 

regard  to  myself,  I  say  nothing.  Be  it,  that  ye  believed  the 
report  rather  through  Miant  of  thought,  than  through  a  wish 
that  it  should  be  true  ;  and  let  me  even  be  supposed  such  a 
person,  that  it  were  no  wonder  if  the  army  were  weary  of  my 
command :  yet,  what  had  your  country  deserved  of  you, 
that,  by  uniting  your  counsels  with  Mandonius  and  Indibilis, 
you  were  going  to.  betray  it  ?  .What  had  the  Roman  people 
merited,  when  you  took  away  the  power  from  tribunes  ap¬ 
pointed  by  their  common  suffrage,  and  conferred  it  on  pri¬ 
vate  men  ?  when,  not  even  content  with  having  them  for  ma¬ 
gistrates,  you,  a  Roman  army,  bestowed  the  badges  of  yotur 
generals  on  men  who  never  had  been:  possessed  of  SOstnuch 
as  a  single  slave  ?  Albius  and  Atrius  dwelt  in  the  generates 
pavilion,  the  trumpets  sounded  by  their  orders,  the  word  was 
taken  from  them,  they  sat  on  the  tribunal  of  Publius  Scipio, 
they  were  attended  by  lictors,  the  way  was  cleared  for  them, 
the  rods  axes  were  carried  before  them.  That  it  should 
rain  stones,  that  lightnings  should  be  darted  from  heaven, 
and  that  animals  shpuld  pro4uce  monstrous  births,  you  look 
upon  as  prodigies,  'l^is  is  a  prodigy  that  can  be  expiated  by 
no  victims,  by  no  supplications,  without  the  blood  of  those 
who  dared  to  commit  such  enormous  crimes. 
XXVIII.  ‘‘  Now,,  although  no  wickedness  proceeds  on  any 
grounds  of  reasc^  y^  In  a  transaction  of  such  atrocity  as 
this,  I  should  be  glad.to  know  what  was  your  intention,  what 
your  scheme.  Formerly,  a  legiem,  which  had  been  sent  as  a 
garrison  to  Rhegium,  wickedly  put  to  death  the  principal  in- 
Imbitants,  and  kept  possession  of  that  opulent  city  for  ten 
years  ;  for  which  offence  the  whole  legion,  four  thousand  men, 
were  beheaded  in  the  Forum  at  Rome.  These,  however,  did 
not  put  themselves  under  the  command  of  an  Atrius,  a  man 
no  better  than  a  scullion,  whose  very  name  was  ominous  ;  but 
of  Decius  JiJjellius,  a  military  tribune:  nor  did  they  join 
themselves  to  the  enemies  of  the  Roman  people,  either  to  the 

49 

BX.  206^3 

. . . :^BOaK  XXVIit 

Samnites  or  Lucanians.  You  united  in  counsels  with  Man- 
donlus  and  Indibilis^  with  whom  you  intended  to  have  united 
also  your  arms.  Besides^  those  then  expected  to  hold  Rhc- 
gium  as  a  lasting  settlement,  as  the  Campanians  held  Capua, 
after  taking  it  from  the  ancient  Tuscan  iidtabitants  j  ant}  as 
the  Mamertines  held  Messana  in  Sicily,— never  entertaining 
a  thought  of  m^ing  war  on  the  Ron^an  people  or  their  allies* 
Did  you  intend  to  settle  your  habitations  at  Sucro  ?  a  place 
in  which,  if  I  your  general  at  my  departure,  after  finishing  the 
business  of  the  provitice,  had  left  you,  and  there  to  remain, 
you  ought  to  have  appealed  to  gods  and  men,  on  'not  being 
allowed  to  return  to  your  wives  and  chilclren..  But  supposing 
that  you  had  banished  out  of  your  minds  all  recollection  of 
them,  as  you  did  of  your  country  and  of  me,  let  us  examine 
what  could  be  your  design,  and  whether  it  can  be  accounted 
for  on  the  supposition  of  a  depravity  of  principle,  without  in¬ 
cluding  also  the  utmost  degree  of  folly.  While  I  was  alive, 
and  the  other  part  of  the  army  safe,  with  which  i  took  Car¬ 
thage  in  one  day,  with  which  I  vanquished,  put  to  flight,  and 
drove  out  of  Spain,  four  generals,  with  four  armies  of  the 
Carthaginians  ;  could  you  expect  that  you,  who  were  but 
eight  thousand  men,  (all  of* you  of  course  inferior  in  wbrth  to 
Albius  and  Atrius,  since  to  their  command  you  submitted 
yourselves,)— could  you  imagine,  I  say,  that  you  should  be 
able  to  wrest  the  province  of  Spain  out  of  die  hands  of  the 
Roman  people  ?  I  lay  no  stress  upon  my  own  name,  I  put 
h  out  of  the  question,  supposing  myself  no  farther  ill  treated, 
than  in  your  easily  and  joyfully  giving  credit  to  the  report  of 
my  death.  What!  if  I  were  dead  ;  was  the  state  to  expire 
along  with  me ;  was  the  empire  of  the  Roman  people  to  fall  with 
Scipio  ?  Jove,  supremely  great  and  good,  forbid  that  the  city 
built  for  eternity,  under  the  favour  and  direction  of  the  gods, 
should  last  no  longer  than  this  frail  and  mortal  body.  Al¬ 
though  so  many  illustrious  commanders,  Flammius,  Paullus, 
VOL.  IV. — H 

50 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y*R.  546. 

Gracchus,  Posthttoiius,  Albhihs,  Marcus  Marcellus,  Titus 
Quintus  Crispiims,  Cueius  .Fulvtus,  my  relations  the  Scipios, 
have  all  been  lost  in  one  war,  yet  the  Roman  people  still  sur- 
vive^  and  will  survive,  whilst  a  thousand  others  perish,  some  by 
Ae  sword,' some  by  disease  :  and  must  the  Roman  state  have 
been  carried  out  to  burial  along -with  my  single  body  ?  You 
yourselves,  here  ki  Spain,  when  my  father  and  uncle,  your 
two  generals,  were  slain,  chose  Septimus  Marciusyour  leader 
against  the  Carthaginians,  exulting  in  their  late  victory.  I 
mention  this  as  if  Spain  would  have  been  without  a  leader ; 
but  would  Marcus' Silanus,  who  was  sent  into  the  province, 
invested  with  the  same  privileges,  the  same  command  with 
myself  ;  would  my  brother  Lucius  Sc ipio,  and  Cakis  Laelius, 
lieutenant-generals,  be  wanting  tOi  avenge  the  majesty  of  the 
empire  ?  Could  either  the  armies^  or  the  leaders,  6r  their 
dignity,  or  their  cause,  admit  of  a  comparison  ?  And  even 
if  you  were  superior  to  all  these,  would  you  bestr  arms  on  the 
side  of  the  Cardiaginians,  ag^st  your  country,  against  your 
countrymen  ?  Would  you  wish  that  Africa  should  rule  over 
Italy.  Carthage  over  the  city  of  Rome  ?  And  for  what'fault, 
I  would  ask,  of  your  nation  ? 
XXIX.  Coriolanus,  provoked  by  a  grievous  hnd  unde¬ 
served  banishment  to  take  up  arms  against  his  oppressors, 
yielded,  however,  to  the  call  of  duty  to  a  parent,  and  refrain¬ 
ed  from  committing  parricide  on  his  country.  What  grief, 
what  anger  had  incited^ you  f  Was  the  dday  of  your  pay 
for  a  few  days,  and  while  your  general  was  sick,  sufficient 
reason  for  declaring  war  against  your  native  land  I  to  revolt 
from  the  Roman  people  to  the  lllergetians  ?  to  leaVe  no  ob¬ 
ligation,  divine  or  human,  un violated  ?  Sdldiers.  the  truth  is, 
you  have  been  mad  ;  nor  was  the  disorder  which  seized  my 
body  more  violent  than  that  which  seized  your  minds.  It 
shocks  me  to  mention  what  such  men  believed,  what  they 
hoped,  what  they  wished.  Bullet  all  those  matters  be  buried 

BOOK  XXVHL 

51 

.  B.C.  206.] 

in  oblivion,  if  p^ibk ;  if  not,  let  them  however  be  covered 
*  in  silence.  I  doubt  not  but  my  language  may  appear  to  you 
severe^nd  harsH  j  yet  how  much  more  harsh  your  actions 
than  my  words  !  Do  you  think  it  reasonable,  that  I  should 
bear  the  facts  which  you  have  committed,  and  that  you  should 
not  have  patience  to  hear  them  mentioned .?  But-  even  with 
these  things  you  jshall  be  reproached  no  farther :  I  wish  you 
may  as  easily  forget  them  as  I  shall.  Therefore,  as  to  what 
concerns  you  all  in  general,  if  you  are  sorry  for  youf  error^  I 
am  fully  satisfied' with  the  expiation^  The  Calenian,  Albius, 
the  Umbrian,  Atrius,  and  the  other  authors  ^of- that  abpmhaa. 
ble  mutiny,  shall  atone  with  their  blood  for  the  crime  of 
which  they  have  been  guilty  j  and  if  you  have  recovered  your 
sound  judgment,  the  sight  of  their  punishment  wdll  not  onfy 
be  not  disagreeable,  but  even  pleasing  to  you,  for  the  tendency 
of  their  schemes  was  as  pernicious  apd  destructive  to  your¬ 
selves  as  to  any  other  persons. whatsoever.”  Scarcely  had  he 
finished  his  speech,  when,  according  to  a  plan  preconcerted, 
their  ^yes  and  ears  were  at  once  assailed  by  every  object  of 
terror.  The  troops,  which  had  formed  a  circle. round  the 
assembly,  clashed  their  swords  against  their  shields^;  the 
herald’s  voice  was  heard  citing  by  name  those  who  bad  been 
condemned  in  the  council :  they  were  dragged  naked  into  the 
midst,  and  ut  die  same  time,.all  the  apparatus  for  death,  was 
produced  ;  they  were  chained  to  the  stake,  beaten  with  rods^ 
and  beheaded ;  the  spectators  all  the  while  standing  so  be¬ 
numbed  with  fear,  that  not  only  no  violent  expression  against 
the  severity  of  the  punishment,  but  not  eveu  a  groan,  was 
heard*  They  were  dien  all  dragged  out,  the  place  was  cleared, 
and  their  fellows  being  summoned  by  their  names;  took  the 
oath  of  obedience  to  Scipio  before  the  tribunes  of  the  soldiers, 
at  the  same  time  receiving  their  pay.  Such  Was  the  end  and 
issue  of  the  rising  which  began  at  Sucro. 

52 

HISTdRY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  546. . 
XXX.  About  the  same  time  Hanno,  Mago’s  lieuteoaut, . 
having  been  sent  from  Gades  with  a  small  body  of  Africans, 
had,  by  tempting  the  Spaniards  with  money,  collected  four 
thousand  young  men  in  arms,  near  the  river  Bstis :  but  being 
afterwards  beaten  out  of  his  camp  by  Lucius  Marcius,  and 
having  lost  the  greatest  part  of  his  forces  in  the  tumult,  and 
others  also  in  the  flight,  (his  disordered  troops  having  been 
pursued  by  the  cavalry,)  he  made  his  escape  with  very  few 
attendants.  During  these  transactions  oil  the  Bsetis,  LaeUus, 
sailing  through  the  Streight,  came  with  the  fleet  to  Carteja, 
a  city  situated  on  the  coast,  and  where  the  sea  begins  to  ex* 
pand  itself.  There  had  been  hopes  of  gaining  possession  of 
Gades  without  a  contest,  by  means  of  a  conspiracy  of  the 
inhabitants,  some  of  whom  came  of  their  own  accord  to  the 
Roman  camp  with  promises  to  that  effect,  as  has  been  men¬ 
tioned  before ;  but  the  plot  was  discovered  before  it  was  ripe ; 
and  Mago'^having  seized  all  the  conspirators,  gave  them  in 
charge  to  Adherbal^  the  prator,  to  be  conducted  to  Carriage. 
Adheriml  put  th^m  on  board  a  ship  of  five  banks,  and  send¬ 
ing  it  off  before  him,  because  it  sailed  slower  than  any  one  of 
three  banks,  followed  himself  at  a  small  distance  with  eight 
three-banked  vessels.  The  quitiquereme  was  just  entering 
the  streight,  when  Lselius,  who  had  sailed  in  a  quinquereme 
also  from  the  harbour  of  Carteja,  attended  by  seven  triremes, 
bore  down  on  Adherbal  and  the  triremes ;  taking  for  granted 
that  the  quinquereme,  once  caught  in  the  rapid,  current  of  the 
narrow  pass,  would  not  be  able  to^ack  about.  The  Cartha¬ 
ginian,  alarmed  by  this  unexpected  affair,  hesitated  for  some 
time  whether  he  should  follow  the  quinquereme,  or  face  the 
enemy.  This  delay  put  it  out  of  his  power  to  avoid  an  en¬ 
gagement,  for  they  were  already  within  a  weapon’s  cast,  and 
the  Roman  pressing  him  closely  on  all  aides.  The  force  of 
the  stream,  too,  had  rendered  it  impossible  to  manage  their 
ships  ;  nor  was  the  fight  like  a  naval  engagement,  for  nothing 

BOOK  XXVIIL 

S3 

B.C. 

was  effected  ekhi^  ty  skill  or  pfudcpce.  The  tide,  indeed, 
might  be  said  to  have  the  entire  command,  for  it  bore  them 
down,  sometiihes  on  their « own,  sometinaes  on  the  Roman 
vessels,  while  they  wefe  endeavouring  in  vain  to  row  in  a 
edntrary  direction ;  so  that  a  ship  which  was  flying  might  be 
seen  whirled  round  by  ah  eddy,  and  carried  full  against  the 
conqueror ;  while  another,.^gaged  in  pursuit,  if  it  happened 
to  fall  into  a  codtrary  current,  would  be  turned  about  as  if 
for  flight.  Thxis  one  ship  aiming  a  violent  stroke  of  its  beak 
against  the  hall  of  the  ehemy,  being  carried  itself  in  aU  oblique 
direction^  received  a  blow  from  the  beak  of  that  it  had  strove 
to  pierce  ;  while  that  wldch  lay  with  its  side  exposed  to  the 
assailant,  was  suddenly  whirled  round,  so  as  to  present  its 
prow  to  them*  While  the  battle  between  the  triremes  was 
thus  doubtful  and  irregular,  being  governed  entirely  by 
ch^ce,  the  Rbmah  quitiquereme,  ihore  manageable,  either 
from  being  steadier  on  account  of  ks  great  weight,  or  from 
making  its  way  through  the  eddies  by  its  superior  number  of 
rowers,  sunk  two  triremes,  and  brushing  along  close  by  a 
third,  swept  off  the  oars  on  one  side,  handling  roughly  some 
others  which  it  -had  ov^taken :  but  Adherbal  crowded  sail, 
and  with  the  five  remaining  ships  escaped  to  Africa. 
XXXI.  Lselius  retuming  victorious  to  Carteja,  and  having 
learned  there  what  had  passed  at  Gades,  (that  the  plot  had 
been  discovered,  the  conspirators  sent  to  Carthage,  and  the 
hopes  which  had  invited  them  thither  entirely  frustrated,^  he 
sent  to  acquaint  Lucius  Marcius,  that  he  was  of  opinion  that 
they  ought  to  return  to  the  general,  unleSs  they  chose  to  waste 
time  to  no  purpose  lying  before  Gades.  *  Marcius  assenting, 
they  both  returned  to  Carthage  a  few  days  after.  By  their 
departure,  Mago  not  only  gained  a  respite  from  the  dangers 
which  had  environed  him  both  by  sea  and  land,  but  on  hear¬ 
ing  of  the  rebellion  of  the  Illergetians,  he  even  conceived* 
hopes  of  recovering  Spain.  He  sent  messengers  to  the  senate 

54 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y  Jl.  546. 
at  Carthage^  with  instructions  to  exaggerate  b^h  the  intes¬ 
tine  dissension,  in  Roman  and  the  defection  of  the 
allies  ;  and  to  exhort  them  to  send  such  supplies  as  should 
enable  him  to  recover  the^  empire  of  Spain^  which  had  been 
transmitted  to  them  by  their  ancestors.  Mandonius  and  In- 
dibilis,  returning  into  their  own  territories,  kept  themselves 
quiet  for  some  time,  not,  knowing  w^hat  to  determine,  until 
they  could  learn  what  measures  were  taken  with  regard  to 
the  mutiny  ;  for  if  pardon  were  granted  by  Scipio  to  his 
countrymen,,  they  did  not  dou^t  but  that  it  would  extend  to 
themselves.  But  when  the  punishment  of  the  offenders  came 
to  be  known,  supposing  that  their  own  crime  would  be  thought 
to  demand  an  equal  atonement,  they  called  their  countrymen 
to  arms,  and  re<  assembling  the  auxiliaries  which  had  joined 
them  before,  they  marched  out  with  twenty  thousand  foot 
and  two  thousand  five  hundred  horse,  into  the  territory  of 
Sedeta,  where,  at  the  beginning  of  the  revolt,  they  had  esta¬ 
blished  a  camp. 
XXXil.  Scipio  quickly  conciliated  the  affections  of  his 
men  by  his  punctuality  m  discharging  all  arrears,  to  the  guil¬ 
ty  as  well  as  to  the  innocent,  and  which  was  strengthened  by 
the  mildness  of  his  discourse,  and- the  benignity  of  his  coun¬ 
tenance  towards  all  without  distinction.  Summoning  an  As¬ 
sembly  on  his  departure^  from  Carthage,  after  copious  invec¬ 
tives  against  the  perfidy  of  the  petty  princes  then  in  rebellion^ 
he  declared,* that he  was  setting tmt  to  take  vengeance  for 
their  crimes,  with  feelings  very  different  from  those  which 
he  had  lately  experienced,  while  he  was  applying  a  remedy 
to  the  error  of  his  countrymen. ;  that  then  he  had,  with  grief 
and  tears,  as  if  cutting  his  own  bowels,  expiated  either  the 
imprudence  or  the  guilt  of  eight  thousand  men  by  the  death 
of  thirty ;  but  now  Ke  was  proceeding  with  cheerfulness  and 
confidence  to  the  destruction  of  the  illergetians ;  for  these 
were  neither  born  in  the  same  land,  nor  connected  with  him 

B.C.  206.]  BOOK  XXVIII.  SS 
by  bond  of  society  ;  and  for  fhe  only  connection  which 
hnd  subsisted,  that  of  good  faith  and  friendship,  they  had 
wickedly  rent  it  asunder.  That  there  was  one  circumstance 
respecting  his  army,  which  gave  him  great  satisfaction,  which 
was,  their  being  all  either  of  bis  own  country,  aljies,  or  of 
the  Latine  confederacy  ;  that  there  was  scarcely  a  single  sol¬ 
dier  in  it  who  had  not  been  brought  thither  from  Italy,  either 
by  his  uncle,  Cneius  Sclpio,  the  first  of  the  Roman  name 
who  entered  that  province,  or  by  his  father  in  his  consulate, 
or  by  himself.  That  they  were  all  accustomed  to  the  name 
and  authority  of  the  Scipios :  that  he  wished  to  carry  them 
home  with  him  to  a  well-deserved  triumph  ;  and  that  he  en¬ 
tertained  confident  hopes  that  th^y  would  support  his  claim 
to  the  consulship,  as  if  they  were,  every  one  of  them,  tO 
share  the  honour  of  it.  That  as  to  the  expedition  before 
them,  that  man  must  have  forgotten  his  own  exploits,  who 
could  consider  it^-as  a  war.  For  his  part,  he  was  really  more 
concerned  about  M ago,  who.  had  fled  with  a  few  ships,  be¬ 
yond  the  limits  of  the  world,  into  a  spot  surrounded  by  the 
ocean,  than  about  the  IHergetians  j  for  on  that  spot,  there  was 
a  Carthaginian  general ;  and  whatever  forces  might  be  there, 
they  were  Carthaginians.  Here  was  only  a  band  robbers, 
and  leaders  of  robbers  ;  who,  though  they  might  have  cour¬ 
age  suflicient  for  ravaging  their  neighbours’  grounds,  burn¬ 
ing  their  houses,  and  seizing  their  cattle^  would  show  none 
in  the  field,  or  in  regular  battle ;  and  who,  whenever  they 
should  see  an  enemy,  would  rely  nvore  on  their  activity  for 
flight,  than  on  their  arnis.  It  was  not,  therefore,  because  he 
apprehended  any  danger  from  thence,  that  he  had  determined 
to  suppress'the  Illergetians  befbre  he  left  the  ptovince,  but 
principally  that  such  a  heinous  revolt  should  not  escape  with¬ 
out  punishment :  and,  also,  that  it  might  not  be  said,  ihiil 
there  was  cme  enemy  left  in  a  country  which  had  been 
run  with  such  bravery  and  success.  He  desired  them,  there- 

56 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  546. 

fore,  with  the  favour  of  die  gods,  to  follow  him^  not  to  what 
-could  properly  be  called  a  war,  for  the  contest  was  not  with 
a  people  on  an  equality  with  (hem,  but  to  inflict  punishment 
on  a  set  of  criminals,’’ 
XXXIIL  After  this  discourse  he  dismissed  them,  witth 
orders  to  prepare  for  a  decarnpment  on  the  following  niom- 
ing.  After  a  march  of  ten  days,  he  arrived  at  the  river  Ibe- 
rus,  which  he  passed,  and  on  the  fourth  day  he  pitched  his 
camp  within  sight  of  the  enemy.  There  was  a  plain  before 
him,  encircled  by  mountains ;  into  this  valley  Scipio  ordered 
some  cattle,  taken  mostly  from  the  surrounding  lands,  to  be 
driven  forward,  in  order  to  provoke  the  savage  greediness  of 
the  barbarians  j  sending  with  them  some*light-armed  troops 
as  a  guard,  and  giving  orders  to  Lselius,  that  as  soon  as  these 
should  be  engaged,  in  skirmishing,  he  should  charge  with  the 
cavalry  from  a  place  of  concealment.  A  conveniently  pro¬ 
jecting  mountain  covered  the  ambush  of  the  cavalry,  and  the 
battle  began  without  delay ;  for  the  Spaniards  rushqd  on  the 
cattle,  as  soon  *as  they  saw  them  at  a  distance,  and  the  light 
infantry  attacked- them,  occupied  with  their  booty.  At  first, 
they  endeavoured  to  terrify  each  other  with  missive  weapons ; 
afterwards,  having  discharged  their  light  darts,  which  were 
fitter  to  provoke  than  to  decide  the  fight,  they  drew  their 
swords,  and  began  to  engage  foot  to  foot.  The  contest  be¬ 
tween  the  infantry  was  doubtful ;  but  the  cavalry  came  up, 
who,  charging  straight  forward,  not  only  trod  down  all  be¬ 
fore  them,  but  some  also,  wheeling  round  along  the  foot  of 
the.  steep,  fell  on  the  enemy’s  fear,  inclosing,  the  greater  part 
of  them :  so  that  the  number  slain  was  far  more  considera¬ 
ble  than  is  usual  in  such  kind  of  engagements.  This  db- 
comfiture  served  rather  to  inflame  the  rage  of  the  barbarians 
than  depress  them.  In  order,  therefore,  to  show  that  they 
were  not  dispirited,  at  the  first  light  on  the  day  following, 
they  led  out  their  troops  to  battle.  The  valley  being  narrow, 

BOOK  xxvin. 

57 

B.C.  206.] 
as  has  been  mentioned,  could  not  contain  all  their  forces  ;  so 
that  only  about  twp-thirds  of  the  infantry  and  all  their  caval¬ 
ry  came  down  to  the  engagement.  The  remainder  of  the 
foot  they  posted  on  a  hill  on  one  side.  Scipio,  judging  that 
the  narrowness  of  the  ground  was  a  favourable  circumstance 
to  him,  both  because  fighting  in  a  confined  space  seemed  bet¬ 
ter  suited  to  the  Roman  than  the  Spanish  soldier,  and  also 
because  the  enemy  could  not  completely  form  their  line, 
turned  his  thoughts  to  a  new  scheme.^  Finding  that  he  could 
not  extend  his  cavalry  on  the  wings,  and  that  those  of  the 
enemy,  whom  they  had  brought  out  with  the  infantry,  would 
be  useless,  he  ordered  Lselius  to  lead  the  cavalry  round  the 
hills  by  the  most  Concealed  roads,  and  to  keep  separate  as 
much  as  possible  the  fight  of  the  cavalry  from  that  between 
the  infantry.  He  himself  led  forward  the  battalions  of  in¬ 
fantry,  placing  four  cohorts  in  front,  for  he  could  not  greatly 
extend  his  line,  and  without  delay  began  the /engagement,  in 
order  to  divert  the  enemy’s  attention,  by  the  hurry  of  the 
conflict,  from  ,Lselius’s  detachment,  who  were  advancing 
from  among  the  hills.  In  this  they  succeeded,  for  the  Span¬ 
iards  were  unconscious  of  their  coming,  until  they  heard 
the  tumult  of  the  fight  between  them  and  their  own  cavalry 
on  the  rear.  Thus  there  were  two  different  battles ;  two 
lines  of  foot,  and  two  bodies  of  horse,  were  engaged  along 
the  extent  of  the  plain,  the  circumscribed  ground  not  allow¬ 
ing  them  to  be  composed  of  both  together.  On  the  side  of 
the  Spaniards,  as  neither  their  foot  could  assist  the  horse,  nor 
the  horse  the  foot,  ythe  latter,  who  had  rashly  ventured  into 
the  plain,  relying  on  the  support  of  their  cavalry,  were  cut 
to  pieces  ;  and  the  cavalry,  being  surrounded,  could  neither 
withstand  the  Roman  infantry  in  front,  .(for  by  this  time  their 
own  was  entirely  cut  off*,)  nor  the  cavalry  on  their  rear ;  but, 
having  formed  in  a  circle,  and  defended  themselves  a  long 
time  without  changing  their  position,  they  were  all  slain  to  a 
VOL,  IV. — I 

58 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.546. 

man.  Thus,  not  one  of  those  who  were  engaged  in  the  vali 
ky,  either  horse  or  foot,  survived  the  fight.  The  third  com¬ 
pany,  which  had  stood  on  the  hill,  rather  to  view  the  engage¬ 
ment  securely,  than  to  take  any  part  in  it,  had  both  room  and 
time  to  make  their  escape.  The  two  princes  also  fled  with 
them  during  the  tumult,  and  before  the  army  was  entirely 
surrounded. 
XXXIV,  The  same  day,  the  camp  of  the  Spaniards  was 
taken,  together  with  about  three  thousand  men,  beside  other 
booty.  Of  the  Romans  and  their  allies,  there  fell  one  thou¬ 
sand  two  hundred  ;  above  three  thousand  were  wounded. 
The  victory  Would  have  been  less  bloody,  if  the  battle  had 
happened  in  a  more  extensive  plain,  so  as  to  havje  allowed 
the  enemy  an  easy  flight.  Indibilis,  renouncing  his  project 
of  proceeding  farther  in  the  war,  and  seeing  no  better  pros¬ 
pect  of  safely  in  this  desperate  state  of  his  affairs  than  in  the 
honour  and  clemency  of  Scipio,  which  he  had  already  expe¬ 
rienced,  sent  his  brother  Mandonius  to  him  ;  who,  prostrat¬ 
ing  himself  at  his  feet,  lamented  the  fatal  frenzy  of  the 
times,  wherein,  as  it  were,  through  some  pestilent  contagion, 
not  only  the  IHergetians  and  Lacetanians,  but  even  the  Ro¬ 
man  camp  had  been  infected :  that  the  present  state  of  him¬ 
self,  his  brother,  and  the  rest  of  his  countrymen,  was  such, 
that,  if  it  was  required,  they  would  surrender  up  to  Scipio 
the  life  which  he  had  spared  to  them  ;  Or,  if  they  might  be 
still  preserved,  they  would  ever  devote  it  to  his  service  ;  for 
in  such  case  they  should  be  actually  twice  indebted  to  him 
alone  for  existence.  That,  in  the  former  case,  they  had  con¬ 
fidence  in  their  cause,  before  they  had  made  trial  of  his  cle¬ 
mency  ;  but  now,  on  the  contrary,  they  could  have  none  in 
their  cause,  and  their  only  hope  lay  in  the  mercy  of  their 
conqueror.”  It  was  the  practice  of  the  Romans,  observed 
from  very  early  times  with  respect  to  persons  with  whom 
they  had  formed  no  treaty  of  friendship  or  alliance,  never  to 

BOOK  xxyiii. 

59 

BX.  206.] 
exercise  any  act  of  authority  over  them :  for  they  were  npt 
held  as  subjects,  until  they  had  surrendered  all  their  property, 
both  sacred  and  common,  had  given  hostages,  delivered  up 
their  arms,  and  received  garrisons  in  dieir  towns.  On  the 
present  occasion,  Scipio,  after  severely  reproaching  Mando- 
nius,  who  was  present,  and  Indibilis,  who  waa  absent,  said, 
that  they  had  deservedly  been  brought  to  ruin  by  their 
own  wicked  practices ;  that  they  should  owe  their  lives  to 
the  generosity  of  himself  and  the  Roman  people.  Further, 
he  would  not  even  deprive  them  of  dieir  arms ;  those  were 
only  to  be  taken,  as  pledges,  by  such  as  feared  a  renewal  of 
war ;  they  should,  therefore,  be  freely  left  them  j  nor  should 
their  minds  be  shackled  with  fear.  Should  they  again  revolt, 
he  would  not  take  vengeance  on  guildess  hostages,  but  cm 
them^lves ;  he  would  inflict  no  punishment  on  defenceless 
enemies,  hut  on  those  who  carried  arms.  That  he  left  it  to 
themselves,  whp  had  experienced  both,  to  choose  the  favour 
or  the  resentment  of  the  Romans.”  On  these  terms  Man^ 
donius  was  dismhsed,  and  they  were  cmly  fined  a  sum  of 
money  for  the  pay  of  the  troops.  Scipio,  having  sent  on  his 
lieutenant  into  Farther  Spain,  and  Silanus  back  to  Tarraco, 
delayed  only  a  few  days,  until  the  Illergetians  had  paid  the 
fine  demanded  of  them.  Then,  with  some  troops  lighdy 
equipped,  he  followed  Marcius,  whom  he  overtook  at  a  small 
distance  from  the  ocean. 
XXXV.  The  negociation,  some  dme  before  commenced 
with  IVlasinissa,  had  been  delayed  by  various  causes ;  the 
Numidian  choosing  to  confer  only  with  Scipio  himself,  and 
from  his  hand  to  receive  the  ratification  of  the  compact.  This 
was  Scipio’s  reason  for  undertaking  at  that  time  so  long  a 
journey,  and  to  places  so  distant  from  his  quarters.  When 
Masinissa  received  notice  at  Gades  from  Marcius,  that  he 
was  drawing  nigh,  complakung  that  his  horses  were  injured 
by  being  pent  up.  in  the  islmid that  they  not  o^y  caused  a 

60 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  546. 

scarcity  of  cvciy  tiling  among  the  men,  but  felt  it  themselves  ; 
and  besides,  that  the  horsemen  were  losing  their  spirits 
through  want  of  exercise  ;  he  prevailed  on  Mago  to  allow 
him  to  pass  over  to  the  continent,  to  plunder  the  adjacent 
cmintry  of  the  Spaniards.  On  landing,  he  sent  forward  three 
chie&  of  the  Numidians,  to  fix  a  time  and  place  for  a  con¬ 
ference,  desiring  that  two  of  them  might  be  detained  by  Sci- 
pio  as  hostages,  and  the  third  sent  back  to  conduct  him  to 
the  place  appointed.  They  came  to  the  Conference  with  but 
few  attendants  ;  the  Numidian  had  long  been  possessed  with 
admiration  of  the  man  he  was  about  to  meet,  from  the  fame 
of  his  exploits,  and  had  formed  a  perfect  idea  of  the  gran¬ 
deur  and  dignity  of  his  person.  But  on  seeing  him,  his  vene¬ 
ration  increased ;  for  the  elegance  of  his  appearance,  natu¬ 
rally  majestic,  was  added  to  by  his  flowing  hair,  and  by  his 
becoming  dress,  not  decorated  with  ornaments,  but  in  a  style 
truly  manly  and  military ;  by  his  age  also,  as  he  was  in  full 
vigour,  aided  by  the  bloom  of  youth,  renewed  as  it  were  after 
his  late  illness.  At  their  meeting,  the  Numidian,  struck 
with  a  degree  of  astonishment,  first  thanked  him  for  having 
sent  home  his  brother’s  son  ;  assured  him,  that  ever  since 
that  transaction  he  had  sought  for  the  present  opportunity, 
which  being  at  length  offered  by  the  favour  of  the  immortal 
gods,  he  had  not  neglected :  that  he  wished  to  exert  himself 
in  his  service  and  that  of  the  Roman  people,  with  more  zeal 
and  effect  than  had  ever  been  shown  by  any  foreigner,  in  sup¬ 
port  of  the  Roman  interest :  that  although  this  had  long  been 
his  wish,  yet  he  was  less  able  to  effect  it  in  Spain, — a  territory 
with  which  he  was  little  acquainted  ;  hut  in  his  own  country, 
in  Africa,  where  he  had  been  bom,  and  educated  with  the 
hopes  of  enjoying  the  kingdom  of  his  father,  it  would  he  more 
easily  in  his  power  to  serve  them  :  that  if  the  Romans  thought 
proper  to  send  the  same  commander,  Scipio,  into  Africa,  he 
had  good  reason  to  hope  that  the  existence  of  Carthage  would 

BOOK  XXVIII. 

61 

B.C.  206.] 
be  of  very  short  duration.’’  Scipio  received  and  heard  him 
with  much  satisfaction ;  he  knew  that  Masinissa  was  the 
main  support  of  the  enemy  with  respect  to  cavalry^  and  the 
young  man  himself  had  given  considerable  proofs  of  spirit. 
After  they  had  mutually  pledged  their  faith,  he  returned  to 
Tarraco  ;  and  Masinissa  having,  with  permission  of  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  ravaged  the  neighbouring  soil,  that  he  might  not  ap¬ 
pear  to  have  passed  over  to  the  continent  for  nothing,  re¬ 
turned  to  Gades. 
XXXVI.  While  Mago  was  preparing  to  pass  into  Africa, 
despairing  of  success  in  Spain,  (of  which  he  had  been  en¬ 
couraged  to  entertain  hopes,  first,  by  the  mutiny  of  the  sol¬ 
diers,  and  afterwards  by  the  revolt  of  Indibilis,)  information 
was  brought  from  Carthage,  that  the  senate  ordered  him  to 
carry  ovet  to  Italy  the  fleet  which  he  had  at  Gades,  and  hav¬ 
ing  there  hired  as  many  of  the  Gallic  and  Ligurian  youth  as 
he  could  find,  to  form  a  junction  with  Hannibal,  and  not  to 
suffer  the  war  to  sink  into  languor,  after  the  very  great  exer¬ 
tions  and  greater  successes  which  had  signalized  its  begin¬ 
ning.  Money,  to  answer  this  purpose,  was  brought  to  Mago 
from  Carthage,  in  addition  to  which  he  extorted  much  from 
the  people  of  Gades,  plundering  not  only  their  treasury  but 
their  temples,  and  compelling  them  to  bring  in  their  private 
properties  of  gold  and  silver  to  the  p\jblic  stock.  As  he  sailed 
along  the  coast  of  Spain,  he  landed  his  men  not  far  from  New 
Carthage  ;  and  having  ravaged  the  lands  adjoining,  brought 
up  his  fleet  from  thence  to  the  city ;  where,  having  kept  his 
soldiers  on  Iward  the  ships  during  the  day,  he  disembarked 
them  in  the  night,  and  led  them  on  to  that  part  of  the  wall 
over  which  the  Romans  had  entered  when  they  took  the 
place ;  fof  he  had  a  notion  that  the  garrison  was  not  strong, 
and  that,  on  seeing  a  hope  of  changing  masters,  some  of  the 
townsmen  would  raise  a  commotion.  But  those,  who  had  fled 

62 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 
in  a  panic  from  the  fields^  had  already  brought  an  account  of 
ibe  dispersion  of  the  country *people,  and  the  approach  of  the 
enemy ;  the  fleet  also  had  been  observed  during  the  day,  and 
it  was  sufficiently  evidcmt  that  its  station  before  the  city  had 
not  been  chc»en  without  some  reason.  The  garrison  were 
therefore  drawn  up,  and  kept  under  arms,  within  side  the 
gate  which  lc»3ks  towards  the  bason  and  the  sea.  The  enemy, 
rushing  on  in  a  tumultuous  manner,  with  crowds  of  seamen 
mixed  among  the  soldiers,  advanced  to  the  wdls  with  more 
noise  than  strength,  when  the  Romans,  suddenly  throwing 
open  the  gate,  rushed  forth  with  a  shout,  and  having  disor¬ 
dered  and  repulsed  the  motley  band  at  the  first  onset  and  dis¬ 
charge  of  their  darts,  pursued  them  with  great  slaughter  to 
the  coast,  nor  would  one  of  them  have  survived  the  batde 
and  the  pursuit,  had  not  the  vessels,  warping  close  to  the 
shore,  received  them  as  they  fled  in  dismay.  Those  on  ship¬ 
board  also  were  not  without  their  share  of  the  confusion,  oc¬ 
casioned  by  the  drawing  up  of  the  ladders,  lest  the  enemy 
should  force  in  along  with  dieir  own  men,  and  in  cuttiti|p 
away  their  cables  and  anchors  to  avoid  the  delay  of  weighii^ 
them.  Many,  in  attempting  to  swim  to  the  ships,  as  they 
could  not  in  the  declining  light  distinguish  whither  they 
ought  to  direct  their  course,  or  what  to  avoid,  met  a  misera¬ 
ble  death.  Next  day,  when  the  fleet  had  fled  hack  to  the  mid¬ 
ocean,  there  were  found  between  the  wall  and  the  shore  eight 
hundred  men  slain,  and  two  thousand  stands  charms. 
XXXVII.  Mago,  returning  to  Gades,  was  iH>t  permitted 
to  enter  the  place,  on  which  he  put  with  his  fleet  into  Cimbis, 
at  a  little  distance,  and  from  thence  sent  ambassadors,  com¬ 
plaining  of  their  having  shut  their  gates  against  an  ally  and 
friend.  While  they  apolc^ized  for  this  alleging  that  it 
had  been  done  by  a  part  of  the  multitude,  who  were  offended 
because  some  of  their  effects  had  been  carried  off  by  the  sol- 

BOOK  XKVm. 

6S 

B.C.206.] 

diets  when  they  wet6  embarking,  he  enticed  their  suffetes* 
(wWdi  is  the  name  of  the  chief  magistracy  among  the  Car¬ 
thaginians)  and  their  treasurer  to  a  conference  ;  and  then  or¬ 
dered  them  to  be  crucified,  after  they  had  been  mangled  with 
Stripes.  Prom  thence  he  sailed  to  the  island  Fityusa,f  about 
one  hundrrf  miles  from  the  continent,  Inhs^ted  at  that  time 
by  Carthaginians,  where  the  fleet  was  received  in  a  friendly 
manner,  and  supplied  not  only  widi  abundance  of  provisions, 
but  with  a  reinforcement  of  young  men  and  ^ms.  Eihbold- 
cned  by  these  succours,  the  Carthaginian  proceeded  to  the 
Batearick  islands,  about  fif^  miles  distant.  There  are  two 
of  the  Baleares,!  one  larger  and  more  powerful  in  men  and 
arms  than  the  other,  and  which  has  also  a  harbbur,  where  he 
believed  he  might  pass  the  winter  commodiously,  as  it  was 
now  the  latter  end  of  autumn.  But  here  he  met  with  an  op¬ 
position,  as  violent  as  if  the  inhabitants  of  that  island  had 
been  Romans.  As  they  now  mostly  use  slings,  so  at  that 
time  these  were  their  only  weapons,  in  the  skilful  use  of 
whkh  the  Baleareans  universally  excel  all  others.  Such  a 
quantity,  therefore,  of  stones  was  poured,  like  the  thickest 
hail,  on  the  fleet  as  it  approached  the  land,  that,  not  daring 
to  enter  the  harbour,  the  Carthaginians  tacked  about  to  the 

*  Hjcm  were  two  naigtstmtes  ch<»en  annually,  and  invested  with  pow¬ 
ers  similar  to  those  the  Roman  consuls.  The  Carthaf^nians  luid  a  se¬ 
nate  also  like  that  of  the  Bonums.  There  vms  one  peculiarity  in  Uieir  pm- 
ceedings  which  deserves  notice:  when  the  members  were  unanimous, 
there  was  no  appeal  from  their  decision;  but  when  opinions  were  divided, 
the  business  devolved  to  the  community  at  Jaige.  For  a  very  long  time 
the  people  interfered  but  fittle  with  the  administration  of  public  affairs ; 
but  afterwards,  by  means  of  factions  and  cabals,  Uiey  idmost  entirely  en¬ 
grossed  it  to  themselves,  which  proved  a  principal  cause  of  their  ruin. 
They  had  a  council  consisting  of  104  members,  called  the  tribunal  of  the 
hundred,  to  which  the  commanders  of  armies  were  responsible  for  their 
conduct. 

t  Yvica. 

i  Majorca  and  Minorca. 

64 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  546. 

main.  They  then  passed  over  to  the  smaller  of  the  Baleares, 
which  is  equally  fertile  in  soil,  thc  ugh,  as  already  noted,  of 
lesser  strength.  Here  they  landed,  and  pitched  their  camp 
in  a  strong  post,  over  the  harbour,  taking  possession  of  the 
city  and, country  without  a  contest.  Then,  having  enlisted 
two  thousand  auxiliaries,  and  sent  them  to  Carthage  for  the 
winter,  they  hauled  their  ships  on  shore.  After  Mago  had 
departed  from  the  coast,  the  people  of  Gades  surrendered  to 
the  Romans. 
XXXVIII.  Such  were  the  transactions  in  Spain  under  the 
conduct  and  command  of  Publius  Scipio  ;  who,  having  com¬ 
mitted  the  charge  of  the  province  to  Lucius  Lentulus  and 
Lucius  Manlius  Audinus,  returned  to  Rome  with  ten  ships; 
and  having  obtained  an  audience  of  the  senate  in  the  temple 
of  Bellona  without  the  city,  made  a  recital  of  his  services  in 
Spain,  how  often  he  had  engaged  the  enemy  in  pitched  bat¬ 
tles,  how  many  towns  he  had  taken,  and  what  nations  be  had 
reduced  under  the  dominion  of  the  Roman  people ;  dtat  ^  he 
had  gone  into  Spain  against  four  generals,  and  four  armies, 
who  were  elated  with  victory ;  and  that  he  had  not  ^  left  a 
Cardiaginian  in  all  that  country.”  On  account  of  these  ex¬ 
ploits,  he  rather  made  trial  how  far  he  might  hope  for  a  tri¬ 
umph,  than  pushed  for  it  with  any  earnestness,  because  it 
was  well  known  that  no  one  had  ever  been  honoured  with  it 
for  achievements  performed,  unless  invested  with  a  puUic 
c^ce.  When  the  senate  was  dismissed,  he  proceeded  into 
the  city,  and  carried  before  him  to  the  treasury  fourteen 
thousand  three  hundred  and  forty-two  pounds  weight  of  sil¬ 
ver,  and  of  coined  silver  a  gi:cat  sum.  Lucius  Veturius  Philo 
then  held  the  assembly  for  electing  consuls ;  and  ail  the  cen¬ 
turies  with  extraordinary  marks  of  attachment  named  Publius 
Scipio  consul.  The  colleague  joined  with  him  was  Publius 
Licinius  Crassus,  chief  pontiff.  We  are  told  that  this  elec¬ 
tion  was  attended  by  a  greater  concourse  of  people  than  any 

BOOK  xxvm. 

65 

B.C,  206.] 

during  that  war.  They  had  come  together  from  all  parts, 
not  only  for  the  purpose  of  giving  their  votes,  but  of  getting 
a  sight  of  Scipio ;  and  ran  in  crowds,  both  to  his  house  and 
to  the  Capi^,  while  he  was  performing  sacrifice,  by  offering 
to  Jupiter  a  hundred  oxen,  which  he  had  vowed  on  occasion 
of  the  mutiny  of  the  soldiers  in  Spain.  Strong  expectations 
were  at  the  same  time  entertained,  that,  as  Caius  Lutatms 
had  finished  the  former  Punic  war,  so  Publius  Cornelius 
Scipio  would  finish  the  present ;  and  that,  as  he  had  already 
expelled  the  Carthaginians  from  every  part  of  Spain,  he  would 
in  like  manner  expel  them  from  Italy.  They  therefore  des¬ 
tined  Africa  to  him  as  a  province,  as  if  the  war  in  Italy 
were  at  an  end.  The  election  of  the  praetors  was  then 
held :  two  wei^  appointed,  who  were,  at  the  time,  ple¬ 
beian  sediles,  Spurius  Lucretius  and  Cneius  Octavius ;  and, 
of  private  rmik,  Cneius  Servilius  Caepio,  and 
Lucius  i£milius  Pdpus.  In  the  fourteenth  year  £*‘^  205 
of  the  Punic  war,  as  soon  as  Publius  Corne¬ 
lius  Scipio,  and  Publius  Licinius  Crassus  enters  m  t\te 
consulship,  the  provinces  for  the  consuls  were  nmned ; 
Scipio,  Sicily,  without  drawing  lots,  with  the  his 
colleague,  because  the  necessaiy*  attendance  on  religieui 
ters  required  the  presence  of  the  chief  pontiff  in  Ibriy ; 
Crassus,  Bruttium.  The  provinces  of  dte  prselurs  warn  ihm 
disposed  of  by  lot ;  that  of  the  city  fell  to  Cneius  ServiHwi 
Ariminum  (so  they  called  Gaul,)  to  Spurius  Lucretius ;  Skify 
to  Lweiut  ^milius  ;  and  Sai^inta  to  Cneius  Octavius;  The 
senate  Was  held  in  the  Capitol;  there,  on  the  matter  being 
proposed  by  Publius  Scipo,  a  decree  was  made,  that  the 
games,  which  be  had  ^owed  during  the  mutit^  of  the  sdh 
diers  in  S]wn,  s^uld  be  eidiibited,  and  the  expense  defray- 
e<l  out  of  the  money  which  himself  had  conveyed  to  the 
treasury,  :  . 
vor.  TV. — ‘  - 

66  HISTORY  ©F  ROME.  [Y.R.  54r. 
XXXIX.  He  ^en  introduced  to  the  senate  ambassadors 
from  Saguntum,  the  eldest  of  whom  addxes^  them  in  this 
manner ;  ‘‘  Conscript  Fathers,  although  there  is  no  degree 
of  evil  beyond  what  we  have  endured,  in  order  that  we  might 
preserve  our  faith  towards  you  inviolate  to  the  last ;  yet  so 
lughly  has  your  behaviour,  and  that  of  your  commanders, 
merited  at  our  hands,  that  we  do  not  repent  of  having  exposed 
ourselves  to  sufferings.  On  our  account  you  undertook  the 
war,  ^d  although  it  is  now  the  fourteenth  year  since  it  be* 
gan,  yet  you  still  maintain  it  with  such  persevering  spirit,  as 
to  endanger  yourselves,  while  having  often  brought  the  Car* 
thagtnians  to  die  very  brink  of  ruin.  At  a  time  when  you 
had  so  grievous  a  contest  to  maintain,  and  with  such  an  an¬ 
tagonist  as  Hannibal,  you  sent  your  consul,  with  an  army, 
into  Spain,  to  collect  as  it  were  what  remained  of  us  after  a 
shipwreck.  Publius  and  Cneius  Cornelius,  from  the  moment 
of  their  arrival  in  the  province,  never  ceased  to  pursue  mea¬ 
sures  favourable  to  us,  and  destructive  to  our  enemies.  They, 
first  of  all,  regained  and  gave  back  to  us  our  city ;  and,  send* 
ing  persons  to  search  for  our  countrymen  who  had  been  sold 
and  dispersed  through  every  part  of  Spain,  they  resttmed 
them  from  slavery  to  liberty.  When,  after  experie^ing  the 
utmost  wretchedness,  we  were  near  being  happily  aettled, 
your  commanders,  Publius  and  Cneius  Cornelius,  fell,  more 
to  be  lamented  in  some  measure  by  us,  even  than  by  you. 
Then,  indeed,  it  appeared  as  if  we  had  been  called  from 
distant  places  to  our  original  residence,  only  that  we  might 
be  a  second  time  ruiiM:d ;  only  that  we  might  see  a  secemd 
destruction  of  our  country.  That,  to  accomplish  this,  thc^ 
was  no  occasion  for  an  army  of  Carthaginians  ;  we  mi^  be 
utterly  destroyed  by  our  oldest  and  most  inveterate  enemies, 
the  Turdulmis,  who  had  also  been  the  cau^  of  our  former 
calamity.  In  which  conjuncture,  you  speedily,  and  beyond 
our  expectations,  sent  to  us  this  Publius  Scipio,  the  author  of 

BOOK  XXVfH< 

6r 

BX.  205.] 

our  wdkbetag,  ike  m]{q>orter  of  aH  oor  hopes  |  ei  whose 
electicm  to  the  t^osolship,  our  havii^  been  eye-wimesses^  and 
omr  being  able  cmy  home  ike  joyhil  i^ws  to  our  oom^- 
men^  rendet^  us  the  happiest  of  the  Saguntines.  He,  having 
taken  a  great  number  of  the  towns  of  your  enemies  in  Spain, 
always  separated  the  Sagunttnes  frmn  the  rest  of  the  |aiscm- 
ers,  and  sent  them  home  to  their  own  country  ;  and,  h^liy, 
by  his  arms,  so  humbled  Turdetania~a  state  so  inveterate  m 
its  miimosity  against  os,  that,  if  its  power  h^  a»^imed, 
Saguntitm  must  have  fallen, — ^diat  not  only  we,  but  (let  me 
say  it  widiout  presumption)  even  our  posterity,  need  have  no 
apprehensicms  from  it.  We  now  see  their  chy  de^royec^ — 
the  city  of  a  people  for  whose  gratihcation  Hannibal  ruined 
Sag^ntum.  We  now  receive  tribute  from  drcir  country— a 
circumstance  not  more  gratifying  to  us,  in  die  profit  we  de¬ 
rive  from  it,  dian  in  the  satisfying  of  our  revenge.  In  grati¬ 
tude  for  these  Uessings,  greater  than  which  we  could  not 
either  hope  or  implore  from  the  immortal  gods,  the  senate 
and  people  of  Saguntum  have  sent  us,  their  ten  ambassadors, 
to  present  their  thanks ;  and,  at  the  same  time,  to  congr^u- 
late  you  on  the  success  which  has  of  late  yesws  attended  your 
arms  in  Sfmio  and  Italy.  You  hold  the  poBsession  Spain, 
$0  acquired,  not  only  as  far  as  the  city  Iberus,  but  to  the  ut¬ 
most  Umtts  and  boundaries  by  the  ocean  ;  while  in  Italy  you 
have  left  nodiing  to  the  Carthaginian,  but  what  the  rampart 
of  his  camp  encit^s.  To  Jove,  suprenaely  great  and  good, 
who  presides  over  the  fortress  erf  the  Capitol,  we  have  been 
ordered,  tkot  only  to  omke  acknowledgn^nts  for  these  bless* 
mgs,  but,  with  your  permission,  to  bear  diithcr  diis  ofifering, 
a  golden  crown,  in  mken  of  victory.  We  request  that  you 
will  permit  us  this  act  of  reverence ;  and,  also,  that  you  wdl 
ratify  by  your  authority,  and  fix  on  a  permanent  footing,  the 
advantages  bestowed  on  us  by  your  commanders.’’  The 
senate  answered  the  Saguotine  antbassadors,  that  the  de- 

68  HISTOHY  OF  ROME.  [Y.».  54Sr. 
struction  and  re8^>ratio&of  would  bt 
all  nations,  of  social  faith  failed  cmjbmh  sid^;  4hat  &ear 
commanders,  in  restoring  that  c^,  and  delivering  its  inhabit 
tants  from  slavery,  had  acted  properly,  regularly,  and  agree* 
^iy  ^  the  intentions  of  tfas  senate :  that  aU  odier  acts  of 
kindness  shown  them  had  likewise  dieh*  approbation,  ami  that 
diey  gave  them  permission  to  deposit  their  charge  in  the 
Capitol.”  Orders  were  then  given  that  apartmenm  md  en- 
teixainment  should  be  provided  for  the  amb^sadon^  and  a 
present  made  to  each  of  them,  of  not  less  than  ten  thousmid 
asses,^  Other  embassies  were  then  introduced  and  heami. 
On  the  Saguntines  requesting  that  they  might  be  allows 
take  a  view  of  Italy,  as  far  as  they  could  go  with  safety, 
guides  were  given  them,  and  letters  despatched  to  dl  the 
towns,  requiring  them  to  entertain  these  Spaniards  in  a  friend* 
ly  manner.  The  senate  then  took  into  consideration  the  state 
of  public  affairs,  the  levying  troops,  and  the  distribution  of 
the  provinces. 
XL,  People  in  general  expressed  a  desire  that  Africa 
should  be  constituted  a  new  province,  and  assigned  to  Pub¬ 
lius  Scipio  without  casting  lots  ;  and  he,  not  content  with  a 
moderate  share  of  glory,  affirmed  that  he  had  been  appoint¬ 
ed  consul,  not  for  the  purpose  only  of  carrying  on  the  war, 
but  of  finishing  it ;  that  this  could  be  accomplished  by  no 
other  means  than  by  transporting  an  army  into  Africa ;  de- 
clarkig  openly,  that  if  the  senate  should  oppose  him  in  that 
point,  he  would  carry  it  by  the  votes  of  the  people.  The 
principal  senators  by  no  means  approved  of  the  design  ;  and 
whilst  the  rest,  either  through  fear,  or  a  desire  of  ingratiat¬ 
ing  dicmselves  with  him,  declined  uttering  their  sentiment, 
Quintus  Fabius  Maximus,  being  asked  his  opinion,  express¬ 
ed  himself  to  this  effect :  ‘‘  I  know,  Conscript  Fathers,  that 

*321.  lOd. 

aooit  XMIL  i 

m 

BX.  m>s.} 
ym  irm  tet  we  tfiis  day  ^Itbe* 
fsxtmg  0ZI  affair  airea^  4(^imikiiied  r  md  that  iie  %ill 
petid  wc^s  to  little  potpe^e  Who  shaU  4e^er  hk 
on  the  anbject  of  Africa  beii^  mu^ituted  a  pfwkce,  m  on 
a  ina^er  op^  ter  dkcti^i<»l^  ¥et,  in  the  first  place,  I  do  not 
tinder^isu^  how  Ahrica  can  he  a  province,  already  secured  to 
tha^  active  commander,  our  consul ;  when  neWier 
have  voted,  nor  the  people  mdered,  th^t  it  should 
^  sM  he  considered  as  such ;  and  again,  if  it  were,  in  my 
jud^^nent  it  is  the  consul  who  acts  amiss ;  for  it  is  a  mockery 
'  of  dte  miate  to  pretend  to  consult  them  on  a  question  if  aU 
ready-decidtd,  and  not  the  senator,  who  in  his  place  would 
tothe  business  which  he  supposed  in  hand.  Now  1 
am  w^  aware,  that,  by  disapproving  this  violent  haste  to 
pass  over  into  Africa,  I  expose  myself  to  two  imputations ; 
one,  the  caution  natural  to  my  temper,  which  young  men 
have  my  free  consent  to  call  cowardice  and  sloth  ;  while  I 
have  no  reason  to  be  sorry,  that,  although  the  schemes  of 
others  always  carried  at  first  view  a  more  specious  appear* 
ance,  yet  mine  were  on  experience  found  to  be  more  useful. 
The  odier  imputation  to  which  1  shall  be  liable.  Is  that  of 
detraction  and  envy  towards  the  rising  glory  of  the  valiant 
consul : — from  a  suspicion  of  which  kind,  if  neither  my  past 
life  mid  morals  can  free  me,  nor  a  dictatorship  and  five  ccm- 
sulships,  together  with  a  store  of  glory  acquired  in  the  trans¬ 
actions  both  of  war  and  peace,  that  it  is  more  likely  I  should 
be  satiated,  than  desirous  of  more ;  let  my  age  at  least  acquit 
me.  For  what  emulation  can  I  have  with  him,  who  is  not 
equal  in  age  even  to  my  son  ?  When  I  was  dictator,  when  I 
was  in  full  vigour,  and  proceeding  in  a  course  the  greatest 
achievements,  Uo  one  heard  me,  either  in  the  senate  or  before 
the  people,  make  opposition  to  the  proposed  measure,  (al¬ 
though  such  as  had  never  before  been  heard  of,  even  in  con- 
vcrsaticm,)  of  conferring  power  equal  to  mine  on  the  master 

70 

HlSTWr  OF  SOME. 

[¥•«,  547. 

of  the  Horse,  uwi  wHo,  at  the  very  time,  was  ^deavoorta^ 
to  injtwe  my  character*  I  cbcm  to  eflFect  my  puipo^  by 
actions  rather  than  words ;  and  that  he  who  was  set  tm  a 
level  wkfa  me  in  the  judgn^nt  of  others,  should  at  let^^ 
by  bis  own  confession,  aUow  me  a  superiorky  ov^  1^. 
Much  less  would  1  now,  after  having  passed  thrcmg^  every 
dignity  of  the  state,  f^opose  to  myself  ctmu^ts  and  etnuk^ 
ttons  with  a  man  blooming  in  youth.  Is  it  that  Africa, 
refused  to  him,  might  he  decreed  as  a  province  to  me, — to 
me,  already  wearied,  not  only  with  die  toils  of  business,  Imt 
even  widi  le^th  of  years?  No:  with  that  glory  which  I 
have  already  acquired,  I  am  to  live  and  die.  I  stopped 
the  career  of  Hannibars  conquests,  that  you,  whose  pow¬ 
ers  are  now  in  vigour,  might  be  able  to  gain  conquests  over 
him. 
XLI,  “  As  I  never,  in  my  own  case,  regarded  the  opinion 
of  the  woiid  when  set  in  competition  with  the  advantage  of 
the  state,  k  will  be  but  reasonable  that  you  pardon  me,  Pub¬ 
lius  Cornelius,  if  I  do  not  consider  even  your  fame  in  pre¬ 
ference  to  the  public  good.  If  either  there  were  no  war  in 
Itsdy,  or  the  enemy  here  were  such,  that  a  victory  over  him 
would  be  productive  of  no  glory,  he  who  should  attempt  to 
retain  you  in  Italy,  notwithstanding  that  he  consulted  therein 
the  general  welfare,  might  seem  to  intend,  while  he  restrain¬ 
ed  you  from  removing  the  war,  to  deprive  you  of  a  subject 
of  future  glory.  Yet  Hannibal,  a  powerful  enemy,  with  an 
army  unimpaired,  maintains  a  footing  in  Italy,  for  the  four¬ 
teenth  year.  Would  you  then  have  reason  to  be  dissatisfied, 
Publius  Cornelius,  with  your  share  of  fame,  if  you  should  in 
your  consulate  expel  4uch  a  foe  from  out  of  Italy ;  a  foe, 
who  has  been  the  cause  of  so  much  mourning,  of  so  many 
calamities  to  us  ?  In  fine,  should  you  not  be  content  to  enjoy 
the  reputation  of  having  finished  the  present  Punic  war,  as 
Caius  Lutatius  did  that  of  finishing  the  former  f  Unless,  in- 

BOOK  xxvai* 

BX.2Q5.] 

Pt 

deed,  you  will  aay,  (bat  Hamitcar  is  a  geiierdi  more  formida¬ 
ble  than  Hannibal ;  or  that  a  war  in  A&iea  ia  of  greater  ini'* 
poftamee  than  it  would  be  in  Italy  ;  that  a  victory  tlierey(sup« 
posing  it  should  be  our  good  fortune  to  obtain  such  while 
ymk  are  consul,)  would  he  iiK>re  profiuUe  and  illustrious  than 
cme  here*  Woukl  you  cimose  to  draw  away  Hatnilcar  from 
Brepanum  or  Etyx^  rather  than  to  e%^  the  Cmthaginimts 
and  Hannibal  out  of  Italy  i  Althcmgb  you  should  locA  with 
a  more  partial  regard  on  the  renown  which  you  have  acquired, 
than  on  that  which  you  have  an  prospect,  yet  surely  you  woidd 
nc^  pride  yourself  so  mnch  in  having  freed  Spain,  as  in  free¬ 
ing  Italy.  Hannibal  is  not  yet  in  such  a  condition,  that  he 
who  prefers  engaging  with  another  general,  must  not  evident¬ 
ly  appear  to  be  actuated  by  frar  of  him,  rather  than  ccm* 
tempt.  Why,  then,  do  you  not  direct  your  efforts,  to  this 
point,  and  carry  the  stretch  of  the  war  immediately  to  the 
place  where  Hannibal  is,  mid  not  by  that  circuition,  pre¬ 
suming  that,  when  you  shall  have  passed  into  Africa,  Hanni¬ 
bal  will  follow  you  thither  ?  Do  you  wish  to  be  crowned  with 
the  distinguished  honour  of  having  finished  the  Punic  war  ? 
In  the  very  nature  of  things,  you  are  to  defend  your  own 
property,  before  you  attack  another’s*  Let  peace  be  restored 
in  Italy,  before  hostilities  commence  in  Africa.  Let  us  be 
delivered  from  fear  ourselves,  before  we  attempt  to  make 
others  afraid  of  us.  If  both  can  be  accomplished  under  your 
cmiduct  and  auspices,  it  will  be  well.  After  you  have  van¬ 
quished  Hannibal  at  home,  then  go  and  lay  siege  to  Carthage. 
If  one  or  the  other  of  these  cmiquests  must  be  left  to  suc¬ 
ceeding  consuls,  the  former,  as  it  will  be  the  more  important 
and  tl^  more  glorious,  will  be  also  the  cause  of  the  subse¬ 
quent  one.  For  in  the  present  state  of  affairs,  besides  that 
the  treasury  cannot  maintain  two  different  armies,  one  in 
Italy,  and  another  in  Africa  ;  besides  that  we  have  nothing 
left  os  wherewith  we  could  equip  fleets,  or  be  able  to  supply 

72 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  54r 

provisions,  who  does  not  see  what  danger  must  be  incurred  ? 
Publius  Licinius  will  wage  war  in  Italy,  Publius  Scipio  in 
Africa.  What  if  Hannibal,  having  gained  a  superiority, 
should  advance  to  the  city,  (may  all  the  gods  avert  the  omen! 
my  mind  is  shocked  even  at  mentioning  it ;  but  what  has  hap¬ 
pened,  may  happen  again,)  will  that  be  a  time  for  us  to  be 
obliged  to  send  for  you,  the  consul,  from  Africa,  as  we  sent 
for  Quintus  Fulvius  from  Capua  ?  Besides,  are  we  to  suppose 
that  in  Africa  the  chances  of  war  will  not  be  the  same  with 
both  parties  ?  Let  your  father  and  your  uncle  be  a  warning 
to  you, — cut  off,  together  with  their  armies,  in  the  space  of 
thirty  days  ;  and  after  having,  during  a  course  of  several 
years,  by  their  great  services,  as  well  on  land  as  at  sea,  ren¬ 
dered  the  name  of  the  Roman  people,  and  of  your  family, 
in  the  highest  degree  illustrious  among  foreign  states.  The 
whole  day  would  not  be  sufficient,  were  I  to  recount  to  you 
all  the  kings  and  generals,  who,  by  passing  rashly  into  an 
enemy’s  country,  have  brought  the  greatest  calamities  on 
themselves  and  their  armies.  The  Athenians,  for  instance, 
a  state  remarkable  for  prudence,  having,  at  the  instigation  of 
a  youth  who  was  distinguished  as  much  by  his  active  spirit 
as  by  his  nobility,  neglected  a  war  at  home,  and  sent  over  a 
large  fleet  to  Sicily,  (their  commonwealth  at  that  time  in  a 
most  flourishing  condition,)  suffered,  in  one  naval  engage¬ 
ment,  such  a  blow  as  could  never  be  retrieved. 
XLII.  “■  But,  not  to  bring  examples  from  distant  coun¬ 
tries,  and  times  of  such  remote  antiquity,  Africa  itself,  and 
Marcus  Atilius,  (a  remarkable  instance  of  both  extremes  of 
fortune,)  may  serve  as  a  warning  to  us.  Be  assured,  Publius 
Cornelius,  that,  when  you  shall  have  a  view  of  Africa  from 
the  sea,  all  your  exploits  in  Spain  will  appear  to  you  to  have 
been  onh^  matter  of  sport  and  play.  For,  in  what  circum¬ 
stance  can  they  be  compared  ?  After  sailing  along  the  coasts 
of  Italy  and  Gaul,  where  there  was  nothing  to  oppose  you, 

mkOK  xx¥iii. 

B£.a05^} 

73 

you  carried  ycHtr  fleet  into  the  harbout;  of  a  ci^ 
belongprag  to  ouc  allies ;  and,  having  landed  your  men,  yau 
led  them  through  countries  entirclyfi’ee  from  danger,  to  Xw» 
Taco,  to  the  friends  and  allies  of  the  Roman  pimple.  Frt^ 
Tarraco,  y<Mi  passed  amid  Roman  gartMcpt*  R  was  mi  the 
Iberus,  indeed,  ^M  the  armies  of  ymir  fatherai^ .uncle  were 
exasperated  by  the  loss  of  their  generals,  their  new  com- 
jnander  being  Lucius.  Marcus,  aregulari^  appointed,  it  is 
ttue,  and  chosen,  ifior  the  tuae,  by  the  suSI-ages  of  the  aa^- 
diers  ;  but, that  he,waptedi.a  noUe  birth,  i^d  aregu- 
lar  course  of  pnunotimi,  equal  to  many  celebrated  capt^)a.ia 
every  military  acccHuplisbment.  The  siege, of  New  CjUlbage 
you  carried  on  qtum  «  your  ieisurct  wWle  slither  of  the 
three  Cardmgiiiian  armies  attempted  to  rejinve  the  plpee* 
As  to  die  rest  of  your  exploits,  1  am  far  wUbi^  |o 
lessen  their  meritj  but  they  arc  o«itwidjf,  meats,  to  be 
compared- with  a  ifm’..ui  Africa  ;  where  .diere-iys-not  a  wigfr 
harbour  open  to  our  fleet ;  no  .p«rt..(^.die  country  at  peace 
with  us  ;  no  stum  our  idly  ;  no  Icing  «mr  friend  ;  no  rooip, 
any  where,  either  to  stand  OT-adaancff  On  whatever  aide 
ycHi  turn  your  eyes,  aU  thiB|^.,ime.JMMUe  and  threatening. 
Will  you  depend  on  Syj>hax.|gsd  4|i«>|N^uaudimis  i  $u^^,  it 
to  say,  that  they  wene  once  truaSaL  Rashness  is  imtsdwigrs 
anccessful ;  and  hypocrii^',  by  acepiring  a  framdadon.^  cre¬ 
dit  in  smaller  matters,  prepares  (or  itself  the  opportunity  .fi£ 
deceiving  with  greater  advantage.  The.|£ae  did  not:get  the 
better  of  your  fathty  and  upcle  by  arms,  lutfil  thmr  dCeltibe* 
rian  stties  had  first  got  .the  better  of  them  by  treachei^.  Npr 
were  you  yourself  broo^  «Bto:BO  much  danger  by  M^F 
and  Hasdntoal,  the..eiiemy’s  gemsnRs,  as  by-  lndibiliB 
Maodtadm,  whom  you  toto  yom  potec^cp- 
Cmi  yo%,  wIbj  hs^vnmtperiwaced  a  defrefton  of  yow,pjj«i4i^- 
di«i%{d«%iimf  c^^^d^ncein  Ifiimidian^  BotbRyf^pifuggd 
Maainiinp  are  (lemWjrf.  het^ping  Rp  greatost  pot«^,>in 
von.  IV. — L 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.54r. 

74 
Africa,  to  the  exclusion  of  the  Carthaginians  ;  but  still  they 
prefer  the  interest  of  those  people  to  that  of  any  other 
state.  At  present,  mutual  emulation  embitter  them  against 
each  other,  and  which  arises  from  their  feeling  no  immediate 
apprehensions  from  any  foreign  force.  The  moment  they 
behold  the  Roman  arms,  they  will  instantly  unite,  as  if  to  ex¬ 
tinguish  a  fire  equally  threatening  them  both.  The  efforts 
which  these  same  Carthaginians  made  in  support  of  Spain, 
were  widely  different  from  what  they  will  exert,  in  defence 
of  the  walls  of  their  native  city,  of  the  temples  of  their  gods, 
their  altars,  and  their  dwellings  ;  when  their  wives,  distract¬ 
ed  with  fear,  shall  accompany  them  as  they  go  to  battle,  and 
their  helpless  children  gather  round  them.  Besides,  what  if 
the  Carthaginians,  thinking  themselves  sufficiently  secured 
by  the  harmony  subsisting  in  Africa,  by  the  faith  of  the  kings 
their  allies,  and  by  their  own  fortifications,  should,  on  seeing 
Italy  deprived  of  your  protection,  either  send  over  a  new 
army  from  Africa  into  Italy,  or  order  Mago,(who,  we  know, 
has  sailed  over  from  the  Baleares,  and  is  now  cruising  on  the 
coast  of  the  Alpine  Ligurians,)  to  join  his  forces  to  those  of 
Hannibal  ?  We  should  then  be  seized  with  the  same  terror 
which  we  felt  lately,  on  hearing  of  the  approach  of  Hasdru- 
bal ;  and  whom  you,  (who  are  to  shut  up  with  your  army, 
not  only  Carthage,  but  all  Africa,)  allowed  to  slip  through 
your  hands  into  Italy.  You  will  say,  that  he  was  defeated  by 
you :  the  less,  for  that  very  reason,  can  I  wish  tl\at  he  should 
be  permitted,  after  being  defeated,  to  march  into  this  coun¬ 
try  ;  and  that,  not  only  upon  the  account  of  the  public,  but 
your  own  also.  Allow  us  to  ascribe  to  your  good  conduct 
all  those  events  in  your  province  which  were  favourable  to 
you  and  to  the  state  ;  and  to  impute  such  as  were  unfavoura¬ 
ble  to  fortune,  and  to  the  chances  of  war.  I'he  more  merit 
and  bravery  you  possess,  the  more  is  your  country  and  all 
Italy  concerned  to  keep  at  home  so  powerful  a  protector. 

BOOK  XXVIII. 

75 

B.C.  205.] 
You  cannot  but  acknowl€||^e,  that  wherever  Hannibal  is, 
there  the  main  stress  and  head  of  the  present  war  must  be 
looked  for :  yet  the  reason  you  give  for  passing  over  into 
Africa  is,  that  you  may  draw  Hannibal  thither.  Whether  the 
Carthaginians,  therefore,  be  in  this  country  or  in  that,  your 
business  is  to  oppose  him.  Now,  I  pray  you,  whether  will 
you  be  better  able  to  cope  with  him  in  Africa,  where  you  are 
to  stand  alone  ;  or  here,  with  the  army  of  your  colleague 
joined  to  your  own  ?  Is  not  the  importance  of  this  considera¬ 
tion  sufficiently  evinced  by  the  recent  fate  of  the  consuls 
Claudius  and  Livius  r  What !  is  Hannibal  to  be  feared  here, 
as  receiving  an  augmentation  of  men  and  arms  from  the  re¬ 
motest  corner  of  the  country  of  Bruttium,  (and  which  he  in 
vain  solicits  from  home ;)  or  with  Carthage  at  his  back,  and 
al^Africa  confederated  with  him  ?  What  is  this  plan  of 
choosing  to  fight  there,  where  your  forces  must  be  less  by 
half,  and  those  of  the  enemy  considerably  greater,  rather  than 
here,  at  the  head  of  two  armies  against  one,  and  that  one  im¬ 
paired  in  strength  by  so  many  battles,  and  by  such  long  and 
laborious  service  ?  Consider  well  how  far  this  plan  of  yours 
resembles  that  of  your  father.  He,  in  his  consulship,  after 
having  gone  to  Spain,  came  back  from  his  province  to  Italy, 
in  order  to  meet  Hannibal  as  he  was  descending  from  the 
Alps  :  you,  when  Hannibal  is  in  Italy,  intend  to  quit  the 
country,  not  because  you  judge  that  measure  useful  to  the 
state,  but  because  you  expect  from  it  splendour  and  glory  to 
yourself.  Just  as  when,  without  an  order  of  the  commons, 
without  a  decree  of  the  senate,  you  left  your  province  and 
your  army  ;~*-yes,  you,  a  commander  employed  by  the 
Roman  people,  entrusted  to  two  ships  the  fortune  of  the 
public,  and  the  majesty  of  the  empire,  which  were  then 
exposed  to  hazard  in  your  person.  In  my  judgment,  Con¬ 
script  Fathers,  Publius  Cornelius  Scipio  was  elected  con¬ 
sul  for  the  purpose  of  serving  us  and  the  people  ;  not  for 
his  own  private  schemes  of  ambition.  In  my  opinion,  the 

76 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  547. 

armies  were  enlisted  for  the  pr«iitectioii  of  the  city  and  of 
Italy,  and  not  to  be  carried  about  by  the  consuls  with  king- 
like  ostentation,  in  gratification  of  their  own  vanity,  and  to 
any  part  of  the  world  they  may  think  proper.” 
XLIII.  By  this  speech,  formed  for  the  occasion,  by  his 
authority  and  his  established  character  for  prudence,.  Fabius 
influenced  a  great  part  of  the  senate,  especially  those  advan¬ 
ced  in  years ;  and  a  greater  number  approving  of  the  wari¬ 
ness  of  the  sage  than  of  the  spirit  of  the  youth,  Scipio  is  said 
to  have  spoken  thus:  Conscript  Fathers,  even  Quintus  Fa¬ 
bius  himself,  in  the  beginning  of  his  speech,  has  acknowledg¬ 
ed  that,  in  the  declaration  which  he  has  made  of  his  senti¬ 
ments,  he  might  possibly  be  suspected  of  detraction ;  and  al¬ 
though  I  will  not  presume  to  bring  a  charge  of  such  a  nature 
against  so  great  a  man,  yet  certainly,  whether  through  a  de¬ 
fect  in  his  discourse,  or  in  the  subject,  the  suspicion  has  not 
been  removed.  For,  in  order  to  avoid  the  imputation  of 
envy,  he  has  extolled  his  own  honours,  and  the  fame  of  his 
exploits,  in  very  magnificent  terms  ;  tending  to  show,  that 
whatever  competition  I  may  enter  into  with  others  ;  however 
I  may  fear  that  some  person,  now  in  obscurity,  may  one  day 
be  equal  with  me  ;  yet,  from  him  I  have  no  kind  of  rivalry 
to  apprehend ;  for  he  has  attained  to  such  a  height  of  emi¬ 
nence,  that  he  will  not  suffer  me  at  any  time  to  be  placed  on 
a  level  with  him,  however  anxiously  I  may  wish  it;  and  that 
I  do  wish  it,  I  will  by  no  means  dissemble.  He  has,  there¬ 
fore,  represented  himself  as  a  man  of  gravity  and  wisdom, 
who  has  passed  through  every  degree  of  public  honours  ; 
and  me,  af  below  the  age  even  of  his  son  ;  as  if  ambition  ex¬ 
tended  not  his  views  beyond  the  present  life,  and  did  not 
look  forward  to  posterity  and  future  remembrance  as  the 
greatest  possible  reward.  I  well  know,  that  it  is  usual  with 
persons  of  exalted  merit  to  compare  themselves  with  the  il¬ 
lustrious  men,  not  only  of  the  present,  but  of  every  age  ;  and 

B.C.  205.J 

BOOK  XXVIII. 

77 
I  do  not  deny,  Qninti^  Fabius,  that  I  wish  not  only  to  ove]> 
take  you  in  the  race  of  g^ory,  but  (pardon  the  expression)  to 
outrun  you,  if  I  can.  That  disposition  of  mind  will  not,  £ 
hope,  aflfect  you  towards  me,  nor  me  towarils  my  juniors, 
that  we  should  be  displeased  if  any  of  our  countrymen  be¬ 
came  distinguished  like  ourselves  ;  for  that  would  be  an  in¬ 
jur)’  not  only  to  those  who  W€r|  the  objects  of  our  envy,  but 
to  the  state,  and  in  some  measure  to  all  mankind.  Fabius 
has  descanted  on  the  danger  which  I  must  incur  if  I  pass 
into  Africa,  so  as  to  appear  anxious,  not  only  about  the  ss^ty 
of  the  nation  and  the  army,  but  about  mine.  Whence  has 
this  concern  for  me  so  suddenly  arisen  ?  When  my  father 
uncle  were  slain ;  when  their  two  armies  were  cut  off 
almost  to  a  man  ;  when  Spain  was  lost ;  when  four  armies 
^d  four  generals  of  the  Carthaginians,  by  terror  and  by 
arms,  kept  possession  of  every  thing ;  when  the  public  were 
at  a  loss  for  a  general  to  conduct  that  war,  and  no  one  stepped 
forward  except  myself  p  when  no  one  dared  to  declare  him¬ 
self  a  candidate  ;  when  the  Roman  people  had  conferred  the 
command  on  me,  though  but  twenty- four  years  old,— -how 
happened  it  that  no  mention  was  then  made  of  my  age,  of 
the  power  of  the  enemy,  of  the  difficulties  of  opposing  him, 
or  of  the  recent  calamity  of  my  relatives  ?  Has  ^y  greater 
misfortune  befallen  us  in  Africa,  than  had  at  that  time  been 
experienced  in  Spain  ?  Are  there  now  on  that  continent  more 
numerous  armies  or  better  generals,  than  there  were  then  in 
Spsrin?  Was  I  fitter  at  that  time  of  life  for  conducting  a  war 
than  I  am  now  ?  Is  a  contest  with  a  Cardiaginian  enemy  less 
difficult  in  Spain  than  in  Africa  ?  It  is  an  easy  matter,  after 
four  Carthaginian  armies  routed  and  entirely  dispersed ;  after 
so  many  cities  taken  by  force,  or  terrified  into  a  surrender ; 
while  all  places,  even  as  far  as  the  ocean,  have  been  brought 
under  entire  subjection ;  while  so  many  princes,  so  many 
savage  nations  have  been  wholly  reduced  ;  in  a  word,  aftei 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  547* 

rs 
all  Spain  has  been  re-conquered,  and  in  such  a  manner  as 
that  no  trace  of  war  remains ; — it  is  easy,  I  say,  to  depreciate 
the  value  of  my  services,  just  as  easy,  in  truth,  as  it  will  be, 
if  I  shall  return  victorious  from  Africa,  to  make  light  of 
those  very  circumstances  which  are  now  so  greatly  aggrava¬ 
ted,  and  painted  in  such  terrible  colours,  for  the  purpose  of 
detaining  me  here.  It  is  a£ij^ed  that  no  entrance  can  be 
found  into  Africa ;  that  there  are  no  harbours  open  to  us ; 
that  Marcus  Atilius  was  taken  prisoner  there,  as  if  Marcus 
Atilius  had  miscarried  on  approaching  that  coast.  But  Fa- 
bius  does  not  recollect  that  this  commander  (afterwards,  in¬ 
deed,  unfortunate)  found  the  harbours  of  Africa  open,  and 
during  the  first  year  performed  extraordinary  services ;  and, 
as  far  as  concerned  the  Carthaginian  generals,  remained  un¬ 
conquered  to  the  last.  The  example  which  you  produce, 
therefore,  does  not  in  the  least  deter  me.  If  that  loss  had 
even  been  sustained  in  the  present  war,  and  not  in  the  for¬ 
mer  ;  if  lately,  and  not  forty  years  ago ;  yet  why  should  I 
not  as  well  pass  into  Africa  after  Regulus  was  made  prison¬ 
er,  as  into  Spain  after  the  Scipios  were  slain ;  nor  suffer  it  to 
be  said,  that  the  birth  of  Xantippus,  a  Laceda&monian,  was, 
by  the  defeat  of  our  consul,  more  fortunate  to  Carthage,  than 
mine  to  my  own  country  ?  and  why  might  I  not  assume  ad¬ 
ditional  confidence  from  that  very  circumstance,  that  it  was 
possible  for  the  bravery  of  one  man,  a  Spartan,  to  produce 
such  important  consequences  f  But  we  are  also  told  of  the 
Athenians  neglecting  a  war  at  home,  and  passing  inconsider¬ 
ately  into  Sicily,  Why  do  you  not  rather  (since  you  have 
leisure  to  recount  Grecian  fables)  mention  Agathocles  King 
of  Syracuse,  who,  when  Sicily  was  for  a  long  time  wasted 
by  a  Punic  war,  by  passing  over  into  this  same  Africa,  avert¬ 
ed  that  war  to  the  place  from  whence  it  came  ? 
XLIV.  But  what  need  is  there  either  of  ancient  or  for¬ 
eign  examples  to  remind  us  how  useful  it  is  to  spread  terror 

BOOK  XXVIII. 

79 

B.C.205.] 
among  the  enemy  by  a  sudden  attack  ;  and  after  removing 
the  danger  to  a  distance  from  ourselves,  to  make  him  abide 
the  hazard  ?  Can  there  be  any  greater  or  more  striking  in¬ 
stance  than  is  found  in  Hannibal  ?  Between  wasting  the  ter¬ 
ritories  of  others,  and  seeing  our  own  destroyed  with  fire 
and  sword,  the  difference  is  immense.  The  assailant  has 
ever  more  spirit  than  the  defendant ;  and  people’s  apprehen¬ 
sions  are  the  greater  in  the  latter  case.  When  you  have  en¬ 
tered  an  enemy’s  territories,  you  can  then  see  more  distinct¬ 
ly  the  advantages  and  disadvantages  which  pertain  to  the 
same.  Hannibal  never  entertained  a  hope  that  so  many  na¬ 
tions  in  Italy  would  revolt  to  him  as  did,  and  which  was  in¬ 
duced  by  our  misfortune  at  Cannae.  How  much  less  can  any 
firm  and  steady  support  in  Africa  be  expected  by  the  Car¬ 
thaginians,  who  are  themselves  faithless  allies,  severe  and 
haughty  masters  ?  As  to  ourselves,  even  when  deserted  by 
confederates,  we  stood  firm  in  our  own  natural  strength,  the 
soldiery  of  Rome.  This  the  Carthaginians  do  not  possess  ; 
beside,  their  soldiers  are  procured  for  hire, — African^,  with 
Numidians,  of  all  men  the  most  unsteady  in  their  attach¬ 
ments.  If  no  obstruction  be  thrown  in  my  way  at  home, 
you  shall  shortly  hear,  that  I  have  made  good  my  descent, 
and  that  Africa  is  in  a  blaze  of  war ;  that  Hannibal,  in  re¬ 
turning  thither,  comes  but  to  experience  a  defeat,  and  that 
Carth^e  is  besieged ;  in  fine,  expect  confidently  more  fre¬ 
quent  and  more  joyful  despatches  from  that  continent  than 
you  received  from  Spain.  These  hopes  are  suggested  to 
me  by  the  fortune  of  the  Roman  people,  the  gods  who  wit¬ 
nessed  the  treaty  which  the  enemy  have  violated,  and  the 
friendship  of  the  Kings,  Syphax  and  Masinissa,  to  whom  1 
shall  look  for  aid  while  securing  myself  against  perfidy.  The 
war  will  disclose  many  things  which  do  not  appear  now  ;  and 
it  is  the  business  of  a  general,  not  to  fail  of  improving  the 
overtures  of  fortune,  and  to  convert  casual  occurrences  to 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

[Y*R,  547. 

the  accomplishment  of  his  designs.  I  shall^  Quintus  Fidiius, 
have  the  antagonist  whom  you  assign  me,  Hannibal:  I  shall 
compel  him  to  fight  in  his  own  country,  and  Carthage  rather 
shall  he  the  prize  than  the  half-ruined  forts  of  the  Bruttians. 
With  respect  to  the  security  of  the  state,  and  that  it  shouhl 
suffer  no  injury  while  I  am  on  my  passage  ;  while  I  am  land¬ 
ing  my  army  in  Africa ;  while  I  am  marching  forwards 
to  Carthage ;  be  careful  in  any  assertion  as  to  what  you, 
Quintus  F^ius,  were  able  to  accomplish,  at  a  time  when 
Haimibal  was  pursuing  a  rapid  career  of  victory  throng  all 
parts  of  Italy  ;  be  mindful,  I  say,  lest  it  he  considered  as  an 
insult,  that  you  do  not  too  frecfy^affirm  of  him,  that,  shaken 
and  almost  Bremen  in  pieces,  his  overthrow  by  Publius  Li- 
cinius  the  consul  were  easy,— a  man  by  the  way  of  the  most 
consummate  valour,  amd  who  declined  the  lot  of  so  distant  a 
province  as  Africa,  only  because,  being  chief  pontiff,  he  must 
not  be  ab^nt  from  his  religious  duties.  In  fact,  even  though 
the  war  were  not  to  be  brought  to  a  speedier  conclusicm  by 
the  method  which  I  "projxjse,  still  it  wmild  concern  the  dig¬ 
nity  of  the  Roman  people,  and  their  reputation  among  for¬ 
eign  kings  and  nations,  that  we  should  appear  to  have  spirit, 
not  only  to  defend  Italy,  but  to  carry  our  arms  into  Africa  ; 
mid  that  it  slmuki  not  be  spread  abroad,  and  believed,  that 
no  Rommi  general  dared  what  Hannibal  had  dared  ;  and  that, 
in  the‘fonner  Punic  war,  when  the  contest  was  Sicily, 
Africa  had  been  often  attacked  by  our  fleets  and  armies ; 
but  that  now,  when  the  contest  is  about  Italy,  Africa  should 
enjoy  peace.  Let'  Italy,  so  long  harassed,  enjoy  at  length 
some  repose:  let  Africa,  in  its  turn,  feel  fire  and  sword. 
Let  the  Roman  camp  press  on  the  very  gates  of  Carthage, 
rather  than  that  we,  a  second  time,  should  behold  from  our 
walls  the  rampart  of  that  of  the  enemy.  Let  Africa,  in  short, 
be  the  scat  of  the  remainder  of  the  war  :  thither  be  removed 
terror  and  flight,  devastation  of  lands,  revolt  of  allies,  and 

BOOK  XXVIII. 

81 

B.C.  205.] 

all  the  other  calamities  with  which,  for  fourteen  years,  we 
have  been  afflicted.  It  is  sufficient  that  I  have  delivered  my 
sentiments  on  those  matters  which  affect  the  state,  the  dis¬ 
pute  in  which  we  are  involved,  and  the  provinces  under  con¬ 
sideration;  my  discourse  w'ould  be  tedious,  and  unsuitable 
to  this  audience,  if,  as  Quintus  Fabius  has  depreciated  my 
services  in  Spain,  I  should,  on  the  other  hand,  endeavour  in 
like  manner  to  disparage  his  glory,  and  extol  my  own.  1 
shall  do  neither,  Conscript  Fathers;  but,  )oang  as  1  am,  I 
will  show  that  I  excel  that  sage,  if  in  nothing  else,  yet  cer¬ 
tainly  in  modesty  and  temperance  of  language.  Such  has 
been  my  life  and  conduct,  that  I  can,  in  silence,  rest  perfect¬ 
ly  satisfied  with  that  character  which  your  own  judgments 
have  formed  of  me.” 
XLV.  Scipio  was  heard  the  less  favourably  on  account  of 
a  rumour  which  prevailed,  that  if  he  did  not  carr\  the  point 
in  the  senate,  of  having  Africa  decreed  to  him  as  his  pro¬ 
vince,  he  was  determined  immediately  to  submit  the#  busi¬ 
ness  to  public  decision.  Therefore  Quintus  Fulvius,  who 
had  been  consul  four  times,  and  censor,  demanded  of  the 
consul,  that  he  should  declare  openly  in  the  senate,  whether 
he  meant  to  abide  by  the  determination  of  the  Fathers  in 
regard  to  the  provinces,  or  whether  he  intended  to  bring  the 
matter  before  the  people?''  Scipio  having  answered,  that  he 
would  act  in  such  a  manner  as  he  should  deem  most  advan¬ 
tageous  to  the  state,  Fulvius  replied,  “I  did  not  ask  the 
question  through  ignorance  of  what  you  would  answer,  and 
what  you  intended  to  do.  It  is  thus  plainly  seen,  that  you 
are  rather  sounding  the  senate,  than  consulting  them  ;  and 
have  an  order  ready  to  be  propc'sed  to  the  people,  if  we  do 
not  immediately  decree  to  you  the  province  that  you  desire. 
I  therefore  call  upon  you,  triiiunes,  to  support  me  in  refusing 
to  give  my  opinion,  and  for  this  reason,  that,  although  a 
majority  should  concur  with  me,  yet  the  consul  w'ould  ap- 
VOL.  IV, — M 

82 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.54r. 
peal  from  their  juSgmeiit.”  On  this  an  altercarion  arose, 
Scipio  insisting,  that  it  was  unfair  for  the  tribunes  to  inter* 
pose,  so  as  to  prevent  any  senator  from  giving  his  opinion, 
on  being  asked  it  in  his  place.  The  tribunes  determined 
thus :  If  the  consul  submits  the  regulation  of  the  provinces 
to  the  senate,  we  are  satisfied  that  their  decision  shall  be 
final,  and  we  will  not  suffer  that  matter  to  be  carried  before 
the  people  ;  if  he  does  not  so  submit  it,  we  will  support 
such  as  shall  refuse  to  give  their  opinion  on  the  subject.” 
The  consul  desired  time  until  the  next  day,  that  he  might 
confer  with  his  colleague,  and  the  affair  was  then  submitted 
to  the  senate,  who  decreed  the  provinces  in  this  manner :  to 
one  consul,  Sicily,  and  the  thirty  ships  of  war,  which  Caius 
Servilius  had  commanded  the  preceding  year,  with  permis¬ 
sion  to  pass  over  into  Africa,  if  he  should  judge  it  for  the 
advantage  of  the  state  ;  to  the  other,  Bruttium,  and  the  war 
against  Hannibal,  with  the  army  which  Lucius  Veturius,  or 
that  l^hich  Quintus  Caecilius,  commanded ;  that  these  latter 
should  cast  lots,  or  settle  between  themselves,  which  of  them 
should  command  in  Bruttium,  with  the  two  legions. which 
would  be  left  by  the  consul ;  and  that  he,  to  whose  lot  that 
province  fell^  should  be  continued  in  it  for  another  year. 
The  others  also  who  were  to  have  the  charge  of  armies,  be¬ 
sides  the  consuls  and  praetors,  had  their  commission  prolong¬ 
ed.  It  fell  by  lot  to  Quintus  Caecilius,  that,  in  conjunction 
with  the  consul,  he  should  manage  the  war  against  Hannibal 
in  Bruttium.  Scipio’s  games  were  then  exhibited  taa  vast 
concourse  of  spectators,  who  expressed  the  highest  apprcrf>a- 
tidti.  Marcus  Pomponius  Matho,  and  Quintus  Catius,  be¬ 
ing  sent  ambassadors  to  Delphi,  with  a  present  out  of  the 
spoils  of  Hasdrubal,  carried  a  golden  crown  of  two  hundred 
pounds  weight,  and  representations  of  the  prizes,  formed  of 
one  thousand  pounds  weight  of  silver.  Although  Scipio 
had  not  obtained,  nor  earnestly  solicited,  authority  lO  levy 

BOOK  xxvm. 

83 

BX.  S05.] 

soldiers^  be  yet  was  permitted  to  enrol  volunteers ;  and  be 
had  declared  that  Ae  fleet  should  be  no  expense  to  the  pub¬ 
lic^  so  he  might  receive  such  ccmtribiitions  as  should  be  of¬ 
fered  by  Ae  allies  fm*  building  new  ships.  The  states  of  Etru¬ 
ria  first  promised  to  give  assistance  to  the  consul,  proportion¬ 
ed  to  the  respective  abilities  of  each ;  the  people  of  Caere  en¬ 
gaged  to  bring  com,  and  provisions  of  all  kinds,  for  the  sea¬ 
men;  the  Populonians,  iron;  the  Tarquinians,  canvass  for 
sails ;  the  Volaterrans,  tackling  and  com ;  the  Arretians, 
thirty  thousand  shields,  the  same  number  of  helmets  ;  of  ja¬ 
velins,  short  pikes,  and  long  spears,  each  an  equal  number, 
amounting  in  the  whole  to  fifty  thousand  ;  to  supply  axes, 
mattocks,  bills,  buckets,  and  millstones,  sufficient  for  forty 
ships  of  war,  with  one  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  pecks 
of  wheat ;  they  also  promised  to  contribute  to  the  expense  of 
Ae  decurions*  and  rowers.  The  people  of  Perusium,  Clu- 
sium,  and  Rusella  gave  assurance  of  fir  for  building  ships, 
and  a  large  quantity  of  corn.  The  states  of  Umbria,  with 
the  people  of  Nursia,  Reate,  and  Amiternum,  and  the  whole 
country  of  the  Sabines,  engaged  to  furnish  soldiers.  Fir, 
however,  he  took  out  of  the  woods  belonging  to  the  state. 
Great  numbers  of  the  Marsians,  Pclignians,  and  Marrusin- 
ians,  voluntarily  gave  in  their  names  to  serve  in  the  fleet. 
The  Cameritans,  though  confederated  with  the  Romans  on 
equal  terms,  sent  a  cohort  of  six  hundred  men  tad  arms. 
Having  laid  the  keels  of  thirty  ships,  twenty  quinqueremes, 
and  ten  quadriremes,  Scipio  pressed  forward  Ae  work  by  his 
personal  attendance^  in  such  a  manner,  Aat  on  Ae  forty-fifiA 
day  after  the  timber  bad  been  brought  from  Ae  woods, 
ships  were  rigged,  sumed,  and  launched. 
XliVI.  The  c<msul  proceeded  to  Sicily  with  thirty  ships 
of  wa^,  having  embarked  about  seven  thousand  volunteers* 

Officers  who  had  the  comraand  of  the  rowers. 

84 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  547. 

Poblius  Licitijus  came  into  Bruttium  to  the  two  consular  ar¬ 
mies,  of  which  be  chose  for  himself  that  which  had  been  com¬ 
manded  by  the  late  consul,  Lucius  Veturius  ;  he  placed  Me- 
tellus  at  the  head  of  the  same  legions  as  before,  because  htf 
thought  it  would  be  the  easier  for  him  to  transact  business 
with  those  who  were  accustomed  to  his  command  :  the  prst- 
tors  also  repaired  to  their  different  provinces.  Money  for 
the  war  being  wanting,  the  quaestors  were  ordered  to  sell  a 
district  of  the  Campanian  territory,  extending  from  the  Gre¬ 
cian  trench  to  the  sea ;  they  were  also  empowered  to  make 
inquiry  what  lauds  had  been  the  property  of  any  native,  in 
order  that  they  might  be  tranhferred  to  the  Roman  people  ; 
with  a  reward  to  any  informer  of  the  tenth  part  of  the  value 
of  the  lands  so  discovered.  It  was  also  given  in  charge  to 
Cneius  Servilius,  praetor  of  the  city,  that  the  natives  of  Cam¬ 
pania  should  obliged  to  remain  in  those  places  which  had 
been  decreed  for  their  residence  by  the  senate,  and  that  such 
as  removed  to  any  other  should  be  punished.  During  the 
same  summer,  Mago,  son  of  Hamilcar,  after  having  spent 
the  yv  inter  in  the  smaller  of  the  Bale  ares,  and  having 
there  embalmed  *8  chosen  body  of  young  men  on  board 
his  fleet,  which  consisted  of  near  thirty  ships  of  war,  and  a 
great  number  of  transports,  carried  into  Italy  twelve  thou¬ 
sand  foot,  and  about  two  thousand  horse  ;  and,  by  his  unex¬ 
pected  arrival,  surprised  Genoa,  there,  being  no  forces  sta¬ 
tioned  to  protect  the  coast.  From  thence  he  sailed  to  the 
coast  of  the  Al|)ine  Liguyans,  to  try  if  he  could  raise  any  com¬ 
motions  there..  The  Ingaunians,  a  tribe  of  the  Ligurians, 
were  at  that  time  engaged  in  war  with  the  Epanterians,  who 
inhabited  the  mountains  :  the  Carthaginian,  therefore,  having 
depositi^d  his  plunder  at  Savo,  a  town  of  the  Alps,  and  left 
a  squadron  of  ten  ships  of  war  to  protect  it,  sent  the  rest  to 
Carthage,  to  guard  the  sea-coast,  a  report  being  spread  that 
Scipio  intended  to  pass  over  thither.  He  then  formed  an  al- 

BOOS:  XXVIII. 

85 

B.C.  205.] 
liance  with  the  Ingaunians,  whose  friendship  he  esteemed,  re¬ 
solving  in  person  to  attack  the  mountaineers.  His  army  in¬ 
creased  daily,  the  Gauls,  induced  byithc  greatness  of  his  cha¬ 
racter,  pouring  in  from  all  sides.  When  the  senate  were  in¬ 
formed  of  these  proceedings,  by  letters  from  Spurius  Lucre¬ 
tius,  they  were  filled  with  much  anxiety,  apprehending  that 
the  joy  which  they  had  conceived,  on  the  destruction  of  Has- 
drubal  and  his  army,  two  years  before,  would  prove  ill- 
founded,  if  another  war,  equal  to  the  former,  only  under  a 
different  general,  were  to  arise  from  the  same  quarter.  They 
therefore  commanded  Marcus  Livius,  proconsul,  to  march  an 
army  of  volunteer  slaves  from  Etruria  to  Ariminum,  at  the 
same  time  charging  the  prsetor,  Cneius  Servilius,  if  he  judged 
it  advantageous  to  the  state,  to  order  the  city  legions  to  be 
led  into  the  field,  by  such  commander  as  he  should  think 
proper.  Marcus  Valerius  Laevinus  conducted  those  legions 
to  Arretium.  About  this  time  eighty  transport*ships  of  the 
Carthaginians  were  taken  on  the  coast  of  Sardinia  by  Cneius 
Octavius,  who  held  the  government  of  that  province.  Cselius 
relates  that  these  were  laden  with  com  and  provisions  for 
Hannibal ;  Valerius,  that  they  were  carrying  to  Carthage  the 
plunder  of  Etruria,  and  the  Ligurian  mountaineers,  Who  bad 
been  made  prisoners.  In  Bruttium,  hardly  any  thing  memo¬ 
rable  happened  during  that  year.  A  pestilence  had  attacked 
both  Romans  and  Carthaginians  with  equal  violence,  except 
that  the  Carthaginians,  besides  the  disorder,  were  distressed 
by  famine.  Hannibal  spent  the  summer  near  the  temple  of 
Juno  Lacinea,  where  he  built  and  dedicated  an  altar,  with  an 
inscription  in  the  Carthaginian  and  Greek  characters,  con¬ 
taining  a  pompous  recital  of  his  exploits. . 

THE 

0 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

BOOK  XXIX. 
In  Spain,  Mandonius  and  Indibilis,  reviving  hostilities,  are  finally  subdued, 
Scipio  goes  over  from  Syracuse  to  Locri ;  dislodges  the  Carthaginian 
general  ;  repulses  Hannibal,  and  recovers  that  city.  Peace  made  with 
Philip.  The  Idxan  Mother  brought  to  Rome  from  Phry^a  j  received 
by  Publius  Scipio  Nasica,  judged  b)  the  senate,  the  best  man  in  the  state. 
Scipio  passes  over  into  Africa.  Syphax,  having  married  a  daughter  of 
Hasdrubal,  renounces  his  alliance  with  Sdipio.  Masinissa,  who  had  been 
expelled  his  kingdom  by  Syphax,  joins  Scipio  with  two  hundred  horse¬ 
men  ;  they  defeat  a  large  army  commanded  by  Han  no.  Hasdrubal  and 
Syphax  approach  with  a  most  numerous  force.  Scipio  i^ses  the  siege 
of  Utica,  and  fortifies  a  post  for  the  winter.  The  consul  Sempronius  gets 
the  better  of  Hannibal  in  a  battle  near  Croton.  Dispute  between  Marcus 
Livius  and  Claudius  Nero,  censors, 
WHEN  Scipio  arrived  in  Sicily, he  formed  his  volunteers 
into  cohorts  and  centuries  ;  of  which  forces  he  kept 
Y  R  547  •  ^ 
B  C  *205  hundred  about  him,  all  of  them  vigorous 
young. men,  and  ignorant  of  the  purpose  for  which 
they  were  reserved,  being  neither  enrolled  in  the  centuries, 
nor  supplied  with  arms.  TJien,  out  of  the  whole  number  of 
youths  in  Sicily,  he  chose  also  three  hundred  of  distinguished 

BOOK  XXIX. 

87 

B.C.205.] 
birth  and  fortune  as  horaemen,  who  were  to  pass  over  with 
him  into  Africa^  appointing  a  day  on  which  they  were  to  at¬ 
tend,  equipped  and  furnished  with  horses  and  arms.  This 
service  appeared  to  them  very  severe,  being  so  far  from  home, 
and  attended  with  great  fatigues  and  great  dangers,  both  by 
sea  and  land  ;  so  much  so,  that  not  only  themselves,  but  their 
parents  and  relations,  were  distressed  with  anxiety  on  their 
account.  At  the  time  appointed,  they  brought  their  horses 
and  arms  to  be  inspected ;  Scipio  then  told  them,  that  he 
was  informed  that  some  of  the  Sicilian  horsemen  dreaded  the 
service  on  which  they  were  going,  as  laborious  and  severe  ; 
that  if  any  were  thus  affected,  he  wished  them  to  acknow¬ 
ledge  it  then  to  him,  rather  than  to  complain  afterwards,  and 
prove  inactive  and  useless  soldiers  to  the  state  :  he  desired 
them  to  express  their  sentiments  freely,  assuring  them  they 
should  be  listened  to  without  displeasure.’’  On  which  one 
of  them  ventured  to  say,  that,  if  he  had  a  free  option,  he  cer¬ 
tainly  would  wish  to  decline  the  service.  Scipio  replied  ; 
^  Since  then,  young  man,  you  have  not  dissembled  your  sen¬ 
timents,  I  will  provide  a  substitute  for  you,  to  whom  you 
must  deliver  your  horse,  your  arms,  and  other  implements 
of  war  :  take  him  hence  directly  to  your  house  ;  exercise  him, 
and  take  care  that  he  be  instructed  in  the  management  of  his 
horse  and  arms.”  These  terms  the  other  embraced  with 
joy,  on  which  Scipio  put  into  his  hands  one  of  the  three 
hundred  whom  he  kept  unarmed.  When  the  others  saw  the 
horseman  discharged  in  this  manner,  with  the  approbation  of 
the  general,  each  began  to  excuse  himself,  and  receive  a  sub¬ 
stitute.  Thus  were  Homan  horsemen  substituted  in  the  place 
of  the  three  hundred  Sicilians,  without  any  expense  to  the 
public.  The  Sicilians  had  the  trouble  of  instructing  and  ex¬ 
ercising  them  ;  the  general  having  ordered,  that  any  who  did 
not  perform  this,  should  continue  in  the  service.  We  are  told 
that  this  proved  an  excellent  body  of  horse,  and  did  good  ser- 

88 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  547. 

vice  to  the  state  in  many  battles.  Afterwards  reviewing  the 
legions,  he  chose  out  of  them  those  soldiers  who  had  been  the 
longest  time  in  the  army,  especially  those  who  had  served  with 
Marcellas  ;  believing  that  they  were  not  only  formed  under 
the  best  discipline,  but,  in  consequence  of  the  long  siege  of 
Syracuse,  were  best  skilled  in  the  method  of  attacking  towns ; 
for  the  object  to  which  his  views  were  now  directed,  was  no 
small  matter,  being  nothing  less  than  the  uter  destruction  of 
Carthage.  He  then  cantoned  his  army  in  the  different  towns  ; 
ordered  in  a  supply  of  corn  from  the  Sicilian  states,  sparing 
what  he  had  brought  from  Italy  ;  repaired  the  old  ships,  and 
sent  Caius  Laelius  with  them  to  Africa,  to  plunder  the  coun¬ 
try  ;  then  hauled  up  the  new  ones  on  land  at  Panormus,  that 
they  might  lie  dry  during  the  winter,  because  they  had  been 
hastily  built  of  ^reen  limber  ;  and  having  completed  the  pre¬ 
parations  for  the  war,  he  came  to  Syracuse,  where  tranquillity 
was  not  yet  entirely  re-established,  after  the  late  violent  com- 
HK^ion.  The  Greeks,  in  pursuance  of  a  grant  of  the  senate, 
demanding  a  restoration  of  their  effects  from  some  Italians, 
who  kept  possession  of  them  with  the  same  force  with  which 
they  had  seized  them,  Scipio,  reckoning  it  essentially  requi¬ 
site  to  support  the  public  faith,  procured  a  restitution  of  the 
mmt ;  partly  by  a  proclamation  issued,  and  partly  by  sen¬ 
tences  passed  against  those  who  persisted  in  retaining  their 
unjust  acquisitions.  This  proceeding  was  highly  acceptable 
not  only  to  the  persons  aggrieved,  but  to  all  the  states  of  Si¬ 
cily,  and  added  to  their  alacrity  in  forwarding  the  prepara¬ 
tions  for  war. 
II.  A  formidable  war  was  raised  this  summer  in  Spain 
by  the  instigation  of  Indibilis,  the  Itlergetian,  on  no  other 
grounds  than  the  contempt  which,  through  his  great  admira¬ 
tion  of  Scipio,  he  entertained  of  all  other  generals.  He  was 
of  opinion,  that  ‘‘  this  commander  was  the  only  one  whom 
the  Romans  had  remaining  ;  the  others  of  any  note,  having, 

as  he  conceived,  been  fifain  by  Hannibal.  For,  when  the 
Scipic^  were  cut  oflF  in  ^pain,  they  had  none  whom  they  could 
send  thit^r;  and,  afterwards,  when  the  war  pressed  too 
heavily  on  them  in  Italy,  the  present  one  had  been  recalkd 
to  act  against  Hannibal.  That,  besides,  the  B,omans  having 
only  nominal  generals  in  Spain,  their  veterm  army  had  been 
withdrawn  from  thence :  that,  among  the  troops  which  re¬ 
mained,  there  was  neither  spirit  nor  firmness,  as  tbejr  con- 
sis^d  of  an  undisciplined  multitude  of  new  recruits :  th^ 
there  would  never  again  be  such  an  opportunity  of  asserting 
the  liberty  of  Spain :  that  until  that  day,  they  had  been  slaves 
either  to  the  Carthaginians  or  Romans ;  and  that,  not  to  one 
or  the  other  by  turns,  but  sometimes  to  both  together  :  that 
the  Carthaginians  had  been  expelled  by  the  Romans ;  and 
that  the  Romans  might  now  be  expelled  by  the  Spaniards,  if 
these  would  act  with  unanimity,  so  that  being  for  ever  freed 
the  dominion  of  foreigners,  they  might  i^tum  to  their 
own  native  manners  and  rites.”  By  these,  and  other  ttelife. 
discourses,  he  roused  to  arms,  not  only  his  own  cowemy^e^^ 
but  the  Ausetanians  also,  a  neighbouring  state,  wti^ 
nations  that  bordered  on  his  and  their  country  }  ^ 
within  a  few  days,  thirty  thousand  foot  and  ad^ut  fo^  tlmu- 
sand  horse  assembled,  in  the  territory  of  Sedeta,  aocord^g  to 
his  directions.  On  the  other  side,  the  Romam  generals,  Lu¬ 
cius  L^ntulas  and  Lucius  Manlius  Acidinus,  lest  the  war, 
being  neglected  in  the  beginning,  should  spread  with  increas¬ 
ing  violence^  united  their  armies}  and  nonducting  them 
through  the  country  of  the  Ausetmiians  in  as  peaceable  a 
manner  as  if  they  were  among  friends,  they  arrived  at  the 
place  where  the  enemy  lay  ;  smd  pitched  their  tents  at  three 
miles  distance  from  the  Spanish  camp.  By  senettng  ambas¬ 
sadors,  they  endeavoured  to  prevail  on  them  to  lay  aside 
their  arms,  but  in  vain.  Afterwards,  the  Spanish  horsemen 
having  made  a  sudden  attock  on  the  foragers  of  the  Ro- 
voL.  ir. — N 

90 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  547, 
mans,  and  the  latter  sending  some  troops  to  support  them 
from  one  of  their  outposts,  there  ensued  a  battle  between 
the  cavalry,  in  which  neither  side  -gained  any  considerable 
advantage. 
III.  At  sunrise  next  day,  the  whole  force  of  the  enemy 
appeared  in  arms,  and  drawn  up  in  order  of  battle,  at  the 
distance  of  about  a  mile  from  the  Roman  camp.  The  Ause- 
tanians  were  in  the  centre,  the  Illergetians  formed  the  right 
wing,  and  people  of  several  inconsiderable  Spanish  states  the 
left :  between  the  wings  and  the  main  body,  they  had  left 
very  wide  intervals,  through  which  the  horse  might  charge 
upon  occasion.  The  Romans  drew  up  their  army  in  the 
usual  manner,  yet  so  far  following  the  example  of  the  enemy 
as  to  leave  passages  open  for  the  cavalry  between  the  legions. 
Lentulus,  however,  considering  that  the  horse  could  be  of 
use  only  to  that  party  which  should  first  make  an  attack  on 
th^  enemy’s  line,  divided  by  the  intervals,  commanded  Scr- 
vius  Cornelius,  tribune  of  the  soldiers,  to  order  them  to 
charge  through  the  same.  The  fight  between  the  infantry 
being  rather  unfavourable  to  the  Romans  at  the  beginning, 
he  was  obliged  to  delay  for  a  time,  while  the  thirteenth  le¬ 
gion  from  the  reserve  was  brought  up  to  the  first  line,  so  as 
to  support  the  twelfth,  which  had  been  posted  in  the  left 
wing  against  the  Illergetians,  and  which  began  to  give  ground. 
The  fight  being  restored,  Scipio  hastened  to  Lucius  Manlius, 
who  was  exerting  himself  among  the  foremost  battalions, 
encouraging  and  supporting  his  men  by  a  supply  of  fresh 
troops  wherever  occasion  required,  and  acquainted  him  that 
matters  were  safe  on  the  left  wing,  and  that  Cornelius  Ser- 
vius,  whom  he  had  despatched  for  the  purpose,  would  quick¬ 
ly  assail  the  enemy  on  all  sides  with  his  cavalry.  Scarcely 
had  he  uttered  these  words,  when  the  Roman  horse,  push¬ 
ing  forwards  into  the  midst  of  their  ranks,  threw  the  line  of 
infantry  into  confusion  ;  and  at  the  same  time  closed  up  the 

BOOK  XXIX. 

91 

BX.^5.3 
passes  by  which  the  Sf^nish  horse  were  to  have  advteced  to 
a  charge.  The  SpaBtards,  therefore,  quitting  all  thoughts  of 
fighting  on  horseback,  dismounted,  in  order  to  engage  on 
foot.  When  the  Roman  generals  perceived  the  enemy’s  dis* 
order,  that  they  were  confused  and  terrified,  and  their  batta¬ 
lions  wavering,  they  encouraged,  they  entreated,  their  men, 
to  “  push  them  briskly  while  they  were  dismayed,  and  not  to 
suffer  their  line  to  be  formed  again.”  The  barbarians  could 
not  have  withstood  so  furious  an  onset,  had  not  their  prince, 
Indibilis,  dismounting  with  the  cavalry,  thrown  himself  into 
the  front  of  the  foremost  baUalions  of  infantry.  There  the 
contest  was  supported  for  some  time  with  great  fury.  At 
length,  those  who  fought  round  the  King,  fell,  overwhelmed 
with  darts,  and  he  himself,  continuing  to  make  resistance, 
though  ready  to  expire,  was  pinned  to  the  earth  with  a  jave¬ 
lin  ;  on  Vhich  their  troops  betook  themselves  to  Sight  in  all 
parts.  The  number  of  the  slain  was  the  greater,  because  the 
horsem^  had  not  time  to  remount  their  horses,  beii^  vigo¬ 
rously  pressed  by  the  Romans,  who  did  not  relax  in  the  least 
until  they  had  driven  them  from  their  camp.  There  fell  on 
that  day  of  the  Spaniards  thirteen  thousand,  and  about  eight 
hundred  were  taken.  Of  the  Romans,  and  their  allies,  little 
more  than  two  hundred  were  killed,  most  of  them  in  the  left 
wing.  The  Spaniards,  who  were  beaten  out  of  the  camp,  or 
who  had  ^scaped  from  the  battle,  at  first  dispersed  about  the 
country,  and  afterwards  returned  to  their  respective  homes. 
They  were  soon  after  summoned  thence  to  an  assembly  by 
Mandonius,  where,  after  complaining  heavily  of  their  losses, 
and  severely  censuring  the  advisers  of  the  war,  they  came 
to  a  resolution,  that  ambassadors  should  be  sent  to  Scipio, 
with  proposals  to  make  surrender  of  themselves.  These  laid 
the  blame  on  Indibilis  and^the  other  chiefs,  most  of  whom 
had  fallen  in  battle,  offering  to  deliver  up  thfeir  arms.  They 
received  for  answer,  that  ‘‘their  surrender  would  be  accepted, 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.54T. 
provided  they  delivered  up  alive  Mandonius  and  the  other 
promoters  of  the  war;  that  if  this  condition  was  not  complied 
with,  the  Romans  would  lead  their  armies  into  the  lands  of 
the  lUegertians  and  Ausetanians  ;  and  afterwards  ipto  those 
of  the  other  states.’*  This  answer  the  ambassador^  carried 
back  to  the  assembly ;  ancL  there  Mandonius  and  the  other 
chiefs  were  seized  and  delivered  up  to  punishment.  Terms 
of  peace  were  then  settled  with  the  states  of  Spain,  who 
were  ordered  to  pay  double  taxes  for  that  year,  and  to  sup¬ 
ply  com  for  six  months,  together  with  cloaks  and  vests  for 
the  army,  hostages  being  received  from  about  thirty  states. 
This  tumultuary  rebellion  in  ISpain  having  been  thus  sup¬ 
pressed,  without  any  great  difficulty,  within  the  space  of  a 
few  days  after  its  commencement,  every  warlike  operation 
was  directed  against  Africa. 
IV.  Caius  Lselius,  having  arrived  in  the  night  at  Hippo 
Royal,  led  out  his  soldiers  and  marines  in  regular  bodies,  at 
the  first  Gght,  in  order  to  ravage  the  country  ;  and,  as  the 
inhabitants  had  taken  no  precautions  more  than  if  it  had 
been  a  time  of  peace,  great  damage  was  done,  and  sfeighted 
messengers  filled  Carthage  with  the  most  violent  ahirms ; 
affirming,  that  the  Roman  fleet  had 'arrived,  and  that  it  was 
commanded  by  Scipio,  of  whose  passing  into  Sicily  they  had 
alrea^  heard.  Nor  could  they  tell,  with  any  degree  of  ex- 
actant,  while  their  fears  aggravated  every  circundsfance^liow 
maby  ships  they  had  seen,  or  what  number  of  men  they  had 
Ismded.  At  first,  therefore,  consternation  and  terror,  after¬ 
wards  melancholy  dejection,  seized  the  people’s  minds,  re- 
fiecring  on  the  reverse  of  fortune  which  had  taken  place,  and 
lamentmg  that  they  who  lately,  flushed  with  success,  had 
their  forces  lying  at  the  gates  of  Rome,  and  after  cutting  off 
so  many  armics^of  the  enemy,  had  made  almost  every  state 
in  Italy  submit  to  them,  either  through  fear  or  choice,  were 
now,  from  the  current  of  success  having  turned  against  them. 

BOOK  XXIX. 

9^ 

b:c.  ao5.] 

to  behold  the  dcvlM^on  of  Africa,  and  the  sie^  <rf  Car¬ 
thage  ;  mid  when  dicy  possess^  not  by  any  means  such  a 
degree  of  strength  as  the  Romans  had  enjoyed  to  support 
them  under  those  calamities.  The  latter  had  received,  from 
the  commonalty  of  Rome,  and  from  'Latiutn,  continually  in¬ 
creasing  supplies  df  yovmg  men  in  the  room  of  so  many  le¬ 
gions  destroyed  :  but  the  citizens  of  Carths^  were  unwar¬ 
like,  and  equally  so  in  the  country.  Auxiliaries,  indeed,  they 
had  procured  for  pay  from  among  the  Africans  j  but  they 
were  a  fmthiess  race,  and  veering  about  with  every  blast  of 
fortune.  Then,  as  to  Ae  kings :  Syphax,  since  his  conference 
with  Scipio,  wsis  app^rendy  estranged  from  them ;  Masinl^ 
had  o]j!ienly  renounc^^  their  alliance,  and  was  become  Aeir 
most  inveterate  enemy  ;  so  that  they  had  no  hope,  no  support 
on  any  side.  Neither  did  Mago  raise  any  commotions  cm  the 
side  of  Gaul,  nor  join  his  forc^  to  Hannibal’s ;  and  Hanni¬ 
bal  himself  was  now  declinii^  both  in  reputation  and 
strength.”  Their  minds,  which,  in  consequence  of  the  late 
news,  had  sunk  into  these  desponding  redections,  were  again 
recaQedy  by  dread  of  Ae  impending  evils,  to  consult  how 
Aey  might  oppose  the  present  dangers.  They  resolved  to 
levy  soldiers  v^iA  aU  haste,  both  in  Ae  city  and  the  country  ; 
to  hire  auxiliaries  from  the  Africans ;  to  strengthen  the 
forts  ;  to  <^llect  com  ;  to  prepare  weapons  and  atmemr 
fit  out  ships,  and  send  Aem  to  Hippo  agmnst  the 
fieet.  While  they  were  thus  employed,  news  at  lengA  ar* 
rived,  that  it  was  Lasiius,  and  not  Scipio,  who  had 
over ;  that  his  forces  were  no  more  than  what  were  sufficient 
to  make  plundering  incursions  ;  and  that  the  main  fume  of 
the  enemy  was  still  in  Sicily.  Thus  they  got  time  to  br^wAc, 
and  began  to  despatch  embassies  to  Syphax  and  the  c^her 
princes,  to  endeavour  to  strengthen  their  alliance.  They 
also  sent  to  Philip,  with  a  promise  of  two  hundred  talents  of 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  54r. 

silver*^  on  ccmditicm  that  he  invaded  Sidly  or  Italy.  Others 
were  sent  to  Italy,  to  their  two  generals  there,  with  orders 
to  use  every  effort  to  raise  the  apprehensions  of  the  enemy, 
so  that  Scipio  might  be  induced  to  return  home.  To  Mago 
they  sent  not  only  deputies,  but  twenty-five  ships  of  war,  six 
thousand  foot,  eight  htindred  horse,  seven  elephants,  and  also 
a  large  sum  of  money  to  hire  auxiliaries,  whose  support  might 
encourage  him  to  advance  his  army  nearer  to  the  city  of 
Rome,  and  effect  a  junction  with  Hannibal.  Such  were  the 
preparations  and  plans  at  Carthage.  Whilst  Lselius  was  em¬ 
ployed  in  carrying  off  immense  booty  from  the  country,  which 
he  found  destitute  of  arms  and  protection,  Masint^a,  roused 
by  the  report  of  the  arrival  of  a  Roman  fleet,  came  to  him 
attended  by  a  few  horsemen.  He  complained,  that  ‘‘  Scipio 
was  dilatory  in  the  business  ;  otherwise  before  that  time  he 
would  have  brought  over  his  army  into  Africa,  while  the 
Carthaginians  were  dismayed,  and  Syphax  engaged  in  wars 
with  his  neighbours.  That  the  latter  was  irresolute  and  un¬ 
determined  ;  and  that  if  time  were  allowed  him  to  settle  his 
own  affairs  as  he  liked,  it  would  be  seen  that  he  had  no  sin¬ 
cere  attachment  to  the  Romans.”  He  desired  him  to  ex¬ 
hort  and  stimulate  Scipio  to  activity  j”  assuring  him,  that 
“  himself,  though  driven  from  his  kingdom,  would  join  him 
with  no  contemptible  force,  both  of  horse  and  foot.”  He 
said,  th^t  Laelius  ought  not  to  make  any  stay  in  Africa : 
that  he  believed  a  fleet  had  sailed  from  Carthage,  which  it 
would  not  be  very  safe  to  encounter  in  the  absence  of  Scipio.” 
After  this  discourse,  Masinissa  departed  ;  and  ^xt  day  Lae- 
lius  set  sail  from  Hippo,  having  his  ships  lad^  with  spoil ; 
and,  returning  to  Sicily,  delivered  Masinissa^s  message  to 
Scipio. 
V.  About  the  same  time,  the  ships  which  had  been  sent 
from  Cm-ths^e  to  Mago,  arrived  on  the  coast  between  the 

38,r50K 

BOOK  XXIX, 

9^ 

B.C.  5tOSJ] 
country  of  the  Albin^unian  Ligurians  and  Genoa^  near 
which  place  the  Carthaginian  impf^ed  at  that  time  to  lie 
with  his  fleet.  On  receiving  from  the  deputies  to  col¬ 
lect  as  great  a  number  of  troops  as  possible,  he  immediate¬ 
ly  held  a  council  of  the  Gauls  and  Ligurimis,  (for  there  was  a 
vast  multitude  of  both  nations  present,)  and  told  them  that  he 
had  been  sent  for  the  purpose  of  restoring  them  to  liberty, 
and,  as  they  themselves  saw,  aid  was  now  afforded  him  from 
home.  But  with  what  force,  with  how  great  an  army  die 
war  was  to  be  carried  on,  was  a  matter  that  depended  entire¬ 
ly  upon  them.  That  there  were  two  Roman  armies,  one  in 
Gaul,  another  in  Etruria ;  and  he  was  well  assured  that 
Spurius  Ludt^tkis  would  join  his  forces  to  those  of  Marcus 
Livius  ;  wherefore  they  on  their  side  must  arm  many  thou¬ 
sands,  to  enable  them  to  oppose  two  Roman  generals  and 
two  armies.”  The  Gauls  answered,  that  “they  had  the 
strongest  inclination  to  act  as  he  advised ;  but  as  they  had 
one  Roman  army  in  the  heart  of  their  country,  and*another 
In  the  next  adjoining  province  of  Etruria,  almost  within  their 
sight,  if  it  should  be  publicly  known  that  they  gave  aid  to 
the  Carthaginians,  those  two  armies  would  immediately  com¬ 
mence  hostilities  against  them  on  both  sides.”  They  request¬ 
ed  him  to  “  demand  such  assistance  only  as  the  Gauls  could 
sup{dy  in  secret.  The  Ligurians,”  they  said,  “  were  at 
liberty  to  determine  as  they  thought  fit,  the  Roman  camps 
being  fair  distant  from  their  lands  and  cities  ;  beside,  it  was 
reasonable  that  they  should  arm  their  youth,  and  take  their 
part  in  the  war.^^  This  the  Ligurians  did  not  decline  ;  they 
only  requited  two  months  time  to  make  their  levies.  Mago, 
having  sent  home  tl^  Gauls,  hired  soldiers  privately  in  thfcir 
country;  provisions  also  of  .all  kinds  were  sent  to  him  se¬ 
cretly  by  their  several  states.  Marcus  Livius  led  his 
of  volunteer  slaves  from  Etruria  into  Gaul,  and  having  JaWedl 

96  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  S47. 
Liicretius,  kept  himself  ia  readmess  to  oppose  Magp,  if  he 
should  move  from  Liguria  towards  die  ci^ ;  intending^  if  the 
Carth^luhm  should  keep  himseR  quiet  under  that  comer  of 
the  Ai^  to  continue  in  the  smne  district,  near  Ariminum, 
for  {i^tection  of  Italy. 
VL  After  Uie  return  of  Caius  La^lius  from  Africa,  although 
Scipio  was  urged  to  expedition  by  the  representations  of  Masi- 
nissa,  and  the  soldiers,  on  seeing  the  spoil  which  landed 
from  the  ships,  were  inflamed  with  a  desire  of  passing  over 
immediately ;  yet  tfos  more  important  business  was  interrupt¬ 
ed  by  one  of  smaller  consideration,  the  recovery  of  Locri  j 
which,  at  the  time  the  general  defection  of  Italy,  had  re¬ 
volted  to  the  Canhaginiaas.  The  hope  of  accomplishing  this 
was  kindled  by  a  very  trifling  circumstmice :  The  operations 
in  BQittium  were  rather  predatory  excursions  than  a  regular 
war  ;  the  Numidians  having  begun  the  practice,  and  the 
Bruttians  readily  joining  in  it,  not  more  from  their  connection 
with  the  Carthaginians,  than  from  their  o^n  natural  disposi¬ 
tion.  At  length  the  Romans  themselves,  by  a  kind  of  conta¬ 
gion,  became  equally  fond  of  plunder ;  and,  when  not  pre¬ 
vented  by  their  oflScers,  made  excursions  into  the  enemy’s 
country.  By  these,  some  Locrensians,  who  had  come  out  of 
the  city,  had  been  surrounded,  and  carried  off  to  Rhegium  ; 
and  among  whom  were  some  artizans,  who  happened  to  have 
been  often  hired  by  the  Carthaginians,  to  work  in  the  citadel 
of  Locri.  They  were  known  by  the  chiefs  of  the  Locrensians, 
who,  having  been  burnished  by  the  opposite  faction  which  had 
given  up  foe  city  to  Hannibal,  had  retired  to  Rhegium.  The 
prisoners,  after  answering  many  of  their  enquiri^  concerning 
affairs  at  home,  gave  them  hopes,  that  if  they  were  ransomed 
and  sent  back,  they  might  be  able  to  put  the  citadel  into  their 
hands ;  teUhig  them  t\tst  they  had  their  residence  in  it,  and 
were  entirely  trusted  by  the  Carthaginians^  In  consequence 
of  this,  the  said  chiefs,  who  anxiously  longed  to  return  to  Lo- 

BOOK  XXIX. 

97 

B.C.  2(H.3 
cri^  ki&imed  at  tht  same  time  with  a  desire  of  revttige^am- 
mech^ly  raisomed  ani^  sent  home  these  men :  luiving  first 
seeded  the  plan  for  the  execution  of  their  project,  with  the 
t^gnals  which  were  to  be  given  and  observed  between  them  at 
a  distance.  '  They  then  went  themselves  to  Sciffio,  to  Syra¬ 
cuse,  wh^  mmp  &{  the  exiles  were,  aikl  informing  him  of 
the  promises  made  by  the  prisoners,  inspired  prc^ble  hopes 
of  success.  '  On  this,  the  consul  despatched  Marcus  &rgius 
and  Publius  M^tienus,  military  tribunes,  (the  exiles  accom¬ 
panying  them,)  with  orders  to  lead  three  thousand  men  from 
Rhegium  to  Locri,  and  for  Qinntus  Pleminius^  propraetor,  to 
give  assistance  in  the  business. '  These  set  out  as  commanded, 
carrying  ocaling  laddem  fitted  to  the  height  of  the  citadel, 
according  to  their  iirfomiation,  and  about  midnight  they  gave 
the  signal  front  the  place  appointed,  to  those  who  were  to 
betray  that  fortress.  These  were  prepared,  and  on  the  watch  ; 
and,  lettii^  down  from  dlei^^side,  machines  made  for  the 
purpose,  received  the  Romans  as  they  climbed  up  in  several 
places  at  once.  They  then  fell  on  the  Carthaginian  Centinels, 
who,  not  apprehending  any  danger,  were"  fast  adeep  j  their 
dying  groans  were  the  first  sound  hei^d.  .  A  sudden  conster¬ 
nation  followed  as  the  remainder  awa¥e,  with  a  general  con¬ 
fusion  from  being  wholly  ignorant  of  the  cause  of  alarm.  At 
length,  the  greater  part  of  them^bcing  roused  from  sleep,  the 
truth  was  discovered.  And  no^  every  one  called  loudly  to 
arms  ;  that  the  enemy  Were  in  the  dtadel ;  that  the  centinels 
were  slain.  The  Romans  being  much  inferior  in  number, 
would  certainly  have  been  overpowered,  had  imt  a  shout,  rais¬ 
ed  by  those  who  were  at  the  outside  of  tfaexitadd,  prevemed 
the  garrison  from  discerning  on  what  side  danger  threat¬ 
ened,  while  the  darkness  of  the  night  aggravated  every  fear. 
The  Carthaginians,  supposing  that  tlte  citadel  had  been  sur¬ 
prised  and  taken,  wrdKHit  att^pting  a  contest,  fled  to  another 
fortress  not  far  dismnt  from  this.  'Fhe  inhabitants  held  the 
VOL.  IV. - O 

98  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  547. 
city  which  lay  b^fween  these  strong  hcdds,  as  a  prize  fat  the 
conquerors,  slight  engagements  happening  every  day.  Quin¬ 
tus  Heminius  commanded  the  Roman,  Hamilcar  the  Cartha- 
^nian  garrison,  both  of  whom  increased  thek  forces  daily,  by 
calling  in  aid  from  the  neighboring  places.  At  length  Han¬ 
nibal  prepared  to  come  thither,  so  that  the  Romans  could  not 
have  kept  their  ground,  had  not  the  principal  part  of  the  Lo- 
crensians,  exasperated  by  the  pride  and  avarice  of  the  Car¬ 
thaginians,  inclined  to  their  side. 
VII.  As  soon  as  Scipio  was  informed  that  the  danger 
increased  at  Locri,  and  that  Hannibal  was  approaching, 
began  to  fear,  lest  even  the  garrison  might  be  endangered,  as 
it  was  not  easy  to  retreat  from  it ;  he  therefore  left  the  com¬ 
mand  at  Messana  to  his  brother,  Lucius  Scipio,  and  going  on 
board  as  soon  as  the  tide  turned,  he  let  his  ships  drive  with 
the  current.  On  the  other  hand,  Hannibal  sent  feuward 
directimis  from  the  river  Aleccs,  which  is  not  far  from  Locri, 
that  his  party,  at  dawn  of  day,  should  attack  the  Romans  and 
Locrensians  with  their  whole  force  ;  in  order  that,  while  the 
attention  of  all  should  be  turned  to  the  tumult  occasioned 
thereby,  he  might  make  an  Unexpected  assault  on  the  oppo¬ 
site  side  of  the  city.  When,  at  the  first  appearance  of  day¬ 
light,  he  fohnd  that  the  battle  was  begun,  he  did  not  choose 
to  attempt  the  citadel,  in  which  there  was  not  room,  had  he 
even  gsdned  it,  for  such  numbers  to  act,  nor  had  he  brought 
ladders  to  effect  a  scalade.  Orderii^,  therefore,  the  baggage 
to  be  thrown  t^pether  ih  a  heap,  he  drew  up  his  army  at  a 
little  distance  from  the  w?ils,  to  terrify  the  enemy  ;  and  while 
all  things  necessary  fo^  the  assault  were  getting  ready,  he  rode 
round  the  city  with  some  Numidian  horsemen  to  find  outtbe 
properest  place  at  which  it  might  be  made.  As  he  advanced 
near  the  rampart,  the  ^rson  next  to  him  happening  to  Ik 
struck  by  a  dart  from  a  scorpion,  be  was  ^ terrified  at  the 
danger  to  which  be  had  been  exposed,  that  he  cffdcfed  a  re- 

BOOK  XXIX. 

99 

B.C.  205.] 
treat  to  be  souoded,  and  fortified  his  camp  far  bey^ond  the 
reach  of  a  weapon.  The  Roman  fleet  arrived  from  Messana 
at  Locri,  while  some  hpurs  of  day  remained,  so  that  the 
troops  were  aU  landed  and  brought  into  the  city  before  sun¬ 
set.  Next  day,  the  Carthaginians,  from  the  citadel,  began 
the  fight.  Hannibal,  now  furnished  widi  scaling  ladders,  and 
every  thing  proper  for  an  assault,  was  coming  up  to  the 
walls,  when,  on  a  sudden,  a  gate  flying  open,  the  Romans 
rushed  out  upon  him,  when  he  apprehended  nothing  less  than 
such  an  encounter,  and,  as  the  attack  was  unexpected,  two 
hundred  of  his  men  were  slain.  The  rest  Hannibal  carried 
back  to  the  camp,  as  soon  as  he  understood  that  the  consul 
was  there  in  person  ;  and  sending  directions  to  those  who 
were  in  the  lesser  citadel,  to  take  care  of  themselves,  he  de¬ 
camped  by  night. ^  On  which,  setting  fire  to  the  houses  there, 
in  order  to  obstruct  any  operations  of  the  enemy,  they  has¬ 
tened  away,  as  if  flying  from  a  pursuit,  and  overtook  the 
main  body  of  their  army  at  the  close  of  day. 
VIII.  When  Scipio  saw  both  citadel  and  camp  deserted  by 
the  enemy,  he  summoned  the  Locrensians  to  an  assembly, 
rebuked  them  severely  for  their  revolt,  inflicted  punishment 
on  the  chief  promoters  of  it,  and  bestowed  their  effects  on  the 
leaders  of  the  opposite  faction,  as  a  reward  for  their  extraor¬ 
dinary  fidelity  towards  the  Romans.  As  to  the  community 
of  the  Locrensians,  he  said,  he  would  neither  make  any 
grant  to  them,  nor  take  any  thing  from  them.  Let  them  send 
ambassadors  to  Rome,  where  they  would  obtam  such  a  settle¬ 
ment  of  their  affairs  as  the  senate  should  judge  reasonable. 
Of  this  he  was  confident,  that,  though  they  had  deserved 
harsh  treatment  from  the  greatly  provoked  Romans,  they 
would  yet  enjoy  a  better  state  in  subjection  to  them  than  un¬ 
der  their  professed  friends  the  Carthaginians.’’  Theb,  leav¬ 
ing  Quintus  Pleminius,  lieutenant-general,  with  the  troops 
which  had  taken  the  citadel,  to  defend  the  city,  he  returned 

100 

HISTORY  OF  ROME- 

[Y.R.  647. 

to  Messana  with  the  forces  which  he  had  brought  from 
thence.  The  Locrensians,  after  their  revolt  from  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  had  been  treated  by  the  Carthaginians  with  such 
haughtiness  and  cruelty,  that  they  could  now  have  endured 
a  lesser  degree  of  severity  not  only  with  patience,  but  almost 
with  content.  But  in  all  excesses,  so  much  did  Pleminius 
surpass  Hamilcar,  who  had  commanded  their  garrison,  and 
the  Roman  soldiers  the  Carthaginians,  that  there  seemed  to 
be  a  greater  emulation  between  them  in  vices  than  in  arms. 
Not  one  of  those  acts,  which  render  the  power  of  a  superior 
odious  to  the  helpless,  was  left  unpractised  on  the  inhabitants 
by  the  commander  or  his  troops  :  the  most  shocking  insults 
were  offered  to  their  persons,  to  their  children,  and  to  their 
wives.  Nor  did  their  avarice  refrain  even  from  the  plunder¬ 
ing  of  things  sacred ;  insomuch,  that  not  .only  the  temples 
^cre  violated,  but  even  the  treasure  of  Proserpine  was 
seized,  which  through  all  ages  had  remained  untouched,  ex¬ 
cept  by  Pyrrhus^  who  made  restitution  of  the  spoil,  together 
with  a  large  atonement  for  his  sacrilege.  Therefore,  as  at 
that  time  the  King’s  ships,  after  being  wrecked  and  shattered, 
had  brought  nothing  safe  to  land,  except  the  sacred  money 
of  the  goddess,  so  now,  that*same  money,  by  a  different  kind 
of  vengeance,  inspired  with  madness  all  those  who  were  pol¬ 
luted  by  the  robbery  of  the  temple,  and  turned  them  against 
each  other  with  hostile  fury,  general  against  general,  soldier 
against  soldier. 
IX.  Plcmiiaus  was  governor  in  chief ;  that  part  of  the  sol¬ 
diers  which  tic  had  brought  with  him  from  Rhegium  were 
under  his  own  immediate  command  ;  the  rest  under  military 
tribunes.  These  tribunes,  Sergius  and  Matienus,  happened 
to  meet  one  of  Pleminius’s  soldiers  running  away  with  a  sil¬ 
ver  cup,  which  he  had  taken  by  force  out  of  the  house  of  a 
citizen,  the  owners  pursuing  him  :  on  the  cup  being  taken 
from  him,  by  order  of  the  tribunes,  at  first  ill  language  wa^^ 

BOOK  XXIX. 

101 

B.C.  205.] 
used,  then  ensued  clamour ;  and  at  length  a  scuffle  between 
the  soldiers  of  Pleminius  and  those  of  the  tribunes.  The  dis¬ 
turbance  increasing,  as  any  happened  to  come  up  to  assist 
their  party,  Pleminius’s  men,  being  worsted,  ran  to  him  in 
crowds,  showing  their  blood  and  wounds,  with  violent  out¬ 
cries  and  expressions  of  resentment,  and  recounting  the  re¬ 
proaches  that  had  been  thrown  on  himself ;  which  so  inflamed 
him,  that,  rushing  out  of  his  house,  and  calling  the  tribunes 
before  him,  he  ordered  them  to  be  stripped,  and  the  rods  to 
be  prepared.  A«  some  time  was  spent  in  stripping  them,  (for 
they  made  resistance,  and  implored  aid,)  on  a  sudden  their 
own  soldiers,  rendered  bold  by  their  late  success,  ran  together 
from  all  parts,  as  if  they  had  been  called  to  arms  against  an 
enemy.  On  seeing  the  persons  of  the  tribunes  already  in¬ 
jured  by  the  rods,  they  were  suddenly  seized  with  such  un¬ 
governable  rage,  that  without  regard  either  to  his  dignity,  or 
even  to  humanity,  after  having  cruelly  abused  his  lictors,  they 
assaulted  the  general  himself ;  and  having  surrounded  and  se¬ 
parated  him  from  his  party,  they  dreadfully  mangled  him,  cut- 
ing  off  his  nose  and  ears,  and  leaving  him  almost  without  life. 
Accounts  of  these  transactions  being  carried  to  Messana,  Sci- 
pio,  a  few  days  after,  sailed  over  to  Locri  in  a  ship  of  six 
banks  of  oars :  and  having  brought  Pleminius  and  the  tri¬ 
bunes,  to  trial  before  him,  he  acquitted  Pleminius,  and  con¬ 
tinued  him  in  the  command  of  the  place  ;  adjudged  the  tri¬ 
bunes  guilty,  and  threw  them  into  chains,  that  they  might  be 
sent  to  Rome  to  the  senate  :  he  then  returned  to  Messana, 
and  went  from  thence  to  Syracuse.  Pleminius,  giving  a 
loose  to  his  rage,  because  he  thought  that  the  injury  done 
him  had  been  treated  too  lightly  by  Scipio,  and  that  no  other 
person  was  qualified  to  rate  the  penalty  in  such  a  case  but  he 
who  had  suffered  the  wrong,  ordered  the  tribunes  to  be  drag¬ 
ged  before  him.  After  having  made  them  undergo  the  ut¬ 
most  degree  of  torture  which  the  human  body  is  capable  of 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R. 

t(^ 
enduring,  he  put  them  to  death ;  and  not  satisfied  with  the 
punishment  thus  inflicted,  he  ^ast  them  out  without  burial. 
The  like  cruelty  he  used  towards  the  chiefs  ot  the  Locren- 
sians,  who,  as  he  heard,  had  complained  to  Scipio  of  the 
treatment  they  had  received,  at  his  hands.  But  the  extreme 
severities  which  he  had  formerly  practised  on  those  allies 
through  lust  and  avarice,  he  now  multiplied  through  rage  and 
resentment,  bringing  infamy  and  detestation  not  only  an  him¬ 
self,  but  on  the  general  also. 
X.  The  time  of  the  elections  was  now  drawing  near,  when  a 
letter  was  brought  to  Rome  from  Publius  Licinius  the  consul, 
staUng,  that  he  and  his  army  were  afflicted  with  a  grievous 
sickness,  and  that  they  could  not  have  stood  their  ground, 
had  not  the  disorder  attacked  the  enemy  with  the  same,  or 
even  greater^  violence.  As  therefore  he  could  not  come  to 
the  elections,  he  would,  if  the  Fathers  approved  of  it,  nomi¬ 
nate  Quintus  Caecilius  Metellus,  dictator,  for  the  purpose  of 
holding  them.  That  it  was  for  the  interest  of  the  state,  that 
the  army  of  Quintus  Caecilius  should  be  disbanded,  as  it  could 
be  of  no  use  at  present.  Hannibal  having  already  retired  in¬ 
to,  winter-quauters  i  nnd  besides,  so  powerful  was  the  distem¬ 
per  in  that  camp,  that  unless  they  were  speedily  separated, 
not  one  of  diem  probably  would  survive.”  The  senate  left 
it  with  the  consul  to  determine  concerning  those  matters,  in 
such  manner  as  he  should  judge  best  for  the  good  of  the  na¬ 
tion,  and  his  own  honour.  The  city  was  at  that  time  sud¬ 
denly  engagedi  in  a  consideration  respecting  religion.  Fre¬ 
quent  showers  of  stones  having  fallen,  the  Sibylline  books 
were  on  that  occasion  inspected  ;  in  which  were  found  cer¬ 
tain  verses,  importing,  that  “  whensoever  a  foreign  enemy 
shall  have  carried  war  into  the  land  of  Italy,  he  may  be  ex¬ 
pelled  and  conquered,  if  the  Idaean  Mother  be  brought  from 
Pessinus  to  Rome.”  These  verses,  discovered  by  the  decem¬ 
virs,  affected  the  senate  the  more,  because  the  ambassadors 

BOOK  XXfX.* 

who  had  carr^  <(^ering  ^  Delphi,  aiflli^ed  ziso^  that 
they  hwi  perfomed^  sacriice^  md  eonaalted  the  Fj^ian 
Apollo  ;  md  diat  ^  oracle  hml  amwered,  that  the  Rotnam 
would^^ocai  ohtaift  a  much  grea^  victory  that  wht^ 
gave  dlcm  spdite^  of  which  their  dF^iug  was  compemed. 
They  €onsida:ed  asra^mifirmatioii  Of  the  same,  diat  Scipio’s 
mind  was  iaipl^d^as  it  were,  by  st^  presages  of  an  end 
to^he  war,  when  .be  had  sO  earnestly  insisted  %n  having  Af¬ 
rica  for  h^piiovinee;  In  order,  therefore,  djat  they  ihi^t 
the  sooa^m^lwthe  enjoyment  of  this  ^iumph,  portended 
to  diem  the&^^  ^eOs,  and  oracles,  they  set  about  con- 
sidefiag^h<^  Ae  goddess  mi^t  be  transported  to  Rome. 
':XL\^E^  R^ahs^ were  Holt  in  sdltance  with  any  of  Ae 
states  of  Afia.  However,  recoBecthtg  that  iEsculapitis  had 
fotaWerlyf  on  of  a  pes$ileii<a;,  been  brought  from 
Greece  befote  any  connexion  wt A  Aat  comitry;  Aat  A^ 
•had  ^^dy  comaaem^  a  friendship  wiA  K*mg  Atmltis,  on 
ae^MsOt  df  tl^r  being  Aliped  In  the  war  a^inst  Philip,  and 
that  he  wtmM  'do  any  thing  in  his  power  to  oblige 
the  R<Mm  pcofde/A^  came  to  a  resohxtibn  of  sending  as 
asibHaiM^dcs  to  Kim,  Marcus  Vrierius  Lsevinus,  who  had 
been  twice  coc»u!,  and  bad  commanded  in  Greece  ;  Marcus 
Cseciifus  Metellus,  who  had  been  pmtor ;  Servius  Sulpicius 
Cialba,  who  bad^'been  sedlle ;  and  two  who  had  been  quaes- 
t<W8,  Caius  Tfemellius  Fkccus  and  Marcus  Valerius  Falto. 
A  convoy  of  five  qukiqueremes  was  ordered  for  them,  that 
they  might  apf^ar  with  suitable  grandeur  in  those  countries 
where  Aey  wiAed  A  procure  a  respect  for  the  Roman  name. 
The  atid^ss^ors  ih' their  way  to  Asia,  having  landed  and 
gone  to  Sel^i  to  the  oracle,  enquired  what  hopes  might  be 
entertained  jcrf*  accomplishing  the  business  on  which  they  had 
been  sem :  they  were  amiWered",  it  is  said,  that  ^‘\hey  wduld 
cAmin  what  Aey  were  in  search  of  by  mentis  of  King  At- 
tahis  ;  and  Aat,  when  they  should  have  carried  the  Goddess 

HISTORY  Of  Dr.%  m. 
to  Home^  ime^  tiif?  iii!l^c% 
was  the  eatercber^f  the 
Oa  comiag  to  Ae  Kkrg  at 
ly,  coadacfeed  Aeta  A  Pes^^maiii  Pbi^yg^atdelivmd  to  them 
the  sacred  steme^  whi A  Ao  imdves  #as  Ac  moAer  of 
the  gods^  and  desired  Am  A  Marcus 
V^erius  Falto,  being  s^t  homeward  befc^  AcT^^ 
am  account  thflU  Aey  were  tctwaJag.^idi,  A?  g^Hldess  j  and 
that^  the  best  Imm  in  mhst  be  semj^t  piy  her 
the  due  rites  of  hosf5<Aty.  €luhstus^Csetffids«Wii3iib"’wii^ 
by  Ac  consul  ia  Bruttiumy 
pose  of  holding  the  elet^pns,  ai^ddds^i^y  srA  dhia^^^ 
Lucias  Vetarius  Ph8o  was  inade  masler  of  tfife  hotsc;  The 
elections  were  held  by  the  dtct?rfbt;‘^^^cohsaIil  ’€tectc^ 
Marcus  Cornelius  Cethegus  ml  PuhMus  SftAptWias  Tudi^ 
tanus,  the  hitter  ptisent,  ^ing  mptey«^  ^  W  Ae'  jrrwipbe  ^  • 
Greece.  The  praArs  were  Acn  elected  i  TSberktrt^adius* 
Nero,  Marcus  Marcias  RsAa,  Uho/ Ad 
Marcus  Poittporuus  Matho*  AssoA'  sis  Ae  cbctidhs  wttt 
finished,  the  dictator  resigned  Ais  0%e. 
were  repeated  Aricc,  Ae  plebeian tidies,  ^"^c  'ciiilde 
sediles  were  Cneius  and  Lucius  CoAeliu^  t^enAlus  j  ^^ciib 
held  the  province  of  Spain,  and  being  etectfed  whife  thclUB, 
continued  absent  during  the  whole  time  of 
berius  Claudius  Asellus  and  Marcus  JuniUs  ^eimus  were 
plebei^  seAles.  In  that  year  Marcus  Marcellos  dedicated 
the  temple  of  Virtue,  at  the  Capuan  gate,  seVent^e^  years 
after  it  had  been  vowed  by  his  father  at  Cb^idiiun  A  QaUl, 
during  his  0rst  consulate.  Marcus  ^milius  flameh 
of  M^S,  died  that  year.  *  ,  /  . 
XII.  Durbg  the  two  la^  years,  the  affairs  iif  Greece 'had 
been  neglected: 'a  circumstance  which  enaMed  Philip  to  re-^- 
duce  Ae  iE  toll  As,  thus  forsakeh  byitbe  Romans,  on  whose 
aid  alone  they  relied.  They  were  therefore  lAliged  to  sue 

BOOK  XXIX. 

105 

B.C.  205.J 
for,  and  agree  to  a  peace  on  such  terms  as  the  King  should 
impose ;  but  had  he  not  used  every  effort  to  hasten  the  con¬ 
clusion  of  it,  Publius  Sempronius,  pi*oconsul,  who  succeeded 
Sulpicius  in  the  command,  would  have  fallen  upon  him  (while 
engaged  in  settling  the  treaty)  with  ten  thousand  foot,  one 
thousand  horse,  and  thirty-five  ships  of  war  ;  no  small  force 
in  support  of  an  ally.  The  peace  was  scarcely  concluded, 
when  news  was  brought  to  Philip  that  the  Romans  had  come 
to  Dyrrachium  ;  that  the  Parthinians,  and  other  neighbourr 
ing  nations,  seeing  a  prospect  of  changing  their  situation, 
were  in  motion,  and  that  Dimallum  was  besieged.  The  Ro¬ 
mans  had  turned  their  operations  to  that  side,  instead  of 
going  forward  to  the  assistance  of  the  iEtolians,  whither  they 
Iiad  been  sent,  provoked  at  the  peace  thus  made  with  the 
King  without  their  concurrence,  and  contrary  to  the  treaty. 
On  the  receipt  of  this  news,  Philip,  fearing  lest  some  greater 
commotions  might  arise  among  the  neighbouring  nations  and 
states,  proceeded  by  long  marches  to  Apollonia,  to  which 
place  Sempronius  had  retired,  after  sending  his  lieutenant- 
general,  Laetorius,  with  part  of  the  forces  and  fifteen  ships, 
to  ^tolia,  that  he  might  take  a  view  of  the  situation  of  af¬ 
fairs,  and,  if  possible,  annihilate  the  compact  of  that  people 
with  the  Macedonian.  Philip  laid  waste  the  lands  of  the 
Apollonians,  and,  marching  his  forces  up  to  the  city,  offered 
the  Ramans  battle  ;  they,  however,  remained  quiet,  only  de¬ 
fending  the  walls,  while  his  force  was  insufficient  for  laying 
siege  to  the  place.  He  was  yet  desirous  of  concluding  a 
peace  with  the  Romans,  as  with  the  iEtolians ;  or,  if  that 
could  not  be  accomplished,  of  obtaining  a  truce ;  and,  not 
choosing  to  provoke  their  resentment  farther  by  a  new  con¬ 
test,  he  withdrew  into  his  own  kingdom.  At  the  same  time 
the  Epirots,  wearied  by  the  length  of  the  war,  having  first 
tried  the  disposition  of  the  Romans,  sent  ambassadors  to 
VOL.  IV. — P  * 

106 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  547. 

Philip  concerning  a  general  peace  ;  affirming  that  they  were 
very  confident  it  might  be  brought  about,  if  he  would,  come 
to  a  conference  with  Publius  Sempronius,  the  Roman  gene¬ 
ral.  They  easily  prevailed  on  him  to  pass  into  Epirus,  foi* 
the  King  himself  was  not  averse  from  the  measure.  There 
is  a  city  in  Epirus  called  Phcenice;  there  Philip,  having  con¬ 
ferred  with  Eropus,  and  Dardas,  and  Philip,  prsetors  of  the 
Epirots,  had  afterwards  a  meeting  with  Publius  Sempronius. 
Amynander  also,  King  of  the  Athamanians,  was  present  at 
the  conference,  together  with  other  magistrates  of  the  Epi¬ 
rots  and  Acarnanians.  Philip  the  prsetor  spoke  first,  and 
entreated  both  the  King  and  the  Roman  general  to  put  an 
end  to  hostilities  ;  and  to  consider,  in  a  favourable  light,  the 
liberty  which  the  Epirots  took  in  mediating  between  them. 
Publius  Sempronius  dictated  the  terms  of  peace  ; — ^That  the 
Parthinians,  and  Dimallum,  and  Bargulum,  and  Eugenium, 
should  be  under  the  dominion  of  the  Romans  ;  that  Atinta- 
nia  should  be  ceded  to  the  Macedonian,  if,  on  sending  am¬ 
bassadors,  he  should  obtain  it  from  the  senate.  Peace  being 
agreed  to  on  these  terms,  the  King  included  in  the  treaty 
Prusias  King  of  Bithynia,  the  Achseans,  Bceotians,  Thessa¬ 
lians,  Acarnanians,  and  Epirots.  On  the  side  of  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  were  included  the  Ilians,  King  Attains,  Pleuratus^ 
Nabis,  tyrant  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  the  Eleans,  Messeni- 
ans,  and  Athenians*  The  conditions  were  committed  to 
writing,  and  signed  by  both  parties,  a  truce  being  made  for 
two  months,  to  allow  time  for  ambassadors  to  be  sent  to 
Rome,  in  order  that  the  people  might  ratify  the  whole. 
Every  one  of  the  tribes  assented  to  it,  because,  having  turn¬ 
ed  their  efforts  against  Africa,  they  wished  to  be  eased  for 
the  present  from  every  other  enemy.  When  all  was  settled, 
Publius  Sempronius  went  home  to  Rome,  to  attend  to  the  du^ 
ties  of  his  consulship. 

B.C.  204.] 

BOOK  XXIX. 

107 

XIIL  In  the  consulate  of  Marcus  Cornelius  and  Publius 
Sempronius,  which  was  the  fifteenth  year  of  the 
Punic  war,  the  provinces  were  thus  decreed  : — to  ^ 
Cornelius,  Etruria,  with  the  old  army  ;  to  Sem^o- 
nius,  Bruttium,  with  power  to  levy  new  legions.  Of  the  prae¬ 
tors,  to  Marcus  Marcius  fell  the  city  jurisdiction  ;  to  Lucius 
Scribonius  Li  bo,  the  foreign,  and  to  the  same  person,  Gaul ; 
to  Marcus  Pomponius  Matho,  Sicily  ;  and  to  Tiberius  Clau¬ 
dius  Nero,  Sardinia.  Publius  Scipio’s  command  was  pro¬ 
longed  for  a  year,  with  the  same  army  and  the  same  fleet  he 
then  had:  as  was  also  that  of  Publius  Licinius,  who  was  or¬ 
dered  to  hold  Bruttium,  with  two  legions,  as  long  as  the  con¬ 
sul  should  judge  it  to  be  for  the  interest  of  the  state  that  he 
should  continue  in  that  province.^  Marcus  Livius,  and  Spu- 
rius  Lucretius,  also  held  oq  their  commissions,  v/ith  the  two 
legions  with  which  they  had  protected  Gaul  against  Mago  ; 
and  likewise  Cneius  Octavius,  who,  after  delivering  up  Sar¬ 
dinia  and  the  legion  tp  Tiberius  Claudius,  was,  with  forty 
ships  of  war,  to  defend  the  sea-coast,  within  such  limits  as 
the  senate  should  appoint.  To  Marcus  Pomponius,  praetor 
in  Sicily,  two  legions  of  the  forces  that  had  been  at  Cannae 
were  decreed  ;  and  it  was  ordered  that,  of  the  propraetors 
Titus  Quintius  and  Caius  llostilius  Tubulus),  the  former 
should  hold  Tarentum,  the  latter  Capua,  as  in  the  former 
year,  each  with  the  old  garrison.  With  respect  to  Spain,  it 
was  referred  to  the  people  to  determine  cm  the  two  procon¬ 
suls  who  should  be  sent  thither  ;  when  all  the  tribes  agreed 
in  ordering  Lucius  Cornelius  Lentulus,  and  Lucius  Manlius 
Acidinus,  in  quality  of  proconsuls,  to  hold  the  command  of 
that  province  in  the  same  m^ner  as  they  had  held  it  the  year 
before.  The  consuls  gave  directions  for  a  levy  of  soldiers, 
out  of  whom  they  might  at  once  form  the  new  legions  for 
Bruttium,  and  fill  up  the  numbers  of  the  other  armies  ;  for 
such  were  the  orders  of  the  senate. 

108 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.548. 

XIV.  Africa  had  not  yfet  been  publicly  declared  a  pro¬ 
vince, — ^the  senate,  I  suppose^  keeping  the  matter  secret,  lest 
the  Carthaginians  should  ^et  intelligence  of  it.  The  city, 
however,  was  filled  with  sanguine  hopes  that  a  decisive  blow 
would  soon  be  struck  cm  that  shore,  and  that  there  would  be 
an  end  to  the  Punic  war.  From  this  cause  arose  abundance 
of  superstitious  notions  $  and  the  minds  of  the  people  be¬ 
came  disposed  both  to  believe  and  to  propagate  accounts  of 
prodigies,  of  which  a  very  great  number  were  reported : 
that  two  suns  had  been  seen,  and  that  in  the  night-time 
light  had  suddenly  appeared  :  that,  at  Setia,  a  blaze  like  that 
of  a  torch  had  been  observed,  extending  from  east  to  west : 
that,  at  Tarracina,  a  gate,  and,  at  Anagnia,  both  a  gate,  and 
several  parts  of  the  wall,  had  been  struck  by  lightning :  that  in 
the  temple  of  Juno  Sospita,  at  Lanuvium,  a  great  noise  had 
been  heard,  succeeded  by  a  dreadful  crash.”  For  the  expiation 
of  these  there  was  a  supplication  of  one  day’s  continuance  ; 
and  nine  days  were  set  apart  for  religious  offices,'  on  account 
of  a  shower  of  stones  that  had  fallen.  In  addition  to  these 
matters,  they  had  to  consult  on  the  reception  to  be  given  to 
the  Idaean  Mother.  For,  besides  the  account  brought  by 
Marcus  Valerius,  (one  of  the  ambassadors,  who  had  come 
before  the  rest,)  that  the  goddess  would  soon  be  in  Italy,  a 
late  account  had  been  received,  that  she  was  at  Tarracina. 
The  senate  also  was  engaged  in  the  decision  of  a  question  of 
no  trifling  importance, — who  was  th6  best  man  in  the  city. 
A  well-grounded  preference  in  that  point,  every  one  would 
certainly  value,  much  more  highly  than  any  honours  which 
could  be  conferred  by  the  votes  either  of  the  senate  or  the 
people.  They  gave  their  judgment,  that  Publius  Scipio, 
son  of  Cneius  who  had  fallen  in  Spain,  (a  youth  who  had  not 
yet  attained  a  cfuaestorship,)  was  the  best  of  all  the  good  men 
in  Rome.  If  the  authors  who  wrote  in  the  times  nearest  to 
this  transaction,  and  when  the  memory  of  it  was  fresh,  had 

BOOK  XXIX. 

109 

B.C.204.] 
mentioned  the  garticular  merits  which  induced  them  to  make 
this  determination,  I  should  gladly  have  handed  down  tihe 
information  to  posterity ;  but  I  will  not  obtrude  any  opinion 
of  my  own,  formed,  as  it  must  be,  on  conjecture,  when  re¬ 
lative  to  a  matter  buried  in  thec^curity  of  remote  antiquity. 
Publius  Cornelius  was  accordingly  ordered  to  to  Os¬ 
tia,  to  meet  the  goddess,  attended  by  ril  the  maUons  ;  to  re¬ 
ceive  her  himself  from  the  ship,  and  then  to  deliver  her  to 
the  said  matrems,  to  be  transported  to  the  city.  Scipio,  fal¬ 
ling  down  the  river  Tiber,  as  had  been  ordered,  received  the 
goddess  from  the  priests,  and  "conveyed  her  to  the  land.  She 
was  there  received  by  the  above-mentioned  women,  and  who 
were  the  principal  of  the  city,  among  whom  the  name  of 
Claudia  Quinta  alone  has  been  distinguished  ;  for  her  charac¬ 
ter,  as  is  said,  having  at  one  time  been  dubious,  the  share 
which  she  had  in  this  solemn  act  of  religion  rendered  her 
chastity  no  longer  questionable^  and  she  became  illustri¬ 
ous  among  posterity.  These,  relieving  each  other  in  suc- 
cessitm,  carried  this  saving  divinity  into  the  temple  of  Vic¬ 
tory,  on  the  Palatine  ^hill,  wiiilst  all  the  city  poured  out  to 
meet  her,  censers  being  placed  before  the  dock's,  wherever 
the  procession  passed,  and  incense  burned  in  them  ;  all  pray¬ 
ing  that  she  would  enter  the  city  with  good  will,  and  a  fa¬ 
vourable  disposition.  This  happened  on  the  day  preceding 
the  ides  of  April ;  and  which  was  appointed  a  festival.  Xhe 
people  in  crowds  carried  presents  to  the  goddess,  and  there 
was  a  religious  feast  ordained,  with  games  called  Megale- 
sian. 
XV.  When  they  came  to  consider  of  the  supplies  for  the 
legions  that  were  in  the  provinces,  it  was  suggested  by  , cer¬ 
tain  of  the  senators,  that  there  were  some  things,  which,  how¬ 
ever  they  might  have  been  tolerated  in  times  of  distress, 
ought  not  to  be  any  longer  endured  ;  since,  by  the  favour  of 
the  gods,  they  had  been  delivered  from  the  apprehension  of 

110 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  548, 

(iangen  The  attention  of  fathers  being  roused,  they  pro¬ 
ceeded  to  mention,  that, the  twelve  Latine  cronies,  wluch 
had  refused  a  supply  of  soldiers  to  Quintus  Fabii^,  ami 
Quintus  Fulvius,,when  consul^,  enjoyed  now,  for  almost  the 
sixth  year,  an  immunity  from  serving  in  war  ;  as  if  it  had 
been  a  privilege  granted  to  dp  them-  honour,  and  on  accoimt 
of  their  ^od  conduct,  while  the  worthy  and  dutiful  allies,  in 
return  for  their  fidelity  and  obedience,  had  heen  esdiausted 
by  continual  levies  through  the  course  of  many  years.  These 
words  at  .  once  recalled  to  the  recollection  of  the  senate,  a 
matter  which  had  been^lmostforgotten,  and  at  the  same  time 
roused  their  resentment ;  so  that,  before  they  suffered  the 
consuls  to  proceed  on  any  other  business,  they  decreed,  that 
the  consuls  should  summon  to  Rome  the^magistrates,  and 
ten  principal  inhabitants  from  each  of  the  following  colonies, 
so  privileged ;  Nepete,  Sutrium,  Ardaea,^  Gales,  Alba,  Car- 
seoii,  Sara,  Suessa,  Setia,  Circsea,  Narnia,  and  Interamna  ; 
and  should  give  them  orders,  that  whatever  was  the  greatest 
number  of  soldiers, '  which  they  had  separately  furnished  to 
the  Roman  people,*  at.  any  tim>€,.  since  the  enemy  came  into 
Italy,  they  should  now  provide  to  the  amount  of  twice  that 
number  of  footmen,  and  one  hundred  and  twenty  horsemen  ; 
and  if  any  of  them-  were  unable  to  produce  so  many  horse¬ 
men,  that  then  they  should  be  allowed  to  bring  three  foot¬ 
men,  instead  of  each  horseman.  That  both  horsemen  and 
footmen  should  be  chosen  from  amon^  the  wealthiest  orders, 
and  should  be  sent  wherever  there  was  occasion  for  a  supply 
out  of  Italy.  That  if  any  of  them  should  refuse  to  comply 
with  this^  requisition,  it  was  their  pleasure,  that  the  magis¬ 
trates  and  deputi^  of  that  colony  should  be  detained  ;  and 
if  they  demanded  an  audience  of  the  senate,  that  it  should 
not  be  granted  them,  until  they  had  obeyed  those  injunctions  ; 
and  farther,  that  an  annual  tax^f  one  as  on  every  thousand 
which  they  possess^,  should  be  imposed  on  them.  That  a 

BOOK  XXIX. 

in 

BX. 
survey  of  persons  ^kd  est^s  should  be  made  in  ^ose  cdb*^ 
nks,  aca)rding  to  a  regulation  of  Roman  censoi^  wiucli 
^ould  be  the  same  that  was  directed  for  the  Roman  people^ 
and  a  leturn  of  diis  made  at.  Rome  by  the  censors  of  the  smd 
colonies  on  their  oaths,  and  before  they  went  out  of  office.” 
The  magistrates  ^d  principal  inhabitants  of  the  places  in 
question  being  summoned  to  Rome,  in  pursuance  of  this  de¬ 
cree  of  the  senate,  and  receiving  the  commands  of  the  con¬ 
suls  respecting  the  soldiers  and  the  tax,  they  all  declared 
violently  against  them,  exclaiming,  that  it  was  impc^sible 
for  them  to  raise  such  a  number  of  soldiers  ;  that  they  could 
scarcely  accerftoplish  it  ^f  their  whole  property  were  to  be 
estreated  by  the  regulation.  Tliey  begged  and  entreated  that 
they  might  be  allowed  to  appear  before  the,  senate,  and  im¬ 
plore  a  mitigation  of  their^  sentence.  They  had  been  guilty 
of  no  crime,  that  deserved  to  be  punished  by  their  ruin  ;  but, 
even  if  diey  were  to  be  ruined,  neither  their  own  guilt,  nor 
the  resentment  of  the  Roman  people,  could  make  them  fur¬ 
nish  a  greater  number  of  soldiers  than  they  actually  had.” 
The  consuls,  unmoved,  ordered  the  deputies  -  to  remain  at 
Rom and  the  magistrates  to  go  home,  to  make  the  levies, 
assuring  them,  that  “  they  should  have  no  audience  of*  the 
senate,  until  they  had  strictly  fulfilled  its  orders.”  Their 
hopes  of  obtaining  an  audience  b^ing  ^hus  cut  off,  the  levies 
were  completed  without  difficnlty ;  the  naxpher  of  youn^mep 
in  those  cedonies  being  much  increased, by^  their  having  been 
so  Imig  exempt  frc>m.  service. 
XVL  Anotiier  afiair  also,  and  which  had  been  almost  as 
long  passed  over  in  silence,  ^as  proposed  fm*  consideration 
by  Marcus  Valerius  La^vinus ;  who  said,  it  was  hi^y 
reasonable  that  the  several  sums  of  money,  winch  had  been 
contributed  by  private  persons,  when  Marcus  Claudius  and 
himself  were  consuls,  should  now  1:>e  repaid.  That  no  one 
ought  to  be  surprised,  at  his  thus  ^ipeaiing  in  an  affair 

112 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  548. 

wherein  the  puUic  faith  was  pledged  ;  for,  besides  that,  m 
some  respect  it  peculiarly  concerned  the  consul  of  diat  year 
in  which  the  money  had  been  advanced  $  he  had  also  been 
the  first  adviser  of  the  same,  on,  account  of  the  emptiness  of 
the  treasury,  and  the  inability  of  the  people  to  {^y  taxes.” 
The  senate  were  well  pleased  at  being  reminded  of  this 
ter^  amd  the  consuls  being  ordered  to  propose  the  question, 
decreed,  that  money  should  be  discharged  in  tlnree 
ments :  that  the  present  consuls  should  make  the  first  payment 
immediately  ;  and  that  the  other  two  instalments  shotdd  be 
made  by  the  third  tmd  fifth  consuls  from  that  time.”  All 
their  cares  soon  after  gave  place  to  one  alone,  when,  on  the 
arrival  of  ambassadors,  they  were  made  acquainted  with  the 
grievances  of  the  Locrensians,  of  which,  until  that  day,  they 
had  been  ignorant ;  grievances  which  greatly  disturbed  the 
people,  who  were,  however,  less  provoked  at  the  villany  of 
Quintus  Pleminius,  than  at  the  partiality  or  negligence  shown 
in  the  business  by  Scipio.  As  the  consuls  were  sitting  in  the 
comitium,  ten  ambassadors  of  the  Locrensians  in  squalid 
mourning  apparel,  holding  out  branches  of  olive  (the  badges 
of  suppliants)  according  to  the  Grecian  custom,  prostrated 
themselves  on  the  ground  before  the  tribunal  with  lamenta¬ 
ble  cries.  On  inquiring  who  they  were,  they  answered,  that 
“  they  were  Locrensians,  who  had  experienced  such  treat¬ 
ment  from  Quintus  Pleminius,  the  lieutenant-general,  and 
his  soldiers,  as  the  Ron^tn  people  would  not  wish  even  the 
Carthaginians  to  suffer ;  and  that  they  requested  the  favour 
of  being  admitted  to  an  audience  of  the  senate^  that  they 
might  represent  to  them  their  deplorable  situation.” 
XVII.  An  audience  being  granted,  the  eldest  of  them 
spoke  to  this  effect:  Conscript  Fathers,  I  know  that  it 
would  tend  exceedingly  to  increase  the  regard  which  you  may 
think  proper  to  afford  to  our  complaints,  if  you  were  fully 
informed  of  the  manner  in  which  Locri  was  betrayed  to 
Hannibal,  and  also  by  what  means  the  Carthaginian  garrison 

BOOK  XXIX. 

113 

BX.  m.] 

wi^exf^lled,  and  tibe  town  re^esod^lishedtmder  your  dommion. 
For  if  the  people,  get^t^ly  taken,  were  entirely  clear  of  the 
guilt  of  the  revolt,  and  if  it  also  appeared,  that  our  return 
to  dietBen^,  and  to  3u:knowledgtnent  of  yoiu*  authority,  was 
not  only  voluunuy,l7ut  effected  by  our  own  co<ipera^m  and 
ftm  would  feel  the  greater  indignation  at  sii^  griev* 
and  liKE^erited  injuries  being  inflicted  tm  good  and 
All  by  your  lieutenant-general  and  his  soldiers.  But  1 
l^hikil  her^  to  defer  the  subject  of  our  changes  of  ^arty 
^  tuuHher  time  ;  ^nd  that  for  two  reasons :  first,  that  it  may 
be  discussed  in  the  presence  of  Publius  Setpio,  who  regained 
^>8session  of  Locri,  and  was  a  witness  of  our  behaviour, 
whether  good  or  ;  md  secondly,  that,  let  our  conduct 
have  what  it  may,  we  ought  not  to  have  suffered  the 
evils  which  have  been  poured  on  us.  We  cannot.  Conscript 
Fathers,  disown,  that,  while  we  had  a  Carthaginian  garrison, 
we  suffered  many  cruelties  and  indignities,  as  well  from  Ha- 
milcar  the  commander  there,  as  from  the  Numidians  and 
Africans.  But  wh^  are  these,  when  compared  with  what 
we  this  ^y  endure  ?  1  request.  Conscript  Fathers,  that  you 
will  hear  without  being  offended,  what  X  unwillingly  mention. 
All  mankind  are  in  suspense  whether  they  are  to  see  you  or 
the  Cmthaginians  sovereigns  of  the  world.  Now,  if  an  esti¬ 
mation  were  to  be  formed  of  the  Roman  andXarthaginian 
governments,  from  the  treatment  which  we  of  Locri  have 
borne  on  the  one  hand,  and  from  that  which  on  the  other  we 
at  this  present  time  bear,  without  remission,  from  ycair  gar¬ 
rison,  there  is  no  one  who  would  not  rather  choose  Africans 
than  Romans  for  his  masters.  Yet,  observe  what  disposi-* 
tions  the  Locrensians  have,  not widatanding,. shown  towards 
you.  When  we  were  ill-treated  by  the  Carthaginians  in  a 
much  less  degree,  we  had  recourse  tcj^  your  general  for  re¬ 
dress,  Now,  when  we  suffer  from  your  garrison  worse  than 
hostile  cruelty,  wc  have  carried  our  complaints  to  up  other 
VOL.  IV. — Q 

114 

HISTOHY  CW  IBOME. 

[YM.Mm 

but  to  you.  Comcript  wM  coiisidar  oia?  4e«- 
peratc  situation,  or  we  arc  teit  any  resource,  S(k 
which  we  can  even  pray  to  die  immcnr^  gods. 
minius,  lieulenant-geQend,  waa  sent  with  a  body  of  txoof» 
to  recover  Locri  from  the  Carthaginians,  aiKi  was  with 
those  troops  to  garrison  the  tcwn.  In  thb  your  officer.  Con* 
^ript  Fathers,  fthe  extremity  of  our  miseries  gives  me  s^rit 
to  speak  freely,)  there  is  nothing  of  a  man  but  the  figure  and 
appearance ;  nor  of  a  Roman  citizen,  but  features,  the 
dress,  and  the  sound  of  the  Latine  language.  He  is  a  pesti¬ 
lent  and  savage  monster ;  such,  as  fabl^  tell  us,  fortncriy  lay 
on  each  side  of  the  straight  which  divides  us  from  Sicily, 
causing  the  destruction  of  mariners.  If,  however,  he  had 
been  content  with  practising  his  own  s^ocities  alone  against 
us  your  allies,  that  one  gulf,  however  deep,  we  should  pa¬ 
tiently  have  filled  up»  As  the  case  at  present  stands,  he  ha^ 
made  every  one  of  your  centurions  and  soldiers  a  Piemintiis: 
so  much  does  he  wish  to  lender  licentiousness  and  wicked¬ 
ness  untv^sal.  All  rc^,  spoil,  beat,  wound,  'slay ;  ravi^ 
both  matrons  and  virgins ;  while  free-bom  children  are  tom 
from  the  embraces  of  their  pm'ents.  Oi^r  city  is  every  day 
stormed,  every  day  plundered  ;  all  parts  of  it  resound  with 
die  lamentations  of  women  and  children,  who  are  seized  and 
dragged  away.  Whoever  knows  our  suflFcrings  cannot  but 
be  uirprised  that  we  still  subsist  under  them,  and  that  our 
persecutm^  are  not  y€t  wearied.  It  is  neither  in  my  power 
to  recapitulate,  nor  ought  you  to  be  trouhkd  with  hearing, 
the  particulars  of  our  calamities ;  I  shaU  comprise  diem  in 
^neral  terms.  I  affirm  that  there  is  not  erne  house,  that 
there  is  not  one  mao  in  Locri,  exempt  ir^  issmry  ;  I  ^rm 
that  there  is  no  instance  of  cruelty,  lust,  avark^,  which 
has  not  been  put  in  practice  against  every  capaMe  erf  be¬ 
ing  the  ediject  of  it.  It  is  scarcely  possible  to  estimate  which 
was  the  more  lamentable  disaster  to  the  city,  its  being  uken 

mmK  XXIX. 

115 

the  enemy,  or  its  i^ng  crushed  under  the  violence 
and  ai^s  of  a  tyrant  Bxmt  to  protect  it,  yet  bent  on  its  de- 
struc&m.  Every  evil,  C<»mript  Fathers,  which  cities  taken 
stoim  suffer,  we  have  suffered,  and  still  continue  to  suf¬ 
fer,  wi^ut  remission.  Every  kind  of  barbarity  which  the 
most  iMTcUess  and  unreasonable  tyrants  practise  against  their 
oppre^d  countrymen,  has  Pleminius  practised  against  us, 
our  chiUren,  and  our  wives. 
XVIII.  “  There  is  one  thmg,  Conscript  Fathers,  concern¬ 
ing  which  we  are  obliged,  by  the  regard  to  religion  impressed 
on  our  minds,  both  to  make  a  particular  complsunt,  and  to 
express  our  wish  that  you  may  think  proper  so  to  attend  to 
the  same,  as  to  f|*ee  your  state  from  any  guilt  resulting  from 
it  I  for  we  have  seen  with  what  due  solemnly  you  not  only 
worship  your  own,  but  even  receive  foreign  deities.  We 
have  a  temple  of  Proserpine,  of  extraordinary  sanctity,  of 
which  probably  some  account  may  have  reached  you  during 
the  war  with  Pyrrhus  ;  for  in  his  return  from  Sicily,  smling 
near  Locri  with  his  fleet,  among  other  violent  outrages  against 
our  city,  on  account  of  our  fidelity,  to  you,  he  plundered  the 
treasures  of  Proserpine,  w^hich,  to  that  day,  had  ever  re¬ 
mained  untouched ;  and  then  putting  the  money  on  bcmrd  his 
ships,  he  left  the  kmd.  What  was  then  the  result.  Conscript 
Fathers  ?  His  fleet  was  next  day  shattered  by  a  most  furious 
tempest,  and  all  the  vessels  which  carried  the  sacred  treasure 
were  thrown  on  Our  coasts.  By  the  greatness  of  thk  calami¬ 
ty,  that  haughty  King  being  at  length  omvinced  that  there 
were  gods,  ordered  all  the  mcmey  to  be  searched  for,  col¬ 
lected,  and  carried  back  to  the  treasury  of  Proserpine.  Never 
afterwards  was  he  successfol  in  any  one  Instance  j  but  after 
being  driven  <rf  Ita^,  and  having  entered  Argos  incem- 
siderately  by  night,  he  fell  by  an.  ignoble  hand ;  he  met.  a  dis¬ 
honourable  death.  Aldiough  your  lieutenaiH-general  and 
military  tribunes  had  heard  these  and  many  other  such  things. 

116  HISTORY  OF  HOME.  [Y.R.  54S. 
(which  were  not  contrived  for  tjie  purpose  of  increasing  re¬ 
spect  to  the  deity,  but  presented  to  the  observation  of  our 
ancestors  and  selves,  through  the  immediate  influence  of  the 
goddess :)  yet,  notwithstanding  this,  I  say,  they  dared  to  lay 
their  impious  h^mds  on  the  treasures,  till  then  untouched, 
except  in  the  instance  of  Pyrrhus,  and  with  the  sacrilegious 
spoil  to  pollute  themselves,  their  families,  and  your  armies  ; 
whose  service,  we  beseech  you,  Conscript  Fathers,  for  your 
own  sakes,  for  your  honour’s  sake,  not  to  employ  in  any  busi¬ 
ness,  either  in  Italy  or  in  Africa,  until  you  have  first  expia¬ 
ted  their  guilt,  lest  they  atone  for  the  crimes  which  they  have 
committed,  not  by  their  own  blood  merely,  but  by  some  pub¬ 
lic  disaster  :  although,  even  at  present,  the  anger  of  the  god¬ 
dess  does  not  fail  to  show  itself  against  both  your  officers 
and  men.  They  have  already,  more  than  oiice,  engaged 
each  other  in  pitched  battles :  Pleminius  was  leader  of  one 
party,  the  two  military  tribunes  of  the  other :  never  did  they 
use  their  weapons  with  more  eagerness  against  the  Cartha¬ 
ginians,  than  on  this  occasion  ;  and,  by  their  mad  proceed¬ 
ings,  they  would  have  afforded  Hannibal  an  opportunity  of 
recovering  the  possession  of  I,.ocn,  had  not  Scipio,  whom  we 
sUnt  for,  arrived  in  time  to  prevent  it.  It  may  be  said,  per¬ 
haps,  that  the  subalterns  who  had  been  polluted  by  the  sacri¬ 
lege,  were  alone  agitated  With  phrenzy,  and  that  no  influence 
of  the  godd'eSs  appeared  in  punishing  the  officers ;  whereas, 
in  fact,  it  has  been  here  'most  conspicuous.  The  tribunes 
were  scourged  with  rods  by  the  lieutenant-general ;  after¬ 
wards,  the  lieutenant-general  was  treacherously  seized  by 
the  tribunes  ;  and,  his  whole  body  being  mangled,  and  his 
nose  and  «ars  cut  off,  he  was  left  apparently  lifeless.  Reco¬ 
vering  from  his  wounds,  he  threw  the  military  tribunes  into 
chains^  scourged  theih,  made  them  suffer  every  kind  of  tor¬ 
ture  usually  inflicted  only  on  slaves,  put'  them  to  a  cruel 
death,  and  riicn  prohibited  them  the  rites  of  burial.  Such 

BOOK  XXIX. 

iir 

p^allies  has  the  goddess  exacted  from  the  plimderm  of  het 
temple  ;  nor  will  she  desist  from  harassing  diem  wMi  eveiy 
kind  of  phrenzy,  until  the  sacred  money  shall  be  replaced  in 
die  treasury.  Our  ancestors,  being  engaged  in  a  grievous 
war  with  the  Crotonians,  intended,  because  this  temple  lies 
widiout  the  walls,  to  remove  the  money  therein  deposited 
into  the  city ;  when  a  voice  was  heard  by  night  from  the 
shrine,  commanding  them  to  desist;  for  diat  the  goddess 
would  defend  her  own  treasures.  This  admonition  an^sted 
their  hands ;  yet,  when  intending  to  surround  the  temple 
with  a  wall,  and  wluch  they  had  raised  to  some  height,  it 
suddenly  fell  down  in  ruins.  Thus,  it  is  seen  that  not  only 
now,  but  at  several  other  times,  the  goddess  has  either  secu* 
red  her  own  habitation,  her  sacred  fane ;  or  has  exacted 
heavy  atonements  from  those  who  dared  to  violate  it.  Our 
injuries  she  cannot  avenge  ;  Conscript  Fathers,  it  can  alone 
be  done  by  you.  To  you,  and  to  your  honour,  we  fly,  and, 
as  suppliants,  implore  relief.  For  whether  you  suffer  Locri 
to  continue  under  the  present  lieutenant-general  and  garriscm, 
or  deliver  our  countrymen  up  to  Hannibal  and  the  Carthagi¬ 
nians,  to  be  punished  as  their  anger  may  direct,  it  will  be 
equally  fatal  to  them.  We  do  not  require  that  you  should, 
at  once,  give  credit  to  us,  and  to  charges  made  in  the  gene¬ 
ral’s  absence,  or  without  allowing  him  to  make  his  defence : 
let  him  come,  let  him  hear  them  in  person ;  let  him  clear  him¬ 
self  of  them,  if  he  can.  In  fine,  if  there  be  any  act  of  ini¬ 
quity  which  one  man  can  commit  agakist  others,  that  he  has 
not  committed  against  us,  we  consent,  if  it  be  possible,  again 
to  endure  our  griefs,  and  that  he  shall  be  acquitted  of  all 
guilt  towards  both  gods  and  men.” 
XIX.  When  the  ambassadors  had  concluded  their  dis* 
eoui^e,  being  asked  by  Quintus  Fabius,  whether  they  had 
laid  those  complaints  before  Publius  Scipio,  they  answered, 
that  “  an  embassy  had  been  sent  to  him  ;  but  that  be  was 

118 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R,  54i. 

taken  up  with  the  prquufiMdoiis  for  the  war ;  txiim 
before  foie  tin^  he  had  passed  over  into  Aftka^^  would  do 
TO  in  a  very  few  days.  That  they  had  a^riTOced  what 
peat  interest  tl^  Ueutenaat^general  had  with  the  TOmmander^ 
when,  after  hearinpt)^  cause  between  him  and  the  tribiu^ 
he  threw  the  tribunes  into  chains,  and  left  the  lieutenrot* 
general,  who  was  equally  guilty,  or  rather  more  so,  in  pos* 
session  of  the  same  power  as  before.”  'Fhe  ambassadors  be- 
ic^  ordered  to  withdraw,  the  principal  senators  inveighed 
TOVtarely  not  only  against  Pleminius,  but  against  Sdpto  ako  j 
but,  above  ail,  Quintus  Fabius,  who  asserted,  that  “  Ik  wwx 
btsm  for  die  corruptiem  of  military  discipliiK  | 
such  conduct,  he  had  lost,  in  Spain,  nearly  as  many  wKn 
mutiny  as  in  war ;  that  he  both  indulged  the  licentiousiiess  of 
the  soldiers,  and  let  his  own  passions  loose  agsdn^  them,  in 
a  manner  customary  only  among  foreigners  and  kings.”  To 
this, speech  he  added  a  resolution  equally  harsh;  that  **  foey 
should  pass  a  vote,  that  Quintus  Pleminius,  lieut^aanl^l^K- 
ral,  be  brought  to  Rome,  and  sUnd  his  trial  in  chains  :  and 
that,  if  the  complmnts  of  the  Locrensians  should  a|^em  to 
be  well  founded,  he  should  be  put  to  death  in  prison,  and  his 
(Aects  confiscated.  That  Publius  Scipio,  on  account  of  lus 
having  gone  out  of  his  province  without  an  order  of  the  se¬ 
nate,  should  be  recaUed  i  and  that  application  shoukl  be  made 
to  the  tribunes  of  the  commons,  to  take  the  sense  of  the  peo¬ 
ple  on  the  abrogating  of  bis  commission.  That  the  Locren- 
sians  should  be  called  in,  and  receive  this  answer  from  the 
sTOate :  that,  as  to  foe  injuries  stated  to  have  been  done  to 
them,  neither  the  aenaite  nor  tht  people  of  Rcme  approved  cf 
their  being  done  ;  that  they  should  be  complimented  with  the 
appellations  of  worthy  men,  allies,  and  ftriends ;  that  their 
children,  their  wives,  and  whatever  else  had  been  taken  from 
them  by  violence,  should  be  restored  ;  that  a  search  should 
be  made  for  the  entire  money  which  bad  been  carried  off 

BOOK  XXIX. 

119 

BX.m,] 
from  the  of  Proserpine,  and  that  double  die  atrni 
shotdd  te  replaced  in  the  treasury.  That  a  solemn  eiepfad<m 
f^uld  ped^E^rmed,  the  college  of  pemtiffs  being  first 
suited  on  this  question  :  inasmuch  as  die  sacred  treasures  bad 
been  removed  and  violated,  what  atonements,  to  what  gods, 
imd  with  what  victims,  should  they  be  made  ?  That  the  sol¬ 
diers  who  were  at  Locri  should  be  all  trans|Kirrted  into  Skity ; 
and  that  four  cohorts  of  allies,,  of  the  Lattne  Confederacy ^ 
should  be  brought  to  Locri  for  a  garrison.”  The  collecting 
of  die  votes  ^idd  not  be  finished  that  day,  the  zeal  of  die 
parties  for  and  against  Scipiq  rising  to  a  great  degree  of 
wmmlb  I  ftH*,  besides  the  crime  of  Pleminius,  and  the  ca- 
lamina  of  the  Locrensians,  the  generals  own  mahner  of 
Uving  wm  refnresented  as  so  far  from  beings  Roman,  that  it 
was  not  even  military  :  that  he  walked  in  the  public  place, 
having  a  cloak  ai^  slippers ;  that  be  gave  much  of  his  time 
to  books  td*  enteitainmefit,  and  the  schools  of  exercise  ;  and 
that  bk  wfat^  cor}»  of  officers,  wkh  equal  indolence  and 
fenunac^,  imlulged  in  all  the  pleasures  of  Syracuse  |  that 
Carthage  wm  quite  forgotten  among  them  ;  that  the  whole 
army,  (debmiched  and  licentious,  like  that  at  Sucre  in  S|^un, 
or  that  now  at  Locri,)  was  more  forniidable  to  the  allies  than 
to  the  enemy.” 
XX«  These  representations  were  compounded  of  a  mix¬ 
ture  of  n^th  and  ialsebood,  yet  carrying  an  appearance  of 
dsc  former.  The  opinion  of  Quintus  Metellus,  however,  pre¬ 
vailed,  who,  concurring  with  Maximus  in  the  other  points, 
dissented  from  him  in  that  concerning  Scipio  ;  affirming,  that 
‘‘  it  wmdd  be  the  height  of  inconsistency,  if  the  person  whom, 
when  but  a  youth,  the  state  had  some  time  since  made  choice 
of  as  the  only  commandtr  capable  of  recovering  Spain ;  whom, 
after  be  actually  recovered  it,  thej'  had  elected  consul 
for  the  purpose  of  putting  an  end  to  the  Punic  war,  and 
whom  they  conceived  able  to  draw  away  Hannibal  from  Ital^% 

HISTORY  OF  R^E. 

[YM.54M. 

and  even  to  subdue  Africa : — that  this  man,  as  if  he  were 
Quintus  Plemlnius,  should  be,  in  a  manner,  condenmed  widi« 
out  a  trial,  and  suddenly  recalled  from  his  province,  he  re« 
pe^cd,  vrcre  highly  inconsistent.  The  abominable  facts 
which  the  Locrensians  complain  of, are  not  alleged  to  have  been 
committed  when  Scipio  was  present ;  nor  can  any  thing  else 
be  laid  to  his  charge  than  the  having  been  tender  of  the  lieu¬ 
tenant-general,  either  through  good  nature  or  respect.  That 
it  was  his  opinion,  that  Marcus  Pomponius,-  the  prsetor,  to 
whose  lot  Sicily  had  fallen,  should,  within  the  next  three 
days,  repair  to  his  province.  That  the  consuls  should  choose 
out  of  the  senate  ten  deputies,  whom  they  should  send  along 
with  the  praetor,  together  with  two  tribunes  of  the  people  and 
an  sediie^  ^d  that,  with  the  assistance  of  this  council,  the 
prastor  should  make  an  inquiry  into  the  affair.  If  it  shodU 
be  found  that  the  oppressions  of  the  Locrensians  arose  from 
the  orders  or  with  the  approbation  of  Publius  Scipio,  tet 
they  should  then  command  him  to  quit  the  province,  ft 
Publius  Scipio  should  have  already  passed  over  into  Africa, 
that  in  such  case  the  tribunes  of  the  commons  and  the  sedile, 
widi  two  of  the  deputies,  whom  the  prsetor  should  judge 
fittest,  should  immediately  proceed  thither :  the  tribunes  and 
the  sedile  to  bring  back  Scipio  from  thence  ;  the  deputies  to 
command  the  forces  until  a  new  general  should  be  appointed. 
But  if  Marcus  Pomponius  and  the  ten  deputies  should  dis¬ 
cover  that  those  severities  had  not  been  committed,  either  by 
the  order  or  with  the  approbation  of  Publius  Scipio,  that  then 
Scipio  should  remain  with  the  army,  and  carry  on  the  war  as 
he  had  proposed.^’  A  decree  of  the  senate  having  passed  to 
this  effect,  application  was  made  to  the  tribunes  of  the  com¬ 
mons,  to  settle  among  themselves,  or  choose  by  lot,  which 
two  were  to  go  with  the  praetor  and  deputies.  The  college 
of  pontiflfs  were  consulted  about  the  expiations  to  be  perform¬ 
ed  on  account  of  the  spoliation  in  the  temple  of  Proserpine 

BOOK  XXIX. 

121 

B.C.  204.} 
at  Locri.  Mareus  Claudius  Marcellus,  aud  Marcus  Cin- 
cius  Alimentus,  tributes  of  the  commons,  accompanied  the 
praetor  and  the  ten  deputies ;  with  whom  an  aedile  of  the 
commons  was  also  sent.  The  instructions  were,  that  should 
Scipio  (whether  in  Sicily  or  Africa)  refuse  to  obey  the  or¬ 
ders  of  the  praetor,  the  tribunes  were  to  give  directions  to 
the  aedile  to  apprehend  and  bring  him  home,  under  the  au¬ 
thority  of  their  inviolable  office.  It  was  intended  that  they 
should  proceed  first  to  Locri,  and  then  to  Messana. 
XXI.  Concerning  Pleminius,  there  are  two  different  ac¬ 
counts  :  some  say,  that,  on  hearing  what  had  passed  at  Rome, 
he  was  going  to  Naples  into  exile,  when  he  happened  to  meet 
Quintus  Metellus,  one  of  the  deputies,  and  was  by  him  for¬ 
cibly  carried  back  to  Rhegium  ;  others,  that  Scipio  himself 
had  sent  a  lieutenant-general,  with  thirty  of  the  most  distin¬ 
guished  among  the  cavalry,  to  throw  Pleminius  into  chains, 
and  also  the  principals  in  the  mutiny.  All  these,  however, 
cither  by  the  orders  of  Scipio  before,  or  of  the  praetor  now, 
were  given  in  charge  to  the  inhabitants  of  Rhegium,  to  be 
kept  in  custody.  The  praetor  and  deputies  proceeding  to 
Locri,  applied  their  first  care,  as  they  had  been  directed,  to 
the  business  respecting  religion  ;  and  causing  search  to  be 
made  for  all  the  sacred  money,  appropriated  both  by  Plemi- 
nius  and  the  soldiers,  they  replaced  it  in  the  treasury,  toge¬ 
ther  with  the  sum  which  they  had  brought  with  them,  per¬ 
forming  a  solemn  expiation.  This  done,  the  praetor  calling 
the  soldiers  together,  ordered  them  to  carry  the  standards 
put  of  the  city,  and  to  form  a  camp  in  the  plain ;  denouncing, 
by  proclamation,  severe  penalties  against  any  one  who  should 
either  stay  behind,  or  carry  out  with  him  any  thing  that  was 
not  his  own  property ;  at  the  same  time  authorising  the  Lo- 
crensians  to  seize  whatever  belonged  to  themselves,  and  to 
search  for  such  of  their  effects  as  were  concealed ;  above  all 
insisting,  that  the  freedom  of  their  persons  should  be  in- 
VOL.  IV. — R 

V22 

HISTORY  OP  ROME. 

[Y.R.  54», 

stantly  admitted,  with  threats  of  heavy  punishment  against 
any  one  who  should  disobey  this  injunction.  He  then  held 
an  assembly  of  the  Locrensiatis,  and  told  them,  that  the 
Roman  people,  and  the  senate,  restored  to  them  their  liberty 
and  their  laws.  That  if  any  one  meant  to  bring  a  charge 
against  Pleminius,  or  any  other  person,  he  must  follow  them 
to  Rhegium  ;  or  if  their  state  had  to  prefer  a  complaint 
against  Publius  Scipio,  as  being  the  author  of  those  crimes 
which  had  been  perpetrated  at  Locri  against  gods  and  men, 
that  they  should  then  send  deputies  to  Rhegium  also,  and 
that  he,  with  the  council,  would  there  hear  their  cause.’^ 
The  Locrensians  returned  thanks  to  the  praetor,  to  the  depu¬ 
ties,  and  to  the  senate  and  people  of  Rome ;  declaring  **  that 
they  would  prosecute  Pleminius.  That,  as  to  Scipio,  al¬ 
though  he  had  shown  but  little  feeling  for  the  injuries  done 
them,  yet  he  was  such  a  man  as  they  would  much  rather 
have  for  their  friend  than  their  enemy.  That  they  firmly 
believed,  the  many  shocking  cruelties  which  had  been  prac¬ 
tised  were  neither  by  the  orders  or  with  the  approbation  of 
Publius  Scipio,  who  had  only  given  too  much  credit  to  Ple¬ 
minius,  too  little  to  them :  that  ^ome  men’s  natural  disposi¬ 
tion  was  such,  that  they  showed  rather  a  dislike  to  the  com¬ 
mission  of  faults,  than  sufficient  resolution  to  punish  them, 
when  committed.”  This  relieved  the  praetor  and  council 
from  a  heavy  burthen,  that  of  enquiring  into  the  conduct  of 
Scipio.  They  condemned  Pleminius,  with  thirty-two  others, 
whom  they  sent  in  chains  to  Rome ;  and  then  proceeded  to 
Scipio,  that,  witnessing  all  matters,  they  might  carry  certain 
information  to  Rome  as  to  the  truth  of  those  reports  which 
had  been  propagated  concerning  his  manner  of  living,  inac¬ 
tivity,  and  total  relaxation  of  military  discipline. 
XXII.  While  they  were  on  their  way  to  Syracuse,  Scipio 
prepared,  not  words,  but  facts,  to  clear  himself  of  any  charges 
in  the  remission  of  duty.  He  ordered  all  the  troops  tb  as- 

BOOK  XXIX. 

123 

B.C.  ^.3 
semble  in  that  city,  and  the  fleet  to  be  got  in  readine^,  as  if, 
on  that  day,  there  was  to  be  an  engagement  with  the  Cartha¬ 
ginians  both  on  land  and  sea.  On  the  arrival  of  the  com¬ 
missioners,  he  gave  them  a  kind  reception  and  entertainment, 
and  next  day  showed  them  both  the  land  and  naval  forces, 
not  only  marshalled  in  exact  order,  but  the  former  perform¬ 
ing  their  evolutions,  and  the  fleet  in  the  harbour  exhibiting  a 
representation  of  a  naval  combat.  The  praetor  and  deputies 
were  then  led  round  to  take  a  view  of  the  armories,  grana¬ 
ries,  and  other  warlike  preparations ;  and  with  such  admira¬ 
tion  were  they  struck,  of  each  in  particular,  and  of  the  whole 
together,  as  to  become  thoroughly  persuaded,  that  the  Car¬ 
thaginians  would  be  vanquished  by  that  general  and  that  ar¬ 
my,  or  by  no  other.  They  desired  him  to  set  oat  on  his 
voyage,  with  the  blessing  of  the  gods  ;  and  to  fulfil,  as  soon  as 
possible,  the  hopes  of  the  Roman  people, — those  hopes  which 
they  had  coiceived  on  that  day,  when  all  the  centuries  con¬ 
curred  in  naming  him  6rst  consul :  saying  this,  they  left  the 
place,  and  with  as  much  joy  as  if  they  were  to  carry  to  Rome 
the  news  of  a  victory,  not  of  a  grand  preparation  for  war. 
Pleminius,  and  those  who  were  in  the  same  circumstances 
with  him,  were,  on  their  arrival  at  Rome,  immediately  thrown 
into  prison.  When  first  produced  by  the  tribunes,  the  peo¬ 
ple  found  no  room  for  mercy,  prepossessed  as  they  were  by 
the  calamities  of  the  Locrensians.  However,  after  having 
been  repeatedly  brought  forward,  and  the  odium  abating 
through  length  of  time,  the  publio  resentment  was  softened; 
while  the  maimed  condition  of  Pleminius,  and  the  respect 
they  had  for  Scipio,  even  in  his  absence,  conciliated  for  them 
some  degree  of  favour.  Nevertheless,  Pleminius  died  in 
confinement,  and  before  his  trial  was  finished.  Clodius  Li- 
cinius,  in  the  third  book  of  his  Roman  history,  relates,  in¬ 
deed,  that  this  Pleminius,  during  the  votive  games  which 
Africanus,  in  his  second  consulate,  exhibited  at  Rome,  mad|^ 

124 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  548^ 

an  attempt,  by  means  of  some  persons  whom  he  had  bribed, 
to  set  fire  to  the  city  in  several  ' places,  that  he  might  have 
an  opportunity  of  breaking  the  prison,  and  m'aking  his  es¬ 
cape  ;  and  that  on  the  discovery  of  his  wicked  design,  he 
was  committed  to  the  dungeon  by  order  of  the  senate.  Con¬ 
cerning  Scipio,  there  were  no  proceedings  but  in  the  senate ; 
where  the  encomiums  made  by  all  the  deputies  and  the  tri¬ 
bunes  on  that  general,  his  fleet,  and  army,  induced  them  to 
vote,  that  he  should  pass  over  into  Africa  as  soon  as  possi¬ 
ble  ;  with  liberty  to  make  his  own  choice,  from  out  the  forces 
then  in  Sicily,  which  to  carry  with  him,  and  which  to  leave 
for  the  defence  of  the  province. 
XX I II.  During  these  transactions  at  Rome,  the  Cartha¬ 
ginians,  on  their  side,  passed  the  winter  in  extreme  anxiety. 
They  fixed  beacons  on  every  promontory  ;  kept  scouts  in  in¬ 
cessant  motion,  every  messenger  filling  them  with  terror. 
They  had  acquired,  however,  an  advantage  of  no  small  mo¬ 
ment  towards  the  defence  of  Africa, — an  alliance  with  King 
Syphax  ;  an  assistance,  on  which  they  supposed  the  Romans 
to  have  relied,  and  as  being  their  great  inducement  to  set 
foot  on  Africa.  Hasdrubal,  son  of  Gisgo,  was  not  only  con¬ 
nected  with  the  King  in  hospitality,  (as  has  been  mentioned 
above,  when  he  and  Scipio  happened  to  come  to  him  at  the 
same  time  from  Spain,)  but  mention  had  been  also  made  of 
an  affinity  to  be  contracted  between  them,  by  the  King  mar¬ 
rying  HasdrubaFs  daughter.  Hasdrubal  had  gone  with  a 
design  of  completing  this  business,  and  fixing  a  time  for  the 
nuptials,  the  damsel  being  now  marriageable  ;  and  finding 
him  inflamed  with  desire,  (for  the  Numidians  are,  beyond  all 
other  barbarians,  inclined  to  amorous  pleasures,)  he  sent  for 
her  from  Carthage,  and  hastened  the  wedding.  Among 
other  instances  of  mutual  regard  and  affection,  (and  in  order 
that  their  private  connection  might  be  cemented  by  a  public 
one,)  an  alliance  between  the  King  and  the  people  of  Carthage 

BOOK  XXIX. 

125 

B.C.204.] 
was  ratified  by  oath,  and  their  faith  reciprocally  pledged  that 
they  would  have  the  same  friends  and  enemies.  But  Has- 
drubal  remembered  that  the  King  had  previously  entered  into 
a  league  with  Scipio,  and  knowing  how  unsteady  and  change¬ 
able  were  the  minds  of  the  barbarians,  he  dreaded  lest,  if 
Scipio  once  came  into  Africa,  that  match  might  prove  a  slen¬ 
der  tie  ;  he  therefore  seized  the  opportunity  while  the  warmth 
of  the  Numidian’s  new  passion  was  at  theliighest ;  and  call¬ 
ing  to  his  aid  the  blandishments  of  his  daughter,  prevailed  on 
him  to  send  ambassadors  into  Sicily  to  Scipio,  and  by  them 
to  warn  him,  “  not  to  be  induced,  by  a  reliance  on  his  former 
promises,  to  pass  over  to  Africa,  for  that  he  was  now  united 
to  the  people  of  Carthage,  both  by  his  marriage  with  a  citi¬ 
zen  of  that  state,  daughter  of  Hasdrubal,  whom  he  had  seen 
entertained  in  his  house,  and  also  by  a  public  treaty.  He 
recommended  it  strongly  to  the  Romans,  to  carry  on  the  war 
against  the  Carthaginians,  at  a  distance  from  Africa,  as  they 
had  hitherto  done  ;  lest  he  might  be  under  a  necessity  of  in¬ 
terfering  in  their  disputes,  and  of  joining  one  or  the  other, 
while  he  wished  to  decline  taking  part  with  either.  If  Scipio 
should  enter  Africa,  and  advance  his  army  towards  Carthage, 
he  must  then  of  necessity'  fight,  as  well  in  defence  of  the 
country  wherein  he  himself  was  bom,  as  in  support  of  the 
native  city  of  his  spouse,  her  parent,  and  household  gods.’’ 
XXIV.  The  ambassadors,  charged  with  these  despatches 
from  the  King  to  Scipio,  had  an  interview  with  him  at  Syra¬ 
cuse.  Scipio,  though  disappointed  in  a  matter  of  the  utmost 
consequence  to  the  success  of  his  affairs  in  Africa,  and  in  the 
high  expectations  which  he  had  entertained  from  that  quar¬ 
ter,  sent  back  the  ambassadors  speedily,  before  their  business 
should  become  publicly  known,  and  gave  them  a  letter  for 
the  King,  in  which  he  conjured  him,  in  the  most  forcible 
terms,  not  to  violate  the  laws  of  hospitality  ;  nor  the  alli¬ 
ance  which  he  had  concluded  with  the  Roman  people  j  nor 

Hismmy  of  bome. 

[Y.R.  $4%. 

m 
justice,  nor  faith,  (their  right  hands  pledged^)  nor  act  in  any 
thing  o&nsive  to  the  gods,  the  witnesses  and  guarantees  of 
colnpacts^,^’  The  coming  of  the  Numidians  was  generally 
known,  for  they  bad  walked  about  the  city,  and  had  been  fre¬ 
quently  at  the  prae tori  urn  ;  so  that  it  was  feared,  should  the 
subject  of  their  embassy  transpire,  that  the  troops  might  be¬ 
come  alarmed  at  the  prospect  of  being  to  fight  against  Sy- 
phax  and  the  Carth^inians.  Scipio  judged  it  prudent,  there¬ 
fore,  to  divert  their  thoughts  from  the  truth,  by  prepossessing 
them  with  false  informations.  Calling  them  to  an  assembly, 
he  said,  that  there  was  no  room  for  longer  delay  ;  that  the 
Kings,  their  allies,  pressed  him  to  pass  over  to  Africa  im¬ 
mediately.  That  Masinissa  had  before  come  in  person  to 
Lselius,  complaining  of  time  being  wasted  in  inactivity  ;  and 
that  Syphax  now  sent  despatches  to  the  like  effect ;  requiring, 
that  either  the  troops  should  at  length  be  carried  over  to 
Africa ;  or,  if  the  plan  was  changed,  that  he  should  be  made 
acquainted  with  it,  in  order  that  he  might  adopt  such  mea¬ 
sures  as  would  be  convenient  to  himself  and  beneficial  to  his 
kingdom.  Since,  therefore,  every  preparation  had  been  made, 
and  as  the  business  admitted  no  longer  hesitation,  it  was  his 
inieitlicm,  after  bringing  over  the  fleet  to  Lilybaeum,  and  as¬ 
sembling  at  that  place  all  the  forces  of  horse  and  foot,  to  pass 
into  Africa,  with  the  favour  of  the  gods,  the  first  day  on 
whidi  the  abips  could  sail.”  He  sent  a  letter  to  Marcus 
Fomponios,  to  come  to  that  port,  in  order  that  they  might 
ctmsuk  together'  as  to  what  particular  legions,  and  what  num¬ 
ber  irf  men  he  should  carry  to  Africa  ;  with  orders  also  to 
aU  the  s^-coast,  that  the  ships  of  burthen  should  be  all  seized, 
md  lurought  thithejr.  When  the  troops  and  vessels  as¬ 
sembled  su  Lilybaeum,  neither  could  the  city  contain  the  men, 
nor  the  harbomr  the  ships  ;  and  such  an  ardent  desire  to  pass 
into  Africa  f^issessed  them  aU,  that  they  appeared,  not  as  if 
going  to  be  em^yed  in  wm",  but  in  receiving  the  rewards  of 

BOOK  XXSX. 

isr 

B.C.  204.] 
victory  already  secured  ;  especially  those  of  the  army  of  Cao- 
Rse,  for  they  expected,  by  exerting  themselves  oO  the  present 
occasion,  and  under  the  then  general,  to  put  an  to  their 
ignominious  service.  Scipio  showed  not  the  least  inclinaticm 
to  reject  soldiers  of  that  description,  knowing  that  the  mis¬ 
fortune  at  Cannse  had  not  arisen  from  their  want  of  spirit, 
and  that,  besides,  there  were  none  in  the  Roman  army  who 
had  served  so  long,  or  who  had  atquiredrso  much  experience, 
both  in  a  variety  of  battles,  and  in  attacking  towns.  The  le¬ 
gions  of  Cannse  were  the  fifth  and  sixth*  After  giving  notice 
that  he  would  carry  these  to  Africa,  he  reviewed  them  man 
by  mail)  and  leaving  behind  such  as  he  thought  unfit  for  the 
service,  he  substituted  in  their  places  those  whom  he  had 
brought  from  Italy,  and  filled  up  those  legions  in  such  a  man¬ 
ner,  that  each  contained  six  thousand  two  hundred  foot  and 
three  hundred  horse  ;  the  horse  and  foot  of  the  dlies,  of  the 
Latine  confederacy,  he  chose  also  out  of  the  army  of  Cannae. 
XXV*  Authors  differ  widely  with  regard  to  the  number  of 
men  carried  over  to  Africa.  In  one  1  find  ten  thousand  foot, 
and  two  thousand  two  hundred  horse  ;  in  another,  sixteen 
thousand  foot,  and  one  thousand  six  hundred  horse :  while 
others  augment  them  more  than  half,  and  asseit,  that  thirty- 
five  thousand  horse  and  foot  were  put  cm  bemrd  the  %hips. 
Some  have  not  stated  the  numbers  ;  and  among  these,  m  the 
matter  is  uncertain,  i  choose  to  place  myself.  Coritus,  indeed, 
avoids  specifying  the  same  ;  but  he  magnifies  to  an  immense 
extent  the  idea  that  he  gives  of  their  multitude  ;  he  tells  us, 
that  birds  fell  to  the  ground,  stunned  by  the  shouts  of  the 
soldiers  j  and  that  it  might  have  been  Well  imagined,  that 
there  was  not  a  man  left  behind  either  in  Italy  or  in  SIcify. 
Scipio  took  upon  himself  the  charge  of  embarking  the  men  in 
a  regular  manner.  The  seamen  i^ere  kept  in  order  on  bemrd 
the  ships  by  Caius  Lseiius,  who  had  the  command-  of  the 
fleet.  The  care  of  shipping  the  stores  was  aflotled  to  Mar^ 

128 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  548. 

CU8  Pomponius,  the  praetor.  A  quantity  of  food  suflScient  for 
forty-five  days  was  put  on  board :  as  much  of  it  ready  dressed 
as  would  serve  for  fifteen  days.  When  all  were  embarked, 
the  general  sent  round  bc^ts  to  bring  the  pilots  and  masters, 
with  two  soldiers  out  of  each  ship,  to  the  Forum,  to  receive 
orders.  Being  there  assembled,  he  first  inquired  whether 
they  had  put  water  on  board  for  men  and  cattle,  and  for  as 
many  days  as  they  had  corn ;  they  answered,  that  there  was 
water  on  board  for  forty-five  days.  ,  He  then  charged  the 
soldiers,  that  attentive  to  their  duty,  they  should  behave  them¬ 
selves  quietly,  so  that  the  seamen  might  perform  their  busi¬ 
ness  without  interruption  ;  informed  them,  that  he  and  Lu¬ 
cius  Scipio,  with  twenty  ships  of  war,  would  protect  the  trans¬ 
ports  on  the  right  division  ;  and  Caius  Laelius  commander  of 
the  fleet,  and  Marcus  Porcius  Cato  the  quaestor,  with  the 
same  number,  those  on  the  left :  that  the  ships  of  war  would 
carry  each  a  single  light,  the  transports  two  ;  that  the  signal 
by  night,  on  board  the  ship  of  the  commander  in  chief,  would 
consist  of  three  lights.  The  pilots  had  orders  to  steer  to  Em¬ 
porium,  where  the  land  is  remarkably  fertile  ;  consequently 
the  country  abounds  with  plenty  of  all  things.  The  inhabi¬ 
tants  are  unwarlike,  as  is  generally  the  case  where  the  soil  is 
rich  ;  and  Scipio  supposed  that  they  might  be  overpowered 
before  succour  could  arrive  from  Carthage.  Having  issued 
these  orders  he  commanded  them  to  return  to  their  ships,  and 
on  the  signal  being  given  next  day,  with  the  favour  of  the 
gods,  to  set  sail. 
XXVI.  Many  Roman  fleets  had  sailed  from  Sicily,  and 
from  that  same  harbour ;  but  never  did  any  equipment  afford 
gi*and  a  spectacle,  either  in  the  present  war,  (which  was 
not  surprising,  as  most  of  those  fleets  had  only  gone  in  quest 
of  plunder,)  or  even  in  any  former  one.  And  yet  his  force 
could  not  be  fully  estimated  from  a  view  of  the  present  arma¬ 
ment,  for  not  only  two  consuls  with  their  armies  had  passed 

BOOK  XXIX. 

129 

from  Uience  before,  but  there  had  been  almost  as  mmy  war- 
vessels  m  d^ir  flee^,  as  there  were  uausporls  attendiog  Sci- 
pio.  These,  it  is  true,  were  not  less  than  four  hundred,  but 
of  shi]^  of  ba^e  he  had  only  fifty*  But  die  Romans  had 
more  alarming  apprehensions  from  one  war  than  from  the 
other ;  from  the  second  than  from  the  farmer ;  as  well  by 
reason  of  its  being  waged  in  Italy,  as  of  the  dreadful  destruc¬ 
tion  of  so  many  armies,  together  with  their  commanders. 
Scipio,  however,  had  attracted  an  extraordinary  degree  of 
attention.  He  had  acquired  a  high  degree  of  renown,  partly 
by  his  bravery,  partly  by  the  happy  success  which  had  attend¬ 
ed  it,  and  which  gave  room  to  expect  from  hira^  the  most 
glorious  atchievements.  ^  Besides,  the  very  object  proposed 
of  passing  into  the  enemy’s  country,  which  had  not  been  at¬ 
tempted  by  9xiy  general  during  that  war,  strongly  roused 
men^s  feelings  ;  for  he  had  on  all  occasions  publicly  declared, 
that  his  intention  was  to  draw  Hannibal  away  from  Italy,  to 
transfer  the  war  to  Atrica,  and  to  finish  it  there.  Not  only 
the  whole  of  the  inhabitants  of  Lilybaeum  crowded  together 
to  the  harbour  to  get  a  view  of  them,  but  also  deputies  from 
all  parts  of  Sicily  ;  who  came  for  the  purpose  of  showing  that 
mark  of  respect,  not  only  to  JScipto,  but  to  Marcus  Pompo- 
nius,  praetor  of  the  province.  I’he  legions  likewise,  which 
were  to  be  left  on  the  island,  quitted  their  quarters  in  compli¬ 
ment  to  their  fellow-soldiers.  In  a  word,  the  fleet  exhibited 
a  grand  prospect  to  those  on  land,  and  the  land  to  those  on 
shipboard,  it  being  covered  all  around  with  the  admiring 
multitude. 
XX VH.  As  soon  as  day  appeared,  a  herald  having  com¬ 
manded  silence,  Scipio,  in  the  admiral’s  ship,  spoke  thus : 
‘‘Ye  gods  and  goddesses,  who  preside  over  the  seas  and 
lands,  I  pray  and  beseech  you,  that  whatever  affairs  have 
been  carried  on,  or  shall  hereafter  be  carried  on,  during  my 
command,  may  all  cpnduce  to  the  happiness  of  mys^^ 
VOL.  IV. - S 

130 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  54*S# 

state^  and  people  of  Rome ;  of  the  allies,  and  the  Latine  con¬ 
federates,  who  follow  my  party,  command,  and  auspices,  and 
those  of  the  Roman  people  on  sea,  on  land,  and  on  rivers. 
Lend  your  favourable  aid  to  all  those  measures,  and  further 
them  by  nappy  advancements ;  bring  us  all  home,  unhurt  and 
victorious,  decorated  with  spoils,  laden  with  booty,  and  ex¬ 
ulting  in  triumph.  Grant  us  the  opportunity  of  taking  ven¬ 
geance  on  our  foes  ;  and  whatever  attempts  the  Carthaginian 
people  have  made  to  Injure  our  state,  grant  to  me,  and  to  the 
Roman  people,  power  to  retaliate  the  same  evils  on  the  state 
of  Carthage.”  After  these  prayers,  he  threw  into  the  sea, 
according  to  custom,  the  raw  entrails  of  a  victim  which  had 
been  slain ;  smd  gave  by  a  trumpet  the  signal  for  sailing.  The 
wind  being  favourable  and  blowing  fresh,  when  they  set  sail, 
they  were  soon  carried  out  of  sight  of  land  ;  but  about  noon 
a  fc^  arose,  which  made  it  difficult  to  keep  the  ships  from 
running  foul  of  each  other.  As  they  advanced  into  the  open 
sea,  the  wind  abated  x  during  the  following  night  the  haziness 
continued,  but  at  the  rising  of  the  sun  it  was  dispersed,  and 
the  wind  freshened.  The  pilot  soon  after  told  Scipio,  that 
Africa  was  not  above  five  miles  distant  ;  that  he  saw  the 
promontory  of  Mercury  ;  and  that  if  he  gave  orders  to  steer 
thither,  the  whole  fleet  would  be  immediately  in  harbour.” 
As  soon  as  Scipio  came  within  sight  of  land,  he  prayed  to  the 
gods  that  his  seeing  Africa  might  be  happy  for  the  state,  and 
for  himself :  he  then  gave  orders  to  make  sail  for  another 
landing  place.  They  proceeded  with  the  same  wind  ;  but  a 
fog  arising,  as  on  the  day  before,  hid  the  land  from  their  sight ; 
and  increasing  as  the  night  came  on,  involved  every  object  in 
obscurity.  They  therefore  cast  anchor,  lest  the  ships  should 
run  foul  of  each  other,  or  be  driven  on  shore.  At  day-break, 
however,  the  wind  sprung  up,  dispersed  the  fog,  and  disco¬ 
vered  the  coast  of  Africa.  Scipio,  inquiring  the  name  of  the 
nearest  promontory,  and  being  told  that  it  was  called  Cape 

BOOK  XXIX, 

131 

B.C.  204.] 

Fair,  said,  “  the  omen  k  pleasing;  steer  your  ships  thither.” 
The  fleet  ran  down  according^,  and  sdl  the  forces  were  dis¬ 
embarked.  I  am  iiu:luied  to  follow  the  accounts  of  very 
many  Greek  and  Latin  authors  ;  which  are,  that  the  voyage 
was  prosperous,  and  without  danger  or  confusion.  Caelius 
alone,  (except  that  he  does  not  represent  sh^  as  being 
lost,)  gives  a  narration  of  every  other  dreadful  occurrencej 
which  could  be  occasioned  by  wind  or  wives ;  that,  at  last, 
the  fleet  was  driven  from  Africa  to  the  island  iEgimurus ; 
that,  from  thence,  with  difficulty,  they  recovered  their  course ; 
and  that  the  men  had,  without  orders  from  the  general,  es* 
caped  to  land  in  boats  from  the  almost  foundering  vessels, 
just  in  short  as  from  a  shipwreck,  without  arms  and  in  the 
utmost  disorder. 
XXVIII.  The  troops  being  landed,  formed  their  camp  tm 
the  nearest  rising  grounds.  The  sight  of  the  fleet,  with  the 
bustle  of  landing,  spread  consternation  and  terror,  not  only 
through  the  parts  adjoining  the  sea,  but  even  among  the  cities 
For  not  only  crowds  of  women  and  children,  mixing  with  the 
bands  of  men,  had  filled  up  all  the  roads,  but  the  country- 
people  also  drove  their  cattle  before  them,  so  that  it  seemed 
as  if  they  were  all  at  once  forsaking  Africa.  Those  caused 
much  greater  terror  in  the  cities  than  they  had  felt  themselves, 
particularly  at  Carthage,  where  the  tumult  was  almost  as  great 
as  though  the  enemy  were  at  its  gates  ;  for,  since  the  consu¬ 
late  of  Marcus  Attilius  Regulus,and  Lucius  Manlius,  a  space 
of  nearly  fifty  years,  they  had  seen  no  Roman  army,  except 
those  predatory  squadrons,  from  which  some  troops  had  made 
descents  on  the  adjoining  coast,  seizing  whatever  chance  threw 
in  their  way,  but  who  had  always  made  a  hasty  retreat  to 
their  ships,  and  before  the  peasantry  had  taken  the  alarm. 
For  this  reason,  the  consternation  and  panic  was  now  the 
greater ;  and,  in  fact,  they  had  neither  a  powerful  army  at 
home,  no»  a  general  whom  they  could  oppose  to  the  invaders. 

m 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

[Y-R.  S4M. 

Hasdruba!,  son  of  Gisgo,  was  by  far  the  first  person  in  the 
city,  not  only  in  character  and  wealth,  but  also  by  reason  of 
his  affinity  with  the  King.  They  considered,  however,  that 
he  had  been  vanquished,  and  put  to  flight  in  several  battles, 
in  Spain,  by  this  same  Scipio  ;  and  that  as  a  commander,  he 
was  no  more  to  be  equalled  with  the  Roman  general,  than 
their  tumultuary  forces  were  with  the  Roman  army.  The 
people  were  therefore  called  to  arms,  as  though  Scipio  were 
ready  to  attack  the  city  ;  the  gates  were  hastily  shut,  armed 
men  placed  on  the  walls,  and  watches  and  outposts  fixed,  to¬ 
gether  with  a  regular  guard,  during  the  following  night.  Next 
day,  five  hundred  horsemen,  who  were  despatched  to  gain  in¬ 
telligence,  and  to  disturb  the  enemy  on  their  landing,  fell  in 
with  the  advanced  guards  of  the  Romans  :  foi*  Scipio,  having 
sent  his  fleet  to  Utica,  had  proceeded  to  some  distance  from 
the  coast,  and  had  seized  on  the  next  high  grounds,  placing 
outposts  of  cavalry  in  proper  places,  and  sending  others  into 
the  country  to  plunder. 
XXIX.  These,  having  met  with  the  Carthaginian  horse¬ 
men,  slew  a  small  number  of  them  in  fight,  and  the  greater 
part  of  the  remaindtr,  as  they  pursued  them,,  flying  ;  among 
whom  was  Hanno  their  commander,  a  young  man  of  distinc¬ 
tion.  Scipio  not  only  laid  waste  the  country  round,  but  cap¬ 
tured  also  a  very  wealthy  city  which  lay  near  him  ;  in  which, 
besides  other  things  which  were  immediately  put  on  board 
the  transports  and  sent  to  Sicily,  there  were  taken  of  freemen 
and  slaves,  not  less  than  eight  thousand.  But  what  gave  the 
Romans  the  greatest  joy  on  the  commencement  of  their 
operations  was,  the  arrival  of  Massinissa,  who  came,  accord¬ 
ing  to  some,  with  no  more  than  two  hundred  horsemen  ;  but 
most  authors  say,  with  two  thousand.  Now,  as  he  was  by 
far  the  greatest  of  all  the  kings  of  that  age,  and  performed  the 
roost  important  services  to  the  Roman  state,  it  appears  worth 
while  to  digress  a  little,  in  order  to  relate  the  great  vicissi- 

wmK  XXIX. 

133 

B.€.  204.] 
tudes  of  fortune  lilikh  he  experienced  in  1$m  and  reco¬ 
very  of  hie  fadicr’s  ktngdom.  While  he  'Wm  fighting  on  the 
side  of  the  Carthaginians,  in  Spain,  his  father,  whose  name 
was  Gala,  died  :  the  kkigdom,  according  to  the  custom  of  the 
Numtdrans,  came  to  the  king’s  brother  .fisalccs,  who  was  far 
advanced  in  years.  In  a  short  time  after,  ifisalces  also  dying, 
Capusa,  the  cider  of  his  two  sons,  the  other  of  whom  was 
very  young,  got  possession  of  his  father’s  dominions :  but  his 
title  being  supported,  more  by  the  regard  paid  to  the  right  of 
deskrent,  than  from  any  respect  to  his  character,  or  any  strength 
which  he  po^essed,  there  stood  forth  a  person  called  Meae- 
tulus,  related  by  blood  in  some  degree  to  the  royal  family. 
His  progenitors,  however,  had  always  opposed  their  interests, 
and  their  issue  had,  with  various  success,  disputed  the  throne 
with  the  branch  then  in  possession.  This  man,  having  rous¬ 
ed  his  countrymen  to  'arms,  among  whom  his  influence  was 
great,  by  reason  of  their  dislike  to  the  reigning  dynasty,  levied 
open  war  ;  so  that  the  King  was  obliged  to  take  the  field,  and 
fight  for  the  crown.  In  that  battle  Capusa  fell,  together  with 
a  great  nui^ber  of  the  principal  men  of  the  kingdom  ;  while 
the  whole  nation  of  the  Massy  lians  submitted  to  the  dominion 
and  government  of  Mezetulus.  He  did  not,  however,  as¬ 
sume  the  regal  title  ;  but,  satisfied  with  the  modest  one  of 
Protector,  gave  the  name  of  king  to  the  boy  Lacumaces,  the 
surviving  son  of  him  whom  he  had  slain.  In  hopes  of  pro¬ 
curing  an  alliance  with  the  Carthaginians,  he  took  to  wife  a 
Carthaginian  woman  of  distinction,  daughter  of  Hannibal’s 
sister,  formerly  married  to  King  iEsalces  ;  and  sending  am¬ 
bassadors  to  Syphax,  renewed  with  him  an  old  connection  of 
hospitality,  endeavouring,  by  ail  these  measures,  to  secure  a 
support  against  Masinissa. 
XXX.  On  the  other  hand,  Masinissa,  hearing  that  his  un¬ 
cle  was  dead,  and  afterwards  that  his  cousin-german  wasslain^ 
came  over  from  Spain  into  Mauritania.  The  King  of  the 

134  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R,  548, 
Mooi^,  atdbi^time,  was  Bocchar:  applying  to  him  as  a  sup¬ 
pliant,  he  obtained,  by  the  humblest  entreaties,  four  thousand 
Moors  to  escort  him  on  his  journey,  not  being  able  to  pre¬ 
vail  for  any  aid  in  die  war.  When  he  arrived  with  these  on 
the  fixmtiers  of  the  kingdom,  as  he  had  before  despatched 
messengers  to  his  own  and  his  father’s  friends,  about  hve  hun¬ 
dred  Numidians  assembled  about  him.  He  then  sent  back  the 
Moors  according  to  his  engagement :  and  although  the  num¬ 
bers  that  joined  him  were  short  of  his  expectations,  and  not 
such  as  might  encourage  him  to  undertake  an  affair  of  mo¬ 
ment  ;  yet,  believing  that  by  entering  upon  action,  and  mak¬ 
ing  some  effort,  he  should  gather  strength  for  a  more  im¬ 
portant  enterprise,  he  threw  himself  in  the  way  of  the  young 
King  Lacumaces,  as  he  was  going  to  Syphax  at  Thapsus. 
The  attendants  of  Lacumaces  flying  back  in  consternation,  Ma- 
sinissa  took  the  city  at  the  first  assault,  received  the  submis¬ 
sion  of  some  of  the  King’s  party  who  surrendered,  and  slew 
others  who  attempted  to  resist ;  but  the  greatest  part  of  them, 
with  the  boy  himself,  escaped  during  the  tumult  to  Thapsus, 
whither  they  had  at  first  intended  to  go.  The  success  of  Ma- 
sinissa  in  this  small  exploit,  and  on  the  first  commencement 
of  his  operations,  drew  the  regards  of  the  Numidians  towards 
him,  while  the  old  soldiers  of  Gala  flocked  from  all  parts 
of  the  country  and  the  towns,  inviting  the  young  prince  to 
proceed  to  the  recovery  of  his  father’s  kingdom.  Mezetulus 
was  superior  in  number  of  men :  for,  besides  the  army  with 
which  he  had  conquered  Capusa,  he  was  strengthened  by 
some  troops  who  had  submitted  after  the  King  was  slain ; 
the  boy  Lacumaces  having  likewise  brought  succours  from 
Syphax.  Mezetulus  had  fifteen  thousand  foot,  ten  thousand 
horse,  with  whom  Masinissa  engaged  in  battle,  though  much 
inferior  in  number.  The  valour,  however,  of  the  veteran 
soldiers  prevailed,  aided  by  the  skill  of  their  leader,  who  had 
gained  experience  in  the  war  between  the  Romans  and  Car- 

BOOK  XXIX. 

135 

B.C.  204.] 
thaginians.  The  young  King,  with  his  guardian  and  a  small 
bcKly  of  Massylians,  escaped  into  the  territories  of  the  Car¬ 
thaginians.  Masinissa  thus  recovered  his  father’s  throne,  yet, 
foreseeing  that  he  should  have  a  much  more  severe  struggle 
to  maintain  against  Syphax,  he  thought  it  best  to  come  to  a 
reconciliation  with  his  cousin-german.  Proper  persons  were 
accordingly  sent  to  give  Lacumaces  hopes,  that  if  he  put  him¬ 
self  under  the  protection  of  Masinissa,  he  should  enjoy  the 
same  honourable  provision  which  iEsalces  had  formerly 
known  under  Gala ;  and  to  assure  Mezetulus  not  only  of  im¬ 
punity,  but  of  an  entire  restitution  of  all  his  property.  As 
they  both  preferred  a  moderate  share  of  fortune  at  home  to 
exile,  he  brought  them  over  to  his  side,  notwithstanding  the 
Carthaginians  used  every  means  to  prevent  it. 
XXXI.  During  these  transactions  Hasdrubal  happened  to 
be  with  Syphax:  and  when  the  Numidian  seemed  to  think 
that  it  was  of  little  consequence  to  him  whether  the  govern¬ 
ment  of  the  Massylians  were  in  the  hands  of  Lacumaces  or  of 
Masinissa,  he  told  him  that  he  would  be  greatly  mistaken 
in  supposing  that  Masinissa  would  be  content  with  the  ac¬ 
quisitions  which  had  satisfied  his  father  Gala,  or  his  uncle 
^salces.  That  he  was  possessed  of  much  greater  spirit  and 
understanding  than  had  ever  appeared  in  any  of  his  race ; 
that  he  had  often  in  Spain  exhibited,  both  to  his  allies  and 
enemies,  instances  of  such  courage  as  is  very  rarely  seen  ; 
that  both  Syphax  and  the  Carthaginians,  unless  they  smo¬ 
thered  that  rising  flame,  would  soon  be  enveloped  in  a  gene¬ 
ral  conflagration,  when  it  would  not  be  in  their  power  to  help 
themselves  ;  that  as  yet  his  strength  was  infirm,  and  might  be 
easily  broken,  while  he  was  endeavouring  to  heal  the  divisions 
of  his  kingdom.”  By  such  kind  of  arguments  Syphax  was 
induced  to  lead  an  army  to  the  frontiers  of  the  Massylians, 
into  a  district  about  which  there  had  often  been  not  only  ver¬ 
bal  disputes,  but  battles  fought,  with  Gala  ;  and  there  to  pitch 

136 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[YA.548. 

his  camp,  as  if  it  were  bis  acknowledged  property  ;  alleging 
that  ‘‘  if  any  opposition  were  made,  which  was  what  was  mc^t 
to  be  wished,  he  would  have  an  opportunity  of  fighting :  but 
if  the  district  were  abandoned  through  fear,  he  should  then 
proceed  into  the  heart  of  the  kingdom  :  that  the  Massylians 
would  either  submit  to  his  authority  without  a  contest,  or,  at 
all  events,  would  be  unable  to  contend  with  him.^’  Stimulated 
by  such  discourses,  Syphax  made  war  on  Masinissa,  and,  in 
the  first  encounter,  routed  and  dispersed  the  Massylians. 
Masinissa  fled  from  the  field,  attended  only  by  a  few  horse¬ 
men,  to  a  mountain  which  the  natives  call  Balbus.  A  num¬ 
ber  of  families  with*their  tents  and  cattle,  which  is  all  their 
wealth,  followed  their  King  :  the  rest  of  the  Massylians  sub¬ 
mitted  to  Syphax.  The  mountain,  of  which  the  fugitive  took 
possession,  abounds  with  grass  and  water  ;  and  as  it  was  thus 
weU  adapted  to  the  grazing  of  cattle,  it  supplied  abundance 
of  food,  to  feed  men  living  on  flesh  and  milk.  Excursions 
from  hence  were  made  through  all  the  neighbouring  parts  ; 
at  first  secretly,  and  by  night ;  afterwards  openly.  The  lands 
of  the  Carthaginians  suffered  most,  because  there  was  greater 
plenty  of  spoil  there,  than  among  the  Numidians,  and  it  was 
carried  off  with  less  danger.  At  length  they  became  so  bold 
as  to  carry  down  their  booty  to  the  sea,  and  sell  it  to  mer¬ 
chants,  who  brought  their  ships  thither  for  the  purpose  ;  and 
on  these  occasions,  greater  numbers  of  the  Carthaginians 
were  slain  and  made  prisoners,  than  often  happens  in  a  re¬ 
gular  engagement.  On  this  subject,  the  Carthaginians  made 
heavy  complaints  to  Syphax,  earnestly  pressing  him  to  crush 
this  remnant  of  the  foe.  To  this  he  was  himself  well  in¬ 
clined,  but  thought  it  rather  beneath  the  dignity  of  a  king  to 
pursue  a  vagrant  robber,  as  he  styled  him,  through  die 
mountains. 
XXXII.  Bocchar,  a  spirited  and  enterprising  general,  was 
chosen  by  the  Nuaaidian  for  that  employment.  Four  thou- 

t$f 

1^  t#o  ^t^Misand  horse  ^ere  gtvea  luai ;  whh  a 
promise  of  iBs^itiise^ward  if  he  sln^ld  faimg  faacA  ^ 
of  Masmtsso  $  t>r  radmr  if  he  shooM  take  him  alive,  fi^a*  ^bsA 
the  iacter  wnM  he  to  Mm  a  matter  of  mexpmsiMe 
FaUiog  uaexpectedlf  mi  Masinissa’s  mfeo,  whmi  they 
6caUered^bmtt,and  off  their  guard,  smd  who  were  m  con¬ 
siderable  numbers,  he  shut  them  out,  together  thehr  cat¬ 
tle,  from  the  fwotection  ^f  dioee  who  wore  m  arms,  driving 
Masinissa  himself,  with  Ms  few  followers,  to  summit  of , 
the  mountain*  On  this,  considering  the  war  as  nearly  hnidi- 
ed,  he  sent  to  Ae'  Kh%  hoth  booty  of  <^^le  said  the  pri¬ 
soners,  md  Mso^a  fiekt  df  his  forces,  wMch  were  nnjre  nanmr- 
ous  thfttidic  i^miAiier  of  Ae  busies  r^uired.  3^ten,  with 
BO  more  dian  fivV  hundred  foot  imd  two  hundred  horse  f^hr- 
suing  Masmissa,  who  had  ^ne  down  from  the  t<^  of  ^he 
moanmm,  he  shut  Mm  opin'a  nhrrow  valley,  securing  the 
entrance  at  each  ciM*  Great  slaughter  was  there  diade  of 
the  Massyltans  i  'Masinissa;  with  not  more  than  fifty  horse¬ 
men,  effected  a  retreat  throu^  the  intricate  passes  of  the 
mountains,  with  which  the  purs^iers  were  nnacquainted. 
Bocchar,  however,  efosely  fdlloWed^his  steps,  and  overtidiing 
him  in  an  open  plrin,  hear  the  cky  Glupea,  surromided  Mm 
in  sucMa  manner,  that  he"%lew  every  one  of  his  Icffowers 
except  four  horsemra  ;  flfasinissa,  with  these,  and  after  re¬ 
ceiving  a  wound;  slipped  out  of  his  hands,  as  it  were^Hluring 
the  tumult.  Thek*  flight  was  in  full  view,  a  body  of  horse 
being  spread  over  the  whol€  plain,  some  of  whom  pursued 
these  five  remaining  cnc^ks,  while  others,  in  Order  to  meet 
them,  pushed  across  their  route.  A  large  river  lay  in  the 
Way  of  the  fugitives,  into  which  they  plunged  their  l^ses 
without  hesitation,  being  pressed  by  greater  danger 
hind.  Hurried  away  by  the  current,  they  Were  carried  dotm 
bbliquely  ;  and  of  them  being  swallowed  by  its  riolcnt 
rapidity  in  sight  of  die  enemy,  diey  believed  that  Msrinissa 
VOL.  IV. - T 

138 

HISTORY  or  ROME. 

£V  J*.  54fE. 

himself  had  perished:  but,  with  the  two  other  horsemen,  he 
landed  among  ^me  bushes  on  the  farther  bank.  This  put  an 
end  to  Bocchar^s  pursuit,  for  he  durst  not  venture  into  the 
river  ;  and  besides,  he  was  persuaded  that  the  object  of  it  no 
longer  existed  :  he  therefore  returned  to  the  King,  with  the 
ilUgrounded  report  of  Masinissa’s  death.  Messengers  were 
despatched  with  the  joyful  news  to  Carthage  ;  though  in  its 
spread  over  Africa,  men’s  minds  were  variously,  affected  by 
it.  Masinissa,  while  healing  his  wound  by  the  applicati<m 
of  herbs,  and  in  a  secret  cave,  lived  fur  several  days  oa  what 
the  two  horsemen  procured  by  pillage.  '  As  soon  as  it  was 
cicatrised,  and  be  thought  himself  able  to  hear  the  motion,  he 
set  out  again  with  wonderful  resoluticm^lto  make  another  ef¬ 
fort  for  the  recovery  of  his  kingdom.  He  collected  in  his 
way  not  more  than  forty  horsemen  ^  but,  as  soon  as  he  ar¬ 
rived  among  the  Massylians,  and  made  himself  known  to 
them,  they  were  so  powerfully  actuated  both  by  their  former 
affection  and  the  unhoped-for  joy  at  seeing  him,  in  safety, 
whom  they  believed  to  have* perished,  that  in  a  few  days  six 
thousand  armed  foot  aud  four  thousand  horse  repaired  to  his 
standard ;  and  he  not  only  got  possession  of  his  father’s 
kingdom,  hut  laid  waste  the  countries  in  alliance  with  the 
Carthaginians,  and  the  frontiers*  of  the  Massesylians^  the  do¬ 
minion  of  Syphax.  Having  thus  provoked  the  Numidian  to 
war,  took  post  between  tCirtha  and  Hippo,  on  the  tops  of 
mountains,  in  a  situation  convenient  for  all  his  purposes. 
XXXI II.  Syphax,  thinking  this  an  aflFair  of  too  much  im¬ 
portance  to  be  entrusted  to  the  management  of  his  generals, 
sent  a  part  of  his  army  with  his  son  Vermina,  tiien  a  youth  ; 
witbiorders  to  march  round  in  a  circuit,  and  fall  upon  the 
enemy’s  reai^,  when  he  himself  should  have  attracted  their 
attention  to  his  side.  Vermina  set  out  by  night,  so  as  to  be 
concealed  until  he  should  begin  the  attack :  hut  Syphax  de¬ 
camped  in  the  diy,  and  marched  openly,  as  he  was  to  engage 

U9 

RC.  sm.] 
a  i^gdbr  pflch^  battle.  Whca  be  Aought  that  sfJIcient 
tntie  had  been  aMowed  for  those  who  had  been  ^ent  rotmd  to 
have  arBsaid  thcit  atatioB,  he  led  his  forces,  by  a 
acclivitjr^'tKrectly  vip  the  motmtaiti,  for  he  relied  both  on  his 
numbers,  and  the  ambuscade  which  he  had  prepared  on  his 
enemy**  rear.  Masinissa,  on  the  other  side,  drew  up  his  men, 
depending  "ohtefiy  on  the  advantage  of  the  ^ound^  although, 
had  h  been  tnc^h  less  In  bis  favour,  he  Would  not  have  de¬ 
clined  the  fight.  The  battle  was  furidiis,  and  for  a  long  time 
doubtiol  V  ’Mummsst  being  favoured  by  his  situation  and  the 
bravtary  of-^"  men  ;  Syphax  by  bk  numbers,  which  wci^ 
more  This  great  laultimde  being  divided^ 
one  part  prc^d  pn  in  {rdtr^^hilCvdie  odier  part  suirounded 
die  rear  j  whkh  gavea  decMe^  victory  to  %fhax  |  nor 
there  even  itKim  ftSr  die  enemyjto  escape,  inclosed  as  they 
were  on  bothsides*  the  rest,  therefiwc,  horse  and  foot,  were 
eithmr  slain  or  taken.  Masthissa  colketed  vound  himself,  in 
close  order^  about  two  himdred  horscnwm,  whom  he  divkfed 
into  three  squadrons^  With  orders  to  break  through  the  ene- 
n^,  having  appointed  a  place  where  they  should  re-aasemble, 
after  being  separated  in'^their  flight.  He  himself  made  his 
way  through -the  midst^of  their  weapmia,  as  he  had  proposed ; 
the  other  two  squadrems  fa^ed  in*  the  attempt ;  one  surren¬ 
dering  through  fear,  the  other,  after  a  mcne  obstinate  resist¬ 
ance,  being  overwhelmed  with  darts,  and  cut  to  pieces.  Ver- 
mina  followed  dose  on  the  steps  of  Masinissa,  who  baffled 
him  by  frequently  toming  out  of  one  road  into  another ;  and 
whom  he  at  length  obliged,  harassed  with  extretne  fatigue^ 
to  desist  from  the  puisuit,  and  arrived  himself  with  sixty 
horsemen  at  the  lesser  Syrtk*  There,  with  the  honourable 
consciousness  of  having  often  attempted  the  recovery  of  his 
father’s  kingdom,  he  rested  until  the  coming  of  Cams  Laeflius 
and  the  Roman  fleetto  Africa,  between  the  Carthaginian  Em¬ 
poria  and  the  nation  of  the  Garamatitians;  From  cir- 

140 

msTom  m  home, 
eumstasceift,  1  tm  htdii^  te  believe,  tiiat  a»l^ 
afterwards  te  ^pib,  rath^  wttk  a  maU  bady  of  forces  dia^ 
a  large  one  :  for  tbesN^y  great  niimber  wlu^  liaadM&co  men* 
by  some,  suit»~ibe  oOadttkm  of  a  fckig<m  tl^  ; 
the  smaller  that  of  an^esdle. 
I  ICXXIV.  The  Cmht^loiaas,  haviag  lost  a^la^i^  party  of 
horse,  together  wHh  ikeir  commander,  made^p  abater  body 
of  cavalry,  by  a  new  levy,,  said  gave  die  c<»am^d  of  it  to 
Haotio,  SOB  of  HamUcar.  They  sent  frequeady  for  Hasdru* 
bsd  and  Syphax  by  leteera  aad  messengers,  and  at  lengdi  by 
ambi^sadors,  Hs^drabsd  wa  mdered  to  come  to  the  aid  of 
,  hk  native  city,  which  was  tte^tened  with  a  siege,  while  Sy« 
pilmx  ws»  entreated  to  br^  rebef  to  Carthage,  and  to  tdl 
Aflriob  Sdpm wascat  tlmt  Utica,  sdiont  five  tnUes 
ftt»a  tlH^^eftjr;  havmg  removed  from  the  seancoast,  where, 
foft  a  fhw  days,  he  Imd  a  camp  aij^oinlng  die  fleet.  Haimo, 
havhig^  received  newly-raised  ^idy  lof  cavalry,  (which,  m 
fiar  kmo  behig  ^wg  enou^  to  maire  any  attempt  on  tl^ 
enemy,  was  imt  even  suffickixt  to  prot^t  die  <kwmtry  fimi 
devastation,)  made  it  his  first  cate  m  increase  dieir  numb^ 
by  pressing.  Tho^  of  other  nations  were  not  rejected ;  but 
he  collected  mosdy  Nomidians,  whoare  by  far  the  best  horse** 
Bf^n  in  Africa,  iiaving  got  together  four  thousand  horse, 
he  took  up  his  quarters  in  a  city  called  Salera,  fifteen  miles 
flmm  die  RonNi  camp.  When  this  was  told  to  Scipio,  he 
said,  widi  siM^se,  What^  cavrfry  lod^ng  in  homes  du^ 
itBgdie^sunatnerf  Xet  them  be  even  moiv  in  number,  wMle 
they 'have  such  a  Ccrnimander.’^  The  less  they  showed  c€ 
acdidty^  die  kas  time  he  thought  shouU  be  Imt  by  himself ; 
he  dierefcm  i^t  ^wward  Masii^sa  with  the  cavalry,  ^ving 
diem  diiecttomt  to  ride  rqi  to  die  gates,  and  entice  the  enemy 
enttobi^^  Timt  when  their  multitudes  should  pour  out, 
and  beemim'^tOo  powerful  mthe  ctmtest,  he  should  give  way 
^degmes  |  imd  dn^  he  wt^id  himself  come  up  in  dme  to 

BOOK  XXIX* 

m 

^  the  adviinc^  party  had^ip  |^4pp> 
posed,  effected  his  purpose,  he  fcdlowed  widt 
horse,  oad  p^ioeeded,  witWut  heiagc^^i^e^  of 
seme  miog  pou^s  which  lay  very  muud  the 
wiodiegs  of  die  road.  Masipbsa,  accofdi^h^  pUa  laid 
dow^  acted  am  dqae»  as  if  threateai^  9#  fsfgult,  at  an¬ 
other,  as  if  seized  with  fear  j  now  riding  i^tp  the  veiy  gates, 
andmw  i^trealhig  wiA  dissesabled  hast^  which  gave  such 
boldness  to  the  enemy,  ffiey  were  at  length  tempted  to 
oome  out  of  the  town^  and  pursue  hiipi  with  disorxter^  in  his 
eouBter&ited  di^^-  Alh  however,  I^d  cc>^  feuth; 
and  w|dt  these  remaining  numbera  the  comman^r  was  a 
Utde  perple^^  Some,  overpowered  with  wine  and  deep, 
he  had|c  i:o&.pel  to  the  lading  of  arms,  others  had  to  stop 
who  were  runmug  out  iy  the  gates  without  their  standards, 
and" in  sca^m*ed  parties,  wholly  regardless  of  order  or  ranks. 
Masinis^$a  withstood  them  at  ^mt,  while  they  rushed  mhly 
to  dm  charge  ;  hut  soon  afmr,  greater  ni:^mbe^s  pouripg  out, 
pnd  their  whnle  lor^  of.  cavalry  joining  in  die  conflict,  they 
c^ld  no  longer  be  xesisted*  Yet  Masinissa  did  not  hetake 
himself  to  a  hasty  flight  s  hut  retired  leisurely,  he  threw 
themcm tol^luUs  whicheoncealed  the  Roman  cavalry.  These 
immediately  risi^  up,  their  strength  unimpaired,  and  dmir 
horms  fresh,  spread  .themselves  round  Hauno  and  the 
cans,  who  were  fatigued  the  fight  and  the  pursuit  ^  apd 
Masinma,  suddenly  wheeling  about,  returned  to  the  charge. 
About  one  thousand,  who  composed  the  first  division,  and 
ndm  could  not  easily  retreat,  were,  together  with  Hanno  the 
commander,  surrounded  and  slain :  the  rest,  terrified  princi¬ 
pally  by  the  death  of  their  general,  fled  in  confusion,  and 
were  puirsued,  for  thirty  miles,  by  the  ccmqucrors,  who  took 
or  slew  two  thousand  more  of  the  cavplry*  It  j^pemed,0at 
ibere  wereammig  these  not  less  than  twobundred  Cjc^agbsian 

14a  HISTOSY  OF  IBOME.  [Y%  J48. 
horsemen ;  several  of  them  of  the  ^richest  and  mo&,  di^il- 
gulshed  families.  '  v 
XXXV.  It  happened  that  the  same  day  on  which  this  bat¬ 
tle  was  fought,  the  ships,  which  had  carried  the  teoty  to  Si¬ 
cily,  returned  with  stores,  as  if  they  had  foreseeri  that  they 
were  to  bear  away  another  cargo  as  before*  All  writers  do 
not  mention  two  generals  of  the  Carthaginians,  of  the  same 
name,  being  slain,  in  two  battles  of  the  cavalry ;  apprehend^ 
ing,  I  suppose,  that  there  was  a  mistake,  occasioned  by  the 
same  l^ing  related  twice.  Nay,  Caelius  and  Valerius 
evai  assert,  that  Hanno  was  taken  prisoner.  Scipio  ^adc 
presents  to  the  officers  and  horsemen,  according  ik  beha¬ 
viour  of  each  ;  and,  above  all,  he  paid  extraordinary  honours 
to  Masinissa.  Having  placed  a  strong  garrison ^n  3^era,  he 
set  out  with  the  rest  cf  the  army ;  and  not  ooty  laid  waste 
the  cotriStry  wherever  he  maryhed^  but  also  todk  some  cities 
and  towns,  and  thereby  widely  diffused  the  terror  of  Hs  arms^ 
Scipio  returned  to  the  camp  on  the  seventh  day  after  he  had 
left  it,  bringing  with  him  a  great  number  of  men  and  catde, 
and  a  vast  quantity  of  plunder;  He  then  dismissed  the  ships, 
heavily  laden,  a  second  time,  with  all  kinds  of  spoil.  From 
that  time,  laying  aside  small  expeditions,  and  predatory  ex¬ 
cursions,  he  turned  the  whole  force  of  the  war  to  foe  siege  of 
Utica  ;  intending,  if  he  should  take  it,  to  establish  his  head¬ 
quarters  there  for  foe  future,  in  order  to  the  better  execution 
of  the  rest  of  his  designs.  While  the  marine  forces  made 
their  approaches  on  that  side  <)f  foe  city  which  is  washed  by 
the  sea,  those  of  the  land  advanced  from  a  rising  ground  hang¬ 
ing  almost  over  foe  walls.  Engines  and  machines  had  been 
sent  from  Sicily,  with  foe  stores  ;  and  many  were  made  in 
foe  armory,  where  a  number  of  artificers,  skilled  in  such 
works,  were  retained  for  foe  purpose.  The  people  of  Utica, 
attacked  on  all  sides  by  such  a  powerful  force,  had  no  h<^a 
but  from  foe  Carthaginians  ;  nor  the  Carthaginians  any  but 

BOOK  XXIX. 

143 

B.C.  IIM.1 
Hasdrut^  and  kom  only,  as  he  should  able  to 
influence  t®yphaa«  measures  proceeded  too  slowly' 
for  thetr  anxious^  desire  of  jud^  of  udiich  they  stood  so  much 
in  need*  Hi^drubal,  though  he  badv  by  the  most  diligent 
press,  made  up  the  number  of  thirty  thousand  foot,  and  three 
thousand  horse,  yet  durst  not  move  towards  the  camp  of  the 
enemy  before  the  arrival  of  Syphax.  Syphax  soon  came,  with 
flfty  thousand  foot,  and  ten  thousand  horse  ;  and  immediately 
decamping  from  Carthage,  sat  down  at  a  small  from 
Utica,  and  the  intrenchments  of  the  Romans.  Thetr  ap~ 
proach  produced  at  least  this  consequencjs,  that  Scipto,  after 
having  hesieged  Utica  for  near  forty  days,  and  ttmd  evoy 
expedient  for  its  reduction  in  vam,  was  oMiged  to  retire  from 
it,  as  the  winter  was  now  at  hand.  He  fortified  his  winter 
camp  on  a  promontoty ,  joined  to  the  continent  by  a  narrow 
isthmus,  and  which  stretches  out  to  some  length  into  the  sea  ; 
and  included  tbe<naval  <^aip  within  the  same  intrenchment. 
The  legions  were  stationed  on  the  middle  of  the  isthmus ;  the 
ships  were  hauled  on  shoi^^-and  the  seamen  occupied  the 
cohst  which  faces  the  north;  the  cavalry  a  valley  on  the 
south.  Such  were  the  transactions  in  Africa  to  the  latter 
end  of  autumn. 
XXXVI.  Various  stores  were  imported  from  Sicily  and 
Italy ;  and  besides  ‘the  corn  collected  from  all  quarters  of 
the  adjacent  country,  Cneius  Octavius,  propraetor,  brought  a 
vast  quantity  out  of  Sardinia,  from  Tiberius  Claudius,  the 
praetor :  in  consequence  of  which,^  not  only  the  granaries  al¬ 
ready  built  were  filled,  ybut  new  ones  were  erected.  Clothing 
was  wanted  for  die  troops :  that  matter  was  g^veti  in  charge 
to  Octavius,  with  directions  to  apply  to  the  praetor,  and  to 
try  if  any  could  be  procured  by  him ;  a  Imsiness  which  he 
carefully  attended  to,  for  in  a  short  time  twelve  hundred 
gowns  and  twelve  thousand  jackets  were  sent.  During  the 
same  summer  in  which  these  things  passed  in  Africa,  Pub- 

HIST^¥  il6ME. 

i<l4 

tius  wlio  liad  the^rovitH^  ^ 
cm  his  tnurch  In  ^  dhtnct  pf  Croton,  engaged  H^iibcd  in 
a  tumnitnaty  %ittSe,  cn-  ra^a:  a  kind  of  skirmishing.  The 
Romans  -were  worsted ;  and  one  thbosimd  two  hundred  of 
the  cemsurs  army  slajis.  The  rest  returned  m  confosiem  to 
the  eamp,^which,  howwer,^^  ^emy  did%iot  ditie  to  assaidt. 
During  the  sileneeof  die  foltewitig^nijfht,Seitiprcmius  march* 
ed  away,  and,  having  sent  directions  to  Publius  pio- 
oonsul,  to  brihg  up  his  Icpcms,  he  made  u  jum^on  thdr 
forces;  thus,  two  commanders  and  riivo  armies  returned 
upon  Hannibal.  JSFeithcr  patty  dediined  an  engage^^t ; 
the  consid  deriving  c<mhdencefr(m’Ms.forces  being  defied; 
the  Carthaginian,  from  has  late  victory.  Sempromus  ltd  up 
his  own  legions  into  the  line,  diUse  of  Licinius  were 
placed  in  reserve,  in  the  beginning  of  the  battle  the  consul 
vowed  a  temple  to  Fortuna  Prtmigenia,4f  he  shotdd  defeat 
the  enemy  on  that  day;  and  the  object  of  his  vow  was  ac¬ 
complished.  The  Carthaginians  wei^  ttmted,  and ‘put  to 
^flight:  above  four  thousand  fell,  sothewhit  less  thmi  three 
hundred  were  made  *  prisoners,  with  wholit  wire  taken  forty 
horses,  arid  eleven  military  sttmdatds.  Hatmftml,  dismayed 
by  this  overthrow,  drew  off  his  army  to  Croton.  At  the 
same  time  Marcus  Cornelius,  consul,  not  so  much  by  force 
of  his  arms  as  by  the  terror  pf  his  judicial  proceedings,  kept 
Etruria  in  obedience ;  though  it  rhis  almost  entirely  devoted 
to  Mago,  and  to  the  hope  of  obtaining,  by  his  means,  a 
change  of  government.  The  inquisitions,  directed  by  the 
senate,  he  executed  with  the  utmost  impartiality  ;  atwi  many 
of  the  Tusc^  nobles,  who  had  either  gone  themselves,  or 
sent  deputies  to  Mago,  about  the  revolt  of  their  states,  stood 
trial,  and  were  found  guilty.  Others,  from  a. consciousness 
of  guilt,  went  into  voluntary  exile  ;  and  by  thus  withdraw¬ 
ing,  though  condemned  in  their  absence,' could  suffer  only 
iU  a  confiscation  of  their  effects. 

:  moKmm.  m 

-  WMe  :^.e<muk  mcrv 
Saetat  }MMm;die  cesaat/nat  R<aiic^ (Mawa» Lfepj^y^ 
t^aedim^citfedover  tbe.lMt:(^tlMrsea^&  i^amtuBli^ij^ 
prinioipal ;  '8<;vea  were-dtsjg^!tei% 
Dot.raie,  faowxTC^  irf'RiMe  wbo  had  sat  <ia  the  ^ride-chaji< 
orders  ^  nqiairiDg'  pv&Kc  braidfags  were  rd^Mced 
witfc  the  gceatett  stnetness.  A  roa^waiCcmtracted  fe^,  to 
be  mj^,4tdln  die-ox  rnariost  to  the  tempAe'irf  Veoua, 
'^ut^'lseMs ;  as^  a^teasplft  to  be  buih,  for  Great  Mi^Sur^ 
OB  the  Pafaktiae.  bUl.  A-  new  ta*,  firoin  the  sale  Cft-  was 
established.  .Tlus  article  had  been  sold  at  ^e  -sbcA  -paft  ^ 
aa^a«$  bodi-at  Rome,  and  tdjdl  parts  of  Italy:  aad  It  irtt 
now  directed  t®  be  sapjdied  iQ  ti»e  sante  rafe  at  Rome,  M  a 
hif^er.ia  the  eouatiy  towns  and  madkete,  aid  at  sjatiof^ 
prices'ia  diffiscent  plafceS.  .People  were  hnnfy  peiamtded^ 
that  Lisjnahad  contrived  this  ttot  in  rocMmmtf  msd  tmat^- 
connt  of  a  seotmce  having  been’  former)^  |«ssed|  cm  hla^^ 
which  had  coaridmredas  nc^ust.';  ri|d  that,  in 
price-of  sal^  '&e.''gi;e8tdta  jbtnidien''iiad  been  teid  cnsf^dte**  ' 
tribes  Iqr  whpte  nfflnmtce  dm  >  laid"  been  ccmdenmed^  .heitee 
the  aotnatpe  jSdybntor  «pM  ,'|^ven  to  him.  The  lustma 
was. dosed  ribam  jiamd;  hacanse  jhe  sensors  sent  per^ 
stMjs  dm>agfa..dl  the  prasnams,  to  bi^ng  thtnn  a  rmum^of  tJbt 
number  of  R9man  cirizem  in  -each  ^  apmes.' 
ingdwse,  diere  ipted,  in  ^  survey,  twohtu^^.jMd 
fiMutemi  thousand  men..,  Ctnuft  Clau^t^i^eio  Imd  jd|e 
our  cd  ch^b^  dboiumrum.  '11»  senate  thea  re^'^  ai«^.  ' 
vey  of.twelvh  :0oloh^  preteOted  by  the  ce^rs  “df  .#ic^, 
Cfil<mie8;a^^;|^  s^V«a^  been  done  befote,,m  c^er  ^ 

l^;^ae.at%;pidil»|lfe^.  "Wlnm  dwy  cawm^to^'!%a 
P<^an  tr^K,,  h^i'aphhoh  .si^vtBndied^^  name  of  .Marcus 
vot.iv. — 

HISTORY  Ot  ROME. 

{YJR.  S4M* 

Uvius,  and  henM  l|«sitaled  to  €ste, 
to  ** Cite  Marcus  bettig  actuated 
by  sbl»e  ramalns  of  theif  old  enmjty^  or  by  ^  unscaaoaaliie 
afifedlattoti  of  strictness^  he  .ordered  Eivitm  to  seti  hia 
becaixse  he  had  been  cotidemtied  by  a  sentence  ©f  the  people, 
jo  Tike  Uianner  Marcus  Livius,  when  they  came  to  the  Nsar- 
niao  tribe,  in  trfaich  the  name  of  his  cidkagne  appealed,  he 
Ordered  him  to  dispose  of  his  home,  for.  two  reasons:  <ate, 
that  he  had  given  false  evidence ;  tlm  other,  that  he  hid  imt 
been  sincere  in  his  recdnciliati<m  with  him.  Tht^  diey  be¬ 
came  engaged  in  a  scandalous  contest,  ,  eacb  aspers^  the 
tharactar  of  the  other,  tfiou^  at  tlws  same  time  he  ityured 
his  own.  On  going  out  of  their  office  of  censOr,  when  Cains 
Gtoihus  had  taken  the  oath  respecting  the  observance  of  the 
laws,  and  had  gone  up  to  the  treasury,  among  the  names  of 
those  whom  he  left  disfranchised  in  the  treasury  list,  he  gave 
in  the  name  of  his  associate.  Marcus  Litmus  also  eanpe 
thtthef,^and^  except  the  MetianMbe,  vriikh  hid  neither  con- 
cnrii^d  m  his  condenmation^  nor  in  ap^inting/Inm  ccmsul  or 
censor,  he  left  the  whole  Roman  people^  ,folity-four  tribes, 
disftat^hised  in  the  treasury  list ;  and  this  ^id)  he  did, 
because  they  ha4  not  only  condemned  Mm  when  innocent, 
but  had^  elected  him,  while  under  the  sank  sentence,  bodi 
cOnS^  ifod  censor  ;  so  thatfhey  could  not  dcpy  tlmt  they  bad 
been  ^^ty,  ieither  of  one  great  fault  in  giving  focir  sentence, 
or  jof  two  th'foc  eleciimts.  He  added,' that  Caius  Claudius 
Wptdd  be  ihclided  in  the  list  among  Ac  thirty 4mxt  tribes ; 
fcSt  that  if  Aei%  had  been  any  prec^ient  of  tnserdng  any 
pmba  t^it^inthe  treasury  list,  he  would  have  inserted  his 
particdarly/  Tlie  fontest  between  t^Bisaors,  thsm 
muhidly  repiTOchin|^  each  oAer,  wjis  dmaotefol  i  rWhile,  Ae 
rebirt^e  ^tven'to  Ae  g^ddtn^  of  pn6e^  h|)l^%  ^ 
emning  a  ^nsm^  and  tlm  strict  principles  of  that  age..  The 
ctmsots  having  imodimpute,  Cneius  Rwbius,  tribmie 

BOOK  XXIX. 

147 

BX.  204.] 
of  the  people^,  ^mking  that  ^l^ir  situation  afforded  him  an 
opportmiity  gaining  notice,  summoned  them  both  to  a 
trial  before  the  people:  but  the  senate  interfered,  and  stopped 
any  &rther  proceediagsr,  lest  the  office  of  censor  should,  in 
future,  be  subjected  to  the  humour  of  the  populace. 
XXXVlIJ.  During  the,  same  summer  the  consul  took 
Clampet^  in  Bruttium,  by  storm,  Consentia  and  Pandosia, 
withtJther  towns  of  smaU  consequence,  surrendered  volun¬ 
tarily ;  andy^  as  the  tipafr  of  the .  elections  drew  near,  it  was 
thought  more  expedient  to  call  home  Cornelias  from  Etru¬ 
ria,  where  thcrO  was  no  employptent  fqr  his  arms.  He  elect¬ 
ed  Cneius  Servilius  Ca^pio,  and  Cneius  ServiUus  Geminus. 
The  election  of  the  pnetors  was  then  held :  there  were  chosen 
Cneiua  Cornelius  Lentulus,  Publius  Quintilius  Varus,  Pub¬ 
lius  iElius  Psetus,  and  Publius  Viliius  Tappqjus ;  although 
the*two  latter  were  asdilcs  of,. the  commons.  The  consul,  as 
soon  as  the  .elections  were  over,  r^Hirned  into  Etruria  to  fits 
arPsy,  The  priests  wjip.dred  Uiat  year,  and  those  who^were 
substkated.Mthe  pla^fs  of  others,  were  Tiberius  Veturius 
Philo,  iftam^  of  Mai^,  elected*  and  inaugurated  in  the  room 
of  Marcus  .^kailius  RejgUlus,^*deceased  the  year  before.  In 
the  room  of  Marcus  Pomponius  Matho,  augur,  and  decem¬ 
vir,  were .  elated,  as  decemvir,  Marcus  Aurelius  Cotta  ;  as 
augur,  Tiberius  Semprqhius  Gracebps,  who  was  then  very 
young  ji  an  instance  HUthoae4imes  extrepaely  rare  in  the  dis¬ 
posal  of  a  liiest’s  office.*  Gfjdcti*  chariots,  with  four  horses, 
were  diat  year  plac^  in  the  Capitol  by.  the  curule  «dilcs, 
Caius  Livius  and  Marcos  Se^Uius  Geminus,  The  Roman 
g^mes  were.repeatedly  exhibited  for  two  days.  In  like  man¬ 
ner  the  Plebeian,  for  two  days,  by  the  sediles  Publius  iElius 
andPabUus  ViUiuSi,  There  was  also  a  feast  of  Jove  on  oc- 
,  casion  of  the  gsunes. 

history  of  ROME. 

BOOK  xxji. 
Scipio,  aided  by  Ma^iiiissa,  defeats  the  Carthaginians,  Syph^  and  Hasdru^ 
hal,  in  several  battles.  Syphax  taken  by  CxUus.and  >^sinissa.  Masi- 
nlssa  espouses  Sophonisba,  the'  wife  of  Syphax,  Basdrubal’s  daughter ; 
being  reproved  by  Scipio,  he  sends  her  pmson,  with>hich  she^juts  an 
to  her  life.  The  Cartha^nians,  reteed  to  great  eaftremity,  by 
Scipio’s  repeated  victories,  call  Hannibal  home  from  It^y  j  he  holds  a 
conference  with  Scipio  on  the  subject  of  peace,  and  is  again  defeated 
by  him  in  battle.  The  Cartha^nlans  sue  for  peace,  which  is  granted 
thew.  Masinissa  reinstated  in  his  kingdom.  Scipio  returns  to  Rome ; 
his  splendid  tfiuit^ ;  is'aumamed  Africanus. 
I.  CNEIUS  SERVILIUS  C^EPIO  and  Cains  Servlius 
Gcminus,  .being  consuls.- in  the  sixteenth  year  of 
B  C  2ol*  runic  war.  consulted  the  senate  on  this  state 
of 'public  affairs,. the  war,  and  the  provinces.  The 
senate  decreed,  that  the  consuls  should  i«rttle  between  them¬ 
selves,  or  determine  by  lot,  which  of  them  should  hold  the 
province  of  Bruttium,  and  act  against  Hannibal  j  and  which 
that  of  Etruria  and  Liguria.  That  he  to  whose  lot  Bnittium 
fell,  should  receive  the  army  from  Publins  Serapronius,  late 
consul.  That  Publius  Sempronius,  to  whom  the  command 

149^ 

BX.  203.]  BOOK  XX^.  , 
wa%  cdatinued^  a«  i^tpconsul^  for  a  year^  should  succeed  Pub¬ 
lius  jLkmkis,  who  was  to  coin«  homc.to  Rome.  Thisrco®- 
mauder  had^  adw  ac;quired  a  high  reputation  for  milhiiry 
skilly  in  addittem  to  lus  oth^r  eacelleat  qualifications^  of  which 
no  citizen,  at  that  time,  possessed  ^ch  ah  abundance ;  nature 
and  fotttme  ebnapiring  to  confer. on  him  every  thing  viduable 
in  msuu  He  was  of  a  noble  race^^and  possessed  great 
he  excelled  in  petsofial  beauty  strexigtii^pf  body  ;  he  was 
esteemed  the  most  eloquent  of  his  time,  whether  he  pleaded 
in  the  courts  of  justice,  or  ehforced  9r.  opposed  any  measure, 
either  in  ^he  senate, dr  before  the'  people  ;  and  was,  besides, 
remarkably  skilled  in  the  pontifical  law.  In/ Edition  to  all 
these,  the  consulship  enabled  him  to  acquire  fame  in  the  field. 
The  same  metlibd  of  proceeding,  which  the  senate  had  de¬ 
creed  in  regaid  to  the  provirfee  of  Bruttiutn,  Was  ordered  to 
be  followed  in  respect  pf  £ttwia'  ^d^i:#i^ria.  Marcus 
Cornelius  Was  ordered  to  deliver  AeiM^y  new  consul ; 
and,  his  commaml  being  ephtumed,^  tohni^l  the  pinyince  of 
Gaul,  with  those/  le^oim  which 'ifUcipa;:  &TH>miius,  prsetew*, 
had  commanded  ^he  year  before.  Vtlm  consids  then  cast 
lots  for  the  provinces :  Bruttium'  feH  to  Xfiepid,  '  Etruria  to 
Setvilius  Gemhtus*  ‘ 'The  provinces  of  tite  praetors  were  next 
put  to  thelot : .  Pitus  ,£lius  obtained  the  city  jurisdiction  ; 
Cneius  ientulus,  Sardinia ;  'Publius- Villi  us,  Stcily ;  Quin- 
tilius  Varus,  Arhnirium,  with  two  legions^  whidi  had  been 
under  Luctetius  Spurius.  Lucretius,  refined. on  his  sta¬ 
tion,  in  order  thathe  mi^trjrebuiid  the  city  of  Genoa,  which 
had  been  demolished  by  Mago  the  Carth^nian.  PubBus 
Saipto’s  command  wag  emitinued,  not  for  a  period  limited 
by  time^  but  by/tbe/ business,:  until  an  end  should  be  put  to 
the  wan  in  Africa  >  and  it  was  decreed,  that  a  supplication 
should  performed,' to  obtain  front  the  gods,  that  bis  hav¬ 
ing  passed  into  Africa  might  prove  happy  the  people,  to 
the  gen^l  himself,  and  to  the  army. 

150 

HISTOSY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  549. 

II.  Tfatec  thousand  men  were  raised  for  Sicilj^;  and,  be¬ 
cause  ^atever  strength  it  had  possessed  was  carried  over  to 
Cardiage,  it  was  resolved  that  the  coast  of  that  island  shbuld 
be  guarded  by  forty  ships,  lest  any  deet  shoidd  come  thither 
from  Africa.  Villius  cairied  with  him  to  Bkily  thirteen  new 
ships,  the  rest  wvre  dW  ones  repaired  the^e.  >  Marcus  Pom- 
ponius,  praetor  of  -frie  former  year,  (his  command  of  this  fleet 
being  continued,)  took  bn  board  the  new  ^oldier^.  An  eqbal 
number  of  ships  were  decreed  by  the  senate  to  Cneius  Oc¬ 
tavius,  praetor  likewise  df  the  former  year,  with  the  same 
right  of  command,  id  OVder  to  protect  the  obast  of  Sardinia. 
Lentulus,  prae^r,  was  ordered  to  supply  the  fleet  with  two 
thousand  soldiers.  The .  defence  of  the  coast  of  Italy  was 
intrusted  to  Mjarcus  Marclus,  praetor  of  the  former  year,  with 
the  same  number  of  shi}^  ;  because  it  was  uncertain  to  what 
place,  the  Cartb^iiHansimigln  xlit^ct  their  attack,  which  would 
probablj^'be  ag^nit- whatever  part  w^  destitute  of  forces  for 
its  defence.  Fbar  dtdt  fle^  in  pursuance  of  a  decree  of  the 
senate,  the  consufe  ehlls^  tha*ee  thou^nd  men,  and  also  two 
city  legions,  for  the.eaigenci^  of  die  War.  \Spaib,  with  the 
armies  there,  and  the  Command,  was  decreed  to  the  former 
generals,  Lucius  Ltntulus,  and  Lucius  Manlius  Acidinus. 
The  Romans  employed  in  their  service,  for  that  year,  in  all, 
twenty  legions,  and  a  hundred  and  sixty  ships  of  war.  The 
pi^tors  were  directed  to  repair  to  their  provinces ;  and  orders 
were  given  to  the  Consuls,  that,  before  their  departure  from 
the  city,  should  celebrate  the  great  gan^,  which  Titus 
Manilas  Torquatus^  ki  his  dictatorship,  had  vowed  to  be  ex- 
Inbited  in  the  fifth  year,  if  the  condition  of  the  st^  remain¬ 
ed  unaltered.  Religious  apprehenripns  were  rai^d  in  men’s 
minds,  by  relations  of  prodigies  Inrought  from  several  jdaces. 
It  was  believed  that  crows  had  not  only  mm  With  dieir  beaks 
some  gold  in  the  Capitol,  but  had  even  eat^  it.  At  Antium, 
mice  gnawed  a  golden  d^own.  A  vast  of  locusts 

BOOK  XXX. 

151 

B.C.203.] 
filled  all  the  country  round  Capua^  though  it  could  not  be 
discovered  from  whence  they  came.  At  Reate,  a  foal  was 
produced  with  five  feet.  At  Anagnia,  there  appeared  in  the 
sky,  at  first,  scattered  fire,  and  afterwards  a  {nx>digious  bl^e. 
At  Frusino,  a  circle  encompassed  the  sun  with  a  narrow  line ; 
then  the  orb  of  the  sun,  increasing  ip  size,  extended  its  cir¬ 
cumference  beyond  the  circle.  At  Arpinum,  in  a  level  plain, 
the  earth  sunk  into  a  vast  gulph.  When  one  of  the  consuls 
sacrificed  the  first  victims,  tfie  head  of  the  liver  was  wanting. 
These  prodigies  were  expiated  by  the  greater  victims,  the 
college  of  pontiffs  directing  to  what  gods  the  sacrifices  should 
be  made. 
HI.  As  socm  as  this  business  was  finished,  the  consuls  and 
praetors  set  out  for  their  respective  provinces.  They  directed 
their  chief  attastion  to  Africa,  as  if  it  were  allotted  to  them, 
cither  because  they  saw  that  the  ^and  interests  of  their 
country,  and  of  the  war, -depended  on  the  proceedings  there, 
or  from  a  desire  to  gratify  Scipio,  who  was  then  the  object  of 
univers^  favour  among  all  the  members  of  the  state.  There¬ 
fore,  thither  were  sent  not  only  from  Sardinia,  as  was  men* 
tioned  before,  but  from  Sicily  also,  and  Spain,  clothing,  com, 
and  arms,  with  every  other  kind  of  stores  :  while  Scipio  re¬ 
laxed  not  his  diligence  during  any  part  of  the  winter  in  the 
operations  of  war,  for  which  he  found  abundant  occasion  on 
evc^  side.  He  was  engaged  in  the  siege  of  Utica  ;  Hasdru- 
baFs  camp  was  within  sight ;  the  Carthaginians  had  launched 
their  ships,  and  kept  their  fleet  equipped,  and  in  readiness  to 
intercept  his  convoys.  Amidst  so  many  objects  which  re¬ 
quired  his  attention,  he  did  not  neglect  endeavouring  to  re¬ 
cover  the  friendship  of  Sypbax  ;  hoping  that  he  might  now 
perhaps  be  cloyed  with  love,  in  the  full  enjoyment  of  his 
bride.  The  answers  of  Syphax  contained,  chiefly,  proposals 
for  an  accommodation  with  the  Carthaginians,  on  the  terms 
of  the  Romans  retiring  from  Africa,  and  the  Carthaginians 

152 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  549. 

from  Italy  ;  but  afforded  scarcely  any  hopes,  that  he  would 
relinquish  his  present  engagements.  I  am  more  incli^d  to 
believe,  that  this  business  was  transacted  by  messe]:^rs,  as 
most  authors  affirm,  than  that  Syphax  came  in  person  to  the 
Roman  camp  to  a  conference,  as  Antias  Valerius  writes.  At 
first,  the  Roman  general  hardly  permitted  tbqse  terms  to  be 
mentioned  by  his  people  ;  but  afterwards,  in  order  that  they 
might  have  a  plausible  pretext  for  going  frequently  into  the 
enemy’s  camp,  he  softened  his  refusals,  even  •seemingly  in¬ 
clining  to  a  negociation.  The  winter-huts  of  the  Carthaginians 
were  composed  almost  entirely  of  timber,  which  they  had 
hastily  collected  from  the  fields  :  those  of  the  Numidians  were 
formed  of  reeds  interwoven,  and  most  of  them  covered  with 
mats,  and  dispersed  up  and  down  without .  any  regularity, 
some  of  them  even  on  the  outside  of  the  trench  and  rampart, 
for  they  were  left  to  choose  their  own  grpund.  These  cir¬ 
cumstances  being  related  to  Scipio,  .gave  him  hopes  ,  that  he 
might  find  an  opportunity  of  burning  the  enemy’s  camp. 
IV.  In  the  retinue  of  the  embassy  to  Syphax,  he  sent,  in¬ 
stead  of  common  attendants,  centurions  of  the  first  rank,  of 
approved  courage  and  prudence,  dressed  as  servants ;  who, 
while  the  ambassadors  were  engaged  in  conference,  might 
ramble  through  the  camp,  and  observe  all  the  approaches  and 
oudets  ;  the  situation  and  form,  both  of  the  whole  and  of  the 
several  parts  of  it ;  where  the  Carthaginians  lay,  wherq  the 
Numidians ;  what  distance  there  was  between  Hasdrubid’s 
station  and  the  King’s ;  and,  at  the  same  time,  discover  their 
method  of  fixing  outposts  and  watches,  and  whether  they 
were  more  open  to  surprise  by  night,  or  by  day.  Many  con¬ 
ferences  being  held,  care  was  taken  to  send  different  persons 
at  different  times,  in  order  that  the  greater  number  might  be 
acquainted  with  every  circumstance.  These  frequent  con¬ 
versations  had  led  Syphax,  and,  through  him  the  Carthagi¬ 
nians,  to  entertain  daily  more  confident  expectations  of  a 

BOOK  XXX. 

153 

B.C.  203.] 

peace,  when  the  Roman  ambassadors  told  him,  that  they 
were  ordered  not  to  return  to  the  general  without  a  definitive 
answer.:  therefore,  if  his  own  determination  was  fixed,  he 
should  declare  it ;  or,  if  Hasdrubal  and  the  Carthaginians 
were  to  be  consulted,  he  should  do  it  without  delay.  It  was 
time  that  either  the  terms  of  peace  should  be  adjusted,  or  the 
war  carried  on  with  vigour.’^  While  Syphax  was  consulting 
Hasdrubal,  and  Hasdrubal  the  Carthaginians,  the  spies 
had  time  to  take  a  view  of  every  thing,  and  Scipio  also  to 
make  the  preparations  necessary  to  his  design.  From  the 
mention  of  accommodation,  and  their  expectation  of  it,  the 
Carthaginians  and  Numidians  took  not  the  necessary  pre¬ 
cautions  against  any  attempt  which  the  enemy  might  make. 
At  length  an  answer  was  returned,  in  which,  as  the  Romans 
appeared  exceedingly  anxious  for  peace,  the  Carthaginians 
took  the  opportunity  of  adding  some  unreasonable  conditions, 
which  afforded  a  plausible  pretence  to  Scipio,  who  now  wish¬ 
ed  to  break  the  truce.  Accordingly,  telling  the  King’s  mes¬ 
senger,  that  he  would  take  the  opinion  of  his  council  on  the 
affair,”  he  answered  him  next  day,  that  he  alone  had  la¬ 
boured  to  put  an  end  to  the  war,  none  of  the  other  parties,  in 
fact,  showing  any  disposition  towards  it :  that  Syphax  must 
entertain  no  hopes  of  entering  into  any  treaty  with  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  unless  he  renounced  the  party  of  the  Carthaginians.” 
Thus  he  dissolved  the  truce,  in  order  to  mature  his  plans. 
Launching  his  ships,  (for  it  was  now  the  beginning  of  spring,) 
he  put  on  board  engines  and  machines,  as  if  an  attack  on 
Utica  were  intended  by  sea  ;  at  the  same  time  sending  two 
thousand  men  to  take  possession  of  the  hill  which  command¬ 
ed  that  place,  and  which  he  had  formerly  occupied  ;  with  a 
view,  at  once  to  divert  the  attention  of  the  enemy  from  his 
real  design,  and  to  prevent  any  sally  being  made  from  the 
city,  while  he  should  be  employed  at  a  distance  against  Sy- 
VOL.  IV. — X 

154 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  549. 
phax  and  Hasdrubai.  He  likewise  feared  an  attack,  should 
his  camp  be  feft  with  only  a  small  force  to  defend  it. 
V.  Having  taken  these  preparatory  steps,  he  summoned  a 
council,  ordering  the  spies  to  give  an  account  of  the  discove¬ 
ries  which  they  had  made ;  at  die  same  time  requesting  Ma- 
sinissa,  who  was  well  acquainted  with  every  circumst^ce  of 
the  enemy,  to  deliver  his  opinion  ;  and,  lastly,  be  informed 
them  of  a  plan,  which  he  intended  to  execute  on  the  follow¬ 
ing  night.  He  gave  orders  to  the  tribunes,  that,  as  soon  as 
the  trumpets  had  sounded  on  the  breaking  up  of  the  meeting 
at  the  prsetorium,  they  should -march  the  legions  out  of  the 
camp.  In  pursuance  of  these  orders,  the  troops  began  to 
move  a  little  before  sunset :  about  the  first  watch,  they  form¬ 
ed  their  line  of  march ;  and  about  midnight,  (for  the  way 
was  seven  miles,)  proceeding  in  a  moderate  pace,  they  arrived 
at  the  enemy’s  camp.  He  there  gave  Laelius  the  command 
of  a  part  of  the  forces,  to  whom  were  joined  Masinissa  and 
the  Numidians,  with  orders  to  fall  upon  the  camp  of  Sy- 
phax,  and  set  it  on  fire.  Then,  taking  Laelius  and  Masinissa 
apart,  he  entreated  each  separately,  that  as  the  night  would 
be  apt  to  impede  the  best-concerted  measures,  they  should 
make  up  for  the  diflSculties  by  their  diligence  and  care 
telling  them,  also,  that  **  he  meant  to  attack  Hasdrubad  and 
the  Carthaginian  camp ;  but  would  not  begin  his  operations 
until  he  should  see  the  fire  in  that  of  the  King.”  The  busi¬ 
ness  was  not  long  delayed ;  and  as  the  huts  all  stood  conti¬ 
guously,  the  flames  spread  rapidly  through  every  part  of  the 
camp.  I'he  alarm  was  great,  by  reason  of  its  being  night, 
and  from  the  widely -extended  blaze  ;  but  the  King’s  troops, 
blinking  it  an  accidental  calamity,  rushed  out,  unarmed,  m 
order  to  extinguish  the  flames,  and  met  the  enemy  in  arms, 
particularly  the  Numidians,  whom  Masinissa,  being  well  ac¬ 
quainted  with  the  King’s  station,  had  posted  at  the  openings 
of  the  passes.  Many  perished  in  their  beds  while  half  asleep ; 

BOOK  XXX, 

155 

BX.  203.] 
while  many  in  their  precipitate  flight,  crowding  upon  one 
another,  were  trodden  to  death  in  the  nafrow  passages  of  the 
gates. 
JVI.  When  the  Carthaginian  centinels,  awakened  by  the 
tumult  of  the  night,  beheld  the  Sre,  they  also  supposed  it  to 
be  accidental ;  while  the.  shout,  raised  amidst  the  slaughter 
and  wounds,  was  so  confused,  (the  alarm,  too,  being  in  the 
dark,)  that  they  were  unable  to  discover  the  cause  or  extent 
of  the  evil  which  assailed  them.  Running  out,  therefore,  in 
the  utmost  hurry,  by  all  the  gates,  without  arms,  as  not  sus¬ 
pecting  an  enemy  to  be  near,  and  carrying  nothing  with  them 
but  what  might  serve  to  extinguish  the  flames,  they  rushed 
against  the  body  of  Ronians.  All  of  these  were  slain,  not 
merely  to  gratify  hostile  animosity,  but  in  order  to  prevent 
any  one  escaping  with  intelligence  as  to  the  truth  of  the  af- 
feir.  Scipio,  immediately  after,  attacked  the  gates,  which 
were  neglected,  as  may  be  supposed,  during  such  confusion, 
and  set  fire  to  the  nearest  huts ;  which,  soon  communicating 
to  the  others,  the  whole  was  enveloped  in  one  general  confla¬ 
gration.  Half- burned  men  and  cattle  stopped  up  the  passages, 
first  by  the  hurry  of  their  flight,  and  afterwards  with  their 
carcases.  Those  who  had  escaped  the  flames  were  cut  off  by 
the  sword ;  and  the  two  camps  were,  by  one  fatal  blow,  in¬ 
volved  in  utter  ruin.  However,  the  two  coi«manders,  with 
two  thousand  foot  and  five  hundred  horse,  ^alf#rmed,  and  a 
great  part  wounded  or  scorched,  got  away.  There  were  de¬ 
stroyed  by  fire  or  sword,  forty  thousand  men  ;  taken,  above 
five  thousand ;  many  Carthaginian  nobles,  eleven  senators, 
military  standards  a  hundred  and  seventy-four,  Numidian 
horses  above  two  thousand  seven  hundred ;  six  elephants  were 
taken,  and  eight  destroyed.  A  great  quantity  of  arms  was 
taken,  all  which  the  general  dedicated  to  Vulcan,  and  com¬ 
mitted  to  the  flames. 

156 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  549. 

VII.  Hasdrubal,  with  a  small  number  of  Africans,  had 
directed  his  flight  to  the  nearest  city  ;  and  thither,  all  who 
survived,  following  the  steps  of  their  general,  had  assembled; 
but,  dreading  lest  he  should  he  delivered  into  the  hands  of 
Scipio,  he  soon  after  quitted  it.*  The  Romans,  who  were, 
immediately  after,  received  there,  committed  no  act  of  hos¬ 
tility,  because  the  surrender  was  voluntary.  Two  other  cities 
were  taken  and  plundered  ;  and  the  booty  found  in  them, 
together  with  what  had  been  saved  when  the  camps  were 
burned,  was  given  up  to  the  soldiers.  Syphax  halted,  in  a 
fortified  post,  at  about  eight  miles  distance.  Hasdrubal.,  lest 
any  timorous  measures  should  be  adopted  through  the^iolent 
apprehensions  occasioned  by  the  late  disaster,  proceeded  to 
Carthage,  where  such  consternation  had  seized  the  people, 
that  they  made  no  doubt  but  Scipio  would  leave  Utica,  and  in¬ 
stantly  lay  siege  to  Carthage.  The  senate  was  therefore  as¬ 
sembled  by  the  suffetes,  who  are  invested  with  the  same 
'  authority  as  our  consuls.  Three  different  opinions  were  offer¬ 
ed  on  the  occasion :  one  proposed  -sending  ambassadors  to 
Scipio,  with  proposals  of  peace  ;  another,  the  recalling  of 
Hannibal,  to  defend  his  country  ;  the  third  showed  Roman 
firmness  in  adversity,  recommending  to  recruit  the  army, 
and  to  entreat  Syphax  not  to  abandon  the  war.  This  latter 
opinion  prevaifcd,  because  Hasdrubal,  who  was  present,  and 
all  of  the  Barcin#  faction,  were  disposed  to  fight  to  the  last. 
On  this  they  began  to  levy  troops  in  the  city  and  the  country, 
and  sent  ambassadors  to  Syphax,  who  was  himself  most  vigo¬ 
rously  employed  in  making  preparations  for  the  renewal  of 
hostilities.  His  queen  had  prevailed,  not  on  this  occasion  as 
formerly,  by  her  allurements,  which  were  sufficiently  power¬ 
ful  over  the  mind  of  her  lover,  but  by  prayers  and  appeals  to 
his  compassion ;  with  tears  having  beseeched  him,  not  to 
forsake  her  father  and  her  country,  nor  suffer  Carthage  to  be 
burned  as  the  camps  had  been.  Add  to  this,  some  new  ground 

BOOK  XXX. 

B<C-  203.] 

167 

of  hope  which  offered  itself  very  seasonably,  the  ambassadors 
acquainting  him,  that  they  had  met,  near  the  city  called  Ab¬ 
ba,  four  thousand  Celtiberians,  able  young  men,  who  had 
been  inlisted  by  their  recruiting  parties  in  Spain ;  and  that 
Hasdrubal  wcmld  speedily  .arrive  with  a  body  of  troops  far 
from  contemptible.  Syphax  not  only  gave  a  favourable  an¬ 
swer  to  the  Carthaginians,  but  showed  them  a  multitude  of 
Numidian  peasants,  to  whom  he  had,  withjn  a  few  days, 
given  arms  and  horses  ;  and  assured  them  also,  that  he  would 
call  out  all  the  youth  in  his  kingdom,  (Serving  that  “  their 
loss  had  been  occasioned  by  fire,  not  by  battle,  and  that  he 
only  who  was  defeated  by  arms,  ought  to  be  deemed  inferior 
to  his  enemy.”  Such  was  his  reply  ;  and,  a  few  days  after, 
he  and  Hasdrubal  again  joined  their  forces ;  when  their 
whole  army  amounted  to  about  thirty  thousand  fighting 
men. 
VIII.  While  Scipio  gave  his  whole  attention  to  the  siege 
of  Utica,  as  if  no  farther  hostilities  were  to  be  apprehended 
from  Syphax  and  the  Carthaginians,  and  was  employed  in 
bringing  up  his  machines  to  the  walls,  he  was  called  away  by 
the  news  of  the  war  being  revived.  Leaving,  therefore,  only 
a  small,  number  of  men  on  sea  and  land,  to  keep  up  the  ap¬ 
pearance  of  a  siege,  he  set  out  himself  with  the  main  body  of 
the  army  to  meet  the  enemy.  At  first,  he  took  post  on  a  hill, 
distant  about  four  miles  from  the  King’s  camp.  On  the  day 
following,  descending  into  the  great  plains,  as  they  are  called, 
which  lie  under  that  hill,  with  a  body  of  cavalry,  he  spent 
the  day  in  advancing  frequently  to  the  enemy’s  posts,  and 
provoking  them  by  slight  skirmishes.  For  the  two  succeed¬ 
ing  days,  however,  though  irregular  excursions  were  made 
by  both  parties  in  turn,  nothing  worth  notice  was*  performed. 
On  the  fourth  day,  both  armies  came  out  to  battle.  The  Ro¬ 
mans  placed  their  first-rank  men  behind  the  front  battalions, 
consisting  of  the  spearmen,  and  the  veterans  in  reserve  ; 

158 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y,R,  549. 

posting  the  Italian  cavalry  on  the  right  wing,  the  Numidians 
and  Masinissa  on  the  left.  Sypbax  and  Hasdrubal,  having 
placed  their  Numidians  opposite  to  the  Italian  cavalry,  and 
the  Carthaginians  opposite  to  Masinissa,  drew  the  Ccltibe* 
rians  into  the  centre  of  the  line,  facing  the  battalions  of  the 
legions  :  in  this  order  they  began  the  engagement.  On  the 
first  encounter,  both  wings  (Numidians  and  Carthaginians) 
were  forced  to^ive  way.  For  neither  could  the  Numidians, 
most  of  whom  were  undisciplined  peasants,  withstand  the 
Roman  cavalry  ;  nor  the  Carthaginians,  who  were  also  raw 
soldiers,  withstand  Masinissa,  who,  besides  other  circum* 
stances,  was  rendered  terrible  by  his  late  victory.  The  line 
of  Celtiberians,  (although,  having  lost  the  cover  of  the  wings, 
they  were  exposed  on  both  flanks,)  yet  resolutely  kept  dieir 
ground  ;  for  neither  could  they  see  any  safety  in  flight,  being 
unacquainted  with  the  country,  nor  had  they  any  hope  of  par* 
don  from  Scipio,  having  come  into  Africa  to  fight  against 
him  for  the  sake  of  hire,  notwithstanding  the  favours  which 
he  had  conferred  on  them  and  their  nation.  Surrounded, 
therefore,  on  all  sides,  they  died  with  determined  obstinacy, 
falling  in  heaps  one  over  another  j  and,  while  the  attention 
of  all  was  turned  on  them,  Syphax  and  Hasdrubal  availed 
themselves  of  this  opportunity,  and  gained  a  considerable 
space  of  time  to  effect  their  escape.  Night  came  upon  the 
conquerors,  who  were  fatigued  more  with  killing,  than  from 
the  length  of  the  contest. 
IX,  Next  day  Scipio  sent  Laelius  and  Masinissa,  with  all 
the  Roman  and  Numidian  cavalry,  and  the  light  infantry,  in 
pursuit  of  Syphax  and  Hasdrubal.  He  himself,  with  the  main 
body  of  the  army,  reduced  all  the  cities  in  that  part  of  the 
countrji  which  belonged  to  the  Carthaginians,  some  by  of¬ 
fering  them  hopes,  others  by  threats,  others  by  force.  At 
Carthage,  the  consternation  was  excessive  :  they  expected 
nothing  less  than  that  Scipio,  who  was  extending  his  opera- 

BOOK  XXX, 

159 

B.C.  003,] 
tions  on  every  side,  should  quickly  subdue  all  the  neighbour¬ 
ing  places,  and  then  immediately  invest  their  city.  They 
tbercfoe  repaired  the  walls,  and  strengthened  them  with  out¬ 
works  ;  every  one  exerting  himself,  in  bringing  in  from  the 
country  such  things  as  were  requisite  for  sustaining  a  long 
and  powerful  siege.  Little  mention  was  made  of  peace  ; 
very  many  advised  that  a  deputation  should  be  sent  to  recall 
Hannibal :  but  the  greater  number  were  earnest  for  despatch¬ 
ing  the  fleet,  (which  had  been  equipped  for  the  purpose  of 
kitercepting  the  convoys,)  to  surprise  the  ships  stationed  at 
Utica,  where  no  attack  was  expected  ;  alleging  the  probabi¬ 
lity,  that  they  might,  at  the  same  time,  make  themselves  mas¬ 
ters  of  the  naval  camp,  which  had  been  left  with  a  slight 
guard.  This  latter  scheme  met  general  approbation  ;  but,  at 
the  same  time,  they  determined  to  call  Hannibal  home,  be¬ 
cause,  should  the  fleet  meet  with  all  possible  success,  Utica 
would,  indeed,  be  relieved  from  some  part  of  the  pressure  <3f 
the  siege  ;  but,  for  the  defence  of  Carthage  itself,  there  was 
now  no  general  remaining  but  Hannibal,  and  no  army  but  his. 
The  ships  were  therefore  launched  on  the  following  day  ;  at 
the  same  time  the  deputies  set  ogat  for  Italy,  and,  the  junc¬ 
ture  being  critical,  every  measure  was  executed  with  the  ut¬ 
most  despatch  ;  each  man  thinking,  that  if  he  were  in  any  de¬ 
gree  remiss,  he  was  so  far  a  betrayer  of  the  public  safety. 
Scipio  led  on  his  forces  by  slow  marches,  as  they  were  hea¬ 
vily  loaded  with  the  spoils  of  many  cities.  After  sending  the 
prisoners^  and  other  booty,  to  his  old  camp  at  Utica,  direct¬ 
ing  his  views  to  Carthage,  he  seized  on  Tunes,  which  was 
defenceless,  the  garrison  having  fled.  This  city  was  very 
strong  both  by  nature  and  art ;  it  may  be  seen  from  Carthage, 
from  which  it  is  distant  about  fifteen  miles,  and*  at  the  same 
time  ^ords  a  prospect  of  that  city,  and  the  adjacent  sea. 
X.  The  Romans,  while  busily  employed  in  raising  a  ram¬ 
part  at  Tunes,  descried  the  fleet  which  was  steering  to  Utica. 

160 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  549. 

On  this,  the  work  was  instantly  dropped,  and  orders  to  m^ch 
were  issued.  The  troops  set  out  with  the  utmost  speed,  lest 
the  Roman  fleet  should  be  surprised,  while  attentive  only  to 
the  siege,  and  in  no  condition  for  a  naval  fight.  For  how 
could  any  resistance  have  been  made  to  a  fleet  of  active 
ships,  furnished  with  every  kind  of  arms,  by  vessels  loaded 
wdth  engines  and  machines  ;  and  which  were  either  converted 
to  the  purpose  of  transports,  or  pushed  so  close  to  the  walls, 
that  they  served  instead  of  mounds  and  bridges  for  the  men 
to  mount  by  ?  Scipio  therefore,  contrary  to  the  usual  practice 
in  sea-engagtlnents,  drawing  back  the  ships  of  war,  which 
might  be  a  protection  to  the  others  into  the  rear,  near  the 
land,  opposed  to  the  enemy  a  line  of  transports  consisting  of 
four  in  depth,  to  serve  as  a  wall ;  and  lest  this  line  should 
be  broken  during  the  confusion  of  the  fight,  he  fastened  the 
vessels  together  by  means  of  masts  and  yards,  passed  from 
erne  to  another,  with  strong  ropes,  in  such  a  manner  as  to 
form,  as  it  might  be  called,  one  entire  tier.  Over  these  he 
laid  planks,  which  formed  a  passage  from  ship  to  ship  through 
the  whole  line ;  and  under  those  bridges  of  communication 
he  left  openings,  through  which  the  scout  boats  might  run  out 
towards  the  enemy,  and  retreat  with  safety.  Having  com¬ 
pleted  these  sea-works,  as  well  as  the  time  allowed,  he  put 
on  board  the  transports  about  a  thousand  chosen  men  to  de¬ 
fend  them ;  with  a  vast  quantity  of  weapons,  chiefly  missive, 
sufficient  to  serve  for  a  battle  of  any  continuance;  Thus  pre¬ 
pared,  they  waited  attentively  the  coming  of  the  enemy.  Had 
the  Carthaginians  been,  expeditious,  they  might  at  the  first 
onset  have  overpowered  the  Romans,  every  thing  being  in 
hurry  and  confusion  ;  but  dispirited  by  their  losses  on  land, 
and  losing  thereby  their  confidence  at  sea  also,  where  their 
strength,  however,  was  superior,  they  spent  the  whole  day  in 
approaching  slowly,  and  about  sunset  put  into  a  harbour, 
which  the  Africans  call  Ruscino.  On  the  following  day, 

BOOK  XXX. 

161 

BLC.  203,] 
about  sunrise,  they  fomed  their  ships  in  a  hue  the 
open  sea,  as  if  for  a  regular  sea«‘fight,  and  as  if  the 
were  to  come  out  to  meet  thi^m.  When  they  had  stood  thus 
for  a  long  time,  and  saw  that  no  motion  was  made  by  the 
enemy,  they  attacked  the  transports.  The  affair  bore  no 
resemUance  to  a  naval  engagement :  it  was  more  like  an  at¬ 
tack  made  by  ships  against  walls.  The  transports  had  some 
advantage  in  their  height ;  for  the  Carthaginians,  being 
obliged  to  throw  their  weapons  upward,  discharged  most 
of  them  to  no  purpose  against  the  higher  places ;  whereas 
those  from  the  transports  fell  with  greater  force,  at  the  same 
time  gaining  additional  power  from  their  own  weight.  The 
scouts  and  lighter  Roman  vessels,  which  pushed  out  through 
the  openings  under  the  bridges  of  communication  between 
their  ships,  were  at  first  run  down  by  the  weight  and  buIk*of 
the  Carthaginian  ships  of  war  f  and  afterwards  they  became 
an  c^struction  to  those  who  defended  the  line,  because,  as 
they  were  mixed  among  the  enemy’s  ships,  they  often  obliged 
them  to  stop  the  discharge  of  their  weapons,  lest,  missing 
their  atm,  they*  should  hit  their  friends.  At  length  the  Car¬ 
thaginians  threw  among  the  Romans,  beams  furnished  at  the 
ends  with  iron  hooks,  which  the  soldiers  call  harpoons.  They 
could  neither  cut  the  beams  nor  the  chains  by  which  they 
were  raised  in  order  to  be  thrown,  so  that  as  soon  as  any  of 
the  ships  of  war,  hauling  back,  dragged  a  transport  entangled 
by  the  hook,  the  fastenings  of  these  vessels  broke,  and  in 
some  places  several  were  dragged  away  together.  By  this 
means^f^iefiy  were  all  the  bridges  torn  asunder,  and  scarcely 
had  the  defenders  time  to  make  their  escape  into  the  second 
row  of  ships.  About  six  were  towed  away  to  Carthage ; 
where  the  joy  of  the  people  was  greater  than  the  occasion 
merited.  But  diey  were  the  more  sensibly  affected,  because 
this  gleam  of  good  fortune,  however  small,  bad  unexpected¬ 
ly  shone  on  them,  in  the  midst  of  a  continued  course  of  losses 
VOL.  IV. — Y 

162 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y  R.  549. 
and  lamentatioxis*  It  appeared  that  the  Roman  fleet  would 
hardly  have  escaped  deatructicm,  had  not  their  own  comman^ 
ders  been  dilatory,  so  that  Scipio  had  time  to  bring  in  relief. 
XI.  Lselius  and  Masinissa  having,  about  the  fifteenth  day, 
arrived  in  Numidia,  Massylia,  Masinissa’s  hereditary  king* 
dom,  submitted  to  him  with  joy,  as  to  a  prince  whom  they 
had  long  and  earnestly  wished  to  hail.  Syphax,  seeing  all 
his  commanders  and  garrisons  expelled  from  thence,  retired 
within  his  own  original  dominions,  but  in  no  disposition  to 
remain  quiet.  In  his  ambitious  views,  he  was  spurred  cm 
by  his  queen  and  father-indaw ;  and  indeed  he  possessed 
such  abundance  of  men  and  horses,  that  a  mind  dess  barba¬ 
rous  and  violent  than  his  might  well  assume  confidence  ;  and 
when  reflecting  on  the  great  strength  of  a  kingdom,  which 
had  enjoyed  prosperity  for  a  long  course  of  years.  Where¬ 
fore,  collecting  together  all  who  were  able  to  bear  arms,  he 
distributed  among  them  horses  and  weapons:  he  divided  the 
horsemen  into  troops,  and  the  footmen  into  cohorts,  as  he 
had  formerly  learned  from  the  Roman  centurions  ;  and  thus, 
with  an  army  not  less  numerous  than  that  which  he  had  be¬ 
fore,  but  composed  almost  entirely  of  raw  undisciplined  men, 
he  advanced  towards  the  enemy,  and  pitched  his  camp  at  a 
small  distance  from  theirs.  At  first,  a  few  horsemen  ad¬ 
vanced  from  the  outposts,  to  make  observations;  these,  be¬ 
ing  attacked  with  javelins,  retreated  to  their  friends.  Skir¬ 
mishing  parties  then  came  forth  from  both  sides ;  and  which¬ 
ever  of  these  were  repulsed,  their  fellows,  being  inflamed 
with  indignation,  came  up  in  greater  numbers  to  thrir  sup¬ 
port.  This  is  generally  the  prelude  to  engagements  between 
the  cavalry ;  hope  encouraging  the  party  which  prevails,  and 
rage  exasperating  that  which  is  worsted.  Thus,  on  the  pre¬ 
sent  occasion,  the  fight  having  commenced  between  small 
divisions,  the  eagerness  of  the  dispute  dnew  out  at  length  the 
whole  force  of  cavalry  on  both  sides.  While  the  contest  lay 

BOOK  XXX. 

163 

B.C.  203.3 
entirely  between  tficse,  the  Massesylians,  whom  Syphax  sent 
out  in  immense  bodies,  could  hardly  be  withstood.  After¬ 
wards  the  Roman  infantry,  rushing  in  suddenly  between  their 
own  cavalry,  who  opened  passages  for  them,  gave  firmness 
to  their  line,  and  terrified  the  enemy,  who  were,  advancing 
furiously  to  the  charge.  The  barbarians  at  first  pushed  on 
their  horses  with  less  briskness ;  then  halted,  disconcerted 
somewhat  by  this  new  manner  of  fighting;  at  last,  they  not 
only  gave  way  to  the  infantry,  but  did  not  dare  to  withstand 
even  the  horse,  emboldened  as  they  were  by  the  support  of 
the  foot  And  m>w,  the  battalions  also  of  the  legions  ap¬ 
proached,  when  the  Massesylians,  so  far  from  daring  to  meet 
their  first  attack,  could  not  support  even  the  sight  of  their 
ensigns  and  arms :  so  strongly  were  they  affected,  either  by 
the  recollection  of  their  former  calamities,  or  by  the  present 
danger*  At  this  juncture  Syphax,  galloping  up  to  try  if, 
either  by  shame,  or  by  the  danger  to  which  he  was  exposed, 
he  could  stop  the  flight  of  his  men,  being  thrown  from  his 
horse,  which  was  grievously  wounded,  was  overpowered  and 
taken,  and  dragged  alive  to  Laelius ; — a  sight  grateful  to 
Masinissa  above  all  others.  To  Cirtha,  the  capital  of  Sy- 
phax’s  kingdom,  a  vast  multitude  fled.  The  number  of  slain 
in  that  battle  was  less  than  in  proportion  to  the  greatness  of 
the  victory,  because  the  cavalry  only  had  been  engaged.  Not 
more  than  five  thousand  were  killed ;  less  than  half  that  num¬ 
ber  taken,  in  an  attack  on  their  camp,  to  which  the  multitude 
had  retired  in  dismay  at  the  loss  of  their  King. 
XII.  Masinissa  declared,  that  ^  nothing  could  be  more 
highly  gratifying  to  him,  now  that  he  was  victorious,  after 
so  long  a  struggle,  than  to  revisit  his  paternal  kingdom  :  but 
that  the  present  happy  situation  of  his  affairs  required  activi¬ 
ty,  as  much  as  his  former  misfortunes.  If  Laelius  would 
permit  him  to  go  on,  before  him,  to  Cirtha,  with  the  cavalry, 
and  Syphax  as  his  prisoner,  he  would  strike  such  terror, 

164 

HISTOHY  of  ROME. 

[Y.R.549* 

while  the  enemy  were  in  confusion  and  dismay,  as  would 
crush  aH  opposition ;  and  that  Lselius  might  follow,  with  the 
infantry,  by  easy  marches.”  Lselius  assenting,  he  went  for- 
ward  to  Cirtha,  and  ordered  the  principal  inhabitants  to  be 
invited  to  a  conference.  But,  as  they  were  ignorant  of  their 
King’s  misfortune,  neither  his  relation  of  what  had  passed, 
nor  his  threats,  nor  persuasions,  wrought  any  effect,  until 
Syphax  was  produced  to  their  view  in  chains.  This  shock¬ 
ing  sight  excited  a  general  lamentation ;  some,  in  a  panic, 
deserted  the  walls,  others  hastily  agreed  to  endeavour  to 
gain  the  favour  of  the  conqueror,  and  opened  the  gates ; 
whereupon  Masinissa,  having  despatched  guards  to  these 
and  other  parts  of  the  fortifications,  to  prevent  any  person 
going  out  of  the  town,  galloped  on  in  full  speed  to  take  pos¬ 
session  of  the  palace.  As  he  entered  the  porch,  Sophonis- 
ba,  Syphax’s  queen,  daughter  of  Hasdrubal  the  Carthaginian, 
met  him  at  the  door ;  where,  seeing  Masinissa  in  the  midst 
of  a  band  of  armed  men,  distinguished  by  his  arms  and  ap¬ 
parel,  and  judging  rightly  that  he  was  the  King,  she  fell  at 
his  knees,  and  thus  addressed  him :  The  favour  of  the 
gods,  added  to  your  own  valour  and  good  fortune,  has  given 
you  absolute  power  to  dispose  of  us.  But  if,  in* the  presence 
of  the  sovereign  disposer  of  her  life  and  death,  a  captive  may 
be  allowed  to  utter  the  words  of  a  suppliant,  to  touch  his 
knees,  or  victorious  right  hand,  I  entreat  and  beseech  you, 
by  the  majesty  of  a  King,  of  which  we  also  were  just  now 
possessed;  by  the  name  of  the  Numidian  race,  which  is 
common  to  you  and  Syphax  ;  by  the  guardian  -gods  of  this 
palace,  who,  I  hope,  will  receive  you  with  better  omens  than 
they  sent  Syphax  hence,  grant  so  much  favour  to  your  sup¬ 
pliant,  as  that  you  will,  yourself,  determine  whatever  you 
may  think  proper  concerning  your  captive,  and  not  suffer  me 
to  fall  under  the  haughty  and  cruel  disposal  of  any  Roman. 
Were  I  nothing  more  than  the  wife  of  Syphax,  I  had  much 

BOOK  XXX. 

US 

B.C.  203,] 
rather  trast  to  the  hemour  of  a'Numidian,  one  bom  in  the 
same  cMOtry  with  me,  *than  to  a  foreigner,  and  from  a  dia* 
tant  part  of  the  world :  but  what  a  Carthaginian,  what  the 
daughter  of  Hasdrubal,  has  reason  to  dread  from  a  Roman, 
is  manifost  to  you.  If  you  cannot  by  any  other  means;  I  im¬ 
plore  and  beseech  you,  that  you  will,  by  my  death,  secure  me 
from  the  power  of  the  Romans.”  She  was  remadtably  beau¬ 
tiful,  and  in  the  foil  bloom  of  youth :  so  that,  while  she  pres¬ 
sed  his  right  hand,  and  implored  his  protection  only  so  far, 
as  that  she  should  not  be  delivered  up  to  any  Roman,  her 
discourse  was  more  like  caresses  than  enweaty  ;  and  the  con¬ 
queror’s  mind  was  not  only  subdued  to  pity,  but,  as  all  the 
Numidians  me  extremely  amorous,  the  victorious  King  be¬ 
came  the  skive  of  his  captive*:  and,  giving  his  right  hand, 
as  a  pledge  for  the  performance  of  what  she  had  requested, 
he  went  into  the  palace.  Immediately,  he  began  to  consider 
within  himself,  by  what  means  he  might  fulfil  his  engage¬ 
ment  ;  and  not  being  able  to  devise  any,  he  adopted  a  rash 
and  shameful  resolution,  suggested  by  his  love.  He  gave 
ordem  that  every  thing  should  be  instantly  prepared  for  a 
marriage  on  that  same  day,  in  order  that  he  might  leave  no 
room  for  Lselius,  or  Scipto  himself,  to  proceed  against  her 
as  a  captive,  since  she  would  then  be  his  wife.  After  the 
marriage  was  concluded,  Laelius  arrived ;  and  so  far  was  he 
from  dissembling  his  disapprobation  of  the  proceeding,  that 
at  first  he  even  resolved  to  drag  her  from  the  nuptial  bed, 
and  send  her  with  Syphax  to  Scipio ;  but  he  was  afterwards 
prevailed  on  by  the  entreaties  of  Masinissa,  who  besought 
him  to  leave  it  to  the  Romans  to  determine,  which  of  the 
*  Sophonisba  had  been  formerly  betrothed  to  Masinissa,  and  being  af¬ 
terwards  given  to  Syphax,  was  one  reason  of  his  quarrelling  with  the 
Carthaginians,  and  joining  the  Romans.  Another  was,  that  in  tlie  contest 
between  him  and  Mezetulus  for  the  throne,  his  rival  had  been  aided  by 
the  Carthaginians. 

166 

HiaXORY  OP  ROMlE. 

[Y.R*  549. 

two  kings  should  have  Sophonisba  a  sharer  of  his  fortune. 
Sending  away,  therefore,  Syphax  and  the  other  prisoners,  he 
reduced,  with  the  assistance  of  Masinissa,  all  the  cities  of 
Numidia,  which  were  held  by  the  King’s  garrisons. 
XIU.  When  it  was  announced,  that  the  detachment  was 
bringing  Syphax  to  the  camp,  the  whole  multitude  poured 
out,  as  if  to  the  sight  of  a  triumph.  He  preceded  the  rest  in 
chains,  and  was  followed  by  ajaumber  of  noble  Numidians. 
On  this  occasion,  every  one  spoke  in  the  most  exalted  terms 
of  the  greatness  of  Syphax,  and  the  fame  of  his  nation  ;  thus 
exaggerating*  the  renown  of  their  victory.  “  That  was  the 
King,”,  they  said,  “  to  whose  dignity  the  two  most  powerful 
states  in  the  world,  the  Roman  and  Carthaginian,  had  paid 
such  deference  ;  that  for  the  sake  of  procuring  his  friendship, 
their  own  general,  Scipio,  leaving  his  province  and  his  army, 
sailed  with  only  two  quinqueremes  to  Africa ;  and  the  Car¬ 
thaginian  general,  Hasdrubal,  not  only  visited  his  kingdom, 
but  also  gave  him  his  daughter  in  marriage.  Thati4he  Ro¬ 
man  and  Carthaginian  generals  4)ad  been  within  his  grasp  at 
one  and  the  same  time.  That  as  both  parties  had,  by  the  of¬ 
fer  of  sacrifices,  solicited  the  favour  of  the  immortal  gods,  so 
his  friendship  had  been  equally  sought  for  by  both.  That 
he  lately  possessed  power  so  great  as  to  enable  him  to  expel 
Masinissa  from  his  kingdom  ;  and  to  reduce  him  to  such  a 
state,  that  his  life  was  preserved  by  a  report  of  his  death, 
and  by  lurking  in  concealment,  while  be  was  obliged,  like  a 
wild  beast,  to  live  in  the  woods  on  prey.”  Such  were  the  dis¬ 
courses  of  the  throng,  through  which  the  King  was  led  to  the 
general’s  quarters.  Scipio  was  moved  on  comparing  the  for¬ 
mer  situation  of  the  man  with  the  present ;  and  also  by  the 
recollection  of  their  connection  in  hospitality,  of  their  right 
hands  pledged,  and  the  treaty  concluded  between  themselves 
and  their  states.  These  circumstances  gave  Syphax  courage 
in  addressing  his  conqueror.  For,  when  Scipio  asked  him. 

BOOK  XXX. 

167 

B.C.  203.] 
“  what  had  been  his  views  in  not  only  renouncing  his  alliance 
with  the  Romans,  but  even  making  war  on  them  he  an¬ 
swered,  that  “  he  had  indeed  erred,  or  rather  acted  under  an 
impulse  of  insanity  ;  but  not  at  that  time,  principally,  when 
he  took  up  arms  against  the  Romans :  that  was  the  conse¬ 
quence  of  his  madness^  not  the  actual  beginning  of  it.  That 
he  was  indeed  mad,  when  he  banished  from  his  thoughts  all 
the  ties  of  private  friendship  and  public  leagues  ;  and  when 
he  received  a  Carthaginian  wife  into  his  house.  By  those 
nuptial  torches,  his  palace  had  been  set  in  flames  ;  that  mis¬ 
chievous  fury  had,  by  every  kind  of  allurement,  perverted  his 
judgment,  and  led  it  astray ;  nor  ever  desisted,  until  with 
her  own  hands  she  clad  him  in  detestable  arras  against  his 
guest  and  his  friend.  Yet,  ruined  and  hopeless  as  he  was^ 
he  felt  some  comfort  in  his,  misfortunes,  from  seeing  that 
pestilent  woman  removed  into  the  house  and  family  of  his 
bitterest  enemy.  Adding,  that  Masinissa  possessed  neither 
more  prudence  nor  firmness  than  himself.  His  youth,  indeed, 
had  made  him  incautious  ;  but  there  was  evidently  more  folly 
and  rashness  in  the  latter  marriage  than  in  his.” 
XIV.  These  words,  dictated  not  merely  by  animosity  to¬ 
wards  his  enemy,  but  by  anguish  on  seeing  the  woman  whom 
he  had  loved  in  the  possession  of  his  rival,  impressed  the 
mind  of  Scipio  with  no  small  degree  of  solicitude.  He  was, 
however,  the  more  induced  to  listen  to  Syphax,  from  the  mar¬ 
riage  having  been  hurried  forward,  in  the  midst  of  arms, 
without  either  consulting  or  waiting  for  Laelius ;  and  from 
Masinissa’s  haste,  for  on  the  very  day  in  which  he  had  seen 
Sophonisba  made  prisoner,  he  had1:ontracted  matrimony  with 
her,  and  performed  the  nuptial  sacrifice,  in  presence  of  the 
household  gods  of  his  enemy.  These  proceedings  appeared  to 
Scipiothemoreheinous,becausehehimself,  when  in  Spain,  and 
when  a  very^oung  man,  had  not  allowed  himself  to  be  moved 
by  the  beauty  of  any  captive  whatever.  While  he  was  re* 

168  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [YJl.540. 
volvirtg  thc5C  cmnimstaxices  in  his  mind,  Lselius  and  Masi- 
nissa  arrived,  to  both  of  whom  he  gave  the  same  kind  recep* 
tion ;  and  afterwards  made  known  their  conduct,  with  the 
Hghest  praises,  in  a  full  assembiv.  Then  retiring  with  Ma« 
sinissa  to  a  private  place,  he  thus  a<Mressed  him :  I  sup¬ 
pose,  Masinissa,  that  in  first  coming  m  Spain  for  the  purpose 
of  contracting  a  friendship  widi  me  ;  and  afterwards  in  Africa, 
submitting  yourself,  and  all  your  concerns,  to  my  protection  ; 
you  must  have  been  influenced  by  some  good  qualities  which 
I  was  said  to  possess.  Now,  of  those  virtues  which  made 
you  think  my  favour  worth  soliciting,  there  is  not  one,  on 
which  I  value  myself  so  much,  as  temperance  and  the  govern¬ 
ment  of  my  passions.  I  wish,  Masinissa,  that  to  your  other 
excellent  qualifications,  you  had  added  this  one  also.  There 
is  not  so  much  danger,  believe  pae  there  is  not,  to  persons  of 
our  time  of  life,  from  armed  foes,  as  from  the  pleasures  which 
every  where  surround  us.  He  who  has  curbed  and  reduced 
his  passions  to  subjection,  has  really  acquired  t6  himself 
much  greater  glory,  and  a  far  more  honourable  victory,  thsm 
that  which  we  now  enjoy  in  our  conquest  of  Syphax.  The 
instances  of  courage  and  conduct,  which  you  displayed  while 
I  was  not  present,  I  have  mentioned  with  pleasure,  and  I  re¬ 
tain  a  proper  sense  of  them.  As  to  other  matters,  I  rather 
wish  that  you  would  review  them  in  your  own  mind,  than 
that  you  should  blush  at  my  recital  of  them.  Syphax  has 
been  subdued  and  taken  under  the  auspices  of  the  Roman 
people  :  therefore  he,  his  wife,  his  kingdom,  his  territories, 
his  towns,  and  the  inhabitants  of  them  ;  in  short,  whatever 
was  the  property  of  Syphat,  is  now  the  prize  of  that  people. 
Both  the  King  and  his  wife,  even  though  sjie  were  not  a  citi¬ 
zen  of  Carthage,  and  we  had  not  seen  her  father  heading  the 
enemy’s  army,  ought  to  have  been  sent  to  Rome,  where  the 
Roman  state  should  have  had  the  power  of  judging  and  de¬ 
termining,  concerning  her — a  woman  who  is  said  to  have  se- 

miOK  XXX. 

169 

4NC.  803.] 

m  lAiaoce  with  u$^  ^ 
into  the  R^l^ain  ycHH*  fieelt^ga.  Beirare^  le^t  ^by  jc«ic 
vice  you.  4i«pATage  a  number  of  *gpod  <|ualUie$,  and  des^^ 
die  credit  of  ao  many  meritorloo^  d^s.  by  a  fault,  too  great 
to  be^pidliated)  even  by  the  occaaioa  of  U-” 
XV.  On  bearing  this  discc^e,  not  ^y  Ma^inissa^s  coun¬ 
tenance  was  suffused  with  [pushes,  but  he  eyeii  burst  into 
tears ;  and  rfter  dedaring,  th%t  “  in  fiuore  he  woul4^l«  di-- 
rectcd  entirely  by  Scipio,”  and  entreating  him,  as.far  as  .the 
affair  would  permit,  to  t^onsider  the  obU^tion  into  which  be 
bad  rashly  entered,  not  to  give  the  Queen  into  the  power  of 
any  ope,”  b^  retired  in  confusion  from  the  general’s  t^nt  to 
his  own.  There,  dismissing  his  attendants,  he  spept  some 
time  in  sighs  and  moans,  which  could  be  heard  distinctly  by 
those  who  stood  without.  At  last,,  having  uttered  a  deep 
git»an,  he  called  one  of  his  servants,  in  whom  he  confided, 
wad  who  had  the  charge,  of  the  poison,  which,  according  to 
cpstom  of  kings,  is  Jcept  against  the  uncertainties  of  for¬ 
tune,  and  ordered  him  to  mix  some  in  a  cup  ;  to  carry  it  to 
Sophoni|bs  ;  and  to  tell  her  at  the  same  time,  that  Masi- 
nissa  would  gladly  have  fulfilled  the  first  c^ligation  which  he 
owed  her,*— that  due  from  a'husbimd  to  his  wife:  but  that, 
since  th<^e,  who  had  the  power,  had  not  left  that  in  his  op- 
ti<m,  be  performed  his  second  engagement,  that  she 
ahoidd  not  come  alive  into  the  bands  of  the  Romans,  fie, 
dierefisre,^  requested  her  to  remember  her  father,  the  general, 
her  country,  and  the  two  kings  to  whom  she  had  been  mar¬ 
ried  ;  and  to  take  such  steps  as  she  should  judge  proper.” 
When  the  servant,  carrying  this  message  and^  the  poison, 
to  Sopbonisba,—- “  I  receive”,  said  she,  ‘‘  this  nuptial 
presem,  by  no  memis  an  unacceptable  one,  if  my  husband  has 
nc^  die  power  to  perform  more  for  his  wife.  Tell  him,  how¬ 
ever,  that  i;sh<^ld  hay^  died  better,  had  I  pot  married  in  the 
vety  moment  of  my  funeraL”  The  firmne^  with  which  she 
VOL.  IV. — Z 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

lYM.m: 

m 
^poke,  waa  not  greater  than  the  rcsohition  with  whidi  she 
received,  9Bd  chraak  off,  the  coat^ts  of  the  cup.  Whi^  Sci- 
pio  was  this  event,  dreading,  lest  the  young  man, 
whose  passions  were  violent,  might,  in  the  present  di^rder 
of  his  mind,  take  some  desperate  measure,  he  sent  for  him 
imtandy ;  and  at  one  time  consoled,  at  another  gently  chid 
him,  for  having  atoned  one  act  of  rashness  by  smother,  and 
for  living  rendered  tl^  affair  more  horrid  than  was  neces¬ 
sary.  Next  day,  in  order  to  divert  his  thoughts  from  the  db- 
ject  which,  at  the  present,  distressed  him,  he  mounted  his 
tribunal,  and  ordered  an  assembly  to  be  summoned.  There, 
after  he  had  first  honoured  Masinissa  with  the  title  of  King, 
and  passed  high  encomiums  on  his  merit,  he  presented  to  him 
a  golden  crown,  a  golden  goblet,  a  curule  chair,  an  ivory 
sceptre,  an  embroidered  robe,  and  a  vest  striped  with  purple ; 
enhancing  the  honour  by  saying,  that  “  anmng  the  Romans 
there  was  nothing  more  magnificent  than  a  triumph,  and  that 
those,  who  were  so  distinguished,  had  not  a  more  splendid 
dress  than  that  of  which  Masinissa  alone,  of  all  foreigners, 
was  esteemed  worthy  by  the  Roman  people.”  EieliuS  also 
he  Eighty  commended,  and  |>Tesented  with  a  golden  crown ; 
and  on  others  of  the  military  he  conferred  gifts  suitable  to 
the  services  which  they  had  performed.  By  these  Imnours 
conferred  on  him,  the  King’s  mind  was  sooihed,  smd  encou¬ 
raged  to  hope  that  he  should  soon  be  in  possession  the 
whole^mctem  of  Numidia,  now  that  Syphax  was  removed  out 
of  his  way. 
XVI.  Scipio,  sending  Caius  Laelius,  with  Syphax  and  foe 
other  prisoners,  tp  Rome,  with  whom  went  also  ambassadors 
from  Masinissa,  led  back  his  troops  to  Tunes,  and  completed 
the  fortifications  which  he  had  begun  some  time  before.  The 
Carthaginians,  who  had  been  filled  with  a  foort-lived  joy,  on 
account  of  their  success  in  the  attack  on  the  Rom^  fleet,  (and 
which  in  their  then  circumstances  foey  had  considered  as 

XXX- 

BX.  203.] 

m  h&mmg  oi  the  ^|mire  rf  SypMx,  fa  whom 
they  had  placed  more  ot  their  hof^s  dia^  fa  H^hibal  and 
tfasir  own  arn^^  wore  tmH:k  wkh  diamay,  mid  would  lis^u 
no  long^  to  any  who  mivised  to  ^«tdnue  the  war ;  but  sent^ 
aa  their  agents  to  sue  Ibr  peace,  thirty  <rf  die  prfac^ial  elders. 
These  compose  the  assembly  of  die  highest  ^gnity  among 
them,  having  &e  principal  cimtrcd  over  the  senate  itself- 
Arriving  at-  die  genersd^s  tent,  they  prosttated  diemsclves, 
like  those  who  huml^  fawn  on  kings,  having  learned  that 
mode,  I  suppose^  from  the  country  whence  diey  derived  thrir 
origin.  Their  discourse  was  suimide  to  such  servile 
tion^  not  at^mp^g  to  apologize  for  their  cond^]^':  but  tram- 
ferrii^  the  bhune  cm  Hannibal,  and  the  favourers  of  his  vior.< 
lent  measures.  Th^  implored  pardon  for  their  state,  which 
had  been  twice  ruined  by  the, rashness  of  hs  citizens,  and 
would  a  second  tiim  be  indebted  fm-  its  resteraticm  to  the  gaie- 
rosity  of  an  enemy :  dtey  Observed,  that  “die  Homan  people 
sought  dominion  over  the  conquered,  not  their  desteuction  ; 
and  declared  d^mselves  ready  to  pay  implicit  obedience  to 
ai^  commands  tahich  their  subjugators  should  be  fdeased  to 
impose.’’  Scipio  tcdd  them,  that  **  he  had  come  into  Africa 
widi  the  expectation,  which  had  been  farther  ^iccairaged  by 
the  happy  fmtune  of  bis  army,  of  carrying  honre  conquest, 
not  peace.  Jlmt,  however,  aldmug^  he  had  ccmquest  wiihm 
his  reach,  yet  he  did  not  reject  peace  |  thait  all  nations  migfa 
know,^  that  the  Ronmn  pecqile  were  guided  by  the  principles 
of  justice,  bodi  in  undertaking  and  concluding  wars«  That 
these  were  tlm  terms  irf  peace  which  be  p^erfaed  : — ^That 
they  should  give  up  the -prisoiters,  d^erters,  smd  fugitives  j 
widnlraw  their  armies  from  iudy  and  Gaul  ;  roiouncc  all 
]netensii:n»  io  Spiun;  retire  from  all  dte  isfands  which  Be 
between  Italy  and  Africa,  deliverup  all  dicit  ships  of  wai?, 
except  twen^,  and  fumidi  five  hundred  thoimnd  measures 
wheat,  and  three  btmdred  thousand  of  barley.”  What  sum 

173  HISTOM  OF  f^ME.  [Y.H.54F. 
of  money  he  demanded,  audibrs  are  ii<k  a^ced/  In  some,  I 
find  five  thousand  talents*  ;  in  others,  five  dtotisand  pounds 
weight  of  silvd* ;  while  it  is  also  said,  that  double  pay  of  the 
troops  was  imposed.  “  Three  days,*®  s&id  he,  ‘‘  shalH  he 
allowed  you  to  consider  whether  ydn  approve  of  pfeace  on 
these  conditions.  If  you  do  apprdvl  of  h,  then  inahe  a  truce 
with  ine,  and  send  ambassadors  to  Rome  to  the  senate,’’  The 
Carthaginians,  thus  dismissed,  thought  it  advisable  to  submit 
to  any  terms,  as  the  only  object  they  had  in  view  Was  to  gain 
time,  until  Hannibal  should  come  ovet*  to  Africa  ;  and  there¬ 
fore  they  sent  ambassadors  to  SCipio,  to  conclude  a  truce,  and 
others  to  Rome  to  solicit  peace.  These  carried  with  them  a 
few  prisoners,  deserters,  and  fugitives,  to  make  a  show  of 
obedience,  and  that  they  might  attain  their  object  with  the 
less  difiiculty. 
XVir.  Laelius,  with  Syphax  and  the  principal  Numidian 
prisoners,  arrived  at  Rome  several  days  before  them,  and 
related,  in  order,  to  the  senate  the  several  transactions  which 
had  passed  in  Africa.  Great  was  the  rejoicing,  on  account 
of  the  present  state  of  affairs,  and  the  mosft  sanguine  hopes 
were  entertained  with  tespect  to  the  future.  The  senate  thfen, 
on  the  business  being  proposed,  ordered  that  the  King  should 
be  sent  prisoner  to  Alba,  atd  that  Laelius  should  be  detained 
until  the  arrival  of  the  Carthaginian  ambassatdors.  A  sup- 
idication  for  four  days  was  decreed.  Publius  iEtius,  praetor, 
when  die  senate  broke  up,  called  an  assembly  of  the  peopk, 
and  ascended  the  rostrum,  with  Caius  Laelius.  There  on 
hearing  that  the  Cartha^niim  armies  had  been  xtmted  $  so 
renowned  a  monarch  aw'  Syphax  vanqmshed  and  mads  pri* 
imner  ;  and  conquest  eji^tended,  with  extraordimuy  success, 
over  every  part  of  Numidia,  the  people  could  not  cdiUtain 
Aehr  joy,  but  by  shouts,  iwM  Other  methods  usuadly  practised 

968,7501. 

BOOilXtX;  m 
by  midthtt^  cxpr^cd  imu^^dera^  The. 
ihcteforc  hnmedia^ly  orders,  thut  die  ]^pa*s 
s}»}uld  open  die  temples  m  cvciy  pait  irf  the  dty ;  and  A»t 
all  should  be  allowed,  during  the  whdk  day,  to  tamd 
diem,  and  pay  tjid**  worship  and  thanka  to  the  gods*  On  die 
day  following,  he  introducad  Masioissa’s^ndKas^oi^  wto 
first  congratulated  the  senate  on  ,the  succe^  of  Pul^t^  Scipio 
in  Africa  ;  then  gave  thaiiks  for  his  hstsf  ing^i^  hon* 
cured  Masinm^  with  the  dde  of  King^  hot  made  Wm  <me, 
by  reinstating  him  on  the  throne  of  his  lather  j  where  (now 
that  Syphax  was  removed)  he  had,  if  it  so  pleased  the  sesmte^ 
a  pn^pcct  of  reipiing  without  contest,  or  apprcl^iwm ;  they 
likewise  made  their  acknowlcdgments  for  prai^s  he  bad  be¬ 
stowed  on  him  in  the  asscidbly,  mid  for  the  vefy  magnificent 
presents '  with  which  he  had  loaded  him.’^  Th^y  ^ded, 
«  diat  Masinissa  had  eicerted  his  fyiat  endeavours  to  appear 
not  unworthy  of  those  favours,  and  would  cimtitme  so  to  do. 
They  then  requested  the  senate/  to  confirm  by  their  decree  Ae 
ride  of  King,  and  the  odicr  distinguished  marks  conferred  on 
him  by  Scipio  ;  telling  them  .that  their  monarch  further  en¬ 
treated,  that,  if  it  so  pleased  them,  die  Numidian  prUoners 
then  at  Rome  might  be  sent  home,— ‘U  chrcumsmocc  which 
would  do  him  high  h<mour  among  Iris  countrymmi.”  The 
senate  made  am^wer,  that  congratidatioi^  on  tte  successes 
m  Africa  ought  in  the  confederate^  to  be  mupial }  that  Scipio 
appeared  to  have,  acted  properly  and  regularly,  m  giving  to 
their  Numidhm  aSly  the  ritfo  of  King ;  and  that  wlmtevcr 
dse  be  should  do  grai^di  to  Masinissa,  the  senate  rati^ 
ami  iqip^oved  They  |hen  ordered  the  pri^m:  to  prepare 
the  ftdlowing  |at»c^  for  the  King  ♦^wo  purple  robes  wWi 
a  g<^^  clasp  smd  vests,  with’ broad  purple  beuders  j 
horses  wirii  trapj^gs ;  two  suits  of  horsemmi’s  armour,  wkh 
cosUs  of  mail  j  with  tents  and  camp  furniture,  such  as  is  cus¬ 
tomary  to  provide  fmr  a  consul*  Donatives  were  also  voted 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  54®. 

m 
for  the  th«o  five  tbo«^^  msts^  to 
each ;  for  their  attendants  a  thousand  as^es^ ;  two  suits  ^ 
^qiparel  tp  each  of  the  ambas8ador|»,  one  to  each  of  their 
tendants,  and  die  same  to  the  Numidians,  who  were  to  be  freed 
firiw  imprisonment,  and  sent  back  to  the  King*  Besidto 
which,  th^  ordered  endre  suits  of  apartments  and  entertain* 
ment  for  the  embassy.  ^  . 
XVIII-  In  the  course  of  the  summer,  during  which  those 
transacticms  passed  Jp  Africa,  mid  decrees  at  Rome, 
Piddius  Quindliua  ^arus,  praetor,  smd  Marcus  Corxkelius, 
procmisvd,,  fought  a  pished  battle  with  Majgp  dtc  Garthagi- 
nian  in  the  country  of  the  Insubrian  Gkuls*  The  praetor’s 
legions  were  in  the  first  line  j  Cornelius  kept  his  in  reserve, 
plying  himself  in  the  fr<mt.  .  The  praetor  and  proconsul  ea- 
hmted  the  soldiers  to  m^e  the  attack  with  the  utmost  vigour. 
Fmding  that  they  made.no  impression  on  the  Carthaginimi 
Une,  Quintilius  said  to  Cornelius,  The  batde  flags,  as  you 
xna^  perceive ;  and  the  entoy,  finding  themselves  aJble  to 
XD^e  xipsistonce  beyond  what  they  had  hoped,  are  Iwdened 
against  fern,  and  it  is  well  if  they  dm  not  ^ume  biddness  ; 
we  must  bear  down  widi  the  cavalry,  if  we  eapect  to  lUaorder 
or  drive  them  from  tiaeir  ground.  Do  you,  thisrefo^,  sup* 
pmt  the  bs^e  in  front,  and  I  win  bring  up  tte  horse  f  or  I 
will  take  cau'e  of  matters  here,  while  you  charge  with  the 
caydbry  of  the  four  legpons.”  The  proconsul  offering  to  un¬ 
dertake  either  part  of  the  business,  as  the  prmtor  sbou^  di¬ 
rect  QuindHtis  the  prmtor,  with  his  son  Marcus,  a  youth  xd 
a  high  and  ardent  spirit  loc^  the  consimand  of  the  cavalry,, 
and  Jbiving  ordered  diem  to  mount  their  bors^,  led  theia 
ii^^antly  to  tibe  charge.  Tbect^fusionoccas^onedhy^ese  wjd^ 
imatoised  by  die  shoutsol  lyipons ;  nor  would  the  Cartha* 
gmumlijPA  have  stood  dieir  ground, had  notMago  immediatdy 

♦  161. 28.  lid. 

tai.4s.7d. 

.  mOK  X10C.  ITS 
up  die  dbphttuts  to  the  hnvi:^  hsi 
mgaiast  the  &st  ^mo&m  ^'viueh  the  A&aid 
mke.  By  die  siuHth^ig  and  sig^  of  i^ese  mdmals,  ^  hmm 
UNst^  frighteaed  to  such  a  degree^  m  ro^teed  ^  idd  ^ 
cavalry  of  no  efipct.  Aa  die  Rcsiaan  horsra^  bad  ^  ad* 
i^mtage  m  |K>iid  wbi»i  in  doee  %^aiul  v^ea 
could  use  his  javelm  and  sword  .baud  to  ;  ao  d^  Nu* 
a^tdtim  hmi.  ^e^better  in  darttog  jav^ira  atliHii  £mm  a  dis- 
tffiace^  and  wb^  horse’s  .flight  wo^  not  bbit  to 
aufviUK:e.  Ataoog  the  iafantry,  the  twdAb  tegum  lost 
thegreiuer  parttif  dieir  number,  kept  thdr  gtoimd,  i^d^r 
thrcmg^  shame,  &an  that  they  had  strosgdi  to  maiaxam  it. 
They  must  soou,  bawever,  have  Mtm  back,  had  ^t  d^  iMr^' 
teenth  led  up  fiom  the  resmre  to  tim  front,  sufqporhid 
the  doubtbd  conflict*  Mago,  at  die  same  dme,  brought  up 
to  diis  fitNib  legion,  die  Gaub,  drawn  aSim  from  Us 
merve«  Hiese  hemg  rout^  widio^  much  diffici^,  dm 
spearmen  d  dm  devendi  legion  formed  themselves  mtoa 
ctrcidar  bc^y,  and  attiudced  the  diephants,  whidi  were  inmr 
throwing  dm  line  of  infantry  into  cbnfu^m ;  mid,  by  dk* 
charging  their  speam  nt  them,  hardly  any  of  wUch  were 
thrown  in.vmn,  as  the  beasts  cfose  togedior,  dmy  tmn- 
ed  them  all  c^pcm  the  Ime  d  dietr  mmpmty.  Four  d  them, 
overpowered  widrwounds,  foH«  Cte  dm,  the  fiint  line  d  die 
enemy  began  give  way  ;  when  aU  die  i^mt^,  the 
ele^mnts  turning  imlted"<mmioidar  to  »n:rease  die 
terror  and  confu^^*  As  bmg,  hm^cver,  as  Mago  stood  at 
the  head  of  die  tbs  rmiks,  re^adng  leisure^,  kept 
up  the  spirit  ^  dm  Imdle  ^  hm^  when  dmy  miw  Urn  iEdl  mi 
receirii^  a  woimd  drot^^his  dii|^,  mnl  owrkd  Mfelm  emt 
of  die  held,  mstandy  dUbetuok  den^riv^m  flight.  "Itee 
were  five  diouMid  Gardmginkns  dain  m  tte  day,  and 
twenty-two  mditary  taken*.  Nor  was  dm  victmy 
Uoo^ess  on  thrall  of  the  Bomamt  diree 

HISTQHt  OP  ROME. 

UM.m. 

176 
butidred  ^  w^re  lost, 
i«r  psrt^  siftio«r  ^ Ak  twidkh  legtoa;  ^rbidi  l^kn 
ikho  Mt  t^  milkftvy  Bfoois  and 
tm  Masnios^  CM'  f be  legbn,  Ukewise,  which  h»d 
shared  the  latter  |»rt  of  tAm  engagement,  Cnetus  Hel^kia, 
tnilkaly  frtbotie,  was  slain  whiW  <m{^i^d-m  resttnring  the 
There  perished,  besides,  thwt3r<^two  horsemen  of  some 
dfsttncdon,  who  #ere  trodden  down  l^the  ^sfdmts,  toge* 
ther  with  somO  cef^urions*  Probity  wotdd  not 
have  been  bo  soon  ended,  had  not  the  their  g^aeiial 
made  the  enemy  retire  from  the  fields  ^ 
%1X.  Mago,  set^tg  out  during  the  Bdemm  trf  dkB  nmct 
night,  and  making  as  f^og  journeys  as  his  woutui  afewed 
him  to  bear,  arrived  at  the  sea^^^oast,  in  die  oc^Mry  of  the. 
Ingaunian  Ligurians.  There  the  di^podes  from  Cartha|;e, 
who  had  a  few  days  l^fore  arrived  wMi  die  ships  in  die 
lie  bay,  waited  on  hhn,  and  ddtver^  orders  10  him,  to  pms 
over  to  Africa  as  soon  as  pmdlde  y  bdorming  him,  that  his 
brother  Hannibal,  to  whom  me8sengers."teid  been  also  sent, 
Woidd  do  the  same,  for  tlw  idFaira  ^  dse  C}idrdu^iidai^  were 
pa^  in  a  condition  to  htdd  po^sdoia  Of  and  Italy  by 
sMis.  Mago  was  not  t^y  mor^  %  ihe 
imtmie,  and  die  danger  dimhreatmidt  hii  c^siintry,  butdr^- 
ed%s$,  ifhe  delayed,  hbm^b»^hi^  pr<fs«^  by  the  vkto- 
rioW^mmiy  l  and,  dso,  lestdie  Lij^mms^heti^dves,  seeing 
that  the  Cmrdiaginikns  were  '«^ut4o^i%Kni|utsh  Italy,  might 
revolt:  to  diOke  under  whoee  pow^  tb^^miist  speedily  fall. 
He,  at  the  same  time,  o^rtained  hopes,  that  his  wound 
mig^t  be  l<^iidtided  on  a  on  land,  and  dmt 
he  might  duntishe  able  to  nlU^  to  the  cure  of  k  with  mme 
coaveniee^  ^l^kmg^  im  Woops,  he  set 
and  had  siwi^ly  pass^  Sbifdinm  when  he  diedt  on  the  coast 
of  whi<^  Idind,  several  Garthagitiian  sM|«^|  which  had  been 
^peined,  dtfe  taken  the  Roman  deet4  Bach  were  the 

BOOK  XXX. 

ITT 

B.C.  203.] 
occurrences  by  land  and  sea,  on  that  side  of  Italy  nearest  to 
the  Alps.  The  consul  Cneius  Servilius  performed  nothing 
memorable  in  Etruria,  or  in  Gaul  (for  he  had  advanced  into 
that  country,)  except  that  he  rescued  from  slavery,  which 
they  had  endured  for  sixteen  years,  his  father  Caius  Servi¬ 
lius,  and  his  uncle  Caius  Lutatius,  whp  had  been  taken  by 
the  Boians  at  the  village  of  Tanetum.  He  returned  to  Rome, 
accompanied  by  these  on  each  side  of  him,  distinguished 
rather  by  family-badges  than  public  services.  It  was  pro¬ 
posed  to  the  people,  that  “  Cneius  Servilius  should  not  be 
subject  to  penalty,  for  having,  contrary  to  the  laws,  during 
the  life  of  his  father  (a  circumstance  of  which  he  was  at  that 
time  ignorant,)  and  who  sat  in  the  curule  chair,  accepted  the 
offices  of  tribune  of  the  commons,  and  plebeian  aedile  this 
being  admitted,  he  returned  to  his  province.  <  Consentia,  Uf- 
fugum,  Vergse,  Besidiae,  Hetriculum,  Sypheum,  Argenta- 
num,  Clampetia,  and  many  other  small  states,  perceiving  that 
the  Carthaginians  grew  languid  in  their  operations,  came  over 
to  Cneius  Servilius,  the  consul,  then  in  Bruttium  ;  and  who 
had  fought  a  battle  with  Hannibal  in  the  district  of  Croton, 
of  which  we  have  no  clear  account.  Valerius  Antias  says, 
that  five  thousand  of  the  enemy  were  slain.  This  is  a  cir¬ 
cumstance  of  such  importance,  that  either  it  must  be  an  im¬ 
pudent  fiction,  or  they  were  guilty  of  great  negligence  who 
omitted  mentioning  it.  It  is  certain,  that  Hannibal  made 
no  farther  efforts  in  Italy,  for  deputies  came  to  him  from 
Carthage,  recalling  him  to  Africa,  nearly  at  the  same  time 
with  Mago. 
XX.  Hannibal  is  said  to  have  been  thrown  into  the  most^ 
violent  agitation,  and  scarcely  to  have  refrained  from  shed¬ 
ding  tears,  on  hearing  the  words  of  the  deputies.  When 
they  had  delivered  the  orders,  which  they  had  in  charge,  he 
said, — Now,  indeed,  they  recall  me,  not  in  ambiguous 
terms,  but  openly,  who  have,  for  a  long  time  past,  been  drag- 
VOL.  TV. — A  A 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  549. 

irs 
ging  me  home^  by  refusing  me  supplies  both  of  men  and 
money.  It  is  not  the  Roman  people,  so  often  discomfited 
and  routed,  that  has  conquered  Hannibal,  but  the  Carthagi¬ 
nian  senate,  through  the  malicious  suggestions  of  envy  ;  nor 
will  Scipio  exult,  and  pride  himself,  so  much  in  this  my  dis¬ 
graceful  retreat,  as  will  Hanno ;  who,  unable  to  do  it  by  any 
other  means,  has  crushed  our  family  under  the  ruins  of  Car¬ 
thage.’’  As  he  had,  for  some  time,  foreseen  this  event,  he 
had  ships  already  prepared  ;  dismissing,  therefore,  a  useless 
crowd  of  soldiers,  under  the  appearance  of  garrisons,  into 
the  towns  of  Bruttium,  a  few  of  which  adhered  to  him  rather 
through  fear  than  affection,  he  carried  over  to  Africa  such  of 
the  troops  as  were  lit  for  service.  A  great  number  of  natives 
of  Italy,  refusing  to  follow  him  to  Africa,  and  flying  to  the 
sanctuary  of  Juno  Lacinia,  which,  till  that  day,  had  never  been 
violated,  were  barbarou'^^ly  put  to  death  within  the  walls  of  the 
temple.  We  are  told,  that  hardly  any  person  ever  showed 
more  grief  on  leaving  his  native  soil,  to  go  into  exile,  than 
Hannibal  on  his  departure  from  the  country  of  his  enemy  ; 
that  he  often  looked  back  on  the  coasts  of  Italy,  inveighing 
against  gods  and  men,  uttering  curses  on  his  own  head,  for 
not  having  led  his  men  to  Rome,  yet  reeking  with  blood 
from  the  slaughter  at  Cannse :  reflecting,  with  the  bitterest 
vexation,  that  Scipio,  who,  since  his  appointment  to  the  con¬ 
sulship,  had  not  looked  in  the  face  of  the  Carthaginian  enemy 
in  Italy,  had  yet  spirit  to  go  and  attack  Carthage  ;  while  he, 
who  had  slain  a  hundred  thousand  fighting  men  at  Thrasi- 
menus  and  Cannse,  had  suffered  his  strength  to  moulder  away 
about  Casilinum,  Cumse,  and  Nola,  In  the  midst  of  such 
self-reproaches  and  complaints,  he  was  forced  away  from 
Italy,  in  which  he  had  so  long  maintained  a  divided  power 
with  the  Romans. 
XXI.  News  was  brought  to  Rome  at  the  same  time,  that 
both  Mago  and  Hannibal  had  departed  for  Africa.  But  the 

BOOK  XXX. 

179 

B.C.  203.] 
exultation  of  the  people  was  diminished  by  the  reflection,  that 
the  Roman  commanders  had  shown  a  want  either  of  spirit  or 
of  strength,  in  not  preventing  such  departure,  though  they 
had  received  orders  to  that  purpose  from  the  senate.  They 
had  also  much  anxiety  concerning  the  final  issue  of  affairs, 
now  that  the  whole  weight  of  the  war  fell  upon  one  general 
and  his  army.  About  the  same  time,  ambassadors  arrived 
from  Saguntum,  bringing  with  them  some  Carthaginians  who 
had  come  over  to  Spain  to  hire  auxiliaries,  and  whom  they 
had  seized,  together  with  their  money.  They  laid  down,  in 
the  porch  of  the  senate-house,  two  hundred  and  fifty  pounds 
weight  of  gold,  and  eighty  of  silver.  The  agents  were  thrown 
into  prison  ;  the  gold  and  silver  were  returned,  and  thanks 
given  to  the  Saguntines  ;  presents  were  made  to  them  be¬ 
sides,  and  ships  provided  to  convey  them  home  to  Spain. 
Some  of  the  older  senators  then  observed,  that  ‘‘  men  had 
less  lively  sensations  of  good  than  of  evil.  Did  they  remem¬ 
ber  what  terror  and  consternation  Hannibal’s  coming  into 
Italy  had  excited  ?  What  losses  they  had  sustained,  and  what 
lamentations  had  followed  ?  When  the  Carthaginian  camp 
was  seen  from  the  walls  of  the  city,  what  vows  were  then 
offered  up  by  each  particular  person,  and  by  the  whole  body 
of  the  people  !  How  often,  in  their  assemblies,  were  their 
hands  stretched  out  towards  heaven,  and  exclamations  heard — 
O  !  will  that  day  ever  arrive,  when  we  shall  see  Italy  cleared 
of  the  enemy,  and  blessed  once  more  with  the  enjoyment  of 
peace  ?  That  now,  at  length,  in  the  sixteenth  year,  the  gods 
had  granted  their  wish,  and  yet  not  the  slightest  proposal 
had  been  made,  of  returning  thanks  to  the  gods.  So  deficient 
are  men  in  gratitude,  even  at  the  time  when  a  favour  is  re¬ 
ceived  ;  and  much  less  are  they  apt  to  retain  a  proper  sense 
of  it  afterwards.”  Immediately,  a  general  exclamation  broke 
forth  from  every  part  of  the  senate-house,  that  Publius  iEli us, 
the  praetor,  should  take  the  sense  of  the  senate  on  the  sub- 

180 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  549. 

ject ;  and  a  decree  passed,  that  a  supplication  should  be  so¬ 
lemnized  in  all  the  temples  for  five  days,  and  a  hundred  and 
twenty  of  the  greater  victims  offered  in  sacrifice. 
XXII .  After  Lselius  and  Masinissa^s  ambassadors  were  dis¬ 
missed,  accounts  were  brought,  that  the  Carthaginian  ambas¬ 
sadors,  who  were  coming  to  treat  of  peace,  had  been  seen  at 
Puteoli,  and  would  proceed  from  thence  by  land  ;  on  which 
the  senate  resolved,  that  Caius  Laelius  should  be  recalled,  in 
ordvr  that  he  might  be  present  at  the  proceedings.  Quintus 
Fulvius  Gillo,  a  lieutenant-general  under  Scipio,  conducted 
the  Carthaginians  to  Rome,  but  the\  were  forbidden  to  enter 
the  city.  Apartments  were  provided  for  them  in  the  Villa 
Puhlica,  and  an  audience  of  the  senate  was  granted  them  in 
the  temple  of  Bellona.  Their  discourse  was  nearly  the  same 
with  that  which  they  had  made  to  Scipio,  throwing  off  all  the 
blame  of  the  war  from  the  community, and  laying  it  on  Han¬ 
nibal.  They  affirmed,  that  “  he  had  acted  contrary  to  the 
orders  of  the  senate,  not  only  in  passing  the  Alps,  but  even 
in  crossing  the  Iberus  ;  and  that  he  had,  without  any  autho¬ 
rity  from  them,  made  \rar,  not  only  upon  the  Romans,  but, 
before  that,  on  the  Saguntines :  that,  if  the  facts  were  duly 
considered,  the  senate  and  people  of  Carthage  had,  to  that 
day,  inviolably  observed  the  treaty  with  the  Romans.  There¬ 
fore  they  had  nothing  farther  in  charge,  than  to  request,  that 
they  might  be  allowed  to  abide  by  the  terms  of  the  peace 
which  had  been  lately  concluded  with  the  consul  Lutatius.’* 
The  praetor,  according  to  the  established  custom,  giving  per¬ 
mission  to  the  senators  to  make  such  inquiries  of  the  ambas¬ 
sadors  as  any  of  them  thought  proper ;  the  older  members, 
who  had  been  present  at  the  concluding  of  the  treaties,  asked 
various  questions  relative  to  them.  The  Carthaginians  re¬ 
plied,  that  they  were  not  of  an  age  to  remember  particulars 
(for  almost  all  of  them  were  }oiuig):  on  which,  the  house 
resounded  with  exclamations,  that  Punic  faith  was  evident, 

BOOK  XXX. 

181 

B.C.  203.] 
xn  appointing  such  men  as  these  to  solicit  the  renewal  of  a 
former  peace,  with  the  terms  of  which  they  were  themselves 
unacquainted. 
XXIII.  The  ambassadors  being  ordered  to  withdraw,  the 
senators  proceeded  to  give  their  opinions.  Marcus  Livius 
recommended,  that  Cneius  Servilius,  the  consul  who  was 
the  nearer  home,  should  be  sent  for,  to  be  present  at  the  pro¬ 
ceedings  ;  for,  as  no  subject  of  greater  importance  than  the 
present  could  ever  come  under  their  consideration,  so  be  did 
not  think  it  consistent  with  the  dignity  of  the  Roman  people, 
that  an  affair  of  such  magnitude  should  be  transacted  in  the 
absence  of  both  the  consuls.”  Quintus  Metellus,  who  three 
years  before  had  been  consul,  and  had  also  been  dictator,  pro¬ 
posed,  that  ‘‘  whereas  Publius  Scipio,  by  destroying  the  ar¬ 
mies  of  the  enemy,  and  w^asting  their  country,  had  reduced 
them  to  such  necessity,  that  they  sued  for  peace.  No  per¬ 
son  whatever  could  be  a  more  competent  judge  of  their  inten¬ 
tion  in  making  the  application,  and  therefore  they  should  be 
wholly  directed  by  the  advice  of  that  general,  who  was  car¬ 
rying  on  the  war  under  the  walls  of  Carthage.”  Marcus  Va¬ 
lerius  Lsevinus,  who  had  been  twice  consul,  charged  those 
men  with  being  come  as  spies,  and  not  as  ambassadors ;  and 
advised,  that  they  should  be  ordered  to  depart  from  Italy  ; 
that  guards  should  be  sent  with  them  to  their  ships  ;  and  that 
orders  should  be  sent  to  Scipio,  not  to  intermit  his  operations.” 
Laelius  and  Fiilvius  added,  that  Scipio  had  grounded  his 
hopes  of  success  on  Hannibal  and  Mago  not  being  recalled 
from  Italy.  That  the  Carthaginians  would  feign  a  compli¬ 
ance  with  any  measures,  while  they  waited  for  the  arrival  of 
those  generals  and  their  armies ;  and  would,  afterwards,  for¬ 
getting  all  gods,  and  all  treaties,  however  recent,  pursue  the 
war.”  This  observation  made  them  more  readily  concur  in 
the  opinion  of  Laevinus.  The  ambassadors  were  therefore 
dismissed,  and  almost  without  an  answer. 

182 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  fY.R.  S49. 
XXIV.  About  the  same  time,  the  consul  Cneius  ServUius, 
n<ft  doubting  but  that  he  should  enjoy  the  glory  of  having 
restored  peace  to  Italy,  passed  over  into  Sicily  in  pursuit  of 
Hannibal,  (as  if  he  himself  had  compelled  him  to  retreat,)  in¬ 
tending  to  proceed  from  thenee  to  Africa.  As  soon  as  this 
became  known  at  Rome,  the  senate  at  first  voted,  that  the 
praetor  should  write  to  the  consul,  that  they  required  him  to 
return  to  Italy.  Afterwards,  on  the  praetor’s  assuring  them 
that  Servilius  would  pay  no  regard  to  his  letter,  Publius  Sul- 
picius,  being  created  dictator  for  the  purpose,  recalled  the 
consul  by  virtue  of  his  superior  authority  ;  and  then,  with 
Marcus  Servilius,  master  of  the  horse,  he  spent  the  remainder  of 
the  year  in  going  round  to  the  cities  which  had  forfeited  their 
allegiance  during  the  war,  and  examining  into  the  conduct  of 
each.  During  the  continuance  of  the  truce,  a  hundred  trans¬ 
ports,  with  stores,  under  the  convoy  of  twenty  ships  of  war, 
sent  from  Sardinia  by  Lentulus  the  praetor,  arrived  safe  in 
Africa,  without  meeting  any  obstruction,  either  from  the  ene¬ 
my  or  bad  weather.  Cneius  Octavius,  who  sailed  from  Si¬ 
cily  with  two  hundred  transports,  and  thirty  ships  of  war,  had 
not  the  same  good  fortune.  His  voyage  was  prosperous,  until 
he  came  almost  within  sight  of  Africa,  when  the  wind  at  first 
subsided  into  a  calm  ;  then,  springing  up  heavily  from  the 
south-west,  his  ships  were  dispersed  on  all  sides.  He  him¬ 
self,  with  the  ships  of  war,  struggling  through  the  opposing 
waves,  with  excessive  toil  to  the  rowers,  made  the  promon¬ 
tory  of  Apollo :  the  transports  were  most  of  them  driven  to 
iEgimurus,  an  island  stretching  across  the  mouth  of  the  bay 
on  which  Carthage  stands,  distant  from  the  city  about  thirty 
miles  ;  the  rest  towards  that  part  of  it  where  the  hot  baths 
are  found.  All  this  happened  within  view  of  Carthage,  and 
occasioned  a  concourse  of  people  from  all  parts,  in  the  Forum. 
The  magistrates  assembled  the  senate ;  the  multitude  in  the 
porch  of  the  senate-house  expressed  aloud  their  uneasiness. 

BOOK  XXX. 

183 

B.C.  203.] 
lest  so  great  a  booty  should  be  allowed  to  escape  out  of  their 
hands.  Although  some  objected,  that  their  faith  was  pledged 
in  having  sued  for  peace,  others  in  their  having  agreed  to  a 
truce,  and  which  had  not  yet  expired,  yet  the  assembly,  being 
composed  of  nearly  an  equal  number  of  the  populace  as  of  sena* 
tors,  came  to  a  resolution,  that  Hasdrubal  should  go  to  ^gi- 
murus  with  a  fleet  of  fifty  sail,  and  proceed  from  thence  to 
pick  up  the  scattered  ships  of  the  Romans,  in  the  several  har¬ 
bours,  and  along  the  coasts.  First,  the  transports  from  iEgi- 
murus,  abandoned  by  the  mariners,  who  effected  their  escape, 
were  towed  to  Carthage ;  afterwards  those  from  the  baths. 
XXV.  The  ambassadors  had  not  yet  returned  from  Rome, 
nor  was  it  known  what  were  the  sentiments  of  the  Roman  se¬ 
nate  concerning  war  or  peace  ;  neither  was  the  term  of  the 
truce  expired.  Scipio,  on  this  account,  more  highly  resented 
the  injury  offered  by  those  who  had  petitioned  for  peace,  and 
the  truce ;  and,  considering  it  as  breaking  off  the  negocia- 
tions,  and  an  infraction  of  the  truce,  he  instantly  sent  Mar¬ 
cus  Bsebius,  Lucius  Sergius,  and  Lucius  Fabius,  ambassadors 
to  Carthage.  These,  having  narrowly  escaped  suffering  vio¬ 
lence  from  the  populace,  and  still  apprehending  themselves 
exposed  to  danger,  applied  to  the  magistrates,  who  had  pro¬ 
tected  them  from  ill-treatment,  for  a  guard  of  ships  on  their 
return.  Two  triremes  were  assigned  them  ;  which,  as  soon 
as  they  came  to  the  river  Bagrada,  from  whence  there  was  a 
view  of  the  Roman  camp,  returned  to  Carthage.  There  was 
a  Carthaginian  fleet  stationed  at  Utica,  from  which  two 
quadriremes  were  sent,  either  in  consequence  of  private  or¬ 
ders  from  Carthage,  or  Hasdrubal,  who  commanded  that 
fleet,  (for  the  infraction  was  unauthorized  by  the  public,)  and* 
which  suddenly  attacked  the  Roman  quinquereme,  as  it  came 
round  the  promontory.  The  Carthaginian  vessels  attempted 
to  strike  the  Roman  with  their  prows,  but  which  they  could 
not  effect  by  reason  of  its  activity,  nor  could  the  fighting  men 

IM 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  549* 
leap  from  those  lower  ships  into  the  higher  ones.  The  qvm^ 
quereme  was  gaUantly  defended,  as  long  as  weapons  lasted* 
These,  however,  spent,  there  was  nothing  that  could  save 
them,  but  the  land  being  near,  and  the  multitude  which  pour¬ 
ed  out  from  the  camp  to  the  coast.  They,  therefore,  pressed 
forward,  using  their  utmost  efforts  with  their  oars  ;  and  run¬ 
ning  on  shore,  the  men  escaped,  but  the  ship  was  entirely 
lost.  After  the  truce  had  been  thus  broken,  by  outrage  after 
outrage,  L®lius  and  Fulvius  arrived  from  Rome,  with  the 
Carthaginian  ambassadors.  To  these  Scipio  declared,  that 
“  although  the  Carthaginians  had  violated  not  only  their  faith 
pledged  in  the  truce,  but  also  the  laws  of  nations  respecting 
ambassadors,  yet  they  should  meet  no  treatment  from  him 
unbecoming  the  maxims  of  the  Roman  people,  and  his  own 
principles  and  thus  dismissing  them,  he  prepared  for  war. 
Hannibal  now  drew  nigh  the  land,  when  one  of  the  sailors 
was  ordered  to  climb  the  mast,  and  discover  what  part  of  the 
country  they  were  arrived  at ;  and  on  his  saying  that  their 
course  pointed  to  a  ruined  sepulchre,  the  Carthaginian,  struck 
with  the  ill  omen,  ordered  the  pilot  to  steer  past  that  place, 
put  in  his  fleet  at  Leptis,  and  there  disembarked  his  forces. 
XXVI.  These  were  the  transactions  in  Africa  during  that 
year  j  those  which  follow  belong  to  the  period  in  which  Mar¬ 
cus  Servilius  Geminus,  who  was  then  master  of  the  horse, 
and  Tiberius  Claudius  Nero,  were  consuls.  However,  to¬ 
wards  the  end  of  the  former  year  deputies  arrived  from  the 
allied  cities  of  Greece,  They  complained,  that  their  lands 
were  ravaged  by  Philip’s  garrisons  ;  and  that  their  ambas¬ 
sadors,  who  had  gone  into  Macedonia  to  solicit  reparation  of 
their  injuries,  had  not  been  admitted  to  the  presence  of  the 
King.  At  the  same  time,  they  gave  information,  that  four 
thousand  soldiers,  under  the  command  of  Sopater,  had  gone 
over  to  Africa,  and  were  marching  to  the  assistance  of  the 
Carthaginians  ;  and  that  some  money  also  had  been  sent  with 

BOOK  XXX- 

185 

fix,  ^a.] 
them  ;  whereupon  the  senate  ordered,  that  un  embassy 
should  be  sent  to  the  King,  to  acquaint  him,  that  the  ^nate 
considered  those  proceedings  as  contrary  to  the  treaty  sub- 
bating  between  them-  Caius  Terentius  Varro,  Caius  Ma- 
milius,  and  Marcus  Aurelius,  were  despatched  on  this  busi¬ 
ness,  with  an  escort  of  three  quinqueremes-  That  year  was 
remarkable  for  a  great  fire,  by  which  the  buildings  on  the 
Publician  hill  were  burned  to  the  ground  ;  and  also  for  an 
uncommon  overflowing  of  the  rivers :  but  provisions  were 
plentiful,  because,  in  consequence  of  peace,  all  parts  of  Italy 
were  open  for  importation  ;  and  besides,  a  gi'eat  quantity  of 
com,  which  had  been  sent  from  Spain,  was  delivered  out  to 
the  inhabitants,  at  the  easy  rate  of  four  asses  a  bushel,  by  the 
curule  aediles,  Marcus  Valerius  Falto,  and  Marcus  Fabius 
Buteo.  In  the  same  year  died  Quintus  Fabius  Maximus,  in 
extreme  old  age,  if  it  be  true,  as  some  writers  affirm,  that  he 
had  been  augur  for  sixty-two  years.  He  was  certainly  a  man 
worthy  of  the  great  surname  which  he  bore,  even  if  he  were 
the  first  to  whom  it  was  applied.  He  surpassed  his  father, 
and  was  equal  to  his  grandfather,  in  the  honourable  posts 
which  he  fllled.  His  grandfather,  Rullus,  was  distinguished 
by  a  greater  number  of  victories,  and  greater  battles  ;  but  the 
actions  of  Fabius,  having  such  an  antagonist  as  Hannibal, 
may  be  considered  as  equivalent  to  them  all.  He  was  deem¬ 
ed  to  possess  more  caution  than  spirit ;  but  though  it  may  be 
doubted,  whether  the  dilatoriness  of  his  conduct  arose  from 
his  natural  disposition,  or  from  a  conviction  that  it  was  best 
suited  to  the  war  in  which  he  was  engaged  ;  yet  nothing  is 
more  certain,  than  that  this  man  alone,  as  the  poet  Ennis  says, 
by  his  delays  retrieved  our  affairs.  Quintus  Fabius  Maxi¬ 
mus,  his  son,  was  consecrated  augur  in  his  pl^ce,  and  Servius 
Sulpicius  Galba  pontiff,  in  his  place  also  ;  for  he  held  twd 
offices  in  the  college  of  priests.  The  Roman  games  were  re¬ 
peated  for  one  day  ;  the  plebeian  thrice  repeated  entire,  by 
VOL.  IV. — B  B 

186 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

CY.R.  550 

the  curule  sediles,  Marcus  Sextius  Sabinus,  and  Gains  Tre- 
xnellius  Flaccus.  Both  of  these  were  elected  praetors,  and, 
with  them,  Gains  Livius  Salinator,  and  Gains  Aurelius  Cotta. 
The  different  accounts  given  by  writers  render  it  uncertain 
whether  Caius  Servilius,  consul,  presided  at  the  elections  that 
year,  or  Publius  Sulpicius,  nominated  dictator  by  him,  be¬ 
cause  he  himself  was  detained  in  Etruria,  being  employed, 
pursuant  to  a  decree  of  the  senate,  in  holding  inquisitions  re¬ 
lative  to  the  conspiracies  of  the  principal  inhabitants* 
XXVII,  In  the  beginning  of  "the  following  year,  Marcus 
Servilius  and  Tiberius  Claudius,  summoning  the 
B*c'  202*  Capitol,  consulted  them  concerning 
the  provinces.  Both  were  desirous  of  obtaining 
Africa ;  they  therefore  wished  that  Italy  and  Africa  should 
be  disposed  of  by  lot ;  but  this  was  opposed,  though  by  Quin¬ 
tus  Metellus  chiefly.  The  consuls  were  ordered  to  apply  to 
the  tribunes,  to  take  the  sense  of  the  people,  as  to  who  should 
conduct  the  war  in  Africa.  All  the  tribes  concurred  in  ap¬ 
pointing  Publius  Scipio.  Nevertheless  the  consuls  put  the 
province  of  Africa  to  the  lot,  for  so  the  senate  had  decreed, 
and  it  fell  to  Tiberius  Claudius,  who  was  to  carry  to  Africa 
a  fleet  of  fifty  ships,  all  quinqueremes,  with  authority  equal 
to  that  of  Scipio.  Marcus  Servilius  obtained  Etruria  ;  and 
in  the  same  province,  the  command  was  continued  to  Caius 
Servilius,  if  the  senate  thought  proper  that  the  consul  should 
remain  in  the  city.  Of  the  praetors,  Marcus  Sextius  obtained 
Gaul,  where  Publius  Quintilius  Varus  was  to  deliver  to  him 
two  legions  with  the  province  ;  Caius  Livius,  Bruttium,  with 
the  two  legions  which  Publius  Sempronius,  proconsul,  had 
commanded  the  year  before  ;  Cneius  Tremeliius,  Sicily,  with 
directions  to  receive  from  Publius  Villius  Tappulus,  praetor 
of  the  former  year,  the  province  and  two  legions  ;  Villius,  as 
propraetor,  was  appointed  to  protect  the  coast  of  Sicily  with 
twenty  ships  of  war  and  one  thousand  troops  ;  Marcus  Pom- 

BOOK  XXX. 

187 

B.C.  202.] 
ponius  to  convey  from  thence  to  Rome,  with  the  remaining 
twenty  ships,  one  thousand  five  hundred  soldiers.  The  city 
jurisdiction  fell  to  Caius  Aurelius  Cotta:  the  rest  were  con¬ 
tinued  in  their  provinces,  and  with  the  armies  to  which  they 
were  first  appointed.  Not  more  than  sixteen  legions  were 
employed  that  year  in  the  service  of  the  empire.  In  order  to 
conciliate  the  favour  of  the  gods  to  all  their  undertakings  and 
proceedings,  it  was  ordered  that  the  consuls  should,  before 
they  set  out  to  the  campaign,  celebrate  those  games,  and  with 
the  greater  victims,  which  Titus  Manlius,  dictator,  in  the 
consulate  of  Marcus  Claudius  Marcellus,  and  Titus  Quintus 
had  vowed,  provided  the  commonwealth  should  for  the  next 
five  years  continue  in  the  same  state.  The  games  were  ex¬ 
hibited  in  the  Circus  during  four  days,  and  the  victims  sacri¬ 
ficed  to  the  gods  to  whom  they  had  been  vowed. 
XXVIII.  Meanwhile,  both  hope  and  anxiety  daily  increi»- 
ed  in  equal  proportion  ;  nor  could  people  judge  with  cer¬ 
tainty,  whether  it  was  a  proper  subject  of  rejoicing,  that  Han¬ 
nibal  had,  at  the  end  of  sixteen  years,  departed  from  Italy, 
and  thereby  left  the  possession  of  it  open  to  the  Roman  peo¬ 
ple,  or  whether  they  had  not  rather  cause  of  fear,  in  his  hav¬ 
ing  carried  his  army  safe  into  Africa.  They  considered, 
that  although  the  place  was  changed,  the  danger  was  still 
the  same.  That  Quintus  Fabius,  lately  deceased,  who  fore¬ 
told  the  violence  of  this  struggle,  had  grounds  for  what  he 
further  presaged,  namely,  that  Hannibal  would  prove  a  more 
formidable  enemy  in  his  own  country  than  he  had  been  in  a 
foreign  one.  Scipio,  he  said,  would  not  have  to  deal  with 
Syphax,  a  King  of  undisciplined  barbarians,  whose  army  had 
been  sometimes  commanded  by  Statorius,  a  man  but  liule 
elevated  above  the  condition  of  a  slave  ;  nor  with  such  a  das¬ 
tardly  general  as  his  father-in-law,  Hasdrubal ;  nor  with  tu¬ 
multuary  armies,  hastily  collected  out  of  a  crowd  of  armed  rus¬ 
tics  ;  but  with  Hannibal,  a  general  of  the  greatest  bravery ; 

188  HISTORY  O!^  ROME.  [Y.R.  550. 
brought  up  from  his  infancy  in  the  midst  of  arms ;  in  his 
childhood  a  soldier ;  when  scarcely  arrived .  at  the  age  of 
youth,  a  general :  who  had  advanced  to  an  old  age,  through 
a  course  of  victories  ;  had  filled  Spain,  Gaul,  and  Italy,  from 
the  Alps  to  the  streight,  with  monuments  of  his  mighty 
atchievements  ;  who  was  at  the  head  of  an  army  equally  ex¬ 
perienced  in  service  with  himself,  hardened  by  having  gone 
through  every  kind  of  difficulty,  even  beyond  what  men  could 
be  supposed  to  endure  ;  which  had  been  stained  numberless 
times,  with  Roman  blood,  and  had  carried  with  them  the 
spoils,  not  only  of  Roman  soldiers,  but  of  Roman  command¬ 
ers.  That  many  would  meet  Scipio  in  battle,  who  with  their 
own  hands  had  slain  prsetors,  generals,  and  consuls  j  who,  in 
fine,  were  decorated  with  the  highest  military  honours,  ac¬ 
customed  as  they  were  to  ravage  camps,  and  the  cities  of 
Italy ;  and  that  the  magistrates  of  the  Roman  people  were 
not  in  possession  of  such  a  number  of  fasces,  as  HannibalJ) 
could  have  carried  before  him,  of  those  which  had  been  ta¬ 
ken  from  the  generals  who  had  fallen  by  his  arms.”  While 
their  thoughts  were  employed  in  these  discouraging  considera¬ 
tions,  their  anxiety  and  fears  were  farther  aggravated  by  other 
circumstances :  for  after  being  accustomed  during  several 
years  to  wage  war  in  different  parts  of  Italy,  without  any  san¬ 
guine  hopes  or  prospect  of  its  speedy  conclusion  ;  Scipio  and 
Hannibal,  champions  matched  as  it  were  for  the  final  decision, 
had  now  raised  their  eagerest  attention.  Even  those  who 
had  the  greatest  confidence  in  Scipio,  and  the  strongest  hopes 
of  victoiys  the  nearer  they  saw  the  completion  of  thcirwishes, 
the  more  was  their  solicitude  heightened.  In  a  similar  man¬ 
ner  were  the  minds  of  the  Carthaginians  affected  ;  who, 
when  they  turned  their  eyes  on  Hannibal,  and  the  greatness 
of  his  exploits,  repented  that  they  had  sued  for  peace.  Then 
recollecting  that  they  had  been  twice  vanquished  in  battle  ; 
that  Syphax  had  been  made  prisoner  ;  that  they  had  been  ex- 

BOOK  XXX. 

189 

B.C.  202.] 
pelled  from  Spain  ;  and  finally,  that  they  had  been  obhged  to 
quit  Italy  for  the  defence  of  their  own  shores ;  and  that  sdl 
this  had  been  effected  by  the  valour  and  conduct  of  Scipio 
alone,  they  looked  on  him  with  terror,  as  a  leader  whose 
birth  the  fates  had  ordained  for  their  destruction. 
XXIX.  Hannibal,  in  the  mean  time,  arrived  at  Hadrume* 
turn,  and  spent  a  few  days  there  in  refreshing  his  soldiers  af¬ 
ter  the  fatigues  of  the  voyage;  when, roused  by  the' alarming 
accounts,  that  all  the  country  round  Carthage  was  possessed 
by  the  enemy’s  troops,  he  advanced  by  long  marches  to  Za* 
ma,  which  lies  at  the  distance  of  five  days’  journey  from  that 
city.  Some  spies  whom  he  sent  out,  being  intercepted  by 
the  Roman  guards,  and  brought  to  Scipio,  he  gave  them  in 
charge  to  the  military  tribunes,  with  orders  to  conduct  them 
through  the  camp,  wherever  they  chose  ;  he  encouraged  them 
to  lay  aside  fear,  and  view  every  thing ;  and  then,  inquiring 
whether  they  had  taken  a  satisfactory  view  of  every  particu¬ 
lar,  he  gave  them  an  escort  back  to  Hannibal.  Hannibal  re¬ 
ceived  no  pleasure  from  any  of  their  accounts.  They  inform¬ 
ed  him  that  Masinissa  happened  to  arrive  that  very  day  with 
six  thousand  foot,  and  four  thousand  horse  ;  and  he  was  par¬ 
ticularly  struck  by  the  confidence  of  the  enemy,  which,  he  well 
knew,  was  not  conceived  without  reason.  Wherefore,  al¬ 
though  he  was  himself  the  cause  of  the  war,  and  had,  by  his 
coming,  occasioned  the  violation  of  the  truce,  and  the  break¬ 
ing  off  the  negociations  ;  yet,  thinking  that  he  might  obtain 
more  reasonable  terms,  by  suing  for  peace  while  his  strength 
was  entire,  than  after  being  discomfited,  he  sent  a  message  to 
Scipio,  requesting  a  conference.  Whether  he  took  this  step 
on  his  own  judgment  or  fay  die  order  of  the  government,  I 
cannot  take  upon  me  to  affirm.  Valerius  Antias  says,  that 
after  he  had  been  defeated  by  Scipio  in  the  first  engagement, 
in  which  twelve  thousand  fighting  men  were  slain,  and  one 
thousand  seven  hundred  taken,  he  came  as  ambassador,  with 

190 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.SSO. 

ten  others,  into  the  camp  to  Scipio.  Scipio  did  not  decline 
the  conference ;  and  the  two  generals,  by  concert,  moved  for¬ 
ward  their  camps,  in  order  that  they  might  the  more  conve¬ 
niently  meet.  Scipio  sat  down  at  a  small  distance  from  the 
city  Nedagara,  in  a  spot  every  way  commodious,  besides 
having  water  within  a  javelin’s  cast :  Hannibal  took  posses¬ 
sion  of  a  hill,  four  miles  distant ;  safe  and  convenient  in  all 
respects,iexcept  that  there  was  no  water  near.  In  the  space 
between  them  a  spot  was  chosen,  open  to  view  on  £dl  sides, 
that  there  might  be  no  room  for  treachery. 
XXX.  Their  armed  attendants  having  retired  to  an  equal 
distance  on  both  sides,  here  met  (each  attended  by  a  signal 
interpreter)  the  two  greatest  generals,  not  only  of  the  age 
they  lived  in,  but  of  all  who  have  been  recorded  in  any  for¬ 
mer  time,  and  equal  to  any  of  the  kings  or  commanders  of 
any  nations  whatever.  On  sight  of  each  other  they  both  stood, 
for  some  time,  silent,  struck  dumb  as  it  were  by  mutual  ad¬ 
miration.  At  length,  Hannibal  began  thus :  Since  it  has 
been  so  ordered  by  fate,  that  I,  who  first  commenced  hostili¬ 
ties  against  the  Roman  people,  and  have  so  often  been  on  the 
point  of  making  a  conquest  of  them,  should  voluntarily  com^ 
to  sue  for  peace,  I  am  glad  that  it  is  to  you,  rather  than  to 
any  other  person,  that  I  am  to  apply.  On  your  part  too, 
among  the  many  illustrious  events  of  your  life,  it  ought  not 
to  be  reckoned  the  least  glorious,  that  Hannibai,  to  whom 
the  gods  granted  victory  over  so  many  Roman  generals,  has 
yielded  to  you  ;  and  that  you  put  an  end  to  this  war,  which 
was  first  rendered  remarkable  by  the  calamities  of  your  coun- 
before  it  was  so  by  those  of  ours.  Here  also  we  may 
observe,  the  sport  of  fortuue  in  the  disposal  of  events,  that, 
in  the  consulate  of  your  father,  I  took  up  arms.  He  was  the 
first  Roman  general  with  whom  I  engaged  in  battle,  and  to 
hk  son  I  now  come  unarmed  to  solicit  peace*  It  were  in¬ 
deed  above  all  things  to  be  wished,  that  the  gods  h^  so  dis- 

BOOK  XXX. 

191 

B*C.  202.] 
posed  the  minds  of  our  fathers,  that  ywir  coun^ymen  had 
been  contented  with  the  dominion  of  Italy,  and  ours  with  that 
of  Africa ;  for,  even  on  your  side,  Sicily  and  Sardinia  are  not 
an  adequate  compensation  for  the  loss  of  so  many  fleets,  ao 
many  armies,  so  many  excellent  generals.  But  what  is  past, 
however  it  may  be  blamed,  cannot  be  retrieved.  Our  at¬ 
tempts  on  the  possessions  of  others  have  ended  in  our  being 
necessitated  to  fight  in  defence  of  our  own.  Thus  we  not 
only  brought  war  home  to  you  in  Italy,  but  to  ourselves  in 
Africa.  You  beheld  the  arms  and  ensigns  of  an  enemy  al¬ 
most  wkhin  your  gates  and  on  your  walls  ;  and  we  now^  from 
the  ramparts  of  Carthage,  hear  the  din  of  a  Roman  camp. 
The  event,  therefore,  for  which  we  ought  most  earnestly  to 
pray,  and  you  to  wish,  above  all  things,  now  comes  in  view  : 
you  are  negociating  a  peace  in  the  midst  of  a  successful 
career,  who  negociatc  are  the  persons  most  interested 
in  its  establishment,  and  whose  stipulations,  whatever  they 
may  be,  will  c:ertainly  be  ratified  by  our  respective  states. 
want  nothing  but  a  disposition  not  averse  from  pacific 
^gounselsf.  For  my  part,  so  much  instruction  have  I  received 
from  age,  returning  now  an  old  man  to  my  country,  which  I 
left  a  boy,  and  also  both  from  prosperity  and  adversity,  that 
I  wish  to  follow  reason  rather  than  fortune.  But  your  early 
time  of  life  and  uninterrupted  flow  of  prosperity,  both  apt  to 
inspire  a  degree  of  warmth  ill  suited  to  peaceful  plans,  excite 
in  my  mind  very  serious  apprehensions.  He  whom  fortune 
has  never  deceived,  rarely  considers  the  uncertainty  of  future 
events.  What  i  was  at  Thrasimenus  and  at  Cannae,  that  you 
are  at  present.  Appointed  to  a  command  at  an  age  scarcely 
fit  for  service,  though  your  enterprises  were  of  the  boldest 
nature,  you  were  ever  successful.  By  avenging  the  death  of 
your  father  and  uncle,  you  acquired  a  distinguished  charac¬ 
ter  of  uncommon  bravery  and  filial  duty.  You  recovered 
Spain  which  had  been  lost,  and  drove  ouCbf  it  four  Canha- 

192 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[  Y.R.  550. 

ginian  armies.  On  being  elected  consul,  when  others  wanted 
spirit  sufficient  to  defend  Italy,  you  passed  into  Africa  ;  and, 
by  there  destroying  two  armies,  by  taking  and  burning  two 
camps  in  one  hour,  by  making  a  captive  of  Syphax,  a  most 
powerful  king,  and  by  seizing  on  so  many  of  his  citjes,  and 
so  many  of  ours,  you  compelled  me  to  relinquish  the  posses¬ 
sion  of  Italy,  which  I  had  continued  to  hold  for  sixteen 
years.  Perhaps  your  wishes  tend  rather  to  conquest,  than  to 
peace.  I  know  the  spirit  of  you  Romans,  that  it  ever  aims 
at  grand  rather  than  useful  objects.  Fortune  once  shone  on 
me  with  the  same  benign  countenance.  But  if,  along  with 
prosperity,  the  gods  would  grant  us  a  sound  judgment,  we 
should  consider  not  only  what  had  already  happened,  but 
what  may  possibly  happen  hereafter.  Although  you  should 
forget  all  other  instances,  I  am  a  sufficient  example  of  every 
kind  of  fortune.  Me,  whom  you  formerly  saw  pitching  my 
camp  between  the  Anio  and  your  city,  and  on  the  point  of 
scaling  the  walls  of  Rome,  you  now  behold  here,  under  the 
walls  of  my  native  city,  which  is  threatened  with  a  siege  ; 
deprived  of  my  two  brothers,  generals  of  consummate  skill 
and  valour ;  deprecating,  in  behalf  of  my  own  city,  those 
calamities,  by  which  formerly  I  struck  terror  into  yours. 
The  most  exalted  state  of  fortune  is  ever  the  least  to  be  re¬ 
lied  on.  A  peace  concluded  at  a  juncture  wherein  your  af¬ 
fairs  flourish,  and  ours  are  distressed,  reflects  splendour  and 
dignity  on  you  who  grant  it ;  to  us,  who  request  it,  it  is  rather 
necessary,  that  honourably  A  certain  peace  is  better  and 
safer  than  a  victory  in  expectation  :  the  former  is  in  your  own 
disposal,  the  latter  in  that  of  the  gods.  Risk  not,  on  the 
chance  of  one  hour,  the  happy  successes  of  so  many  years. 
When  you  consider  your  own  strength,  recollect,  at  the  same 
time,  the  chances  of  war.  Arms  there  will  be  on  both  sides ; 
but,  on  both  sides,  the  bodies  that  cbntend  will  be  but  human. 
Events  less  correspond  to  men’s  expectations  in  war,  than  in 

BOOK  XXX. 

193 

B.C.202.] 
any  other  case  whatever.  Even  supposing  that  you  should 
gain  the  victory  in  battle,  the  proportion  of  glory  which  you 
would  thereby  acquire,  in  addition  to  what  you  may  now  se¬ 
curely  enjoy  on  granting  peace,  would  be,  by  no  means,  com¬ 
mensurate  to  that  which  you  must  lose,  should  any  misfor¬ 
tune  happen  to  you.  The  chance  of  but  a  single  hour  may 
destroy,  at  once,  both  the  honours  which  you  have  attained, 
and  those  for  which  you  hope.  In  the  adjusting  of  matters, 
every  thing,  Publius  Scipio,  will  be  in  your  own  power ;  in 
the  other  case,  you  must  abide  by  the  pleasure  of  the  gods. 
Formerly,  Marcus  Atilius,  in  this  same  land,  would  have 
been  celebrated  among  the  few  most  extraordinary  examples 
of  bravery  and  success,  had  he,  when  possessed  of  victory, 
granted  peace  to  the  request  of  our  fathers ;  but  by  setting 
no  bounds  to  his  ambition,  by  laying  no  restraint  on  his  pas¬ 
sions  ;  in  proportion  to  the  height  of  glory  to  which  he  had 
attained,  was  his  fall  dishonourable.  Certainly  it  is  his  right 
who  grants  peace,  not  his  who  sues  for  it,  to  prescribe  the 
terms  ;  yet,  perhaps,  we  might  not  be  deemed  altogether  in¬ 
adequate  to  the  estimation  of  what  degree  of  punishment 
should  be  inflicted  on  us.  We  are  ready  to  give  up  to  you 
the  possession  of  ail  those  places,  on  account  of  which  the 
war  was  begun :  Sicily,  Sardinia,  Spain,  with  all  the  islands 
that  lie  in  any  part  of  the  sea  between  Africa  and  Italy.  Let 
us,  Carthaginians,  confined  within  the  shores  of  Africa,  be¬ 
hold  you  (since  such  is  the  will  of  the  gods)  extending  your 
sovereignty,  both  by  land  and  sea,  over  foreign  realms.  I  am 
far  from  denying  that  you  have  some  reasop  to  distrust  the 
faith  of  the  Carthaginians,  on  account  of  the  insincerity  which 
they  showed  in  their  solicitations,  and  in  not  waiting  the 
issue  of  the  negotiation.  Scipio,  the  security  of  a  peace  be¬ 
ing  observed  depends  much  on  the  character  of  those  who 
sue  for  It,  Your  senate,  I  hear,  refused  to  grant  it,  partly 
from  the  consideration  that  the  persons  employed  in  the  em- 
VOL.  jv. — C  c 

m 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R. 

ba^sy  were  not  sufficieotiy  respectaMc.  Hanail^  »wb  for 
p^ace,  wha  would  not  so&  for  it  i^fdesa  be  thoi^t  it  esqpe- 
dient ;  and  who,  on  account  of  the  aaaae  espedkmy  which 
him  to  sue  for  it^  will  also  tnaintasn  it.  And  as  be¬ 
cause  the  war  was  begun  by  me,  1  took  effectual  cmre,  until 
iho  gods  themselves  declared  against  me.  that  my  connUy- 
men  should  have  no  reason  to  complain  of  it,  so  will  I  exert  * 
my  utmost  endeavours  to  make  them  satisfied  with  a  pe^e 
procured  by  my  means.” 
XXXI.  The  Roman  general  answered  to  this  effect:  ^  Han¬ 
nibal,  it  was  not  unknown  to  me  that  their  expectation  eff  your 
arrivsd  was  what  urged  the  CarthagiBians  to  violate  the  truce 
subwsting,  and  to  break  off  the  treaty  of  peace.  Nor  do  you 
dissemble  it ;  as  you  deduct,  from  the  former  conditiomt, 
every  particular,  except  those  which  are,  for  some  time  pj^t^ 
in  oflr  own  power.  But  as  you  are  solicitous  that  your  coim- 
trymen  should  understand  how  great  a  burden  they  are  re¬ 
lieved  from  by  your  means,  so  it  b  my  business  to  endeavour 
that  they  shall  not  now  retract  the  concessions  which  diey 
then  agreed  to  make,  and  enjoy  what  they  then  ceded,  as  a 
reward  of  their  perfidy.  Unworthy  of  being  allowed  the 
same  terms,  you  require  additional  advantages  in  consequence 
of  your  treachery.  Neither  were  our  fathers  the  aggressors 
m  the  war  of  Sicily,  nor  we  in  that  of  Spain.  In  the  former 
case,  the  danger  of  their  allies  the  Mamertines ;  in  the  latter, 
the  destruction  of  Saguntum,  armed  us  in  the  cause  of  jus¬ 
tice  and  in  duty.  That  you  were  the  aggressors,  you  your¬ 
self  acknowledge ;  and  the  gods  bear  witness  to  it,  who  di¬ 
rected  the  issue  of  the  former  war  according  to  equity,  and 
who  are  now  directing,  and  will  bring  the  present  to  the  same 
issue.  As  to  myself,  I  am  sensible  of  the  instability  of  hu¬ 
man  affairs ;  I  am  mindful  of  the  power  of  fortune^  and  I 
know  that  aU  our  undertakings  are  subject  to  a  thousand 
casualties.  But  as  on  the  one  band,  if  you  t^re  retiring 

BOaK  XXX. 

195 

B.C.  202.] 
from  Imfy  of  your  owa  accord,  and,  after  embarking  your 
troops,  were  cotm  to  sdiicit  peace,  if  m  that  case  I  refused 
to  ftsten  to  Vim,  1  ^ould  acknowledge  that  I  behaved  with 
{^-ide  and  arrogaoice :  the  other  hand,  now  that  I  have 
cftagged  ycm  Afiica,  in  spite  every  effort  which  you 
used  to  prevOTt  it,  I  am  not  bound  to  «how  you  any  particu¬ 
lar  respect,  if,  therefore,  in  addition  to  the  terms  on  which 
it  was  t^n  intended  to  conclude  a  peace  (and  with  which 
you  are  acquainted,)  a  full  compensation  be  proposed  for 
having  seized  our  ships  and  stores,  during  the  siAsistence  of 
a  truce,  and  for  the  insult  offered  to  my  ambassadors,  1  shall 
then  have  matter  to  lay  before  my  council.  But  if  this  also 
seem  severe,  prepare  for  war,  since  you  must  be  insincere  in 
proposing  peace.”  Thus,  without  coming  to  any  accommo¬ 
dation,  they  retired  to  their  respective  armies,  and  informed 
them  that  words  had  been  med  to  no  purpose,  that  the  busi¬ 
ness  must  be  decided  by  arms,  and  they  must  abide  the  for¬ 
tune  which  the  gods  should  all^  them. 
XXXII.  Arrived  at  their  camps,  both  gave  orders  to 
their  soldiers  to  **  get  ready  their  arms,  and  call  forth 
their  courage,  for  a  decisive  contest  in  whi«^^  if  success 
attended  them,  they  would  secure  a  superiority,  not  for  a 
day,  but  for  ever.  That  it  would  be  seen  before  to-morrow 
night,  whether  Rome  or  Carthage  to  give  laws  lo 
nations:  for  not  Africa,  nor  Italy,  but  the  wm’ld,  was  to  be 
the  prize  of  victory  ;  while  the  calamities  to  those  who  should 
be  overcome,  were  proportionate  to  the  prize for  as,  on 
the  one  hand,  the  Romans  had  no  chance  of  escaping,  m  a  # 
foreign,  and  to  them  unknown,  country ;  so,  on  the  other, 
Carthage,  having  exhausted  her  last  resources,  seemed  to  be 
threatened  with  immediate  ruin.  Next  day,  advance  two 
by  far  the  most  iliusUrious  gei^rals,  and  two  most  puissmit 
armies,  of  the  two  most  powerful  states,  to  complete  the 
splendid  £id>ric  of  glory  which  they  had  erected,  and  which 

196 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  550. 

each  were  desirous  of  securing  to  himself.  The  minds  all 
were  anxiously  suspended  between  hope  and  fear ;  and  whilst 
they  viewed,  at  one  time,  their  own,  at  another,  the  enemy’s 
army,  estimating  their  powers  either  by  the  eye  or  judgment, 
they  met  with  objects  both  of  encouragement  and  of  dread. 
Such  as  did  not  occur  to  their  own  thoughts,  were  suggested 
by  the  generals  in  their  admonitions  and  exhortations.  The 
Carthaginian  recounted  the  exploits  of  sixteen  years  in  the 
heart  of  Italy  ;  so  many  Roman  generals,  so  many  armies 
utterly  destroyed  ;  and  when  he  came  to  any  soldier,  who 
had  been  distinguished  for  his  behaviour  in  a  former  battle, 
he  reminded  him  of  the  honours  which  he  had  received. 
Scipio  called  to  his  men’s  recollection  Spain,  the  late  engage¬ 
ments  in  Africa,  and  the  acknowledgment  of  the  enemy,  that 
they  had  been  compelled  by  their  fears  to  sue  for  peace  ; 
which,  yet,  the  natural  perfidy  of  their  disposition  would  not 
allow  them.to  establish.  He  related^also  his  conference  with 
Hannibal ;  which,  as  it  had  passed  in  secret,  he  might  have 
misrepresented  at  his  pleasure.  He  mentioned,  as  an  encou- 
raging  omen,  that,  as  they  were  coming  out  to  battle,  the 
gods  had  shown  them  the  same  portents,  under  the  auspices 
of  which  their  fathers  had  fought  at  the  islands  iEgates. 
‘‘  The  end  of  the  war,  and  of  all  their  toils,”  he  said,  was 
now  at  hand  ;  they  had,  within  their  reach,  the  plunder  of 
Carthage :  and  might  speedily  return  home  to  their  country, 
to  their  parents,  their  children,  their  wives  and  their  house¬ 
hold  gods.”  These  words  he  uttered  in  an  erect  attitude, 
and  with  a  countenance  so  animated  with  joy,  that  he  seemed 
as  if  he  had  already  obtained  the  victory, 
XXXIII.  He  then  drew  up  the  spearmen  in  the  van,  be¬ 
hind  them  the  first-rank  men,  and  closed  the  rear  with  the 
veterans.  He  did  not,  as  usual,  form  the  cohorts  in  clo^e 
order,  each  before  their  own  colours,  but  placed  the  compa¬ 
nies  at  some  distance  from  each  other,  that  there  might  be 

BOOK  XXX. 

B.C.  202.] 

m 

room  lo  admit  the  elephants  of  the  enemy,  without  disturb¬ 
ing  the  ranks,  Laelius,  who  formerly  served  under  him  as 
lieutenant-general,  but  that  year  as  quaestor,  by  particular 
appointment,  in  pursuance  of  a  decree  of  the  senate,  he  post¬ 
ed  with  the  Italian  cavalry  on  the  left  wing  ;  Masinissa  and 
the  Numidians  on  the  right.  The  openings  between  the  com¬ 
panies  of  the  cohorts  he  filled  up  with  light-armed  troops,  and 
gave  them  directions,  on  the  attack  of  the  elephants,  either 
to  retire  to  the  rear  of  the  files,  or,  opening  to  right  and  left, 
to  form  along  with  the  cohorts,  so  as  to  leave  a  passage  for 
those  beasts,  through  which  they  might  advance,  exposed  on 
both  sides  to  their  weapons.  Hannibal,  in  order  to  strike 
terror,  placed  his  elephants  in  the  front :  of  these  there  were 
eighty  (a  number  greater  than  he  had  ever  before  brought 
into  the  field ;)  next  to  them,  the  auxiliary  Ligurians  and 
Gauls,  with  the  Balearians  and  Moors  intermixed.  In  the 
second  line,  he  placed  the  Carthaginians,  Africans,  and  the 
legion  of  Macedonians ;  and  then,  (leaving  a  moderate  in¬ 
terval,)  he  formed  the  line  of  reserve,  consisting  of  Italian 
soldiers,  chiefly  Bruttians,  a  greater  number  of  whom  follow¬ 
ed  him  on  his  departure  from  Italy,  by  compulsion  and  through 
necessity,  rather  than  from  inclination.  He  also  covered  the 
flanks  with  cavalry,  the  Carthaginians  being  posted  on  the 
right,  the  Numidians  on  the  left.  Various  were  the  methods 
of  encouragement  made  use  of  among  such  a  number  of 
men,  differing  from  each  other  in  language,  in  manners,  in 
laws,  in  arms,  in  garb,  in  temper,  and  in  their  motives  for 
engaging  in  the  service.  To  the  auxiliaries  was  held  out 
present  gain ;  and  that  to  be  greatly  increased  by  future 
plunder.  The  Gauls  were  inflamed  by  rousing  their  peculiar 
and  natural  hatred  to  the  Romans.  To  the  Ligurians,  who 
had  been  brought  down  from  craggy  mountains,  the  fertil# 
plains  of  Italy  were  pointed  out  as  the  reward  of  success. 
The  Moors  and  Numidians  he  terrified  with  the  prospect  of 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

LY.R,  5S0. 

t9B 
crael  tyranny  otidef  Masmissa.  Different  objects  of  hope 
t  and  fear  were  proposed  to  each  ;  but  to  die  Carthaginians, 
nothing  but  extremes,  either  on  die  side  of  hope  or  of  fear, 
was  presented  to  view  ;  ti^  walls  of  dieir  native  city,  dieir 
household  gods,  the  sepulchres  of  their  ancestors,  their  chil¬ 
dren,  parents,  and  wives  distracted  with  terror ;  in  a  word, 
utter  ruin  and  abject  slavery,  or  the  empire  of  the  world. 
While  the  general  was  thus  employed  among  the  Carthagi¬ 
nians,  and  die  commanders  of  the  several  nations  among  their 
respective  countrymen,  (many  of  them  speaking  by  interpre¬ 
ters,  being  intermixed  with  foreigners,)  the  trumpets  and 
comets  sounded  on  the  side  of  the  Romans ;  and  such  a 
shout  was  raised,  that  the  elephants,  particularly  in  the  left 
wing,  turned  about  against  their  own  men,  the  Moots  and 
Numidians.  Masinissa,  charging  them  while  in  disorder, 
easily  drove  them  in,  and  stripped  their  line  on  that  flank  of 
the  cover  of  the  cavalry.  However,  a  few  of  these  beasts, 
unaffrighted,  being  driven  -forward  on  the  Romans,  made 
great  slaughter  among  the  light  troops,  but  not  without  re¬ 
ceiving  many  wounds  ;  for,  springing  back  to  the  companies, 
and,  to  avoid  being  trodden  under  foot,  opening  a  passage 
for  the  elephants,  they  discharged  their  spears  at  them  from 
both  sides,  being  entirely  exposed  as  they  passed  through  ^ 
nor  did  the  javelins  from  the  first  line  of  troops  cease,  until, 
being  driven  away  from  the  Roman  line  by  the  weapons 
showered  on  them,  they  put  to  flight  even  the  Carthaginian 
cav^ry,  in  their  own  right  wing.  Lfelius,  seeing  the  enemy 
inf  this  confusion,  charged  their  disordered  troops,  and  put 
them  to  flight. 
XXXIV.  The  Carthaginian  line  was  exposed  on  both 
flanks,  not  having  cavalry  to  cover  them,  when  the  infantry 
^gan  to  engage  ;  but  no  longer  on  an  equality  with  the  Ro¬ 
man,  either  in  hope  or  in  strength.  There  was  another  cir¬ 
cumstance  which,  though  trifling  in  appearance,  is  yet 

Bom  XXX. 

B.C.  202.] 

196 

great  Qonsequeace  in  action.  The  on  the  aide  of  the 
Romans  was  compoBed  of  tl^  same  m>ibh1s  uttered  by  every 
oiie ;  coQsequentiy  it  was  die  stronger^  and  more  terrible : 
on  the  odier  side,  the  sounds  were  dis^nant,  ottered  in  die 
discordant  languages  of  many  different  nations.  Besides,  the  < 
Roman  man^r  of  fighting  was  steady,  l^ing  accustomed  to 
press  against  the  enemy  with  their  own  weight,  and  that  of 
their  arms.  That  of  tho  Carthaginian  was  more  loose,  with 
greater  agility  than  strength.  Immediately,  therefeu'e,  at  ^ 
the  first  onset,  the  Remans  made  the  line  of  the  enemy  give 
way;  and  then,  thrusting  against  them  with  their  elbows 
and  the  bosses  of  thetr  shields,  and  upping  forward  into 
the  pku:e  from  which  diey  had  pmhed  them,  they  rapidly 
gained  ground.  The  rear  ranks  also,  on  perceiving  the  ene* 
my^s  line  shrink,  pasted  fiDrward  those  who  were  before 
them,  which  greatly  encreased  their  force  in  repelling  the 
enemy.  On  the  other  side,  the  Africans  and  Carthaginhms, 
so  far  from  supporting  the  auxUi^es,  who  were  giving  way, 
drew  back ;  fearing  lest,  if  that  first  line  m^e  an  obstinate 
resistance,  the  enemy,  in  cutting  through  those,  might  close 
with  them.  The  auxiliaries,  therefore,  quickly  turned  their 
backs,  and  facing  about  to  their  own  party,  some  of  them  re¬ 
treated  into  the  second  line  ;  others,  who  were  not  received 
there,  made  use  of  their  arms  against  them,  enraged  at  not 
^ving  been  supported  befen-e,  and  at  being  now  excluded. 
So  that  there  were,  in  a  manner,  two  battles  carried  on  to¬ 
gether  ;  the  Carthaginians  being  obliged  to  engage  in  fight, 
and  at  the  same  time,  both  with  their  mercenaries  and  with 
the  Romans.  They  did  not,  however,  admit  those  craven 
soldiers  into  their  line,  which  was  still  firm  and  fresh ;  Uit, 
closing  the  ranks,  drove  them  off  to  the  wings,  and  to  the 
open  plains  round  the  fieki  of  battle.  The  place  where  thA 
auxiliaries  had  lately  stood  was  filled  up  with  such  a  num¬ 
ber  of  slain,  and  such  a  quantity  of  arms,  that  it  was  rather 

200 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  550, 

more  difilcult  to  make  way  through  them,  than  it  had  been 
through  the  body  of  troops ;  the  spearmen,  however,  who 
were  in  the  van,  pursuing  the  enemy,  as  each  could  find  a 
passage  through  the  heaps  of  carcases  and  weapons  and 
streams  of  blood,  disordered  both  their  battalions  and  ranks. 
The  battalions  of  the  first-rank  men  also,  seeii^  the  line  be¬ 
fore  them  in  confusion,  began  to  waver  ;  which,  as  soon  as 
Scipio  observed,  he  instantly  ordered  a  retreat  to  be  sounded 
for  the  spearmen,  and  carrying  off  the  wounded  to  the  rear, 
brought  up  the  first-rank  men  and  veterans  to  the  wings,  in 
order  that  the  line  of  the  spearmen,  in  the  centre,  might  be 
the  more  secure  and  firm.  Thus  was  a  new  battle  begun, 
for  they  had  now  come  up  to  their  real  antagonists,  who  were 
upon  an  equality  with  them,  both  in  respect  to  the  kind  of 
arms  which  they  used,  of  their  experience  in  war,  the  fame 
of  their  exploits,  and  the  greatness  both  of  their  hopes  and 
dangers.  But  the  Romans  had  the  advsmtage  in  number, 
and  also  in  spirit,  as  having  already  routed  the  cavalry  and 
the  elephants,  and,  after  having  defeated  the  first  line,  en¬ 
gaging  now  with  the  second. 
XXXV.  Lselius  and  Masinissa,  who  had  pursued  the  fly¬ 
ing  cavalry  to  some  distance,  returning  at  this  critical  junc¬ 
ture,  fell  upon  the  rear  of  the  enemy  ;  and  by  this  charge 
effectually  routed  them.  Many  were  surrounded  in  the  field 
and  slain  ;  many,  being  dispersed  in  flight  through  the  open 
country  adjoining,  where  the  cavalry  were  entirely  masters, 
perished  in  various  places.  Of  the  Carthaginians  and  their 
allies  there  were  slain,  on  that  day,  above  twenty  thousand  ; 
about  the  same  number  were  taken,  with  an  hundred  and 
thirty-three  military  standards,  and  eleven  elephants.  Of 
the  conquerors  there  fell  two  thousand.  Hannibal,  escaping 
during  the  confusion  with  a  few  horsemen,  fled  to  Hadru- 
metum,  having  left  no  effort  untried  to  rally  his  troops  be¬ 
fore  he  left  the  field.  Scipio  himself,  and  all  who  were  skil- 

ffOOK^J^.  2di 
led  In  the  military  art,  allowed  hina  fe 
the  disposition  of  his  forces 
the  elephants  in  the  front,  m  lingaVeiS!^ 
onset  and  insupportable  viole^^  put  It  out 
power  of  the  Romans  to  fo^wAeit  ensigns,  and  preset^ 
their  ranks^  ih  Vhiich  they;  chief  confident  5* 
the  auidliarie^,^fore  tfc^^e  ofH^ii^aginia]^,  in  oi^cr^at 
tltei^  tticii)  madc  npdf  Ae'wfii^sfelbf 
refined  in  dicir  dn^,  iakk  by  safy  ^se  of  hboouf,  fctit  bj 
gain,  should  ]^bsj^  of  sife^ 
8ii^®e  dite  ^0cM*staM  and^  f^  of 
tfefit,  if  they  did  tm  cdieT^iervice,^^t^^  mi|^t  af  ^ 
sbMds  to  lAhift  tbeir  Iwords  t  next, 
i^dleis,  in  whom  lay  ill  his  hop^,  in  '^at 
they,i>illlig  equad  in  ^  respects  widf  thfe  RoiMO^^  n^ 
have  iWi  advantage  of  ^ga^ng  fitish;  a^infet  tmm  fatig^d 
and 'wounded  ^  separating' tfab  ftafians  at  some  dii^t^Ce 
the  rest,  and  placing  diem  ih  the  rSar,  as  he  !^W  not,  ViA 
certatttyi  whcAcr  "’they  Wetd  ^ends  or  fo^,  'Bahhil^, 
after  exerting  this  last  effoit  of  brav^, '!^^mg 
d^metutti;  tm  lecfOTing  a  snmmms,  rkutned’to  C^hage, 
in  the  thifty-sfaA  year  Mfter  he  had  left  if,  and  vir%en  nh^. 
He  acknoWi^ged,  in  the  senate-house,  that  He  Wis  vanquish¬ 
ed,  hc^t^ly  in  receht  battle,  hut  in  the  whoI?irf war; 
and  ftmf  iheit  w^  bdler  hope  of  avoiding  n^,  hut  in 
obtaining  peacef  .  •  "  .  ^  ^  ^  * 
XXXVIv  Immediately  afi^  the  Ibaftle^  IKtpib  Wvihg 
taken  and  qilutiderctf  the  enemy^  camp,  retamed  with  im¬ 
mense  booty  to  ^e  sea-coast,  ^  his  hhvlbg  received 
an  acconnf  thm  PtAMm  Lentohni'  wkS  at^  ift  Utica  with 
hftyidilps  dr  War,  a  kuntlhcd  of  all, 
kindsu "  Wfeh  a  view,  tImmfMa,  cf  esnistenW- 
tkm  «f  Carriage,  by  showing  ^«ti  c^ec^  of  tmror  on 
sidfe,"  after  despatching  to  ftothe  vdth  ncWs'vif  ttr© 
VOL.  IV. — D  D 

202 

HISTORY  0F  ROME. 

[Y.R.  550, 

victory,  he  ordered  Cneius  Octavius  to  couduct  the  legions 
to  that  city  by  land ;  and,  joining  the  fleet  of  Lentulus,  lately^ 
arrived,  with  his  own  which  he  had  before,  he  himself,  set* 
ting  sail  from  Utica,  steered  for  the  harbour  of  Carthage, 
When  he  had  arrived  within  a  small  distance,  he  was  met 
by  a  Carthaginian  ship,  dressed  with  fillets  and  branches  of 
olive,  on  board  of  which  were  ten  ambassadors,  th«  chief 
men  of  the  state,  sent,  by  the  advice  of  Hannibal,  to  sue  for 
peace.  These  coining  under  the  stem  of  the  general^s  ship, 
holding  out  the  badges  of  supplicants,  besought  and  implored 
the  favour  and  compassion  of  Scipio :  but  they  received  no 
other  answer,  than  that  they  should  come  to  Tunes,  to  which 
piU^e  he  intended  to  remove  his  camp.  Then,  after  taking 
a  view  of  the  situation  of  Carthage,  not  so  much  for  the 
sake  of  any  present  use  which  he  intended  to  make  of  his 
knowledge  of  it,  as  of  dispiriting  the  enemy,  he  returned  to 
Utica,  and  at  the  same  time  recalled  Octavius  thither.  As 
they  advanced  towards  Tunes,  an  account  was  brought  that 
Vermina,  son  of  Syphax,  w'ith  a  greater  number  of  horse 
than  of  foo^,  was  coming  to  the  aid  of  the  Carthaginians. 
A  detachment  of  the  army,  with  all  the  cavalry,  attacking 
this  body  of  Numidians  on  their  march,  on  the  first  day  of 
the  Saturnalia,  routed  them  without  much  difficulty ;  and 
every  possibility  of  flight  being  cut  off  by  the  surrounding 
cavalry,  fifteen  thousand  men  were  slain,  one  thousand  two 
hundred  taken,  together  with  fifteen  hundred  horses,  and 
seventy«two  military  standards.  The  prince  himself,  with 
very  few  attendants,  made  his  escape  during  the  tumult.  The 
camp  was  then  pitched  near  Tunes,  in  the  same  place  as  be¬ 
fore,  whither  thirty  ambassadors  came  from  Carthage  to 
Scipio,  and  the  behaviour  of  these  was  much  more  calculated 
to  excite  compassion  than  that  of  the  former,  as  their  distress 
was  stUl  encreasing.  But,  from  the  recollection  of  their  late 
perfidy,  they  were  heard  with  the  kss  pity.  In  the  council^ 

BOOK  XXX- 

BX.  ®2.] 

^3 

though  all  were  stimulated  by  just  reseatment  to  pimue  Car¬ 
thage  to  destruction^  yet,  when  they  considered  how  great  an 
undertaking  it  was,  and  what  a  length  of.  time  the  siege  of  a 
city,  so  strong  and  so  well  fortified,  would  require,  (Scipio 
himself  also  being  uneasy,  under  the  apprehension  of  a  suc¬ 
cessor  being  appointed  in  his  place,  who  might  claim  the  glory 
of  having  terminated  the  war,  though  it  had  been  actu^y 
brought  to  an  issue  by  the  labours  and  dangers  of  another,) 
they  all  became  inclined  to  peace. 
XXXVII.  The  next  day,  the  ambassadors  being  again 
called,  and,  with  severe  rebukes  for  their  perfidy,  admonished, 
that,  instructed  by  so  many  calamities,  they  should  at  length 
be  convinced  of  the  regard  due  to  the  gods,  and  to  an  oath, 
these  terms  of  peace  were  prescribed  to  them  ; — That  they 
should  live  free  under  their  own  laws,  should  enjoy  the  pos¬ 
session  of  whatever  cities,  whatever  territories,  and  whatever 
boundaries,  they  possessed  before  the  war ;  and  that  the  Ro¬ 
man  general  would,  on  that  day,  put  an  end  to  the  devasta¬ 
tion  of  their  country.  That  they  should  deliver  up  -to  the 
Romans  all  deserters,  fugitives,  and- prisoners  ;  and  should 
surrender  their  ships  of  war,  except  ten,  together  with  all 
their  trained  elephants,  and  should  not  train  any  more.  That 
they  should  wage  no  war,  either  in  or  out  of,  Africa,  without 
the  permission  of  the  Roman  people ;  sl^uld  make  restitution 
to  Masinissa,  and  conclude  a  treaty  with  him ;  should  supply 
corn  and  pay  to  the  auxiliaries,  until  their  ambassadors  should 
r^urn  from  Rome.  That  they  should  pay,  within  fifty  years, 
ten  thousand  talents  of  silver,*  by  equal  payments,  according 
to  a  mode  laid  down  in  writing,  and  should  give  a  hundred 
hostages  to  be  approved  of  by  Scipio,  none  younger  than 
fourteen  years,  or  older  than  thirty.  That  he  would  grant 
them  a  truce  on  this  condition  z  that  the  transports  which  had 

^  1,437,5001 

204 

HISraRY  OF  ROME. 

[Y,R.  550. 

been  captored  during  the  former  truce,  together  with  their 
cargoes,  be  restored  ;  if  this  tvere  not  complied  with,  they 
were  not  to  expect  either  truce  or  peace.”  When  the  am¬ 
bassadors,  wbo  were  sent  home  with  these  conditions,  re- 
ported^^hein  in  an  assembly  of  the  people,  Gisgo  having  stood 
f<l^h  to  dissuade  them  from  accepting  the  terms,  and  being 
listened  to  by  the  multitude,  who  were  as  impatient  of  quiet, 
unfit  for  fvar,  Hannil^,  filled  with  indignation  on  finding 
ob|eclions  made,  and  listened  to,  at  such  a  juncture,  laid  hold 
of  Gisgo  with  his  hand,  and  pulled  him  down  from  the  place 
on  which  he  stood.  When  this  sight,  unusual  in  a  free  state, 
raised  a  murmur  among  the  citizens,  he,  being  accustomed 
to  military  manners,  and  disconcerted  by  their  reception  of 
bim'^  said  to  them  ;  At  nine  years  of  age  I  left  this  city,  at 
the  end  of  the  thirty-sixth  I  have  returned.  The  rules  of 
war,  I  think,  I  perfectly  understand,  having,  from  my  child¬ 
hood,  been  continually  supplied  with  opportunities  of  learning 
them,  at  some  times  by  the  state  of  my  own  affairs,  at  others 
by  that  of  the  public.  The  privileges^  laws,  and  manners  of 
the  city  and  of  the  Forum,  you  ought  to  teach  me.”  Having 
thus  apologized  for  his  imprudence,  he  spoke  at  large  con¬ 
cerning  the  peace,  showing  how  necessary  it  was,  and  that  the 
terms  were  not  unreasonable.  The  greatest  difficulty  of  all 
was  that  of  the  which  had  been  captured  during  the 
truce  ;  nothing  was  to  be  found  but  the  ships  themselves,  nor 
was  it  easy  to  collect  the  effects,  those  who  were  charged  with 
having  them  4n  their  possession,  making  opposition  to  all  that 
was  proposed.  It  was  at  length  resolved,  that  the  ships^hould 
be  restored,  that  the  men  at  all  events  should  be  collected, 
and  that  the  other  matters  which  could  not  be  produced, 
should  be  left  to  the  valuation  of  Scipio,  according  to  which 
the  Carthaginians  should  make  compensation  in  money.  Some 
say,  that  Hannibal,  having  gone  from  the  field  to  the  sea- 
coast,  sailed  immediately  in  a  ship  which  had  been  prepared, 

BOOK  XXX. 

205 

B.C.202.] 
and  went  to  King  Antiochus  ;  and  that  when  Scipio  made  it 
a  principal  demand^  that  Hannibal  should  be  given  up  to  him, 
he  was  told  that  Hannibal  had  quitted  Africa. 
XXXVII L  On  the  return  of  the  ambassadors  to  Scipio, 
the  quaestors  were  ordered  to  give  in  a  return,  extracted  from 
the  public  accounts,  of  the  public  property  which  had  been 
on  board  the  ships ;  and  the  owners  to  make  a  return  of  the 
private  property.  For  the  amount  of  the  value,  twenty-five 
thousand  pounds  weight  of  silver  w^ere  required  to  be  imme¬ 
diately  paid,  and  a  truce  for  three  months  was  granted  to  the 
Carthaginians.  A  clause  was  added,  that,  during  the  truce, 
they  should  not  send  ambassadors  to  any  other  place  than  to 
Rome  ;  and  that  if  any  such  should  come  to  Carthage,  they 
should  not  dismiss  them  until  the  Roman  general  was  made 
acquainted  with  their  business.  With  the  Carthaginian  am¬ 
bassadors  were  sent  to  Rome,  Lucius  Veturius  Philo,  Mar- 
cius  Ralla,  and  Lucius  Scipio,  the  general’s  brother.  From 
that  time,  the  great  supplies  from  Sicily  and  Sardinia  caused 
such  cheapness  of  provisions,  that  the  merchant  often  fur¬ 
nished  corn  to  the  mariners  for  the  freight.  At  Rome  there 
had  been  some  uneasiness  on  the  first  account  of  the  Cartha¬ 
ginians  having  recommenced  hostilities,  and  Tiberius  Clau¬ 
dius  had  been  ordered  to  conduct  the  fleet  to  Sicily  with  all 
expedition,  and  to  pass  over  from  thence  to  Carthage  ;  and 
the  other  consul,  Mai^us  Servilius,  to  remain  in  the  city,  un¬ 
til  the  state  of  affairs  in  Africa  should  be  known.  Tiberius 
Claudius  proceeded  slowly  in  every  step  towards  the  equip¬ 
ment  and  sailing  of  the  fleet,  being  offended  at  the  senate 
having  voted,  that  Scipio,  in  preference  to  the  consul,  should 
have  the  honour  of  prescribing  the  terms  of  peace.  Accounts 
of  prodigies  also,  arriving  a  little  before  the  news  of  the  re¬ 
vival  of  hostilities,  had  raised  people’s  apprehensions.  At 
Cumse,  the  orb  of  the  sun  seemed  to  be  diminished,  and  a 
shower  of  stones  fell ;  and  in  the  district  of  Veliturnum,  the 

206 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  550. 

earth  sunk  in  great  chasms,  in  which  trees  were  swallowed. 
At  Aricia,  the  Forum,  and  the  shops  round  it ;  at  Fmsino, 
several  parts  of  the  wall  and  a  gate,  were  struck  by  lightning. 
On  the  Palatine  hill,  too,  a  shower  of  stcAcs  fell.  This  pro^ 
digy,  according  to  the  method  handed  down  by  tradition,  was 
expiated  by  a  nine  day’s  solemnity  ;  the  others  by  the  greater 
victims.  Among  the  rest,  an  unusual  overflowing  of  the 
rivers  was  also  considered  as  a  prodigy :  for  there  was  such 
an  inundation  of  the  Tiber,  that,  the  Circus  being  filled  with 
water,  preparations  for  the  games  of  Apollo  were  made  on  the 
outside  of  the  Colline  gate,  near  the  temple  of  Venus  Eryci- 
na.  But  on  the  very  day  of  the  games,  the  weather  suddenly 
clearing  up,  the  procession,  which  had  begun  to  advance  to¬ 
ward  the  Colline  gate,  was  recalled,  and  conducted  to  the 
Circus,  on  its  being  known  that  the  water  had  retired  from 
thence.  Its  own  proper  place  being  thus  restored  to  this  so¬ 
lemn  exhibition,  gave  much  joy  to  the  people,  and  added  con¬ 
siderably  to  the  splendour  of  the  games. 
XXXIX.  The  consul  Claudius,  having  at  last  set  out  from 
the  city,  was  overtaken  by  a  violent  storm  between  the  ports 
of  Cosa  and  'Laureta,  and  brought  into  imminent  danger ; 
however,  having  got  as  far  as  Populonii,  where  he  continued 
until  a  change  of  weather,  he  proceeded  to  the  island  Ilva  ; 
from  Ilva  to  Corsica,  and  from  thence  to  Sardinia.  There, 
as  he  was  sailing  by  the  Mad  Mountains,  a  still  more  furious 
tempest  surprised  him,  and  dispersed  his  fleet.  Many  ships 
v/ere  damaged,  and  lost  their  rigging,  and  several  were  wreck¬ 
ed.  In  this  harassed  and  shattered  condition,  the  fleet  arrived 
at  Carales,  where  the  winter  came  upon  them  while  they  were 
employed  in  docking  and  repairing  the  ships.  Meanwhile 
the  year  coming  to  a  conclusion,  and  it  not  being  proposed  to 
continue  him  in  command,  Tiberius  Claudius,  after  he  had 
ceased  to  hold  any  public  office,  brought  home  the  fleet.  Mar¬ 
cus  Servilius,  having  nominated  Caius  Servilius  Geminus  die-* 

BOOK  XXK. 

207 

*  B.C.202.] 
tator,  kst  he  might  be  recalled  on  account  of  the  elections, 
set  out  for  his  province.  Hie  dictator  named  Publius  iElius 
Paetus  master  of  the  home.  The  ekctioos,  though  many  days 
were  appointed  for  the  puq^c,  were  still  prevented  by 
storms  ;  so  that  the  ma^strates  of  the  former  year  going  out 
of  office,  on  the  day  preceding  the  ides  of  March,  and  no  suc¬ 
cessors  being  appointed,  the  state  was  without  curule  magis¬ 
trates.  Lucius  Manikis  Torquatus,  a  pontiff,  died  that  year : 
in  his  place  was  substituted  Gains  Sulpicius  Galba.  The  Ro¬ 
man  gam^  were  thrice  repeated,  entire,  by  the  curule  aediles, 
Lucius  Licinius  Lucullus  and^Quintus  Fulvius.  Some  of  the 
inferiorofBcersbelonglng  to  the  sedifcs^  being  convicted, on  the 
testimony  of  a  discoverer^  of  having  secretly  conveyed  money 
out  of  the  treasury,  were  condemned,  not  widiout  reflecting 
disjionour  on  the  «dile  Lucaliu8>.  Publius  .fiUus  Tubero  and 
Lucius  Laetorius,  plebei^  aediles,  on  some  irregularity  being 
discoveredln  their  election,  abdicated  their  office,  after  they 
had  celebrated  the  games,  and,  on  occasion  thereof,  a  feast  to 
Jupiter ;  having  also  erected  in  the  Capitor  three  images, 
farmed  out  of  silver  raised  by  fines.  The  dictator  and  mas¬ 
ter  of  the  horse,  in  pursuance  of  a  decree  of  the  senate, <*cele- 
brated  the  games  of  Ceres. 
XL.  When  the  Roman  deputies,  together  with  the  Car¬ 
thaginian  ambassadors,  were  come  to  Rome  from  Africa,  the 
senate  assembled  in  the  temple  of  Bellona.  Lucius  Veturius 
Philo  acquainted  them  (to  the  great  joy  of  the  Fathers),  that 
a  battle  had  been  fought  with  Hannibal,  in  which  the  Cartha¬ 
ginians  were  finally  overpowered,  and  an  end  put  at  last  to 
that  disastrous  war :  he  added,  as  a  small  accession  to  that 
great  and  happy  event,  that  Vermina,  son  of  Syphax,  had 
also  been  vanquished.  He  was  then  ordered  to  go  oat  to  the 
general  assembly,  and  to  communicate  the  joyful  news  to  the 
people.  On  this,  after  mutual  congratulations,  a  public 
thanksgiving  being  ordered,  all  the  temples  in  the  city  were 

208 

HISTORY  OF  ROME 

[Y.R.551. 
thrown  open,  and  a  supplication  for  three  d&ys  decr^d.  The 
ambassadors  of  the  Carthaginians^  and  ^  King  PjiUipf  for 
they  also  had  arrived,  requesting  an  audience  of  the 
the  dictator  answered,  by  order  of  the  Fathers,  diat  tint 
consuls  would  procure  them  an  audience ^  The 
Y  R  551  ^ 
elections  were  then  held/  The  consuls  elected 
x3  *  v-/ *30  T. «  ^ 
were,  Cneius  Cornelius  Lentulus,  and  Publius 
^lius  Patus  ;  the  praetors,  Marcus  Junius  Penrius,  to  whom 
the  city  jurisdiction  fell;  Marcus  Valerius  Falto  acquired, 
by  lot,  Bruttium  ;  Marcus  Fabius  Butco,  Sardinia  ;  Publias 
iEUus  Tubero,  Sicily.  With  respect  to  the  provinces  of  the 
consuls,  it  was  determined  that  nothing  should  be  done 
until  the  ambassadors  of  King  Philip  and  the  Carthaginians 
were  heard  ;  for  it  was  plainly  foreseen,  that  the  conclusicm 
of  the  one  war  would  be  quickly  followed  by  the  commence* 
ment  of  another.  The  consul  Cneius  Xcntolus  was  inflan^d 
with  a  strong  desire  of  obtaining  the  province  ‘'of  Africa  i 
having  in  view  either  an  easy  conquest,  or^  If  it  were  now 
to  be  concluded,  the  glory  of  terminating  so  great  a  war  m 
his  consulate.  He  declared,  therefore,  that  he  would  not  suf¬ 
fer  any  business  to  be  done  until  Africa  were  decreed  to  him  ; 
for  his  colleague  declined  putting  in  his  claim  for  it,  being  a 
moderate,  prudent  man,  who  perceived,  that  a  contest  ^ith 
Scipio  for  that  honour,  besides  being  unjust,  would  be  ^bo 
unequal.  Quintus  Minucius  Thermus,  ^d  Mmatius 
Glabrio,  tribunes  of  the  peopk,.s«id,,that  **  Cnetus  Cmnelte 
was  endeavouring  to  carry  a  point  which  had  been 
in  vain,  the  year  t^ore,  by  the  consul  Tiberius  Claudius : 
that,  by  the  direction,  of  the  senate,  the  question  had  been 
to  the  people  respecting  the  command  in  Africa, 
and  that  the  thirty-five  tribes  unanimously  decreed  that  com¬ 
mand  to^  Publius  Scipio.”  The  affair,  after  being  canvassed 
with  much  heat  both  in  the  senate  and  in  the  assembly  of  the 
peo|de,  was  at  last  brought  m  this  it  should 

BOOK  XXX. 

209 

B.C.  201.] 
be  left  to  the  determination  of  the  former.  The  Fathers^ 
therefore,  on  oath,  for  so  it  had  been  agreed,  voted  that  the 
consuls  should  settle  between  themselves,  or  cast  lots  for  their 
provinces,  which  of  them  should  have  Italy,  and  which  a  fleet 
of  fiftjT  ships.  That  he  to  whose  lot  it  fell  to  command  the 
fleet,  should  sail  to  Sicily  ;  and  if  peace  could  not  be  con« 
eluded  with  the  Carthaginians,  should  pass  over  from  thence 
to  Africa,  where  he  the  said  consul  should  command  at  sea, 
and  Scipio  on  land,  with  the  same  extent  of  authority  as 
heretofore.  If  the  terms  of  peace  should  be  agitated,  that 
then  the  tribunes  should  take  the  opinion  of  die  people, 
whether  they  would  order  the  consul  or  Publius  Scipio  to 
settle  those  terms,  and  if  the  victorious  army  was  to  be  con¬ 
ducted  home,  whom  they  would  order  to  do  it.  If  they 
should  order  the  peace  to  be  granted  hy  Publius  Scipio,  and 
the  army  also  to  be  brought  home  by  him,  that  then  the  con¬ 
sul  should  not  cross  over  from  Sicily  to  Africa.  That  the 
other  consul,  to  whose  lot  Italy  fell,  should  receive  two  le¬ 
gions  from  Marcus  Sextius,  praetor. 
XL  I.  Publius  Scipio’s  command  in  the  province  of  Africa 
was  prolonged,  with  the  armies  which  he  then  had.  To  Mar¬ 
cus  Valerius  Falto,  praetor,  were  decreed  the  two  legions  in 
Bruttium,  which  Caius  Livius  had  commanded  the  preced¬ 
ing  year.  Publius  iElius,  praetor,  was  to  receive  two  legions 
in  Sicily  from  Cneius  Tremellius.  One  legion,  which  had 
been  under  Publius  Lentulus,  propraetor,  was  decreed  to 
Marcus  Fabius,  for  Sardinia.  The  command  in  Etruria  was 
continued  to  Marcus  Serviiius,  consul  of  the  former  year, 
with  his  own  two  legions.  With  regard  to  Spain,  the  senate 
ordered,  that  whereas  Lucius  Cornelius  Lentulus,  and  Lu¬ 
cius  Manlius  Acidinus,  had  now  remained  in  that  country 
for  several  years,  the  consuls  should  therefore  make  applica¬ 
tion  to  the  tribunes,  that,  if  they  thought  proper,  they  should 
ask  the  people,  whom  they  would  order  to  have  charge  in 
VOL.  IV. — E  E 

210 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  551. 

Spain  ;  and  that  the  person  so  ordered  should  collect  such  a 
number  of  Romans  out  of  the  two  armies,  as  would  make  up 
one  legion,  and  as  many  of  the  allies  of  the  Latine  confede¬ 
racy  as  would  form  fifteen  cohorts  ;  with  which  he  should 
conduct  the  business  of  the  province ;  and  that  Lucius  Cor¬ 
nelius  and  Lucius  Manlius  shall  lead  home  the  veteran  sol¬ 
diers  to  Italy.  To  the  consul  Cornelius  was  decreed  a  squad¬ 
ron  of  fifty  ships  out  of  the  two  fleets,  one  of  which  was  un¬ 
der  Cneius  Octavius  in  Africa,  the  other  under  Publius 
VelUus,  guarding  the  coast  of  Sicily  j  with  liberty  to  take 
such  of  those  vessels  as  he  might  please.  It  was  also  decreed, 
that  Publius  Scipio  should  keep  the  fifty  ships  of  war  on  his 
station  as  before  ;  and  that  if  Cneius  Octavius  chose  to  con¬ 
tinue  in  the  command  of  these  as  heretofore,  he  should  have 
it  for  that  year  as  propraetor  ;  that  if  Laelius  should  be  set  at 
the  head  of  the  fleet,  then  Octavius  should  return  to  Rome, 
and  bring  home  such  ships  as  the  proconsul  had  not  occasion 
for.  Ten  ships  of  war  were  also  decreed  to  Marcus  Fabius 
for  Sardinia  ;  and  the  consuls  were  ordered  to  inlist  two  le¬ 
gions  for  the  city,  so  that  the  state  should  have  in  its  service, 
for  that  year,  fourteen  legions,  and  one  hundred  and  ten  ships 
of  war. 
XLII.  The  next  business  attended  to  was  that  of  the  en¬ 
voys  of  Philip  and  the  Carthaginians.  It  was  thought  proper 
that  the  Macedonians  should  be  first  introduced.  Their  dis¬ 
course  comprehended  a  variety  of  subjects:  they  first  endea¬ 
voured  to  clear  themselves  of  those  matters,  of  which  the 
ambassadors  sent  from  Rome  to  the  King  had  complained, 
relative  to  the  depredations  committed  on  the  allies.  Then, 
on  their  part,  they  remonstrated  on  the  conduct  of  the  allies 
of  the  Romans,  and  particularly  on  that  of  Marcus  Aurelias, 
who,  they  said,  being  one  of  the  three  ambassadors  sent  to 
them,  had  staid  behind  the  rest,  levied  soldiers,  committed 
hostilities  against  them,  and  fought  several  pitched  battles 

BOOK  XXX. 

211 

B.C.  201.] 
with  their  commanders.  They  afterwards  demanded,  that 
the  Macedonians,  and  their  captain,  Sopater,  who  had  served 
for  pay  under  Hannibal,  and  having  been  made  prisoners 
were  still  detained,  might  be  restored  to  them.  In  opposition 
to  this,  Marcus  Furius,  who  had  been  sent  from  Macedonia 
to  Aurelius  for  the  purpose,  asserted,  that  Aurelius  had 
been  directed  to  take  care,  lest  the  allies,  wearied  out  by  in¬ 
sults  and  depredations,  should  go  over  to  the  King :  that  he 
had  not  gone  beyond  the  boundaries  of  the  confederated 
states,  but  had  endeavoured  to  prevent  devastations  being 
committed  with  impunity  within  their  territories  :  that  Sopa- 
ter  was  one  of  the  King’s  particular  favourites,  one  of  those 
distinguished  with  the  purple,  and  that  he  bad  been  lately 
sent  with  four  thousand  men  and  a  sum  of  jnoney  into  Afri¬ 
ca,  to  the  assistance  of  Hannibal  and  the  Carthaginians.” 
The  Macedonians  being  intefrogated  on  these  points,  and 
not  giving  any  clear  answers,  the  senate,  without  farther  dis¬ 
cussion,  told  them,  that  the  King  was  seeking  war,  and,  if 
he  persisted,  would  quickly  find  it.  That  the  treaty  had  been 
doubly  violated  by  him  :  first,  in  offering  injury  to  the  allies 
of  the  Roman  people,  assaulting  them  in  open  hostilities  j 
secondly,  in  assisting  their  enemies  with  troops  and  money. 
That  Publius  Scipio  had  acted  and  was  acting  properly,  and 
regularly,  in  treating  as  foes,  and  throwing  into  confinement, 
those  who  were  taken  in  arms  against  the  Roman  people ;  and 
that  Marcus  Aurelius  did  his  duty  to  the  state,  and  in  a  man¬ 
ner  agreeable  to  the  senate,  in  protecting  the  allies  of  the 
Roman  people  by  arms,  since  he  could  not  do  it  by  the  au¬ 
thority  of  the  treaty,’’  The  Macedonians  being  dismissed 
with  this  severe  answer,  the  Carthaginian  ambassadors  were 
called ;  on  sight  of  whose  ages  and  dignities,  every  cme  was 
ready  to  observe,  that  they  were  now  in  earnest  in  their  ap¬ 
plication  for  peace,  for  that  these  were  by  far  the  most  re- 
spect^le  persons  of  their  nation.  Hasdrubal,  (by  his  coun- 

212 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y*R.  551. 

trymen  surnamed  Hsedus,)  was  distinguished  above  the  rest, 
having  always  recommended  peace,  and  opposed  the  Bar* 
cine  faction.  On  that  account,  ^reat  attention  was  paid  to 
him,  when  be  transferred  the  blame  of  the  war  from  the  state 
on  the  ambition  of  a  few.  After  discoursing  on  various  heads, 
at  one  time  refuting  charges  which  had  been  made  against 
them  ;  at  another,  acknowledging  some,  lest,  by  denying 
what  was  manifestly  true,  he  might  render  forgiveness  more 
difficult ;  and  then  going  so  far  as  to  admonish  the  Conscript 
Fathers  to  show  mildness  and  moderation  in  pros{)erity,  he 
added,  that  ‘‘  if  the  Carthaginians  had  listened  to  him  and 
Hanno,  and  made  a  proper  me  of  occurrences  as  they  hap^ 
pened,  they  would  have  in  a  condition  of  prescribing 
terms,  instead  of  begging  a  peace,  as  they  now  did  ;  but  men 
were  seldom  blessed  with  good  fortune  and  a  good  under¬ 
standing  at  the  same  time.  Thkt  the  Roman  people  were 
therefore  invincible,  because,  when  successful,  they  never 
lost  sight  of  the  maxims  of  wisdom  and  prudence  ;  and,  in¬ 
deed,  it  would  have  been  surprising,  had  they  acted  other¬ 
wise  :  while  those  who  are  unaccustomed  to  success,  unable 
to  restrain  their  transports,  run  into  extravagance.  To  the 
Roman  people  the  joy  of  victory  was  now  habitual,  and  al- 
mmi  a  matter  of  course  ;  and  they  had  enlarged  their  em¬ 
pire  more  by  their  lenity  ter  the  vanquished,  than  by  their 
victories.”  The  discourse  of  the  others  was  more  calculated 
to  excite  compassion  ;  the^^  represented,  “  to  what  a  low 
state,  from  an  exalted  height,  the  affairs  of  the  Carthaginians 
had  fallen.  That  they  who  had  lately  extended  the  power  of 
their  arms  over  almost  the  whole  world,  had  now  little  left 
them  except  the  walls  of  Carthage.  Shut  up  within  these, 
they  could  see  nothings  either  on  land  or  sea,  that  they  could 
caU  ihetr  own.  Even  of  the  city  itself,  and  of  their  habita- 
tations,  they  had  no  other  tenure,  than  the  Romans  not 
choosmg  to  wreak  their  vengeance  on  those  also,  when  no 

BOOK  XXX. 

213 

B.C,  201.3 
other  object  for  it  now  remained.’-  When  it  appeared,  that 
the  Fathers  were  moved  by  compassion,  one  of  the  senators, 
it  is  said,  incensed  at  the  perfidy  of  the  Carthaginians,  called 
out  to  them,  and  asked,  “  What  gods  they  would  now  invoke*^^ 
as  witnesses  in  the  pending  treaty,  having  broken  faith  with 
those  in  whose  name  the  former  one  was  concluded.”  The 
same,”  said  Hasdrubal,  “  who  now  show  such  resentment 
against  the  violators  of  treaties.” 
XLlll.  The  minds  of  all  inclining  to  peace,  Cneius  Len- 
tulus,  consul,  whose  province  was  the  fleet,  protested  against 
the  senate-  passing  a  decree.  On  which  the  tribunes,  Manias 
Acilius  and  Quintus  .Minucius,  put  the' question  to  the  peo¬ 
ple,  “  Whether  they  would  choose  and  order  the  senate  to 
decree  that  peace  should  be  made  with  the  Carthaginians; 
whom  they  would  order  to  grant  peace,  and  whom  to  con¬ 
duct  the  armies  hopae  from  Africa  AH  the  tribes  unani¬ 
mously  passed  the  question  as  it  was  put,  and  ordered  Pub¬ 
lius  Scipio  to  grant  the  peace,  and  also  to  conduct  the  armies 
home.  In  consequence  of  this  order  of  the  people,  the  senate 
decreed,  that  Publius  Scipio,  in  concert  with  the  ten  ambas¬ 
sadors,  should  conclude  a  peace  with  the  people  of  Carthage, 
on  such  terms  as  he  should  judge  proper.  The  Carthagi¬ 
nians  then,  after  returning  thanks  to  the  senate,  requea^d 
that  they  might  be  permitted  to  enter  the  city,  and  to  con¬ 
verse  with  their  cpuntrjTnen,  who,  having  been  made  prison¬ 
ers,  were  still  kept  so  :  among  whom  some  of  them  had  re¬ 
lations  and  friends,  m6n  of  distinction,  and  to  others  they 
had  messages  from  their  relations.  After  a  meeting  with 
their  friends,  on  making  a  second  request,  that  liberty  might  be 
allowed  them  to  ransom  of  them  as  they  chose,  they  were 
ordered  to  give  in  a  list  of  their  names ;  and  when  they 
given  in  about  two  hundred,  a  decree  of  the  senate  was  p^s- 
ed,  that  “  the  Roman  ambassadors  should  carry  two  humbed 
of  the  prisoners,  such  as  the  Carthaginians  should  select,  iiUo 

214 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  5^U 

Africa,  to  Publius  Cornelius  Scipio,  and  give  him  directions, 
that,  if  peace  were  concluded,  he  should  restore  them,  with¬ 
out  ransom,  to  the  Carthaginians.”  The  heralds  being  or¬ 
dered  to  go  to  Africa  to  ratify  the  trearty,  at  their  desire  the 
senate  passed  a  decree  in  these  words:  that  ‘^they  should 
carry  with  them  flint  stones  of  their  own,  and  vervain  of 
their  own :  that  the  Roman  commander  should  give  them 
the  order  to  strike  the  treaty,  and  that  they  should  call  on 
him  for  the  herbs.”  This  was  a  kind  of  herb  brought  from 
the  Capitol,  and  given  to  the  heralds  on  such  occasions.  The 
deputies  being  dismissed  from  Rome  in  this  manner,  as  soon 
as  they  came  to  Scipio  in  Africa,  concluded  a  peace  on  the 
terms  beforementioned.  The  Carthaginians  delivered  up 
the  ships  of  war,  elephants,  deserters^  fugitives,  and  four 
thousand  prisoners,  among  whom  was  Quintus  Terentius 
Culleo,  a  senator.  The  ships  Scipio  ordered  to  be  carried 
out  into  the  deep,  and  burned.  Some  say  that  they  amounted 
to  five  hundred,  of  all  sorts,  which  were  worked  with  oars; 
and  that  the  sudden  sight  of  these  in  flames  was  as  great  a 
shock  to  the  Carthaginians,  as  if  Carthage  itself  had  been 
set  on  fire.  The  deserters  were  treated  with  more  severity 
than  the  fugitives ;  those  who  were  of  the  Latine  confederacy 
were  beheaded,  the  Romans  were  crucified. 
XL IV.  The  last  peace  with  the  Carthaginians  had  been 
made  forty  years  before  this,  in  the  consulate  of  Quintus 
Lutatius  and  Aulus  Manlius.  The  late  war  began  twenty- 
three  years  after,  in  the  consulate  of  Publius  Cornelius  and 
Tiberias  Sempronius,  and  ended  in  the  seventeenth  year, 
when  Cneius  Cornelius  and  Publius  iElius  Psetus  were  con¬ 
suls.  We  are  told  that  Scipio  often^said  afterwards,  that  the 
ambition,  first  of  Tiberius  Claudius,  and  then  of  Cneius  Cor¬ 
nelius,  was  what  prevented  that  war  from  ending  in  the  utter 
destruction  of  Carthage. 

BOOK  XXX. 

215 

B.C.  201.] 
The  Carthaginians  having  been  exhausted  by  the  long  con¬ 
tinuance  of  the  late  struggles,  found  it  difficult  to  raise  the 
first  contribution  money,  so  that  the  senate-house  was  filled 
with  grief  and  lamentations  j  on  which  occasion,  it  is  said, 
that  Hannibal  was  observed  to  laugh ;  and  that  being  ob¬ 
served  by  Hasdrubal  Hsedus,  for  laughing,  in  a  moment  of 
public  sorrowing,  and  when  he  himself  was  the  cause  of  their 
tears,  he  said, — ‘‘  If  the  inward  thoughts  could  be  perceived, 
in  the  same  manner  as  the  look  of  the  countenance  is  per¬ 
ceived  by  the  eye,  you  would  be  immediately  convinced  that 
the  laughter  which  you  blame,  proceeds  not  from  a  heart 
elated  with  joy,  but  from  one  driven  almost  to  madness  by 
misfortunes  ;  and  yet  it  is  not,  by  any  means,  so  unseasonable 
as  those  absurd  and  inconsistent  tears  of  yours.  Then  ought 
you  to  have  wept,  when  our  arms  were  taken  from  us,  our 
ships  burned,  and  we  ourselves  forbidden  to  engage  in  foreign 
wars  :  that  was  the  wound  by  which  we  fell.  And  do  not 
imagine  that  the  measures  taken  against  you  by  the  Romans, 
were  dictated  merely  by  animosity.  No  great  state  can  re¬ 
main  long  at  rest.  If  it  has  no  enemies  abroad,  it  finds  them 
at  home ;  as  overgrown  bodies  seem  safe  from  external  in¬ 
juries,  but  suffer  grievous  inconveniences  from  their  own 
strength.  We  feel,  it  seems,  for  the  public  misfortunes,  only 
in  proportion  as  our  private  affairs  are  affected  by  them ;  and 
none  of  them  stings  more  deeply  than  the  loss  of  money. 
Thus,  when  the  spoils  were  stripped  off  from  vanquished 
Carthage,  and  you  saw  her  left  naked  among  so  many  armed 
states  of  Africa,  not  one  of  you  uttered  a  groan  ;  now,  be¬ 
cause  a  contribution  must  be  made  to  the  tribute  out  of  your 
private  properties,  you  lament  as  if  the  existence  of  the  state 
were  terminated.  Much  I  dread  lest  you  quickly  feel  that 
the  subject  of  your  tears  this  day  is  the  lightest  of  your  mis¬ 
fortunes.’’  Such  were  Hannibal’s  sentiments  which  he  de¬ 
livered  to  the  Carthaginians.  Scipio,  having  called  an  assem- 

216 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  551. 

bly,  bestowed  on  Masinissa,  in  addition  to  his  paternal  king- 
dom»  the  city  of  Cirtha,  and  the  other  cities  and  lands  be¬ 
longing  to  the  territories  of  Syphax^  which  had  fallen  into  the 
hands  of  the  Roman  people.  He  ordered  Cneius  Octavius 
to  conduct  the  fleet  to  Sicily,  and  deliver  it  to  the  consul 
Cneius  Cornelius  ;  and  the  ambassadors  of  the  Carthaginians 
to  go  to  Rome,  in  order  that  the  terms  stipulated  for  by  him, 
might  be  ratified  by  the  authority  of  the  senate  and  the  order 
of  the  people. 
.  XLV.  Peace  being  established  by  sea  and  land,  he  embark¬ 
ed  his  army,  and  carried  it  over  to  Lilybaeum  in  Sicily,  and 
from  thence,  sending  a  great  part  of  his  troops  round  by  sea, 
he  himself  landed  in  Italy.  As  he  proceeded  through  the 
country,  he  found  it  no  less  delighted  at  finding  there  was  an 
end  to  the  war,  than  at  his  success  in  it ;  not  only  the  inhabi¬ 
tants  of  the  cities  pouring  out  to  show  their  respect  to  him, 
but  crowds  of  the  country  people  also  filling  up  the  roads ; 
and  thus  he  arrived  at  Rome,  where  he  entered  the  city  in 
the  most  splendid  triumph  which  had  ever  been  beheld.  He 
carried  into  the  treasury  a  hundred  and  twenty-three  thou¬ 
sand  pounds  weight  of  silver,  and  out  of  the  spoil  distributed 
to  each  of  his  soldiers  four  hundred  asses^.  The  death  of 
Syphax  caused  some  diminution  in  the  splendour  of  the  show, 
but  none  in  the  glory  of  the  general  who  triumphed.  He  died 
a  short  time  before  at  Tibur,  to  which  place  he  had  been  re¬ 
moved  from  Alba.  His  death,  however,  made  some  noise, 
for  he  was  honoured  with  a  public  funeral.  Polybius,  a  wri¬ 
ter  of  no  contemptible  authority,  asserts,  that  this  King  was 
led  in  triumph.  Quintus  Terentius  Culleo  followed  Scipio 
in  his  triumph,  with  a  cap  on  his  headf  ;  and  through  his 
whole  life  after,  as  became  him,  he  respected  him  as  the 
author  of  his  liberty.  I  have  not  been  able  to  discover  whether 

'  11. 5s.  loa. 

I  The  symbol  of  liberty 

BOOK  XXX. 

217 

B.C.  201.] 
# 
it  was  the  afFection  of  the  soldiers,  or  the  attadment  of  the 
people,  which  honoured  Scipio  with  the  surname  of  Africa- 
nus  ;  nor  whether  it  was  first  brought  into  use  by  the  flattery 
of  his  friends,  as  that  of  Felix  given  to  Sylla,and  of  Magnus 
to  Pompey,  in  the  memory  of  our  fathers.  He  was  certainly 
the  first  general  distinguished  by  the  title  of  a  nation  which 
he  had  subdued.  Others,  afterwards,  following  his  example, 
though  far  inferior  in  the  greatness  of  their  atchievements, 
assumed  pompous  inscriptions  for  their  statues,  and  splendid 
surnames  for  their  families. 

VOL.  iv.~F  r 

THE 

HISTOKY  OF  ROME, 

BOOK  XXXI. 

Renewal  of  the  war  with  Philip,  King  of  Macedon.  Successes  of  Publius 
Sulpicius,  consul,  who  had  the  conduct  of  that  war.  The  Abydenians, 
besieged  by  Philip,  put  themselves  to  death,  together  with  their  wives 
and  children.  Lucius  Furius,  praetor,  defeats  the  Insubrian  Gauls  who 
had  revolted,  and  Hamilcar  who  stirred  up  the  insurrection  is  slsun,  with 
thirty -five  thousand  men.  Farther  operations  of  Sulpicius,  Attains,  and 
the  Rhodians,  against  Philip. 
I,  I  FEEL  a  degree  of  pleasure  in  having  /:ome  to  the 
end  of  the  Punic  war,  as  if  myself  had  borne  a 
Y  R  551  '' 
B  C  201  danger.  For  though  it  ill 
becomes  a  person  who  has  ventured  to  promise  an 
entire  history  of  all  the  Roman  affairs,  to  be  fatigued  by  any 
particular  parts  of  so  extensible  a  work  ;  yet  when  I  reflect 
that  sixty -three  years,  (for  so  many  there  are  from  the  first 
Punic  war  to  the  end  of  the  second,)  have  filled  up  as  many 
volumes  for  me,  as  the  four  hundred  and  eighty-seven  years, 
from  the  building  of  the  city  to  the  consulates  of  Appius 
Claudius,  who  first  made  war  on  the  Carthaginians  ;  I  plainly 

BOOK  XXXI. 

B.C.20L] 

perceive  that,  like  those  who  are  tempted  by  the  shallows 
near  the  shore,  to  walk  into  the  sea,  the  farther  I  advance,  I 
am  carried  into  the  greater  depth  and  abyss  as  it  were ;  and 
that  my  work  rather  increases  on  my  hands,  than  diminishes, 
as  I  expected  it  would,  by  the  first  parts  being  completed. 
The  peace  with  Carthage  was  quickly  followed  by  a  war  with 
Macedonia  ;  a  war,  not  to  be  compared  to  the  former,  indeed, 
either  in  danger,  or  in  the  abilities  of  the  commander,  or  the 
valour  of  the  soldiers  ;  but  rather  more  remarkable  with  re¬ 
gard  to  the  renown  of  their  former  Kings,  the  ancient  fame 
of  that  nation,  and  the  vast  extent  of  their  empire,  which 
formerly  comprehended  a  large  part  of  Europe,  and  the 
greater  part  of  Asia,  The  contest  with  Philip,  which  had 
begun  about  ten  years  before,  had  been  intermitted  for  the 
three  last  years;  the  ^tolians  having  been  the  occasion 
both  of  the  commencement  and  of  the  cessation  of  hos¬ 
tilities.  The  Romans  being  now  disengaged  from  all  em¬ 
ployment,  and  being  incensed  against  Philip,  on  account 
both  of  his  infringing  the  peace  with  regard  to  the  iEto- 
lians,  and  the  other  allies  in  those  parts,  and  also  on  ac¬ 
count  of  his  having  lately  sent  aid  of  men  and  money  into 
Africa,  to  Hannibal  and  the  Carthaginians,  were  excited  to  a 
renewal  of  the  war  by  the  entreaties  of  the  Athenians,  whose 
country  he  had  ravaged,  and  shut  up  the  inhabitants  within 
the  walls  of  the  city. 
II.  About  the  same  time,  ambassadors  arrived  both  from 
King  Attalus,  and  from  the  Rhodians,  with  information  that 
the  Macedonian  was  tampering  with  the  states  of  Asia.  To 
these  embassies  an  answer  was  given,  that  the  senate  would 
give  attention  to  the  affairs  of  Asia.  The  determination  with 
regard  to  the  making  war  on  him,  was  left  open  to  the  con¬ 
suls,  who  were  then  in  their  provinces-  In  the  mean  time, 
three  ambassadors  were  sent  to  Ptolemy,  King  of  Egypt, 
namely,  Caius  Claudius  Nero,  Marcus  Emilias  Lepidus,  and 
Publius  SemproniusTuditanuSjto  announce  their  conquest  of 

220 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  551. 

Hannibal  and  the  Carthaginians^  to  g^ve  thanks  to  the 
for  his  faithful  adherence  to  bis  engagements  in  the  time 
of  their  distress,  when  even  the  nearest  allies  of  the  Romans 
abandoned  them,  and  to  request,  that,  if  they  should  be  com¬ 
pelled  by  ill-treatment  to  break  with  Philip,  he  would  pre¬ 
serve  the  same  disposition  towards  the  Roman  people.  In 
Gaul,  about  this  time,  the  consul  Publius  -Elius,  having  heard, 
that,  before  his  arrival,  the  Boians  had  made  inroads  on  the 
territories  of  the  allies,  levied  two  occasional  legions  on  ac¬ 
count  of  this  disturbance  ;  and  adding  to  them  four  cohorts 
from  his  own  army,  ordered  Caius  Oppius,  the  praefect,  to 
march  with  this  tumultuary  band  through  Umbria  (which  is 
called  the  Sappinian  district),  and  to  invade  the  territories  of 
the  Boians  ;  leading  his  own  troops  thither  openly,  over  the 
mountains  which  lay  in  the  way.  Oppius,  on  entering  the 
same,  for  some  time  committed  depredations  with  good  suc¬ 
cess  and  safety.  But  afterwards,  having  pitched  on  a  place 
near  a  fort  called  Mutilum,  convenient  enough  for  cutting 
down  the  corn  which  was  now  ripe,  and  setting  out,  with¬ 
out  having  acquired  a  knowledge  oi  the  country,  and  with¬ 
out  establishing  armed  posts,  of  sufhcient  strength  to  protect 
those  who  were  unarmed  and  intent  on  their  work,  he  waa 
suddenly  surrounded,  together  with  his  foragers,  and  attack¬ 
ed  by  the  Gauls.  On  this,  even  those  who  were  furnished 
with  weapons,  struck  with  dismay,  betook  themselves  to 
flight.  Seven  thousand  men,  dispersed  through  the  corn¬ 
fields,  were  put  to  the  sword,  among  whom  was  the  com¬ 
mander  himself,  Caius  Oppius.  The  rest  were  driven  in 
confusion  into  the  camp,  from  whence,  in  consequence  of  a 
resolution  there  formed,  they  set  out  on  the  following  night, 
without  any  particular  commander  ;  and,  leaving  behind  a 
great  part  of  their  baggage,  made  their  way  through  woods 
almost  impassable,  to  the  consul,  who  returned  to  Rome  with¬ 
out  having  performed  any  thing  in  his  province  worth  notice* 

BOOK  XXXL 

22t 

B.C.  201.] 
except  that  he  ravaged  the  \2mds  of  the  Boians,  and  made  a 
treaty  with  the  Ingaunian  Ligurians. 
III.  The  first  time  he  assembled  the  senate,  it  was  unani¬ 
mously  ordered  that  he  should  propose  no  other  business 
before  that  which  related  to  Philip,  and  the  complaints  of  the 
allies  ;  it  was  of  course  immediately  taken  into  consideration, 
and  in  full  meeting  decreed,  that  Publius  ^lius,  Consul,  should 
send  such  person  as  he  might  think  proper,  vested  with  com¬ 
mand,  to  receive  the  fleet  which  Cneius  Octavius  was  bring¬ 
ing  home  from  Sicily,  and  pass  over  to  Macedonia.  Accord¬ 
ingly,  Marcus  Valerius  Lsevinus,  propraetor,  was  sent ;  and, 
receiving  thirty-eight  ships  from  Cneius  Octavius  near  Vibo, 
he  sailed  to  Macedonia,  where,  being  met  by  Marcus  Aure¬ 
lius,  the  ambassador,  and  informed  what  numerous  forces  and 
what  large  fleets  the  King  had  prepared,  and  how  busily  he 
was  employed  in  prevailing  on  divers  states  to  join  him, 
applying  to  some  in  person,  to  others  by  agents,  not  only 
through  all  the  cities  of  the  continent,  but  even  in  the  islands, 
Lsevinus  was  convinced  from  this,thaLthe  war  required  vigor¬ 
ous  exertions  on  the  side  of  the  Romans  ;  for,  should  they  be 
dilatory,  Philip  might  be  encouraged  to  attempt  an  enterprise 
like  to  that  which  had  been  formerly  undertaken  by  Pyrrhus, 
who  possessed  not  such  large  dominions.  He  therefore  de¬ 
sired  Aurelius  to  convey  this  intelligence,  by  letter,  to  the 
consuls  and  to  the  senate. 
IV.  Towards  the  end  of  this  year  the  senate,  taking  into 
consideration  the  lands  to  be  given  to  the  veteran  soldiers,  who, 
under  the  conduct  and  auspices  of  Publius  Scipiu,  had  finish¬ 
ed  the  war  in  Africa,  decreed,  that  Marcus  Tunius,  praetor 
of  the  city,  should,  if  he  thought  proper,  appoint  ten  commis¬ 
sioners  to  survey,  and  distribute  among  them,  that  part  of  the 
Samnite  and  Apulian  lands  which  was  the  property  of  the 
Roman  people.  For  this  purpose  were  appointeil,  Publius 
Servilius,  Quintus  Caecilius  Metellus,  Caius  and  Marcus 

222 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  551. 

Servilius,  both  surnamed  Geminus,  Lucius  and  Aulus  Hos- 
tilius  Cato,  Publius  Villius  Tappulus,  Marcus  Fulvius  Fiac- 
cus,  Publius  iElius  Paetus,  and  Quintus  Flaminius.  At  the 
same  time,  Publiils  iElius  presiding  at  the  election  of  consuls, 
Publius  Sulpicius  Galba,  and  Caius  Aurelius  Cotta,  were 
elected.  Then  were  chosen  praetors,  Quintus  Minucius 
Rufus,  Lucius  Furius  Purpureo,  Quintus  Fulvius  Gillo, 
Cneius  Sergius  Plancus.  The  Roman  stage-games  were  ex¬ 
hibited,  in  a  sumptuous  and  elegant  manner,  by  the  curule 
aediles,  Lucius  Valerius  Flaccus,  and  Lucius  Quintius  Fla- 
mininus,  and  repeated  for  two  days  ;  and  a  vast  quantity  of 
com,  which  Scipio  had  sent  from  Africa,  was  distributed  by 
them  to  the  people,  with  strict  impartiality,  and  general  satis¬ 
faction,  at  the  rate  of  four  asses  a  peck.  The  plebeian  games 
were  thrice  repeated  entire  by  the  plebeian  aediles,  Lucius 
Apustius  Fullo,  and  Quintus  Minucius  Rufus  ;  the  latter  of 
whom  was,  from  the  sedileship,  elected  praetor.  There  was 
also  a  feast  of  Jove  on  occasion  of  the  games. 
V.  In  the  year  five  hundred  and  fifty- two  from  the  build¬ 
ing  of  the  city,  Publius  Sulpicius  Galba,  and  Caius 
u  r  onn  Aurelius,  being  consuls,  within  a  few  months  after 
the  conclusion  of  the  peace  with  the  Carthaginians, 
war  began  against  King  Philip.  This  was  the  first  business 
introduced  by  the  consul,  Publius  Sulpicius,  on  the  ides  of 
March,  the  day  on  which,  in  those  times,  the  consuls  entered 
into  office;  and  the  senate  decreed,  that  the  consuls  should 
perform  sacrifices  with  the  greater  victims,  to  such  gods  as 
they  should  judge  proper,  with  prayers  to  this  purpose, — that 
“  the  business  which  the  senate  and  people  of  Rome  had  then 
under  deliberation,  concerning  the  state,  and  the  entering  on 
a  new  war,  might  be  attended  with  success  and  prosperity  to 
the  Roman  people,  the  allies,  and  the  Latine  confederacy 
and  that,  after  the  sacrifices  and  prayers,  they  should  consult 
the  senate  on  the  state  of  public  affairs,  and  the  provinces. 

BOOK  XXXI. 

223 

B.C.  200.] 
At  this  time,  very  opportunely  for  promoting  a  war,  the  let¬ 
ters  were  brought  from  Marcus  Aurelius  the  ambassador, 
and  Marcus  Valerius  Lsevinus,  propraetor.  An  embassy, 
likewise,  arrived  from  the  Athenians,  to  acquaint  them,  that 
the  King  was  approaching  their  frontiers,  and  that  in  a 
short  time,  not  only  their  lands,  but  their  jcity  also,  must  fall 
into  his  hands,  unless  they  received  aid  from  the  Romans. 
When  the  consuls  had  made  their  report,  that  the  sacrifices 
had  been  duly  performed,  and  that  the  gods  had  accepted 
their  prayers  ;  that  the  aruspices  had  declared  that  the  en¬ 
trails  showed  good  omens,  and  that  enlargement  of  territory, 
victory  and  triumph  were  portended  ;  the  letters  of  Valerius 
and  Aurelius  were  read,  and  audience  given  to  the  ambassa¬ 
dors  of  the  Athenians.  After  which,  a  decree  of  the  senate 
was  passed,  that  thanks  should  be  given  to  their  allies,  be* 
cause,  though  long  solicited,  they  had  not  been  prevailed 
upon,  even  by  dread  of  a  siege,  to  depart  from  their  engage¬ 
ments.  With  regard  to  sending  assistance  to  them,  they  re¬ 
solved,  that  an  answer  should  be  given  as  soon  as  the  consuls 
should  have  cast  lots  for  the  provinces  ;  and  when  the  consul, 
to  whose  lot  Macedonia  fell,  should  have  proposed  to  the 
people,  to  declare  war  against  Philip,  King  of  the  Macedo¬ 
nians* 
VI.  The  province  of  Macedonia  fell  by  lot  to  Publius  Sul- 
picius :  and  he  proposed  to  the  people  to  declare,  “  that  they 
chose  and  ordered,  that  on  account  of  the  injuries  and  hos¬ 
tilities  committed  against  the  allies  of  the  Roman  people,  war 
should  be  proclaimed  against  King  Philip,  and  the  Macedo¬ 
nians  under  his  government.”  The  province  of  Italy  fell  to  the 
lot  of  the  other  consul,  Aurelius.  The  praetors  then  cast  lots  : 
to  Cneius  Sergius  Plancus  fell  the  city  jurisdiction  ;  to  Quin¬ 
tus  Fulvius  GiUo,  Sicily ;  to  Quintus  Minucius  Rufus,  Brutti- 
um ;  and  to  Lucius  Furius  Purpureo,  Gaul.  At  the  first  meeting 
of  the  people,  the  proposal  concerning  the  Macedonian  war 
was  rejected  by  almost  all  the  tribes.  This  was  occasioned 

Z%4> 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[y.R.5^2. 

partly  by  the  pe<^le’s  own  inclinations,  who,  ^esmed  by 
length  and  severity  of  the  late  war,  k^ged  to  be  fr^d  from 
toils  and  dangers,  and  partly  by  Qnintus  Baebi^,  of 
the  people,  who,  pursuing  the  old  practice  of  crindnating 
the  patricians,  charged  them  with  multiplying  wars  one  af¬ 
ter  another,  so  that  the  people  could  never  enjoy  peaces 
This  proceeding  gave  great  olFence  to  the  patiitdans,  and  the 
tribune  was  severely  reprehended  in  the  senate,  where  all  ear¬ 
nestly  recommended  it  to  the  consul,  to  call  a  new  assem¬ 
bly  for  passing  the  proposal ;  to  rebuke  the  baekwiwdiieas 
of  the  people,  and  to  prove  to  them  how  highly  detrinu^i^ 
and  dishonourable  it  would  be  to  decline  engagii^  m  tiii^ 
war. 
VII.  The  consul  having  assetrdded  tiie  people  in  the  field 
of  Mars,  before  he  called  upon  the  centuries  to  give  tbdir 
votes,  required  their  attention,  and  addressed  them  thus: 
Citizens,  you  seem  to  me  not  to  undemtand  that  the  quea* 
tion  before  you  is  not,  whether  you  cho<^  to  have  peace  or 
war  ;  for  Philip,  having  already  commenced  hostilities  wWi 
a  formidable  force,  both  on  lahd  and  ^a,  sdlows  yw  notli^ 
option.  The  question  is,  whether  you  choose  to  minspoit 
your  legions  to  Macedonia,  or  to  suffer  the  enemy  to  come 
into  Italy  I  How  important  the  difference  is  between  these 
two  cs^es,  if  you  knew  it  not  before,  you  have  sufiiciendy 
learned  in  the  late  Punic  war.  For  who  entertains  a  doubt, 
but  if,  when  the  Saguntines  were  besieged  and  implored  our 
protection,  we  had  assisted  them  with  vigour,  as  our  fathers 
did  the  Mamertines,  we  should  have  averted  the  whole  weight 
of  the  war  upon  Spain,  which,  by  our  dilatory  pioceedings. 
We  suffered  to  our  extreme  loss  to  fall  upon  It^y  ?  Nor  does 
it  admit  a  doubt,  that  what  confined  this  same  Philip  in  Ma¬ 
cedonia,  (after  be  had  entered  into  an  engagement  with  Han¬ 
nibal,  by  ambi^adors  and  letters,  to  cross  over  into  Italy,) 
was  our  Bouting  Laevinus  with  a  fleet  to  carry  the  war  home 

BOOK  XXXI. 

BX*  200.] 

22ir 

to  him.  AttdMrhat  we  did  at  that  time^  when  wc  had  Han¬ 
nibal  to  contend  wi^  in  Italy,  do  we  hesitate  to  do  now,  af¬ 
ter  has  been  expelled  Italy,  and  the  Cardiaginians 
sid>dned.  Suppose  for  an  instant,  that  we  allow  the  King  to 
experience  the  same  inactivity  on  our  part,  while  he  is  taking 
Athens,  as  Hannibal  found  while  he  was  taking  Saguntum  : 
it  will  not  be  in  the  fifth  month,  as  the  Carthaginian  came 
from  Saguntum,  but  on  the  fifth  day  after  the  Macedonian 
sets  ml  from  Corinth,  that  he  will  arrive  in  Italy.  Peihaps 
you  may  not  consider  Philip  as  equal  to  Hannibal ;  or  the 
Macedonians  to  the  Carthaginians  :  certainly,  however,  you: 
will  allow  him  equal  to  Pyrrhus.  Equal,  do  I  say  ?  what  a 
vast  superiority  has  the  one  man  over  the  other ;  the  one  nation 
over  the  other  ?  Epirus  ever  was,  and  is  at  this  day,  deemed 
but  an  inconsiderable  accession  to  the  kingdom  of  Macedonia. 
Philip  has  the  entire  Peloponnesus  under  his  dominion,  even 
Argos  itself,  not  more  celebrated  for  its  ancient  glory,  than  for 
the  death  of  Pyrrhus.  Now  compare  our  situation .  How  much 
moire  flourishing  was  Italy  when  Pyrrhus  attacked  it  ?  howmuch 
greater  its  strength,  possessing  so  many  commanders,  so  ma- 
ny  armies,  which  the  Punic  war  afterwards  consumed  ?  yet 
was  he  able  to  give  it  a  violent  shock,  and  advanced  victori¬ 
ous  almost  to  the  gates  of  Eome ;  and  not  the  Tarentines  on-  * 
ly,  and  the  inhabitants  of  that  tract  of  Italy  which  they  call 
the  greater  Greece,  whom  you  may  suppose  to  have  been  led 
by  the  similarity  of  language  and  name,  but  the  Lucanian, 
the  Bruttian,  and  the  Samnite,  revolted  from  us.  Do  you 
believe  that  these  would  continue  quiet  and  faithful,  if  Phi¬ 
lip  should  come  over  t®  Italy,  because  they  continued  faith¬ 
ful  afterwards,  and  during  the  Punic  war  ?  Be  assured  thc^e 
states  will  never  fail  to  revolt  from  us,  except  when  thei^  is 
no  one  to  whom  they  can  go  over.  If  you  had  disapproved 
of  a  Roman  army  passing  into  Africa,  you  would  this  day 
have  had  Hannibal  and  the  Carthaginians  to  contend  with  in 
VOL.  IV. — G  G 

226 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  SS2. 

Italy.  Let  Macedonia  rather  than  Italy,  be  the  seat  of  war. 
Let  the  cities  and  lands  of  the  enemy  be  wasted  with  fire  and 
sword.  We  have  already  found  by  experience,  that  ottr  arms 
are  more  powerful  and  more  successful  abroad  than  at  home. 
Go,  and  give  your  voices,  with  the  blessing  of  the  gods;  and 
what  the  senate  have  voted,  do  you  ratify  by  your  order. 
This  resolution  is  recommended  to  you,  not  only  by  your 
consul,  but  even  by  the  immortal  gods  themselves;  who, 
when  I  offered  sacrifice,  and  prayed  that  the  issue  of  this 
war  might  be  happy  and  prosperous  to  me  and  to  the  senate, 
to  you  and 'the  allies  and  Latine  confederates,  granted  every 
omen  of  success  and  happiness.” 
VIII .  After  this  speech  of  Sulpicius,  being  sent  to  give 
their  votes,  they  declared  for  the  war  as  he  had  proposed. 
On  which,  in  pursuance  of  a  decree  of  the  senate,  a  suppli¬ 
cation  for  three  days  was  proclaimed  by  the  consuls ;  and 
prayers  were  offered  to  the  gods  at  all  the  shrines,  that  the 
war  which  the  people  had  ordered  against  Philip  might  be 
attended  with  success  and  prosperity.  The  consul  Sulpicius, 
enquiring  of  the  heralds,  whether  they  would  direct  the  de¬ 
claration  of  the  war  against  King  Philip  to  be  made  to  him¬ 
self  in  person  ;  or  whether  it  would  be  sufficient  to  publish 
it  in  the  nearest  garrison,  within  nhe  frontiers  of  his  king¬ 
dom,  they  answered,  that  either  would  do.  The  consul  re¬ 
ceived  authority  from  the  senate  to  send  any  person  whom 
he  thought  proper,  not  being  a  senator,  as  ambassador,  to 
denounce  war  against  the  King.  They  then  proceeded  to 
arrange  the  armies  for  the  consuls  and  praetors.  The  consuls 
were  ordered  to  levy  two  legions,  and  to  disband  the  veteran 
troops.  Sulpicius,  to  whom  the  management  of  this  new  and 
highly  important  war  had  been  decreed,  was  allowed  permis¬ 
sion  to  carry  with  him  as  many  volunteers  as  he  could  pro¬ 
cure  out  of  the  army  which  Publius  Scipio  had  brought 
home  from  Africa ;  but  he  was  not  empowered  to  compel 

BOOK  XXXI. 

527 

B,e.  soo.] 
any  veteran  soldier  to  attend  him.  They  ordered  that  the 
consul  should  give  to  the  praetors,  Lucius  Furius  Purpureo, 
and  Quintus  Minucius  Rufus,  five  thousand  of  the  allies  of 
the  Latine  confederacy;  with  which  forces  they  should  hold, 
one,  the  province  of  Gaul,  the  other,  Bruttium.  Quintus 
Fulvius  Gillo  was  ordered,  in  like  manner,  to  select  out  <rf 
the  army  which  Publius  iElius,  late  consul,  had  commanded, 
such  as  had  been  the  shortest  time  in  the  service,  until  he 
also  made  up  five  thousand  of  the  allies  and  Laiioe  confede¬ 
rates,  for  guarding  his  province  of  Sicily.  To  Marcus  Va¬ 
lerius  Falto,  who,  during  the  former  year,  had  held  the  pro¬ 
vince  of  Campania,  as  praetor,  the  command  was  continued 
for  a  year ;  in  order  that  he  might  go  over,  in  quality  of  pro¬ 
praetor,  to  Sardinia,  and  choose  out  of  the  army  there  five 
thousand  of  the  allies  of  the  Latine  confederacy,  who  also 
had  been  the  shortest  time  in  the  service.  The  consuls  were 
at  the  same  time  ordered  to  levy  two  legions  for  the  city, 
which*  might  be  sent  wherever  occasion  should  require  ;  as 
there  were  many  states  in  Italy  infected  with  an  attachment 
to  the  Carthaginians,  which  they  had  formed  during  the  war, 
and,  in  consequence,  swelling  with  resentment.  The  state 
was  to  employ  during  that  year  six  Roman  legions. 
IX.  In  the  midst  of  the  preparations  for  war,  ambassa¬ 
dors  came  from  King  Ptolemy,  with  the  following  message 
that  ‘‘  the  Athenians  had  petitioned  the  King  for  aid  against 
Philip  ;  but  that  although  they  were  their  common  allies,  yet 
the  King  would  not,  without  the  direction  of  the  Roman  peo¬ 
ple,  send  either  fleet  or  army  into  Greece,  for  the  purpose  of 
defending  or  attacking  any  person.  That  he  would  remain 
quiet  in  his  kingdom,  if  the  Romans  were  at  leisure  to  pro¬ 
tect  their  allies  ;  or,  if  more  agreeable  to  them  to  he  at  test, 
would  himself  send  such  aid  as  should  effectually  secure 
Athens  against  Philip.’^  I'hanks  were  returned  to  the  King 
by  the  senate,  and  this  answer :  that  “  it  was  the  intention 

228 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  552. 

of  the  Roman  people  to  protect  their  allies ;  that  if  they 
should  have  occasion  for  any  assistance  towards  carrying  on 
the  war,  they  would  acquaint  the  King ;  and  that  they  were 
fully  sensible,  that,  in  the  power  of  his  kingdom,  their  state 
had  a  sure  and  faithful  resource.”  Presents  were  then,  by 
order  of  the  senate,  sent  to  the  ambassadors,  of  five  thousand 
asses^  to  each.  While  the  consuls  were  employed  in  levy¬ 
ing  troops,  and  making  other  necessary  preparations,  the 
people,  prone  to  religious  observances,  especially  at  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  new  wars,  after  supplications  had  been  already 
performed,  and  prayers  offered  up  at  all  the  shrines,  lest  any 
thing  should  be  omitted  that  had  ever  been  practised,  order¬ 
ed,  that  the  consul  who  was  to  have  the  province  of  Mace¬ 
donia,  should  vow  games,  and  a  present  to  Jove.  Licinius, 
the  chief  pontiff,  occasioned  some  delay  in  the  performance 
of  it,  alleging,  that  “  he  could  not  properly  frame  the  vow, 
unless  the  money  to  discharge  it  were  specified.  For  as  the 
«um  to  be  named  could  not  be  applied  to  the  uses  of  the  war, 
it  should  be  immediately  set  apart,  and  not  to  be  intermixed 
with  other  money ;  and  that,  unless  this  were  done,  the  vow 
could  not  be  fulfilled.’^  Although  the  objection,  and  the  per¬ 
son  who  proposed  it,  were  both  of  weight,  yet  the  consul  was 
ordered  to  consult  the  college  of  pontiffs,  whether  a  vow 
could  not  be  undertaken  without  specifying  the  amount 
discharge  it  ?  The  pontiffs  determined,  that  it  could  j  and 
that  it  would  be  even  more  in  order,  to  do  it  in  that  way. 
The  consul,  therefore,  repeating  after  the  chief  pontiff,  made 
the  vow  in  the  same  words  in  which  those  made  for  five 
years  of  safety  used  to  be  expressed ;  only  that  he  engaged 
to  perform  the  games,  and  make  the  offerings,  at  such  ex¬ 
pense  as  the  senate  should  direct  by  their  vote,  at  the  time 
when  the  vow  was  to  be  put  in  act.  Before  this,  the  great 

161.2s,  Id, 

BOOK  XXXL 

229 

B.C.  200.J 
games,  so  often  vowed,  were  constantly  ^ed  at  a  certain 
expense  :  this  was  the  first  time  tha^  the  sum  was  not  spe¬ 
cified. 
X.  While  every  one’s  attention  was  turned  to  the  Mace¬ 
donian  war,  and  at  a  time  when  people  apprehended  nothing 
less,  a  sudden  account  was  brought  of  an  inroad  made  by  the 
Gauls.  The  Insubrians,  Csenomanians  and  Boians,  having 
been  joined  by  the  Salyans,  Ilvatians,  and  other  Ligurian 
states,  and  putting  themselves  under  the  command  of  Ha- 
milcar,  a  Carthaginian,  who,  having  been  in  the  army  of 
Hasdrubal,  had  remained  in  those  parts,  had  fallen  upon 
Placentia ;  and,  after  plundering  the  city,  and,  in  their  rage, 
burning  a  great  part  of  it,  leaving  scarcely  two  thousand 
men  among  the  flames  and  ruins,  passed  the  Po,  and  advan¬ 
ced  to  plunder  Cremona.  The  news  of  the  calamity,  which 
had  fallen  on  a  city  in  thfeir  neighbourhood,  having  r^ched 
thither,  the  inhabitants  had  time  to.  shut  their  gates,  and 
place  guards  on  the  walls,  that  they  might,  at  least,  try  the 
event  of  a  siege,  and  send  messengers  to  the  Roman  praetor. 
Lucius  Furius  Purpureo,  who  had  then  the  command  of  the 
province,  had,  in  pursuance  of  the  decree  of  the  senate,  dis¬ 
banded  the  army,  excepting  five  thousand  of  the  allies  and 
Latine  confederates ;  and  had  halted,  with  these  troops,  in 
the  nearest  district  of  the  province  about  Ariminum.  He 
immediately  informed  the  senate,  by  letter,  of  the  subsisting 
tumult.  That,  of  the  two  colonies  which  h^d  escaped  the 
general  wreck  in  the  dreadful  storm  of  the  Punic  war,  one 
was  taken  and  sacked  by  the  present  enemy,  and  the  other 
besieged.  Nor  was  his  army  capable  of  affording  sufficient 
protection  to  the  distressed  colonists,  unless  he  chose  to  ex¬ 
pose  five  thousand  allies  to  be  slaughtered  by  forty  thousand 
invaders  (for  so  many  there  were  in  arms) ;  and  by  such  a 
loss,  on  his  side,  to  augment  their  courage,  already  elated 
on  having  destroyed  one  Roman  colony.” 

230 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  352. 
XI.  On  reading  this  letter  it  was  decreed,  that  the  consul 
Aurelius  should  order  the  array  which  he  had  appointed  to 
assemble  on  a  certain  day  in  Etruria,  to  attend  him  on  the 
same  day  at  Ariminum  ;  and  should  either  go  in  person,  if 
the  public  business  would  permit,  to  suppress  the  tumult  of 
the  Gauls,  or  write  to  the  praetor  Lucius  F urius,  that,  as 
soon  as  the  legions  from  Etruria  came  to  him,  he  should  send 
five  thousand  of  the  allies  to  guard  that  place  in  the  mean 
time,  and  should  himself  proceed  to  relieve  the  colony  from 
the  siege.  It  was  also  decreed,  that  ambassadors  should  be 
sent  to  Carthage,  and  also  into  Nunpiidia  to  Masinissa  :  to 
Carthage,  to  tell  that  people  that  “  their  countryman,  Hamil- 
car,  having  been  left  in  Gaul,  (either  with  a  part  of  the  army 
formerly  commanded  by  Hasdrubal,  or  with  that  of  Mago— 
they  did  not  with  certainty  know  which,)  was  waging  war, 
contrary  to  the  treaty.  That  he  had  raised  forces  from  among 
the  Gauls  and  Ligurians,  and  persuaded  them  to  take  arms 
against  Rome.  That,  if  they  chose  a  continuance  of  j^ace, 
they  must  recall  him,  and  give  him  up  to  the  Homan  peo¬ 
ple.”  They  were  ordered  at  the  same  time  to  tell  them,  that 
**■  all  the  deserters  had  not  been  produced  ;  that  a  great  part  of 
them  were  said  to  appear  openly  in  Carthage,  who  ought  to 
be  souglit  after,  and  surrendered  according  to  the  treaty.” 
This  was  the  message  they  were  to  deliver  to  the  Carthagw 
nians.  To  Masinissa,  they  were  charged  with  congratula¬ 
tions,  on  his  having  not  only  recovered  the  kiiigdom  of  his 
father,  but  enlarged  it  by  the  acquisition  of  the  most  flourish¬ 
ing  part  of  Syphax’s  territories.”  They  were  ordered  also  to 
acquaint  him,  that  the  Romans  had  entered  into  a  war 
against  Philip,  because  he  had  given  aid  to  the  Carthaginians, 
while,  by  the  Injuries  which  he  offered  to  the  allies  of  the 
Roman  people,  he  had  obliged  them  to  send  fleets  and  armies 
into  Greece,  at  a  time  when  the  flames  of  war  spread  over 
all  Italy  ;  and  tliat  by  thus  making  them  separate  their  forces, 

BOOK  XXXL 

231 

B.C.  200.] 
had  been  the  principal  cause  of  their  being  so  late  in  passing 
over  to  Africa  ;  and  to  request  him  to  send  some  Numidiaa 
horsemen  to  assist  in  that  war.”  Ample  presents  were  given 
them  to  be  carried  to  the  King :  vases  of  gold  and  silver,  a 
purple  robe,  and  a  tunic  adorned  with  palms  of  purple,  an 
ivory  sceptre,  and  a  robe  of  state,  with  a  curule  chair.  They 
were  also  directed  to  assure  him,  that  if  he  deemed  any  thing 
farther  requisite  to  confirm  and  enlarge  his  kingdom,  the 
Roman  people,  in  return  for  his  good  services,  would  exert 
their  utmost  zeal  to  effect  it.  At  this  time,  too,  the  senate 
was  addressed  by  ambassadors  from  Vermina,  son  of  S}  phax, 
apologizing  for  his  mistaken  conduct,  on  account  of  his  youth 
and  want  of  judgment,  and  throwing  all  the  blame  on  the 
deceitful  policy  of  the  Carthaginians ;  adding,  that  as  Masi- 
nissa  had  from  an  enemy  become  a  friend  to  the  Romans,  so 
Vermina  would  also  use  his  best  endeavours  that  he  should 
not  be  outdone  in  offices  of  friendship  to  the  Roman  people, 
either  by  Masinissa,  orl^y  any  other  ;  and  requesting  that  he 
might  receive  from  the  senate,  the  title  of  king,  friend  and 
ally.”  The  answer  given  to  these  ambassadors  was,  that 
‘‘  not  only  his  father  Syphax,  from  a  friend  and  ally,  had  on  a 
sudden,  without  any  reason,  become  an  enemy  to  the  Roman 
people,  but  that  he  himself  had  made  his  first  essay  of  man¬ 
hood  in  bearing  arms  against  them.  He  must,  therefore,  sue 
to  the  Roman  people  for  peace,  before  he  could  expect  to  be 
acknowledged  king,  ally,  and  friend  ;  that  it  was  the.practice 
of  that  people  to  bestow  the  honour  of  such  title,  in  return 
for  great  services  performed  by  kings  towards  them  ;  that  the 
Roman  ambassadors  would  soon  be  in  Africa,  to  whom  the 
senate  would  give  instructions  to  regulate  conditions. of  peace 
with  Vermina,  as  he  should  submit  the  terms  entirely  to  the 
will  of  the  Roman  people  ;  and  that,  if  he  wished  that  any 
thing  should  be  added,  left  out,  or  altered,  he  must  make  a 
second  application  to  the  senate.”  The  ambassadors  sent  to 

232 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  552. 
Africa  on  those  affairs  were  Caius  Terentlus  Varro,  Publius 
Lucretius,  and  Cneius  Octavius,  each  of  whom  had  a  quin* 
quereme  assigned  him. 
XII.  A  letter  was  then  read  in  the  senate,  from  Quintus 
Minucius,  the  praetor,  who  held  the  province  of  Bruttium, 
that  the  money  had  been  privately  carried  off  by  night  out 
of  the  treasury  of  Proserpine  at  Locri ;  and  that  there  were 
no  traces  which  could  direct  to  the  discovery  of*  the  guilty 
persons.”  The  senate  was  highly  incensed  at  finding  that  the 
practice  of  sacrilege  continued,  and  that  even  the  fate  of  Pie- 
mini  us,  an  example  so  recent  and  so  conspicuous  both  of  the 
guilt  and  of  the  punishment,  did  not  deter  from  it.  They 
ordered  the  consul,  Cneius  Aurelius,  to  signify  to  the  praetor 
in  Bruttium,  that  it  was  the  pleasure  of  the  senate,  that  an 
inquiry  be  made  concerning  the  robbery  of  the  treasur}\  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  method  used  by  Marcus  Pomponius,  praetor, 
three  years  before  ;  that  the  money  which  could  be  disco¬ 
vered  should  be  restored,  and  any  deficiency  be  made  up^ 
and  that,  if  he  thought  proper,  atonements  should  be  made 
for  the  purpose  of  expiating  the  violation  of  the  temple,  in  the 
manner  formerly  prescribed  by  the  pontiffs.^’  At  the  same 
time,  also,  accounts  were  brought  of  many  prodigies  happen¬ 
ing  in  several  places.  It  was  said,  that  in  Lucania  the  sky 
had  been  seen  in  a  blaze  ;  that  at  Privernum,  in  clear  weather, 
the  sun  had  been  of  a  red  colour  during  a  whole  day  ;  that 
at  Lanuvium,  in  the  temple  of  Juno  Sospita,  a  very  loud  bust¬ 
ling  noise  had  been  heard  in  the  night.  Besides,  monstrous 
births  of  animals  were  related  to  have  occurred  in  many 
places  :  in  the  country  of  the  Sabines,  an  infant  was  bom 
whose  sex  could  not  be  distinguished  ;  aqd  another  was  found 
sixteen  years  old,  whose  sex  also  was  doubtful.  At  Frusino 
a  lamb  was  born  with  a  swine’s  head  ;  at  Sinuessa,  a  pig  wilh 
a  human  head  ;  and  in  Lucania,  in  the  land  belonging  to  the 
state,  a  foal  with  five  feet.  All  these  were  considered  as 

BOOK  XXXL 

233 

B.C.  200.] 
horrid  and  abominable,  and  as  if  nature  were  straying  from 
her  course  in  confounding  the  different  species.  Above  all, 
the  people  were  particularly  shocked  at  the  hermaphrodites, 
which  were  ordered  to  be  immediately  thrown  into  the  sea, 
as  had  been  lately  done  with  a  production  of  the  same  mon- 
strous  kind,  in  the  consulate  of  Caius  Claudius  and  Marcus 
Livius.  Not  satisfied  with  this,  they  ordered  the  decemvirs 
to  inspect' the  books  in  regard  to  that  progrdy  ;  and  the  de¬ 
cemvirs,  from  the  books,  directed  the  same  religious  cere¬ 
monies  which  had  been  performed  on  an  occasion  of  the  same 
kind.  They  wdered,  besides,  an  hymn  to  be  sung  through 
the  city  by  thrice  nine  virgins,  and  an  offering  to  be  made  to 
Imperial  Juno.  The  consul,  Caius  Aurelius,  took  care  that 
ail  these  matters  were  performed  according  to  the  direction 
of  the  decemvirs.  The  hymn  was  composed  by  Publius  Li- 
cinius  Tegula,  as  a^  similar  one  had  been,  in  the  memory  of 
their  fathers,  by  Livius. 
XIII.  All  religious  scruples  were  fully  removed  by  expia¬ 
tions  ;  at  Locri,  too,  the  affair  of  the  sacrilege  had  been  tho¬ 
roughly  investigated  by  Quintus  Minucius,  and  the  money 
replaced  in  the  treasury  out  of  the  effects  of  the  guilty.  When 
the  consuls  wished  to  set  out  to  their  provinces,  a  number  of 
private  persons,  to  whom  the  third  payment  became  due,  that 
year,  of  the  money  which  they  had  lent  to  the  public  in  the 
consulate  of  Marcus  Valerius  and  Marcus  Claudius,  applied 
to  the  senate.  The  consuls,  however,  having  declared  that 
the  treasury  being  scarcely  sufficient  for  the  exigencies  of  a 
new  war,  in  which  a  great  fleet  and  great  armies  must  be  em¬ 
ployed,  there  were  no' means  of  paying  them  at  present.  The 
senate  could  not  avoid  being  affected  by  their  complaints,  in 
which  they  alleged  that  “  if  the  state  intended  to  use,  for  the 
purposes  of  the  Macedonian  war,  the  money  which  had  been 
lent  for  the  Punic  war,  as  one  war  constantly  arose  after  ano¬ 
ther,  what  would  be  the  issue,  but  that,  in  return  for  their 
VOL.  IV. — H  H 

234 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  552. 
kind  assistance  to  the  public,  their  property  would  be  confis¬ 
cated,  as  if  they  had  been  guilty  of  some  crime  ?”  The  de¬ 
mands  of  the  private  creditors  being  equitable,  and  the  state 
being  in  no  capacity  of  discharging  the  debt,  they  determined 
to  pursue  a  middle  course  between  equity  and  convenience  ; 
and  accordingly  they  decreed,  that  “  whereas  many  of  them 
mentioned  that  lands  were  frequently  exposed  to  sale,  and 
that  they  themselves  wished  to  become  purchasers:  diey 
should,  therefore,  have  liberty  to  purchase  any  belonging  to 
the  public,  and  which  lay  within  fifty  miles  of  the  city.  That 
the  consuls  should  make  a  valuation  of  these,  and  impose  on 
each  acre  a  quit-rent  of  one  as^  as  an  acknowledgn^ent  that 
the  land  was  the  property  of  the  public,  in  order  that  when 
the  people  should  become  able  to  pay,  if  any  one  chose  rather 
to  have  the  money  than  the  land,  he  might  restore  it.”  The 
private  creditors  accepted  the  terms  with  joy  ;  and  that  land 
was  called  Trientius  and  Tabulius,  because  it  was  given  in 
lieu  of  the  third  part  of  their  money. 
XIV.  Publius  Sulpicius,  after  making  his  vows  in  the 
Capitol,  set  out  from  the  city  in  his  robes  of  war,  attended 
by  his  lictors,  and  arrived  at  Brunduslum  ;  where,  having 
formed  into  legions  the  veteran  soldiers  of  the  African  army 
who  were  willing  to  follow  him,  and  chosen  his  number  of 
ships  out  of  the  fleet  of  the  late  consul,  Cornelius,  he  set  sail, 
and  next  day  arrived  in  Macedonia.  There  he  was  met  by 
ambassadors  from  the  Athenians,  entreating  him  to  relieve 
their  city  frovd  the  siege.  Immediately,  Caius  Claudius 
Centho  was  despatched  to  Athens,  with  twenty  ships  of  war, 
and  a  small  body  of  land  forces.  For  it  was  not  the  King 
himself  who  carried  on  the  siege  of  Athens  ;  he  was  at  that 
time  intently  occupied  in  besieging  Abydus,  after  having 
tried  his  strength  at  sea  against  Attains,  and  against  the 
Rhodians,  without  meeting  success  in  either  engagement. 
But,  besides  the  natural  presumptuousness  of.  his  temper,  he 

BOOK  XXXI. 

23i 

BX.  200,3 
acquired  confidence  ftoma  treaty  which  he  had  formed  with 
Antiochus,  King  of  Syria,  in  which  they  had  divided  the 
wealth  of  Egypt  between  them  ;  sm  object  which,  on  hearing 
of  the  death  of  Ptolemy,  they  were  both  eager  to  secure. 
As  to  the  Athenians,  they  had  entangled  themselves  in  a  war 
with  Philip  on  too  trifling  an  occasion,  and  at  a  time  when 
they  retained  nothing  of  their  ancient  dignity  but  pride. 
During  the  celebration  of  the  mysteries,  two  yqpng  men  of 
Acarnania,  who  were  not  initiated,  unapprised  of  its  being 
an  oflfence  against  religion,  entered  the  temple  of  Ceres  along 
with  the  rest  of  the  crowd  :  their  discourse  quickly  betrayed 
them,  by  their  asking  questions  t^ich  discovered  their  igno¬ 
rance  ;  whereupon,  being  carried  before  the  presidents  of  the 
temple,  although  it  was  evident  that  they  went  in  through 
mistake,  yet  they  were  put  to  deaths  as  if  for  a  heinous  crime. 
The  Acamanian  nation  made  complaint  to  Philip  of  this  bar¬ 
barous  and  hostile  act,  and  prevailed  on  him  to  grant  them 
some  aid  of  Macedonian  soldiers,  and  to  allow  them  to  make 
war  on  the  Athenians.  At  first  this  army,  after  ravaging  the 
lands  of  Attica  with  fire  and  sword,  retired  to  Acarnania  with 
booty  of  all  kinds.  This  was  the  first  provocation  to  hostili¬ 
ties.  The  Athenians  afterwards,  on  their  side,  entered  into 
a  regular  war,  and  proclaimed  it  by  otder  of  the  state.  For 
King  Attains  and  the  Rhodians,  having  com^  to  iEgina  in 
pursuit  of  Philip,  who  was  retiring  to  Macedonia,  the  King 
crossed  o\’er  to  Piraeeus,  for  the  purpose  of  renewing  and 
strengthening  the  alliance  between  him  and  the  Athenians. 
On  entering  the  city,  he  was  received  by  the  whole  inhabi¬ 
tants,  who  poured  forth  with  their  wives  and  children  to  meet 
him  ;  by  the  priests,  with  their  emblems  of  religion  ;  and  in 
a  manner  by  the  gods  themselves,  called  forth  from  their 
abodes. 
XV .  Immediately  the  people  were  summoned  to  an  assem¬ 
bly,  that  the  King  might  treat  with  them  in  person  on  such 

236 

HISTOiRY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.552. 
subjects  as  he  chose  ;  but  afterwards  it  was  judged  more  suit¬ 
able  to  his  dignity  to  explain  his  sentiments  in  writings  than, 
being  present,  to  be  forced  to  blush,  either  at  the  recital  of 
his  extraordinary  favours  to  the  state,  or  at  the  immoderate 
applause  of  the  multitude,  which  would  overwhelm  his  mo¬ 
desty  with  acclamations,  and  other  signs  of  approbation.  In 
the  letter  which  he  sent,  and  which  was  read  to  the  assembly, 
wa*^  ■  ';ntaii?ed,  first,  a  recapitulation  of  the  several  acts  of 
kindness  which  he  had  shown  to  the  Athenian  state,  as  his 
ally ;  then,  of  the  actions  which  he  had  performed  against 
Philip  ;  and  lastly,  an  exhortation  to  enter  immediately  on 
the  war ;  while  they  had  ftim  ( Attains),  the  Rhodians,  and 
the  Romans  also  to  assist  them  not  omitting  to  warn  them, 
that  if  they  were  backward  now,  they  would  hereafter  wish, 
in  vain,  for  the  opportunity  which  they  neglected.”  They 
then  gave  audience  to  the  ambassadors  of  the  Rhodians,*  to 
whom  they  were  under  a  recent  obligation  for  having  retaken, 
and  sent  home,  four  of  their  ships  of  war,  which  had  been 
lately  seized  by  the  Macedonians-  War  was  determined 
upon  against  Philip  with  universal  consent.  Unbounded 
honours  were  conferred  on  King  Attains,  and  then  on  the 
Rhodians.  At  that  time,  mention  was  made  of  adding  a 
trit^,  which  they  were  to  call  Attalis,  to  the  ten  ancient 
tribes  ;  the  Rhodian  state  was  presented  with  a  golden  crown, 
as  an  acknowledgment  of  its  bravery,  and  the  inhabitants 
with  the  freedom  of  Athens,  in  like  manner  as  Rhodes  had 
formerly  honoured  that  people.  After  this.  King  Attains  re¬ 
turned  to  iEgina,  where  his  fleet  lay.  From  iEgina,  the  Rho¬ 
dians  sailed  to  Cia,and  thence  to  Rhodes,  steering  their  course 
among  the  islands,  all  of  which  they  brought  to  join  in  the  al¬ 
liance,  except  Andros,  Paros,  and  Cythnus,  which  were  held 
by  Macedonian  garrisons.  Attains,  having  sent  messengers  to 
iEtolia,  and  expecting  ambassadors  from  thence,  was  detained 
at  Algina,  for  some  time,  in  a  state  of  inaction  ;  failing  also  in 

BOOK  XXXI. 

237 

B.C.200.] 
his  endeavours  to  excite  the  iEtolians  to  artnsv  for  they  were 
rejoiced  at  having  made  peace  with  Macedon  on  any  terms. 
Had  Attains  and  the  Rhodians  pressed  Philip  vigorously,  they 
might  have* acquired  the  illustrious  title  of  the  deliverers  of 
Greece,  but  by  sulFering  him  to  pass  over  again  into  Helles- 
pontus,  and  to  strengthen  himself  by  seizing  the  advantageous 
posts  in  Greece,  they  increased  the  difficulties  of  the  war,  and 
yielded  up  to  the  Romans  the  glory  of  having  conducted  and 
finished  it. 
XVI.  Philip  acted  with  a  spirit  more  becoming  a  king ; 
for,  though  he  had  found  himself  unequal  to  the  forces  of 
Attalus  and  the  Rhodians,  yet  he  was  not  dismayed,  even  by 
the  prospect  of  an  approaching  war  with  the  Romans.  Send¬ 
ing  Philocles,  one  of  his  generals,  with  two  thousand  foot 
and  two  hundred  horse,  to  ravage  the  lands  of  the  Athenians, 
he  gave  the  command  of  his  fleet  to  HeracHdes,  with  orders 
to  sail  to  Maronea,  and  marched  thither  himself  by  land,  with 
two  thousand  foot,  lightly  equipped,  and  two  hundred  horse. 
Marcmea  he  took  at  the  first  assault ;  and,  afterwards,  with  a 
good  deal  of  trouble,  got  possession  of  iEous,  which  was  at 
last  betrayed  to  him  by  Ganymede,  who  commanded  there 
for  Ptolemy.  He  then  seized  on  other  forts,  Cypselus,  0o- 
riscos,  and4SerrheuS ;  arid,  advancing  from  thence  to  the  CJher^ 
sonesus,  received  Elseus  and  Allopecondesus,  which  were  mjr- 
rendered  by  the  inhabitants.  Callipolis  also,  and  Madytos, 
were  given  up  to  him,  with  several  forts  of  but  little  conse¬ 
quence.  The  people  of  Abydus  shut  their  gates  against  him, 
not  suffering  even  his  ambassadors  to  enter  the  place.  The 
siege  of  this  city  detained  Philip  a  long  time ;  and  it  might 
have  been  relieved,  if  Attalus  and  the  Rhodians  had  acted 
with  any  vigour.'  The  King  sent  only  three  hundred  men  for 
a  garrison,  and  the  Rhodians  one  quadrireme  from  their  fleet, 
although  h  was  lying  Idle  at  Tenedos  ;  and,  afterwards,  when 
the  besieged  could  with  difficulty  hold  out  any  longer,  Atta« 

238 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

[Y.R.  552. 

lus,  going  over  in  person,  did  nothing  more  than  show  them 
^mie  hope  of  relief  being  near,  giving  not  any  real  assistmice 
to  these  his  allies  either  by  land  or  sea. 
XVII.  At  first  the  people  of  Abydus,  by  mcansr  of  engines 
placed  along  the  walls,  not  only  prevented  the  approaches  by 
land,  but  annoyed  the  enemy’s  ships  in  their  statibn.  After¬ 
wards  a  part  of  the  wall  being  thrown  down,  and  the  assail¬ 
ants  having  penetrated,  by  mines,  to  an  inner  wall,  which  had 
been  hastily  raised  to  oppose  their  entrance,  the  besieged  sent 
ambassadors  to  the  King  to  treat  of  terms  of  capitulation. 
They  demanded  permission  to  send  away  the  Rhodian  quad- 
rireme,  with  the  crew,  and  the  troops  of  Attains  in  the  gar¬ 
rison  ;  and  that  they  themselves  might  depart  from  the  city, 
each  with  one  suit  of  apparel ;  but  Philip’s  answer  afforded 
no  hopes  of  accommodation,  unless  they  surrendered  at  dis¬ 
cretion.  When  this  was  reported  by  their  ambassadors,  it  so 
exasperated  them,  rousing  at  the  same  time  their  indignation 
and  despair,  that,  seized  with  the  same  kind  of  fury  which 
had  possessed  the  Saguntines,  they  ordered  all  the  matrons 
to  be  shut  up  in  the  temple  of  Diana,  and  the  free-born  youths 
and  virgins,  and  even  the  infants  with  their  nui^es,  in  the 
place  of  exercise  ;  the  gold  and  silver  to  be  carried  into  the 
Forum  ;  their  valuable  garments  to  be  put  on  board  the  Rho¬ 
dian  ship,  and  another  from  Cyzicum,  which  lay  in  ,  the  har¬ 
bour  ;  the  priests  and  victims  to  be  brought,  and  altars  to  be 
erected  in  the  midst.  There  they  appointed  a  select  tmmbej:, 
who,  as  soon  as  they  should  see  the  army  of  their  friends  cut 
off  in  defending  the  breach,  were  instantly  to  slay  their  wives 
and  children ;  to  throw  into  the  sea  the  g(dd,  silver,  and  ap¬ 
parel  that  was  on  board  the  ships,  and  to  set  fire  to  the  build- 
ings,  public  and  private  :  and  to  the  performance  of  this  deed 
they  were  bound  by  an  oath,  the  priests  repeating  before  them 
the  verses  of  execration.  Those  who  were  of  an  age  capable 
of  fighting  then  swore  to  continue  the  battle  till  they  fell,  un- 

BOOK  XXXL 

239 

B.C.2Q0.] 

less  victorious.  These,  regardful  of  the  gods  by  whom  they 
had  sworn, 'maintained  their  ground  with  such  obstinacy,  diat 
although  the  night  would  soon  have  put  a  stop  to  the  fight, 
yet  the  King,  terrified,  by  their  fury,  first  drew  off  his  forces. 
The  chief  inhabitants,  to  whom  the  more  shocking  part  of  the 
plan  had  been,given  in  charge,  seeing  that  few  survived  the 
battle,  and  that  these  were  exhausted  by  fatigue  and  wounds, 
sent  the  priests  (having  their  heads  bound  with  the  fillets  of 
suppliants,)  at  the  dawn  of  the  next  day,  to  surrender  the 
city  to  Philip.  ^ 
XVIII.  Before  the  surrender,  .one  of  the  Roman  ambassa¬ 
dors  who  had  been  sent  to  Alexandria,  Marcus  iEmilius,  be¬ 
ing  the  youngest  of  them,  in  pursuance  of  a  resolution  which 
the  three  had  jointly  formed,  on  hearing  of  the  present  siege, 
came  to  Philip,  and  complained  of  his  having  made  war  on 
Attains  and  the  Rhodians  ;  and  particularly  of  the  attack  on 
Abydus,  in  which  he  was  then  employed ;  and  on  Philip’s 
saying  that  he  h^  been  forced  into  the  war  by  Attains  and 
the  Rhodians  commencing  Imstilhies  against  him,— Did  the 
people  of  Abydus,  too,”  said  he,  “  commence  hostilities 
against  you  ?”  To  him,  who  was  unaccustomed  to  hear  truth, 
this  language  seemed  too  arrogant  to  be  used  to  a  kipg,  and 
he  answered,— ‘‘  Your  youth,  the  beauty  of  your  form,  and, 
above  all,  the  name  of  Roman,  render  you  too  presumptuous. 
However,  my  first  desire  is,  that  you  wimld  observe  the  trea¬ 
ties,  and  continue  in  peace  with. me ;  but  if  you  begin  an  at¬ 
tack,  I  am,  on  my  part,  determined  to  prove  that  the  king- 
dom,  and  nam^  of  the  'Macedonians  is  not  less  formidable 
in  war  than  that  of  the  Romans.”  Having  dismissed  the  am¬ 
bassadors  in  this  mamner,  Philip  got  possession  of  the  gol4 
and  silver  which  had  been  thrown  togedier  in  a  heap,  but  was 
disappointed  of  his  booty  with  respect  to  .prisoners ;  for  such 
violent  frenzy  had  seized  the  multitude,  that,  on  a  sudden, 
taking  up  a  persuasion  that  they  were  guilty  of  treachery  to- 

240 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  552. 

wards  those  who  had  fallen  in  the  battle,  and  upbraiding  one 
another  with  perjury,  especially  the  priests,  who  would  sur¬ 
render  alive  to  the  enemy  those  persons  whom  they  them¬ 
selves  had  devoted,  they  all  at  once  ran  different  ways  to  put 
th^r  wives  and  children  to  death  ;  and  then  diey  put  an  end 
to  their  own  lives  by  every  possible  method.  The  King,  as¬ 
tonished  at  their  madness,  restrained  the  violence  of  his  sol¬ 
diers,  and  said,  that  he  would  allow  the  people  of  Abydus 
three  days  to  die  in  j’’  and,  during  this  space,  the  vanquished 
perpetrated  more  deeds  of  cruelty  on  themselves,  than  the  en¬ 
raged  conquerors  would  have  committed  ;  nor  did  any  one  of 
them  come  into  the  enemy®s  hands  alive,  except  such  as  were 
in  chains,  or  under  some  other  insuperable  restraint.  Philip, 
leaving  a  garrison  in  Abydus,  returned  to  his  kingdom  ;  and, 
just  when  he  had  been  encouraged  by  the  destruction  of  the 
people  of  Abydus,  to  proceed  in  the  war  against  Rome,  as 
Hannibal  had  been  by  the  destruction  of  Saguntum,  he  was 
met  by  couriers  with  intelligence,  that  the  consul  was  already 
in  EpyrCis,  and  had  drawn  his  land  forces  to  Apollonia,  and 
his  fleet  to  Corcyra,  into  winter-quarters. 
XIX.  In  the  mean  time,  the  ambassadors  who  had  been 
sent  into  Africa,  on  the  affair  of  Hamilcar,  the  leader  of  the 
Gallic  army,  received  from  the  Carthaginians  this  answer : 
that  “  it  was  not  in  their  power  to  do  more  than  to  inflict  on 
him  the  punishment  mf  exile,  and  to  confiscate  his  effects  : 
that  they  had  delivered  up  all  the  deserters  and  fugitives, 
whom,  on  a  diligent  inquiry,  they  had  been  able  to  discover, 
and  would  send  ambassadors  to  Rome,  to  satisfy  the  senate 
on  that  head.”  They  sent  two  hundred  thousand  measures 
of  wheat  to  Rome,  and  the  same  quantity  to  the  army  in  Ma¬ 
cedonia.  From  thence  the  a mbassadtws  proceeded  into  Nu- 
midia,  to  the  kings  ;  delivered  to  Masiiiissa  the  presents  and 
the  message  according  to  their  instructions,  and  but  of  two 
thousand  Numkiian -horsemen,  which  he  offered,  accepted  one 

BOOK  XXXL 

341 

B.c.  2oo»3 
diou^d.  Masmissa  superintended  in  person  the  einbarka«- 
tion  of  these^  and  sent  them,  with  two  hundred  thousand  mea¬ 
sures  of  wheat,  and  the  same  quantity  of  barley,  into  Mace¬ 
donia.  The  third  commission  which  they  had  to  execute  was 
with  Vermina.  He  advanced  to  meet  them,  as  far  as  the  ut¬ 
most  limits  of  his  kingdom,  and  left  it  to  themselves  to  pre¬ 
scribe  such  conditions  of  peace  as  they, thought  proper,  de¬ 
claring,  that  ‘‘  he  should  consider  any  peace  with  the  Roman 
people  as  just  and  advantageous.”  The  terms  were  then  set¬ 
tled,  and  he  was  ordered  to  send  ambassadors  to  Rome  to 
procure  a  ratification  of  the  treaty.  * 
XX.  .About  the  .same  time,^  Lucius  Cornelius  Lentulus, 
proconsul,  came  home  from  Spain ;  and  having  laid  before 
the  senate  an  account  of  his  brave  and  successful  conduct, 
during  the  coarse  of  many  years,  demanded  that  he  might  be 
allowed  to  enter  the  city  in  triumph.  The  senate,  on  this, 
gave  their  opinion,  that  his  services  /Were,  indeed,  deserv¬ 
ing  of  a  triumph  ;  but  that  they  had  no  precedent  left  them 
by  their  ancestors,  of  any  person  enjoying  a  triumph,  who 
was  not,  at  the  lime  of  performing  the  service,  on  account  of 
which  he  claimed  that  honour,  either  dictator,  consul,  or  prse- 
tor ;  that  he  had  held  the  province  of  Spain  in  quality  of  pro- 
consul,  and  not  of  consul,  or  praetor.”  They,  determined, 
however,  that  he  might  enter  the  city  in  ovation.  Against 
this,  Tiberius  Sempronius  Longus,  tribune  of  the  people, 
protested,  alleging,  that  such  proceedings  would  be  no  less 
unprecedented,  and  contrary,  to  the  practice  of  their  ancestors, 
than  the  other ;  but,  overcome  at  length  by  the  unanimous 
desire  of  the  senate,  the  tribune  withdrew  his  opposition,  and 
Lucius  Lentulus  entered  the  city  in  ovation.  He  carried  to 
the  treasury,  forty-four  thousand  pounds  weight  of  silver,  and 
two  thoi^and  four  hundred  pounds  weight  of  gold.  To  each 
VOL.  IV. — I  r 

24®  HISTORY  OP  ROME.  [Y.R.  m. 
of  the  soldiers  he  distributed,  of  the  spoil,  one  hundred  andl 
twenty  asses.* 
XXL  The  consular  army  had, by  this  time, removed  from  Ar. 
retium  to  Arimraum,  and  the  five  thousand Latine  confederates 
had  gone  from  Gaul  into  Etruria.  Lucias  Furius^th^fore,  ad¬ 
vanced  from  Ariminum,  by  forced  inarches,  against  the  Gauls, 
who  were  then  besieging  Cremona,  and  pitched  his  camp  at 
the  distance  of  one  mile  and  a  half  from  the  enemy.  Furies 
had  an  excellent  opportunity  of  striking  an  important  blow, 
had  he,  without  halting,  leddtis  troops  directly  to  attack  dieir 
camp  ;  they  were  scattered  and  dispersed  through  the  coun¬ 
try  ;  and  the  guard,  which  they ‘had  left,  was  very  insufficient ; 
but  he  was  apprehensive  that  his  men  were  tod  much  fatigued 
by  their  hasty  march.  The  Gapls  recalled  from  the  fields  by 
the  shouts  of  theh  party, returned  to  the  camp  without  seizing 
the  booty  within  their  reach,  and,  next  day,  marched  out  to 
offer  battle ;  the  Roman  did  not  decline  the  eombat,  but  had 
scarcely  time  to  make  the  necessary  dispositions,  so  rapidly 
did  the  enemy  advance  to  the  fight.  The  right  brigade  (for 
he  had  the  troops  of  the  allies  divided  into  Mgades)  was  placed 
in  the  first  line,  the  two  Roman  lemons  in  reserve.  Marcus 
Furius  was  at  the  head  of  the  right  brigade,  Marcus  CsecUius 
of  the  legions,  and  Lucius  Valerius  Flaccus  of  the  cavalry  : 
these  were  all  lieutenant-generals.  Two  cipher  lieutensmt- 
generals,  Cneius  Laetorius  and  PubUus  Titinnius,  the  prsetor 
kept  near  himself,  that,  with  their  assistance,  he  might  ob¬ 
serve,  and  take  proper  measui'es  against  any  suddmi  atmek. 
At  first,  the  Gauls,  bending  thek*  whole  force  to  one  point, 
were  in  hopes  of  being  able  to  overwhelm,  ^mdtfample  under 
foot,  the  right  brigade,  which  was  in  the  van ;  but  not  suc¬ 
ceeding,  they  endeavoured  to  turn  round  the  flanks,  and  to 
surround  their  enemy’s  line,  which,  considering  dje  multitude 

7s.  9d, 

BOOK  XXXI. 

B.C.  ^.3 

of  their  fotceSj^  and  the  small  number  of  the  ot^rs,  seemed 
^  easy  to  be  done.  On  observing  this,  the  praetor,  in  order  to 
extend  his  own  line,  brought  up  the  two  lemons  from  the 
reserve,  and  placed  them  on  the  right  and  left  of  the  bri^de 
which  was  engaged' in  the  van  ;  vowing  a  temple  to  Jupiter, 
if  he  should  on  that  day  prove  victorious.  To  Lucius  Va¬ 
lerius  he  gave  orders,  to  make  the  horsemen  of  the  two 
legions  on  one  flank,  and  the  cavalry  of  the  allies  on  the  other, 
charge  the  wings  of  the  enemy,  .  and  not  suffer  them  to  come 
round  to  his  rear.  At  the  same  time,  observing  that  the 
centre  of  their  line  was  weakened,  from  having  extended^the 
wings,  he  directed  his  men  to  make  m  attack  there  in  close 
order,  and  to  break  ll^rough  their  ranks.  The  win^.  were  rout¬ 
ed  by  the  cavalry,  and,  at  the  same  time,  the  centre  by  the  foot. 
Being  worsted  in  all  parts  with  great  slaughter,  the  Gauls  quick¬ 
ly  turned  their  backs,  and  fled  to  dieir  camp  in  hurry  and  con¬ 
fusion.  The  cavalry  pursued  them  ;  :uid  thelegions,  coming 
up  in  a  short  time  after,  assaulted  the  camp,  from  whence 
there  did  not  escape  so  many  as  six  thousand  men.  There 
were  slain  and  taken  above  thirty-five  thousand,  with  eighty 
standards,  and  above  two  hundred  Gallic  wagons  laden  with 
booty  of  all  kinds,  Hamilcar,  the  Carthaginian, general,  fell 
that  day,  and  diree  distinguished  generals  of  the  Gauls.  The 
prisoners  taken  at  Placentia,  to  the  number  of  two  thousand 
free-men,  were  restored  to  the  colony. 
XXII.  This  was  an  important  victory,  and  caused  great 
joy  at  Rome.  On  receipt  of  the  praetor’s  letter,  a  supplication 
for  three  days  was  decreed.  In  that  battle,  there  fell  of  the 
Romans  and  allies  two  thousand,  most  of  them  in  the  right 
brigade,  against  which,  in  the  first  onset,  the  most  violent 
efforts  of  the  enemy  had  been  directed.  Although  the  praetor 
had  brought  the  war  ^most  to  a  conclusion,  yet  the  consul, 
Cneius  Aurelius,  having  finished  the  business  which  required 

244 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  552. 
his  attendance  at  Rome,  set.  out  for  Gaul,  and  received  the 
victorious  army  from  the  praetor.  The  other  consul  arriving 
in  his  province  towards  the  end  of  autumn,  passed  the  winter 
in  the  neighbourhood  of  Apollonia.  Caius  Claudius,  and  the 
Roman  triremes  which  had  been  sent  to  Athens  from  the 
fleet  that  was  laid  up  at  Corcyra,  as  was  mentioned  above, 
arriving  at  Pirseeus,  greatly  revived  the  hopes  of  their  allies, 
who  were  beginning  to.  give  way  to  despair.  Their  arrival 
not  only  put  a  stop  to  the  inroads  by  land,  which  used  to  be 
made  from  Corinth  through  Megara,  but  so  terrified  the  pi¬ 
rates  from  Chalcis,  who  had  b*een  accustomed  to  infest  both 
the  Athenian  sea  and  coast,  that  they  dared  not  venture  round 
the  promontory  of  Sunium,  nor  even  trust  themselves  out  of 
the  streights  of  the  Euripus.  In  addition  to  these  came  three 
quadriremes  from  Rhodes,  the  Athenians  having  three  open 
ships,  which  they  had  equipped  for  the  protection  of  their 
lands  on  the  coast.  While  Claudius  thought,  that  if  he  were 
able  with  his  fleet  to  give  security  to  the  Athenians,  it  was  as 
much  as  could  be  expected  at  present.  Fortune  threw  in  his 
way  an  opportunity  of  accomplishing  an  enterprise  of  greater 
moment. 
XXIII.  Some  exiles  driven  from  Chalcis,  by  ill-treatment 
received  from  the  King’s  party,  brought  intelligence,  that  the 
place  might  be  taken  without  even  a  contest  j  for  the  Mace¬ 
donians,  being  under  no  immediate  apprehension  from  an 
enemy,  were  straying  idly  about  the  country  ;  and  the  towns¬ 
men,  depending  on  the  Macedonian  garrison,  neglected  the 
guard  o^  the  city.  Claudius,  in  consequence  of  this,  set  out, 
and  though  he  arrived  at  Sunium  early  enough  to  have  sail¬ 
ed  forward  to  the  entrance  of  the  streight  of  Euboea,  yet 
fearing  that,  on  doubling  the  promontory,  he  might  be  de¬ 
scried  by  the  enemy,  he  lay  by  with  the  fleet  until  night.  As 
soon  as  it  grew  dark  he  began  to  move,  and,  favoured  by  a 
calm,  arrived  at  Chalcis  a  little  before  day  j  and  then,  ap- 

B.G.  200*] 

BOOK  XXXI* 

245 
proachipg  the  city,  on  a  side  where  it  was  thinly  inhabited, 
with  a  small  party  of  soldiers,  and  by  means  of  scaling  lad¬ 
ders,  he  got  possession  of  the  nearest  tower,  and  the  wall  on 
each  side.  Finding  in  some  places  the  guards  asleep,  and 
other  parts  left  without  any  watch,  they  advanced  to  the  more 
populous  parts  of  the  town,  and  having  slain  the  sentinels, 
and  broken  open  a  gate,  they  gave  an  entrance  to  the  main 
body  of  the  troops.  These  immediately  spread  themselves 
through  all  parts  of  the  city,  and  increased  the  tumult  by 
setting  lire  to  the  buildings  routid  the  Forum,  by  which  means 
both  the  granaries  belonging  to  the  King,  and  his  armory, 
with  a  vast  store  of  machines  and  engines,  were  reduced  to 
ashes.  Then  commenced  a  general  slau^ter  of  those  who 
fled,  as  well  as  of  those  who  made  resistance ;  and  after  hav¬ 
ing  either  put  to  the  sword  or  driven  out  every  one  who  was 
of  an  age  fit  to  bear  arms,  (Sopater  also,  the  Acamanian,  who 
commanded  the  garrison,  being  slain,)  they  first  collected  all 
the  spoil  in  the  Forum,  and  then  carried  it  on  board  the 
ships.  The.  prison,  too,  was  forced  open  by  the  Rhodians, 
and  those  whom' Philip  had  shut  up  there,  were  set  at  liber¬ 
ty.  They  next  pulled  down  and  mutilated  the  statues  of  the 
King ;  and  then,  on  a  signal  being  given  for  a  retreat,  reim- 
barked  and  returned  to  Piraeeus,  from  whence  they  had  set 
out.  If  there  had  been  a  sufficient  number  of  Roman  sol¬ 
diers  to  have  kept  possession  of  Chalcis,  without  stripping 
Athens  of  a  proper  garrison,  that  city  and  the  command  of 
the  Euripus  would  have  been  a  most  important  advantage  at 
the  commencement  of  the  war :  for  as  the  pass  of  Thermo¬ 
pylae  is  the  principal  barrier  of  Greece  by  land,  so  is  the 
streight  of  the  Euripus  by  sea. 
XXIV.  Philip  was  then  at  Demetrias,  and  as  soon  as  the 
news  arrived  there  of  the  calamity  which  had  befallen  the 
city  of  his  allies,  although  it  was  too  late  to  carry  assistance 
to  those  who  were  already  ruined,  yet  anxious  to  accomplish 

m  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.552. 
what  was  next  to  assistance,  revenge,  he  set  out  instantly 
with  five  thousand  foot  lightly  equipped,  and  tteee  hundred 
horse.  With  a  speed  almost  equal  to  that  of  racing,  he  has¬ 
tened  to  Chalcis,  not  doubting  but  that  he  should  be  able  to 
surprise  the  Romans.  Finding  himself  disappointed,  and 
that  his  coming  answered  no  other  end  than  to  give  him  a 
melancholy  view  of  the  smoking  ruins  of  that  friendly  city, 
(so  few  being  left,  that  they  were  scarcely  sufficient  to  bury 
those  who  had  fallen  by  the  sword  of  the  enemy,)  with  the 
same  rapid  haste  which  he  had  used  in  coming,  he  cross¬ 
ed  the  Euripus  by  the  bridge,  and  led  his  troops  through 
Boeotia  to  Athens,  in  hopes' that  a  similar  attempt  might  be 
attended  by  a  similar  issue.  And  he  would  have  succeeded, 
had  not  a  scout  (one  of  those  whom  the  Greeks  call  day-nm- 
ners,*  because  they  run  through  a  journey  of  great  length 
in  one  day,)  descrying  from  his  post  of  observation  the  King’s 
army  in  its  march,  set  out  at  midnight,  and  arrived  before 
them  at  Athens.  The  same  sleep,  ^md  the  same  negligence, 
prevailed  there  which  had  proved  the  ruin  of  Chalcis  a  few 
days  before.  Roused,  however,  by  the  alarming  intelligence, 
the  praetor  of  the  Athenians,  and  Dioxippus,  commander  of  a 
cohort  of  mercenary  auxiliaries,  called  the  soldiers  together 
in  the  Forum,  and  ordered  the  trumpets  to  sound  aii  alarm 
from  the  citadel,  that  all  might  be  informed  of  the  approach 
of  the  enemy.  On  which  the  people  ran  from  all  quarters  to 
the  gates,  and  afterwards  to  the  walls.  In  a  few  hours  after, 
and  still  some  time  before  day,  Philip  approached  the  city, 
and  observing  a  great  number  of  lights,  and  hearing  the  noise 
of  the  men  hurrying  to  and  fro,  as  usual  x>n  such  an  alarm, 
he  halted  his  troops,  and  ordered  them.to  sit  down  and  take 
some  rest ;  resolving  to  use  open  force,  since  his  design  of 
surprise  had  not  succeeded.  Accordingly  he  advanced  on 

Hciperodromoi. 

BOOK  XXXI. 

24T 

BX.  200.3 
the  side  of  Dipylos,  or  the  double  gate,  which  being  the 
principal  enWance  of  the  city  is  somewhat  larger  and  wider 
than  the  rest.  Both  within  and  without  the  streets  arc  wide, 
so  that  the  townsmen  could  form  their  troops  from  the  Fo¬ 
rum  to  the  gate,  while  cm  the  outside,  a  road  of  about  a  mile 
in  length,  leading  to  the  school  of  the  academy,  afforded  open 
room  to  -the  foot  and  horse  of  the  enemy.  The  Athenians, 
who  bad  formed  their  troops  within  the  gate,  marched  out 
with  Attalus’s  garrison,  and  the  cohort  of  Dioxippus,  along 
that  road.  This  Philip  observed,  and  thinking  that  he  had 
the  enemy  in  his  power,  ami  might  now  satisfy  his  revenge 
in  their  destruction,  and  which  lie  had  long  wished  for,  (be¬ 
ing  more  incensed  against  them  than  any  ,  of  the  Xrcciau 
states,)  he  exhorted  his  men  to  Jceep  their  eyes  on  him  dur¬ 
ing  the  fight,  and  to  take  nc^ce,  that  wherever  the  King 
was,  there  the  standards  and  the  army  ought  to  be.  He  then 
spurred  on  his  horse,  animated  not  only  with  resentment,  but 
with  a  desire  of  gaming  honour,  reckeming  it  a  glorious  op¬ 
portunity  of  displaying  his  prowess,  in  the  view  of  an  im¬ 
mense  crowd.which  covered  the  walls,  many  of  them  for  the 
purpose  of  behoving  the  engagement.  Advancmg  far  before 
the  line,  and,  with  a  small  body  of  horse,  rushing  into  the 
midst  of  the  enemy,  .he  inspired  his  men  with  great  ardour, 
and  the  Athenians  with  terror.  Having  wounded  many  with 
his  own  hand,  both  in  close  fight  and  with  missive  weapons, 
and  driven  them  bac^  within  the  gate,  he  still  pursued  them 
closely  ;  and  having  made  ^greater  slaughter  among  them 
while  embarrassed  in  the  narrow  pass,  rash  as  the  attempt 
was,  he  yet  retired  unmolested :  because  those  who  were  in 
the  towers  withheld  their  weapons  lest  tiiey  should  hit  their 
friends,  who  were  mingled  in  confusion  among  their  enemies. 
The  Athenians,  after  this,  confining  their  troops  within  the 
walls,  Philip  sounded  a  retreat,  and  pitched  his  camp  at  Cy- 
nosarges,,  a  temple  of  Hercules,  and  a  school  surrounded  by 

248 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

[Y.R,  552, 

a  grove.  But  Cynosarges,  and  Lycaeum,  and  whatever  was 
sacred  W  pleasant  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  city,  he  bam* 
cd  to  the  ground,  and  levelled,  not  only  the  houses,  but  se» 
pulchres,  paying  no  regard,  in  the  violence  of  his  rage,  to 
any  privilege  either  of  men  or  gods. 
XXV.  Next  day,  the  gates  having  at  first  been  shut,  and 
afterwards  suddenly  thrown  open,  in  consequence  of  a  body 
of  Attalus’s  troops  from  ./Egina,  and  the  Romans  from  Pi- 
raeeus,  having  entered  the  city,  the  King  removed  his  camp 
to  the  distance  of  about  three  miles.  From  thence. he  pro¬ 
ceeded  to  Eleusis,  in  hopes  of  suprising  the  temple,  and  a 
fort  which  overlooks  and  surrounds  it ;  but,  finding  that  the 
guards  were  attentive,  and  that  die  fleet  was  coming  from 
Piraeeus  to  support  them,  he  laid  aside  the  design,  and  led 
his  troops,  first  to  .Megara,  and  then  to  Corinth  ;  where,  on 
hearing  that  the  council  of  the  Achaeans  was  then  sittmg  at 
Argos,  he  went  and  joined  the  assembly,  to  tlie  surprise  of 
that  people.  They  were  at  the  time  employed  in  forming 
measures  for  a  war  against  Nabis,  tyrant  of  the  Lacedaemo¬ 
nians  ;  who  (observing,  on  the  command  being  transferred 
from  Philopaemen  to  Cycliadas,  a  general  uiuch  inferior  to 
him,  that  the  confederates  of  the  Achaeans  were  falling  off,) 
had  renewed  the  war,  and  besides  ravaging  the  territories  of 
his  neighbours,  was  become  formidable  even  to  the  cities. 
While  they  were  deliberating  what  number  of  men  should  be 
raised  out  of  each  of  the  states  to  oppose  this  enemy,  Philip 
promised  that  he  would  relieve  them  from  all  anxiety,  as  far 
as  concerned  Nabis  and  the  Lacedsemonians ;  and  that  he 
would  not  only  secure  the  lands  of  their  allies  from  devasta¬ 
tion,  but  transfer  the  whole  terror  of  the  war  on  Laconia  it¬ 
self,  by  leading  his  army  thither  instantly.  This  discourse  be¬ 
ing  received  with  general  approbation,  he  added, — It  is  but 
reasonable,  however,  that  while  I  am  employed  in  protecting 

BOOK  XXXJ. 

249 

B.C.  200.] 
your  property  by  my  ^fms,  my  own  shoi:dd  not  fee  exposed 
wttbout  defence ;  therefore,  if  you  think  proper,  provide  such 
a  number  oi  troops  as  will  be  sufficient  to  secure  Orcus,  Chal* 
eis,  and  Corinth ;  that  my  ^airs,  being  in  a  state  of  safety 
behind  me,  I  may  proceed,  without  distraction,  to  attack  Na- 
bis  and  the  Lacedaemonian The  Achaeans  were  not  igno¬ 
rant  6f«the  tendency  of  these  kind  promises,  and  his  offer  of 
assistance  against  the  Lacfedaemonians,  and  that  his  view  was 
to  draw  the  Achaean  youth  out  of  .Pelo|K)nnesus  as  hostages, 
that  he  might  have  it  in  his  power  to  embroil  the  nation  in  a 
war  with  the  Roinans.  /Cycliades,' praetor,  thinking  that  it 
wonld' answer  no^piirpdse  to  expose  his  scheme  by  ar-gument, 
md  nothing  more  .than  that  it  w^s  not  allowable,  according 
to  the  laws  of  the  Achseahs,  to  take  any  matter  into  conside¬ 
ration  exceptlthat bn  which 'they  had  been  called  together; 
dnd  the  decree  for  levying  an  army  agmnsr  Nabis  being  pass¬ 
ed,  he  dismissed  the  assembly after  having  presided  in  it 
with  mnch  resolution  and  public  spirit,  although,  until  that 
day,  he  had  been  reckoned  a  partizan  of  the  King.  Philip, 
grievously  disappointed,  after  having  collected  a  few  volun¬ 
tary  soldiers,  f eturned  to  Corinth,  and"  from  thence  into  the 
territories  of  Athens.  ^  ^ 
XXVI.  while  Philip  was  in  Achaia,  Philocles,  one  of 
the  generals,  marching  from  Euboea  with  two  thousand  Thra¬ 
cians  and  Macedonians,  intending  to  lay  waste  the  territories 
of  the  Athenians,  crossed  the  forest  of  .Cithaeron,  opposite  to 
Eleiisis.  Despatching  half  of  his  troops,  to  make  depreda¬ 
tions  m  all  parts  of  the  country,  he  lay  concealed  with  the 
remainder  in^  a  place  convenient  for  an  ambush ;  in  order 
that  if  any  attack,<shoiild  be  made  from  the  fort  at  Eleusis 
on  bis  men  employed  in  plundering,  he  might  suddenly  fall 
upon  the  enemy  unawares,  and  while  they  were  in  disorder. 
His  stratagem  did  not  escape  discovery:  wherefore,  calling 
back  the  soldiers,  who  had  gone  different  ways  in  pursuit  of 
VOL.  IV. — K  K 

250 

HISTCmY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  552. 
booty,  and  drawing  thetn  up  in  order,  he  advanced  to  assault 
the  fort  at  *Eleus1s^  but  being  repulsed  from  thence  with 
many  rounds,  He  joined  Philip,  on  his  return  from  Aehaia, 
who  was  also  induced  to  a  similar  attempt:  but  the  Roman 
ships  coming  from  Piraeekis,'aad  a  body  of  forces  beipg  thrown 
into  the  fort,  he  was  compiled  to  relinquish  the  design.  On 
this  the  King,  dividing  his  army,  s<ent  Philocles^with  one  part 
to  Athens,  and  went  himself  with  the  dther  to  Pirseeus ;  that, 
while  his  general,  by  advaincing  tathe  wails 'add  threatening 
An  assault,  should  keep  the"  Athenians  within  the  city,  he 
might  be  able  to  make  himself  master  of  ^he  Harbour,  which 
he  supposed  would  be  left  with  only  a  slight  garrison.  But  he 
found  the  attack  of  Pirseeus  no  less  difficult  than  that  of 
Eleusis,  the  same  persons  acting  in  its  defence.  He  there¬ 
fore  hastily  led  his  troops  to  Athens,  and  being  repufed  by 
a  sudden  sally  of  both  foot  and  horse,  who  engaged  him  in 
the  narrow  ground,  inclosed  by  the  half-ruined  wall,  wHich, 
with  two  arms,  joins  Piraeeus  to  Athens,  he » laid  aside  the 
scheme  of  attacking  the  city,  and,  dividing  his  forces  again 
with  Philocles,  set  but  to  complete  the  devastation  df  the 
country.  As,  in  His  former  ravages,  he  had  employed  him¬ 
self  in  levelling  the  sepulchres  round  the  city,  so  now,  not  to 
leave  any  thing  unviolated,  he  ordered  the  temples  of  the 
gods,  of  which  they  had  one  consecrated  in  every  village,  to 
be  demolished  and  burned.  The  country  of  Attica  afforded 
ample  matter  for  the  exercise  of  this  barbarous  rage  :  for  it 
was  highly  embellished  with, works  of  that  kind,  having  plen¬ 
ty  of  marble,  and  abounding  with  artists  of  exquisite  inge¬ 
nuity.  Nor  was  he  satisfied  with  merely  destroying  the 
temples  themselves^  and  overthrowirfg  the  images,  but  he  or¬ 
dered  even  the  stones  to  be  broken,  lest,  remaining  whble, 
they  should  give  a  degree  of  grandeur  to  the  ruins ;  and  then, 
his  rage  not  being  satiated,  but  no  object  remaining  on  which 

%OOJL  XXXI. 

251 

B.C.  200,] 
it  could  be  .  ejafrcised,  he  retired  from  Beotia,  without  hav¬ 
ing  performed  ia  Greece  any  thing ^Ise  #orth  mention. 
XXVII.  The  consul,  Sulpieius,  who  was  at  that  time  en¬ 
camped  on  the  river  Apsus,  between  ApoUosia  and  Dyrfa- 
chium,  having  ordered  Lucius  Apustius,  lieutenant-general, 
thither,  sent  him  with  part  of  the  forces  |o  lay  waste  the 
enemy’s  country.  Apustius,  after  ravaging  the  frontiers  of 
Macedonis^  an.d  having,  at  the  first  assault,  taken  tlie  forts 
of  Corragos,  Gerrunios,-ahd- OrgesSoSy^came  to  Antipatria, 
a  city  situated  in  a  narrow  vale ;  wbere^  at  first  inviting  the 
leading  men  to  a  conference,  he  endeavoured  to  prevail  on 
them  to  put  themselves  under  theprotection  of  the  Romans; 
but  finding  that  from  confidence  in  the 'size,  fortifications  and 
situation  of  their  city,  they  paid  no  regard  to  his  discourse, 
be  attacked  the  p^ce  by  force  of  arms,  and  took  it  by  ^assault; 
then,  putting  all  the,  yomjg  men  to  the  sword,  and  giving  up 
the  entire  spoil  to  .his^soldiers,  he  razed  the  walls,  and  burned 
the  famldings.  Th^  proceeding  spread  such  terror,  that 
Cojdripn,  a  sU'ong  mid  well-fortified  town,  surrendered  to 
the  Romans  widibpt  a  struggle.  Leaving  a  garrison  there, 
be  took  lUon  by  force,  n  name  better  known  than  the  town, 
on  account  of  that  of  the  s^me  denomination  in  Asia.  As 
the  lieutenant-general  was  returning  to  the  consid  with  a 
great  quantity  of  spoil,  Athenagoras,  one  of  the  King’s  gene¬ 
rals,  falling  on  his  rear,  its  passage  over  a  river,  threw  it 
into  disorder*  On  ^hearing  the  shouting  and  tumult,  Apus- 
tius  rode  back  in  fuU  speed,  ordered  the  troops  to  face  about, 
^nd  drew  them  up  in  order,  with  the  baggage  in  the.  centre. 
The  King’s  troops  could  not  support  the  onset  of  the  Roman 
soldiers :  so  that  many  of  them  were  slain,  and  more  made 
prisoners.  The  fieutenant-general  having  brought  back  the 
ariny  without  loss,  to  the  consul^  was  ordered  to  returnjm- 
mediately  to  the  fleet. 

252 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  552, 

XXVIII.  The  war  commencing  thus  brilUatuly  with  this 
successful  expedition,  several  petty  kings  and  princes,  whose 
dominions  bordered  on  Macedonia,  came  to  the  Roman 
campt  Pleuratus,  sdn  of  Scerdilaedus,  and  Amynander,  King 
of  the  Athamanians  ;  and  from  the  Oardanians,  Bato,  son  of 
Longarus.  This  Lon garua had,  in  his  own' quarrel,  supported 
a  war  against  Demetrius,  father  of  Philip.  To  their  offers  of  aid, 
the  consul  answered^  that  he  would  make  use  of  the  assistance 
of  the  Dardanians,  and  of  Pleuratu^,  when  he  should  lead 
his  troope  into  Macedonia.  To  Amynander  he  aflotted  the 
part  of  exciting  ,the  iEtolians  to  war.  To  the «  ambassadors 
of  Attalus,  (for  they  also  had. come  at  the  same  time,)  he 
gave  directions  that  the  King  should  wait  at  ifEgina,  where 
he  wintered,  for  the  arrival  of  the  Roman  fleet ;  and  when 
joined  ^)y  that,  he  should,  as  before,  harass  Philip  by  such 
enterprises  as  he  could  undertake  by  sea.  To  the  Rhodians, 
also,  an  embassy  was .  sent,  to  engage  them  to  contribute 
their  share  towards  carrying  on  the  war.  Nor  was  Philip, 
who  had  by  this  lime  arrived  in  Macedonia,  remiss  in  his 
preparations  for  the  campaign.  He  sent  his  son  Perseus, 
then  very  young,  with  part  of  his  forces  to  block  up  the  pass 
near  Pelagpnia ;  appointing  persons  Out  of  the  number  of  his 
friends  to  attend  him,  and  direct  his  unexperienced  age, 
Sciathus  and  Peparethus,  no  inconsiderable  cities,  he  de¬ 
molished,  fearing  they  might  fall  a  prey  to  the  enemy’s  fleet ; 
despatching  at  the  same  time  ambassadors  to  the  iEtolians, 
lest  that  restless  nation  might  change  sides  6n  the  arrival  of 
the  Romans.  , 
.XXIX.  Yhe  assembly  of  the  iEtolians,  which  they  call 
Pansetolium,  was  to  meet  on  a  certain  day.  In  order  to  be 
present  at  this,  the  King’s  ambassadors  hastened  their  jour¬ 
ney,  and  Lucius  Furius  Purpureo  also  arrived,  being  sent  in 
like  capacity  by  the  consul.  Ambassadors  from  Athens, 
likewise,  came  to  this  ^sembly.  The  Macedonians  were 

BOOK  XXXI. 

253 

B.C.  200.] 
first  heard,  as  with  them  the  latest  treaty  had  been  made ; 
and  they  declared,  that  ‘Vas  no  change  of  circumstances  had 
occurred,  they  had  nothing  new  to  introduce  ;  for  the  same 
reasons  which  had  induced  the  iEtplians  to  make  peace  with 
Philip,  after  experiencing  the  unprofitableness  of  an  alliance 
with  the  Romans,  should  engage  them  to  deserve  it,  now 
that  it  was  established.  Do  you  rather  choose,”  said  one  of 
the  ambassadors,  fo  imHate  the  inconsistency,  or  levity, 
shall  I  call  it,  ot  the  Romans,  who  ordered  this  answer  to  be 
given  to  your  ambassadors  at  Rome:  ‘Why,  iEtolians,  do 
you  apply  to  us,  when  without  our  approbation  ’  you  have 
made  peace  with  Philip  V  Yet  these  same  people  now  re¬ 
quire,  that  you  should,  in  coUjunction  with  them,  wage  war 
against  Philip.  Formerly,  too,‘ it  was  pretended  that  they 
took  arms  bn  your  account',  and  in  ypur  defence  against  Phi¬ 
lip  :  now  they  do "  not  allow  you  to  continue  at  peace  with 
him.  To  assist  Messana,  they  first  embarked  for  Sicily;  and 
a  second  time,  to  vindicate  the  liberty  of  Syracuse,  oppressed 
by  the  Carthaginians.  Both  Mess^a  and  Syracuse,  and  all 
Sicily;  ihey  hold  in  their  own  possession,  and  have  reduced 
it  into  a  tributary  province  under  their  axes  and  rods.  You 
imagine,  perhaps,  that  in  the  same  manner  as  you  hold  an 
assembly  at  Naupactus,  according  to  ydiir  own  laws,  under 
magistrates  of  your  own  appointment,  at  liberty  to  choose 
allies  and  enemies,  and  to  have  peace  or  war  at  your  own 
option,  so  the  assembly  of  the  states  of  Sicily  is  summoned 
to  Syracuse,  or  ^Messana,  or  Lilybaeum.  No,  a  Roman  prae¬ 
tor  presides  at  the  meeting  ;  at  his  command  they  assemble ; 
they  behdid  him,  attended  by  his  lictors,  seated  on  lofty 
throne,  issuing  his  haughty  edicts.  His  rpds  are  ready  for 
their  backs,  his  axes  for  their  necks,  and  every  ye%T  they  are 
allotted  a  different  master.  Neither  ought  they,  nor  ban  they, 
wonder  at  this,  when  they  see  ^11  the  cities  of  Italy^  bending 
under  the  same  yoke,-*— RhcgiUm,  Tarcntum,  Capua,  not  to 

254 

HISTORY  aF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  552. 

mention  those  in  their  own  neighbourhood,  out  of  the  mins 
of  which  their  city  of  Rome  ^rew  into  power.  Capua  in¬ 
deed  subsists,  the  grave  anil  monument  of  the  Campanian 
people,  who  were  either  cut  off,  or  driven  into  banishment ; 
thb  mutilated  carcase  of  a  city,  without  senate,  without  com¬ 
mons,  widiout  magistrates  j  a  sort  of  prodigy,  the  leaving 
which  to  be  Inhabited  ki  this,  milnner,  ^showed  more  cruelty 
than  if  it  had  been  razed  to  the  ground.  If  foreigners,  who 
are  separated  from  ua  to  a  greater  distance. by  tbeir  language, 
manners,  and  laws^  than  by  the  length  of  se^  and  land,  are 
allowed  to  get  footing  here,  it  is  idadness  to  hope  that  any 
thing  will  continue  in  its  present,  state*  Does  yout  liberty 
appear  to  be  in  any  degtee  qf  dangtjr  from  the  ^government 
of  Philip,  who,  at  a  time  when  he  was  justly  incensed,  de¬ 
manded  nothing  mbre  of  you  than  peace  ;  and  at  present  re¬ 
quires  no  more  than  the  o^^ervance  of  the  peace  which  ye 
agreed  to?  Accustom  foreign  iegioes  to  these  countries,  and 
receive  the  yoke  ;  too  late  and  in  vain,  will  yoalook  for  an 
alliance  with  Philip,  when  you  will  have  become  a  property 
of  the  Romans.  Trifling  causes  occasionally  unite  add  dis¬ 
unite  the  iEtolians,  Acamanians,  and  Macedonians,  men 
speaking  the  same  language.  With  foreigners,  with  baiha- 
rians,  all  Greeks  have,  and  ever  will  have,  eternal  war ;  be¬ 
cause  they  are  enemies  by  nature^  which  is  always  the  same, 
and  not  from  causes  which  change  with  the  times,  I  con¬ 
clude  my  discourse  with  the  same  argument  with  which  I 
began.  Three  years,  since,  the  same  persons,  assembled  in 
this  same  place,  determined  on  peace  with  the  same  Philip, 
contrary  to  the  inclinarions  of  the  same  Romans,  who  now 
wish  that  the  peace  should  be  broken,  after  it  has  been  ad¬ 
justed  and  ratified.  In  the  subject  of  your  deliberation, 
fortune  has  made  no  change ;  why  you  should  mako  any,  I 
do  not  see.” 

BOOK  XXXL 

255 

B.C.  200.] 
XXX.. Next,  after  the  Macedonians,  with  the  consent  and 
at  the  desire  of  the  Romans,  the  Athenians  were  introduced  ; 
who,  having  suffered  grievously,  could,  with  the  greater  jus¬ 
tice,  inveigh  agaiifst  the  cruelty  and  inhumanity  of  the  King. 
They  represented,  in  a  deplot£d>le  light,  the  miserable  devas¬ 
tation  and  ruin  of  their  country  ;  adding,  that,  “  they  did  not 
complain  on  account  of  having,  from  an  enemy,  suffered  hos¬ 
tile  treatment ;  for  there  were  certain  rights  of  war,  according 
to  which,  as  it  was  just  to  act,  so  it  Was  just  to  endue.  Their 
crops  being  bth^ied,  their  houses  demolished,  their  men  and 
cattle  carried  off  as  spoils  were  to  be  considered,  rather  as 
misfoitunes  to  the  sufferer,  than  as  ill-treatment.  But  of  this 
they  had  good  reason  to  compla^,  diat  he  who  called  the 
Rom^s  foreigners  and  barbarians,  had  so  atrociously  vio¬ 
lated,  himself,  aU  rights  both  divine  and  human,  as, -'in  his 
former  inrbad,  to  have  waged  an  impious  war  against  the  in¬ 
fernal  gods,  in  the  latter  against  those  above.  That  every 
sepulchre  and  monument  within  their  Country  was  demolish¬ 
ed,  the  graves  tom  open,  and  the  bones  left  uncovered.  There 
had  been  several  temples,  which  in  former  times,  when  their 
ancestors  dwelt  in  the  country  in  their  separate  districts,  had 
been  consecrated  in  each  of  their  little  forts  and  villages, ^and 
which,  even  after  they  were  incorporated  into  one  city,  they 
did  not  neglect  or  forsake.  Every  one  of  these  sacred  edi¬ 
fices  had  Philip  destroyed  by  fire,  and  deft  the  images  of  the 
gods  lying  scorched  and  mutilated  among  the  prostrated  pil¬ 
lars  of  the  temples;  Such  as  he.  had  rendered,  the  country  of 
Attica,  formerly  opulent,  and  adorned  with  improvements, 
such,  if  he  were  suffered,  would  he  render  ^Etolia  and  every 
part  of  Greece.  That  Athens,  also,  Would  have  been  reduc¬ 
ed  to  the  same  ruinous  state,  if  the  Romans  had  not  come  to 
its  relief ;  for  he  had  shewn  the  same  wicked  rage  against  the 
gods,  Who  are  the  guardians, of  the  city,  and  Minerva  who 
presides  over  the  citadel ;  the  same  against  the  temple  of 

256 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  552. 

Ceres  at  Eleusis  ;  the  same  against  Jupiter  and  Minerva  at 
Piraeeus-  In,  a  word,  having  been  repelled  by  force  of  arms, 
not  only  from  their  temples,  but  even  from  their  walls,  he  had 
vented  his  fury  on  those  sacred  edifices,  which  had  no  defence 
but  in  the  respect  due  to  religion.  They  therefore  entreated 
and  besought  tbe  iEtolians,  that,  compassionating  the  Athe¬ 
nians,  and  following  the  guidance  of  the  goda,  and,  under 
them,  of  the  Romans,  who,  n^xt  to  the  gods,  possessed  the 
greatest  power,  they  would  ta|ce  part  in  the  war.” 
XXXI.  The  Roman  ambassador  *  then  addressed  them  to 
this  purport :  The  Macedonians,  first,  and,  afterwards,  the 
Athenians,  have  obliged  me  .tp  change  entirely  the  method  of 
my  discourse.  For,  oa  tbe  one  hand,  the  Macedonians,  by 
introducing  charges  against  the  Romans,  when  I  had  come 
prepared  to  make  complaint  of  the  injuries  committed  by 
Philip  against  so  many  cities  in  alliance  with  us,  have  obliged 
me  to  think  of  defence  rather  than  accusations  and,  on  the 
other  hand,  after  the  relation  given  by  the  Athenians,  of  his 
inhuman  and  impious  crimes  against  gods  both  celestial 
and  infernal,  what  room  is  there  left  for  me,  or  any  other,  to 
make  any  addition  to  the  charge  ?  You  are  to  suppose, 
that  the  same  complaitits  are  made  by  the  Cianians,  Abyde- 
nians,  iEneans,  Maronites,  Thasians,  Parians,  Samians,  La- 
rissenlans,  Messenian%  on  the  side  of  Achaia ;  and  com¬ 
plaints,  still  heavier  and  more  grievous,  by  tho^se  whom  he 
had  it  more  in  his  power  to  injure.  For  as  to  .thos^  proceed¬ 
ings  which  he  censures  in  u^,  if  they  are  not  found  highly 
meritorious,  let  them  not  be  defended.  He  has  objected  to 
us,  Rhegium,  and  Capua,  and  Syracuse.  As  to  Rhegium, 
during  the  war  with  J^rrhus,  a  legion  Which,  at  the  earnest 
request  of  the  Rhegians  themselves,  we  had  sent  thither  as  a 
garrison,  wickedly  possessed  themselves  of  the  city  which 
they  had  been  sent  to  defend.  Did  we  then  approve  of  that 
deed  ?  or  did  we  exert  the  force  of  our  anns  against  that 

BOOK  XXXL 

257 

B.C.  200.] 
guilty  kgion,  until  we  reduced  them  under  our  power ;  and 
then,  after  making  them  give  satisfaction  to  the  allies,  their 
stripes^  and  the  loss  of  their  heads,  restore  to  the  Rhegians 
their  city,  their  lands^  and  all  their  effect^  together  witti  their 
liber^  and  laws  ?  To  the  Syracusans,  when*oppressed  (and, 
to  add  to  t^ie  indignity,  by  foreign  tyrants),  we  lent  assistance ; 
nnd  after  enduring  great  fatigues  in  carrying  on  the  siege  of 
so  strong  a  city,  both  by  land  and  sea,  for  almost  three  years, 
(although  the  Syracusans,  themselves  chose  to  continue  in 
slavciy  to  the  tyrants,  rather  than  to  trust  to  us,)  yet,  becom¬ 
ing  masters  0;f  tjie  j^ce,  aind  by  exertion  of  the  same  force 
setting  it  at  liberty,  >e  restored  it  to  tim  inhabitants.  At 
the  same  time,  we  do  not  deny  that  Sicily  is  our  province, 
and  that  the  states  which  sided  with  the  Carthaginians,  and, 
in  t:onj  unction  with  them,  waged  war  against  us,  pay  us  tri¬ 
bute  and  tax;es*;  on  the  contrsu-y*  we  wiah  that  you  and  dOi 
nations  should  know,  that  the  condition  of  each  is  such  as  it 
has  deserved  at  our  hands :  and  ought  we  to  repent  of  the 
punishment  inflicted  on  the  Campanians,  of  which  even  they 
themselves  cannot  complain  ?  These  men,  after  we  had 
ftieir  account ,  carried  pn  war  against  the  Samnites  for  nes^ 
seventy  years,  with  great  losses  on  oucside  ;  had  united  them 
to  ouraelves,  first  by  treaty.,  and  then.hy  intermarriages,  and 
the  consequent  affinities  j  and  .lastly^,  by  admitting  them  to  a 
participation  of  the  rights  of  our  state,  yet  in  the  time  of  our 
adversity,  were  the  first  of  all  the  states  of  Italy  which  re¬ 
volted  to  Hannibal,  ^er  basely^puttihg  our  garrison  to  death, 
and  afterwards,. through  resentment  at  being  besieged  by  us, 
sent  Hannibal  to  attack  Rome.  If  neither  their. city  nor  one 
man  of  them  had  been  left  remaining,  who  could  take  offence, 
or  consider  them  as  treated  with  more  severity  than  ;hcy  bad 
deserved  ?  From  consciousness  of  guilt,  greater  numbers  of 
them  perished  by  their  own  hands,  than  by  the  punishments 
inflicted  by  us.  And  while  from  the  rest  we  took  away  the 
VOL.  IV. — L  L 

258 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y*R.  552. 
town  and  the  lands,  still  We  left  them  a  place  to  dwell  in,  we 
suffered  the  city  which  partook  not  of  the  ^ik  to  stand  un* 
injured  ;  so  that  there  is  not  visible  this  day,  any  trace  of  its 
having  been  besieged  ot  taken*'  But  why  do  I  speak  of  Capua, 
when  even  to  vanquished  Carthage  we  granted  peace  and 
liberty.  The  greatest  danger  is,  that  by  our  too  great  readi¬ 
ness  to  pardon  such,  we  rhay  encourage  others  to  try  the  f6r- 
tune  of  war  against  us.  Let^o  much  suffice  m''our  defence, 
and  against  Philip,  whose  dotnestic  crimes,  whose  parricides 
and  murders  of  his  reiatiofts '  and  friends,  and  whose  lust, 
more  disgraceful  to  hunaan  nature,  if  possible;  than  his  cruelty, 
you,  as  being  nearer  to  Macedonia,  are  better  acquainted  with. 
As  to  what  concerns  you,  ^Etdlians,  .we  entered  into  a  war 
with  Philip  on  your  account :  you  made  peace  with  him 
without  consulting  us.  ^  Perhaps  you  will  say,  that  while  we 
were  occupied  in  the  Punic  war,  j’^ou  wfere  constrained  by 
fear  to  accept  terms  of  pacification,  from  him  who  possessed 
superior  power  ;  and  that  on  out  side,  pressed  by  more  ur¬ 
gent  affairs,  we  suspended  our  operations  ifi  a  war  which  you 
had  laid  aside.  At  present,  as  we,  having,  by  the  favour  of 
the  gods,  brought  the  Punic' war  to  a  conclusion,  have  fallen 
on  Macedonia  with  the  whole  weight  of  our  power,  so  you 
have  an  opportunity  offered  you. of  regaining  a  place  .in  our 
friendship  and  alliance,  unless  you  choose  to  perish  with 
Philip,  rather  than  to  conquer  with  the  Romans.^’ 
XXXlI.  After  this  discourse  of  the  ambassador,,  the  incli¬ 
nations  of  all  leaning  towards  the  Romany  Damocritus,  pree- 
tor  of  the  iEtolians,  (who,  if  was  reported,  had  received  mo¬ 
ney  from  the  King,)^  without  seeming  to  favour  either  payf}", 
said,— that,  ‘‘  in  consultations  wherein  the  public  safety  was 
deeply  interested,  nothing  was  so  injurious  as  haste.  That 
repentance,  indeed,  generally  followed,  and  that  quicklj%  but 
yet  too  late  and  unavailing  ;  because  designs  carried  on  with 
precipitation  could  not  be  recalled,  nor  matters  brought  back 

B.C.200.] 

BOOK  XXXI. 

259 

to  their  origiiml  State.  The  time,  however,  for  determining 
the  point  under  consideration,  which,  fpr  his  part,  he  thought 
should  not  be  too  cafly^  might  yet  immediately  be  fixed  in 
this  manner.  As  it  had  been  provided  by  the  laws,  that  no 
determination  should  be  made  conc^ning  peace  or  war,  ex¬ 
cept  in  the  Panaetolic  or  Pykic  councils, ;  let  them  immediate¬ 
ly  pass  a  decree^  that  the  prsetor,  when  he  chooses  to  treat  of 
either,  may  have  full  authority  to  ^summon  a  council ;  and 
that  whatever  %haif  be  then  debated  and  decreed,  shall  be,  to 
all  intents  and  purpose^,  legsd  and  valid,  as  if  it  had  been 
transacted  in  th^^  Panse^oKc  or^Pylaic  assembly.”  And  thus 
dismissing  the  ambassadors,  without  coming  to  any  resolu¬ 
tion,  he  said,' that  therein^he  acted  most  prudently  for  the  in¬ 
terest  of  the  state  ;  for  the  ^toKans  would  have  it  in  their 
power  to  join- in  alliance' with  whichever  of  the  parties  should 
be  more  successful  in.  the  war^  Nothing  further  was  done  in 
the.  assembly.  ^ 
XXXIIl.  ^Meanwhile  Philip -was  making  vigorous  pre¬ 
parations  for  carrying  on  the  war  both  by  sea  and  land.  His 
naval  farces  he  drew  together,  at  Demetrias  in  Thessaly  ; 
supposing  that  Attains,  and  the  Roman  fleet,  would  move 
fromiEgkia  in  the  beginning  of  the  spring.  He  gave  the 
command  of  the  fleet  and  of  the  sca-coast  to  Heraclides,  to 
whom  he  had  formerly  intrusted  iti-  The  equipment  of  the 
land  forces  he  took  care  of  in  person  j  and  thought  that  he 
had  deprived  the  Romans  of  two  powerful  auxiliaries,  the 
iStolians  on  the  one  side,  and  the  Dardanians  on  the  other,  by 
making  his  son  Perseus  block  up  the  p^s  at  Pelagonia.  The 
consul  was^  employed,  not  in  preparations,  but  in  the  opera¬ 
tions  of  warr  .  He  led'  his  army  through  the  country  of  the 
Dassaredans,  leaving  the  corn  untouched,  which  he  had 
brought  from  his  winter  quarters,  for  the  fields  afforded  sup¬ 
plies  sufficient  for  the  consumption  of  the  troops.  The  towns 
and  villages  surrendered  to  him,  some  through  inclination, 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

others  through  fear ;  scnne  were  taken  by  assault,  others  were 
found  desjsrted,  the  barbarisms  flying  to  the  neighbouring 
nmtmtains.  He  fixed  a  standing  eamp  at  Lycus  n^r  the  river 
Beous,  from  thence  sent  to  bring  in  com  frpm  the  maga¬ 
zines  of  the  Oassaretians.  Philip  saw  the  whole  comitry  filled 
with  consternation,  and  not  kndwing  the  designs  of  the  con¬ 
sul,  he  sent  a  patty  of  horse  to  discover  his  route.  Sulpicius 
was  in  the  same  state  of  uncertainty  ;  he  Imew  that  the  King 
had  moved  from  his  winter  quarters,  but  in  trhsu  directitm 
he  had  proceeded,  he  knew  not:  he.  also  had  serrt horsetnoo 
to  gain  intelligence.  These  .two  parties  having  set  out  from 
opposite  quarters,  after  wandering  a  long  time  among  the 
Oassaretians,  through  unknown  roads,  fell  at  length  into  the 
same  road.  Neither  doubted^  as  soon  as  the  noise  of  men 
and  horses  was  heard  at  a  dtstance^  that  an  enemy  approach¬ 
ed  :  therefore,  before  they  came  within  sight  of  each  other, 
they  got  thiir  arms  in  readiness,,  and  the  montent  they  met, 
both  hastened  eagerly  to  engage.  As  they  happened  to  be 
nearly  equal  in  number  and  valour,  beii^  picked  men  on  both 
sides,  they  fought  during  several  hours  with  vigour,  until 
fatigue,  both  of  men  and  horses,  put -an  end  to  the  fight,  with¬ 
out  deciding  the  victory.  .  Of  the  Macedonians,  there  fell 
forty  horsemen  j  of  the  Romans,  thirty-five.  Still,  however, 
neither  party  was  able  to  carry  back  any  certain  information 
in  what  quarter  the  camp  of  his  enemy  lay^  But  this  was 
socm  made  known  to  them  by  deserters ;  of  whom,  either 
through  restlessness,  or.  the  prospect  of  reward,  a  sufficient 
number  are  found,  in  every  war,  to  discover  the  affairs  of  the 
contending  parties. 
XXXIV,  Philip,  judging  that  it  would  tend  considerably  to¬ 
wards  conciliating  the  affections  of  his  men,  and  induce  them 
to  face  danger  more  readily  on  his  account,  if  he  bestowed 
some  pains  on  the  burial  of  the  horsemen,  who  fell  in  that 
expedition,  ordered  them  to  be  conveyed  into  the  camp,  in 

BOOK  XXXI. 

261 

order  that  aU  OHgbt  bh  sp^:tator6  of  ^  homnirs  paUl  them 
at  their  funeral.  Notiiing  is  so  uncertain^  or  so  difficult  to 
form  a  judgment  of^  as  the  minds  of  the  multitude.  Hie 
very  measures  which  seem  calculated  to  mcrease  dieir  alac* 
rity,  in  exertions  of  every  sort,  often  inspire  them  with  fear 
and  timidity.  Accordingly  those,  who,,  being  always  accus* 
tomed  to  fight  With  Greeks  and  lUynans^had  cmly  seen  wounds 
made  with  javelins  smd  arrows,  seldom  even  by  lances,  came 
to  behold  bodies  di^embered  by  the  Spanish  sword,  some 
with  their  arms  lopped  off,  or,  the  neck  entirely  cut  through, 
heads  severed  from  the  trunk,  and  the  bowels  laid  open,  with 
other  shocking  circumstmlces  which  die  present  warfare  had 
wrought :  they  therefore  perceived,  with  hoiror,  against  what 
we^pcms  and  what  men  they  were  to  fight.  Even  the  King 
himself  was  seized  with  apprehensions,  having  never  yet  en¬ 
gaged  tile  Romaic  in  a  regular  battle.  Wherefore,  recalling 
his  son,  aaid  the  guard  posted  at  the  pass  of  Pelagonia,  in 
order  to  strengthen  his  army  by  the  addition  of  those  troops, 
he  thereby  opened  a  passage  into  Macedonia  for  Pleuratus 
and  the  Dardanians.  Then,  taking,  deserters  for  guides^  he 
marched  towards  the  enemy  with  twenty  thousand  foot  and 
four  thousand  horse,  and,  at  tiie  distsuice  of  somewhat  tnoTe 
than  two  hundred  paces  from  the  Romsui  camp,  and  near 
Ithacus,  he  fortified  a  hill  with  a  trench  and  rampart.  From 
this  place,  taking  a  view  of  the  Roman  station,  in  the  valley 
heneatii,  he  is  said  to  have  been  struck  with  admiration,  both 
at  tim  general  appearance  of  tiie  camp,  and  the  regular  dispo¬ 
sition  of  each  particular  part,  distinguished  by  the  order  of 
the  tents,  and  the  intervals  of  the  passages,  and  to  have  de¬ 
clared,  tiiat,  certainly,  that  was  not  a  camp  of  barbarians. 
For  two  days,  the  consul  and  the  King,  each  waiting  for  the 
odicr*s  making  some  attempt,  kept  their  troops  within  the 
ramparts.  On  the  third  day,  the  Roman  led  out  all  his  forces, 
and  offered  battle. 

262 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.552. 
XXXV.  But  Xingj  not  daring  to’risk  so  hastily  a  gene¬ 
ral  engagement,  sent  four  hundred  Trallians,  who  are  a  tribe 
of  the  Illyrians,  as  we  have  said  in  another  place,  and  three 
hundred  Cretans  ;  adding  to  this  body  of  infantry  ah  equal 
number  of  horse,  under  the  command  of  Athenagoras,  one 
of  his  nobles  honoured  with  the  purple,  to  make  an  attack  on 
the  enemy’s  cavalry.  When  these,  troops  arrived  within  a 
little  more  than  five  hundred  paces,  the  Romans  sent  out  the 
light-infantry.,  and  two  cohorts  of  horse,  that  both  cavalry 
and  infantry  might  be  equal  in  number  to  the  Macedonians. 
The  King’s  troops  expected  that  the  method  of  fighting  would 
be  such  as  they  had  been  accustomed  to ;  that  the  horsemen, 
pursuing  and  retreating  alternately,  would  at  one  time  use 
their  weapons,  at  another  turn  their  backs  ;  that  the  agility 
of  the  Illyrians  would  be  serviceable  for  excursions  and  sud¬ 
den  attacks,  and  the  Cretans  might  discharge  their  arrows  as 
they  advanced  eagerly  to  the  charge.  But  this  plan  of  fight¬ 
ing  was  entirely  disconcerted  by  the  manner  in  which  the  Ro¬ 
mans  made  their  onset,  which  was  not  more  brisk  than  it  was 
obstinate  :  for  the  light-infantry,  as  if  in  a  general  line  of  bat¬ 
tle,  after  discharging  their  javelins,  carried  on  a  close  fight 
with  their  swords  ;  and  the  horsemen,  when  they  had  once 
made  a  charge,  stopping  their  horsed,  fought,  some  on  horse¬ 
back,  while  others  dismounted  and  intermixed  themselves 
with  the  foot.  By  this  means  neither  were  the  King’s  caval¬ 
ry,  who  were  unaccustomed  to  a  steady  fight,  a  match  for  the 
others  ; .  nor  were  the  infantry,  who  were  unacquainted  with 
any  other  mode  of  fighting  but  that  of  skirmishing  and  irregu¬ 
lar  attacks,  and  were  besides  but  half  covered  with  the  kind 
of  harness  which  they  used,  at  aU  equal  to  Ae  Roman  in¬ 
fantry,  who  carried  a  sword  and  buckler,  and  were  furnished 
with  proper  armour,  both  to  defend  themselves,  and  to  annoy 
the  enemy :  nor  did  they  sustain  the  combat,  but  fled  to  their 
camp,  trusting  entirely  to  their  speed  for  safety. 

B.C.200.] 

BOOK  XXXI. 

263 

XXXVI.  After  an  interval  of  one  day,  the  King,  resolving 
to  make  an  attack  with  all  his  cavalry  and  light-  armed  infan- 
tr)^,  had,  during  the  night,  placed  in  atnbush,  in  a  convenient 
place  between  the  two  camps,  a  body  of  targetcers,  whom 
they  call  Peitastse,  and  given  orders,  to  Athenagoras  and  the 
cavalry,  if  they  found  they  had  the  advantage  in  the  open 
fight,  to  pursue  success  ;  if  not,  that  they  should  retreat  lei¬ 
surely,  and  by  that  means  draw  on  the  enemy  to  the  place 
where  the  ambush  lay.  The  cavalry  accordingly  did  retreat ; 
but  the  officers  of  the  body  of  t^rgeteers,  by  bringing  forward 
their  mfeh  before  the' time,  and  not  waiting  for  the  signal,  as 
they  ought,  lost  an  opportunity  of  performing  considerable 
service.:  The  Romahs*,  having- gained  the  victory  in  open 
fight,'  and'also  escaped  the  danger  of  the  ambuscade,  retired 
to'their  camp.  Next  day  the  consul  marched  out  with  ail  his 
forces,  and  offered  battle,  placing  his  elephants  (which  had 
been  taken  in  the  Punic  war)  in  the  front  of  the  foremost  bat¬ 
talions,  and  which  was  the  first  time  that  the. Romans  made 
ifse  of  those  creatures  in  the  field.  Tinding  that  the  King 
kept  himself  quiet  behind  his  entrenchments,  he  advanced 
close  up  to  them,  upbraiding  him  with  cowardice  ;  and  as, 
notwithstanding,  he  still  declined  an  engagement,  the  consul, 
considering  how  dangerous  foraging  must  be  while  the  camps 
lay  so  near  eacfo  other,  where  the  soldiers,  dispersed  through 
the  country,  were  liable  to  be  suddenly  'attacked  by  the  horse, 
removed  his  camp  to*  a  place  polled  Octolophus,  distant  about 
eight  miles,  where  he  could  forage  with  more  safety.  While 
the  Romans  were  collecting  corn  in  the  adjacent  fields, ♦the 
King  kept  his  men  within  the  trenches,  in  order  to  increase 
both  the  negligence  and  confidence  of  the  enemy-  But,  when 
he  saw  them  scattered,  he  set  out  with  all  his  cavalry,  and 
the  auxiliary^  Cretans,  and  marching  with  such  speed  that  the 
swiftest  footmen  could,  by  running,  but  just  keep  up  with  the 
horse,  he  took  post  between  the  camp  of  the  Romans  and  their 

2§4 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  552. 

foragers.  Then^  dividing  the  forces,  he  sent  one  part  of  them 
in  quest  of  tJie  marauders,  with  orders  to  give  no  quarter ; 
wilii  the  other,  he  himself  halted,  and  placed  guards  on  the 
roads  through  which  he  supposed  the  enemy  would  fly  back 
to  their  camp.  The  slaughter  and  flight  of  the  provisioning 
party  had  continued  for  some  time  on  all  sides,  and  no  intelli¬ 
gence  of  the  misfortune  had  yet  reached  the  Roman  camp, 
because  those  who  fled  towards  the  camp,  fell  in  with  the 
guards,  which  the  King  had  stationed  to  intercept  them,  and 
greater  numbers  were  slain  by  those  who.  were  placed  in  the 
roads,  than  by  those  who  had  been  sent  out  to  attack  them. 
At  length,  a  few  effected  their  escape,  through  the  midst  of 
the  enemy’s  posts,  but  were  so  filled  with  terror,  that  they 
excited  a  general  consternation  in  the  camp,  without  being 
able  to  give  any  certain  account  of  what  was  going  on. 
XXXVII.  The  consul,  ordering  the  cavalry  to  csirry  aid  to 
those  who  were  in  danger,  in  the  best  manner  they  could, 
drew  out  t^ie  legions  from,  the  camp,  and  led  them  in  order  of 
battle  towards  the  enemy.  The  cavalry,  taking  different  ways 
through  the  fields,  missed  the  road,  being  deceived  by  the 
various  shouts  raised  in*  several  quarters.  Some  of  them  met 
with  the  enemy,  and  battles  began  in  many  placjes  at  once. 
The  hottest  part  of  the  action  was  at  the  station  where  the 
King  commanded  ;  for  the  guard  there  was,  in  numbers 
both  of  horse  and  foot,  almost  a  complete  army  ;  and,  as  they 
were  posted  on  the  middle  road,  the  greatest  number  of  the 
Romans  fell  in  with  them.  The  Macedonians  had  also  the 
advantage  in  this,  that  the  King  himself  was  present  to  en¬ 
courage  them  ;  and  the  Cretan  auxiliaries,  fighting  in  good 
order,  and  in  a  state  of  preparation,  against  troops  disordered 
and  irregular,  wounded  many  at  a  distance,  where  no  such 
danger  was  apprehended.  If  they  had  acted  with  prudence 
in  the  pursuit,  they  would  have  secured  an  advantage  of  great 
importance,  not  only  in  regard  to  the  glory  of  the  present 

BOOK  XXXI, 

205 

B.C.  200.] 

contest,  but  to  ^he  general  interest  of  the  war ;  but,  greedy  af 
slaughter,  and  following  with  too  much  ea^meas,  th^  fcH 
in  with  the  advanced  cohorts  of  the  Ramans  under  the  milU 
tary  tribimes.  The  horsemen  who  were  flying,  as  soon  as 
they  saw  the  ensigns  of  their  friends,  faced  about  against  the 
enemy,  now  in  disorder ;  so  thatin  a  moment’s  time  the  for¬ 
tune  of  the  battle  was  changed,  thosenow  turning  their  backs, 
who  had  lately  been  the  pursuers.  Many  were  slain  in  close 
fight,  many  in  the  pursuit :  nor  was  it  by  the  sword  alone 
that  they  perished  ;  several  being  driven  into  morasses  were, 
together  with  their  horses,  swallowed  up  in  the  deep  mud. 
The  King  himself  was  in  danger ;  for  his  horse  falling,  in 
consequence  of  a  wound,  Uirew  him  headlong  to  the  ground, 
and  he  very  narrowly  escaped  being  overpowered  before  he 
could  recover  his  feet.  He  owed  his  safety  to  a  trooper,  who 
instantly  leaped  from, his  horse,  on  which  he  mounted  the  af¬ 
frighted  King*;  himself,  as  he  could  not  run  so  fast  as  to  keep 
up  with  the  horsemen,  was  slain  by  the  enemy,  who  had  col¬ 
lected  about  the  place  where  Philip  fell.  The  King,  in  his 
desperate  flight,  rode  dbout  among  the  morasses,  some  of 
which  were  easily  passed,  and  others  not ;  at  length,  when 
most  men  despaired  ofhis  ever  returning,  he  arrived  in  safety 
at  his  camp.  Two  .hundred  Macedoniin  horsemen  perished 
in  that  action  ;  about  one  hmidried  were  taken  :  eighty  horses, 
richly  caparisoned,  were^  led  off  the  field ;  at  the  same  time 
the  spoils  of  arms/w^ere  also  carried  icff. 
XXXVIII.  Some  have  found  fault  with  the  King,  as  guilty 
of  rashness  on  that  day  ;  and  wlih  the  consul,  as  not  having 
pushed  with  spirit  the  advantage  which  he  had  gained.  For 
Philip,  they  say,  on  his  part,  ought  to  have  avoided  coming 
to  action,  knowing  that  in  a  few  days,  the  enemy,  having  ex¬ 
hausted  all  the  ^idjacent  country,  must  be  reduced  to  the  ex¬ 
tremity  of  want;  and  that  the  consul,  after  having  routed  the 
Macedonian  cavalry  and  light- infantry,  and  nearly  taken  the 
VOL.  IV. - M  M 

266  HISTORY  OF  ROME,  [Y.R.  552, 
King  himsel£>  ought  to  have  led  on  his  troops  iRrectly  to  the 
enemy’s  camp,  where,  dismayed  as  they  were,  could 
have  made  no  stand,  and  that  he  might  have  finished  the  war 
in  a  moment’s  time.  This,  like  most  other  matters,  was^easier 
in  speculation  than  m  practice.  if  the  King  had  brought 
his  infantry  into  the  engagement,  then,  mdeed,  during  the  tu¬ 
mult,  and  while  vanquished  and  struck  with  dismay^  they  fled 
from  the  field  into  their  entrenchments,  (and  even  continued 
their  flight  from  thence  on  seeing  the  victorious  enemy 
mounting  the  ramparts,)  the  King’s  camp  might  have  falkn 
into  the  Romans’  possession.  But  as  the  infantry  bad  re¬ 
mained  in  the  camp,  fresh  and  free  from  fatigue,  with  out¬ 
posts  before  the  gates,  and  guards  properly  disposed,  what 
would  he  have  gained  in  having  imitated  the  rashness  of 
which  the  King  had  just  now  been  guilty,  by  pursuing  the 
routed  horse  ?  On  the  other  side,  the  King’s  first  plan  of  m 
attack  on  the  foragers,  while  dispersed  through  the  fields, 
was  not  injudicious,  -could  he  have  satisfied  himself  with  a 
moderate  degree  of  success  ;  and  it  is  the  less  surprising, 
that  he  should  have  made  a  trial  of  fortune,  as  there  was  a 
report,  that  Pleuratus  and  the  Dardanisms  had  marched  with 
very  numerous  forces,  and  had  already  passed  into  Macedo¬ 
nia  ;  so  that  if  he  should  be  surrounded  on  all  sides,  there 
was  reason  to  think  that  the  Roman  might  put  an  end  to  the 
war  without  stirring  from  his  seat.  Philip,  however,  consi¬ 
dered,  that  after  his  cavalry  had  been  defeated  in  two  engage¬ 
ments,  he  could  with  much  less  safety. contbue  in  the  same 
post ;  accordingly,  wishing  to  remove  from  thence,  and,  at 
the  same  time,  to  keep  the  enemy  in  ignorance  of  his  design, 
he  sent  a  herald  to  the  consul  a  lijttle  before  sunset,  to  de¬ 
mand  a  truce  for  the  purpose  of  burying  the  horsemen ;  and 
thus  imposing  on  him,  he  began  his  march  in  silence,  about 
the  second  watch,  fravbg  a  number  of  fires  in  all  parts  of  his 
camp. 

BOOK  XXXI. 

267 

B.C.  2(X5.3 
XXXIX.  The  consul  had  already  retired  to  take  refresh¬ 
ment,  when  he  was  told  that  the  herald  had  arrived,  and  on 
what  business  ;  he  gave  him  no  other  answer,  than  that  he 
should  be  admitted  to  an  audience  early  the  next  morning: 
by  which  means,  Philip  gained  what  he  wanted, ^ — the  length 
of  that  night,  and  part  of  the  following  day,  during  which  he 
might  march  his  troops  beyond  the  enemy’s  reach.  He  di¬ 
rected  his  route  towards  the  mountains,'  a  road  which  he 
knew  the  Romans  with  their  heavy  baggage  would  not  at¬ 
tempt.  The  consul,  having  at  the  first  light,  dismissed  the 
herald,  with  a  grant  of  a  truce,  in  a  short  time  after  disco¬ 
vered  that  the  enemy  had  gone  off ;  but  not  knowing  what 
course  to  take  in  pursuit  of  them,  he  remained  in  the  same 
camp  for  several  days,  which  he  employed  in  collecting 
forage.  He  then  marched  to  Stubera,  and  brought  thither, 
from  Pelagonia,  the  corn  that  wasift  the  fields.  From  thence 
he  advanced  to  Pellina,  not  having  yet  discovered  to  what 
quarter  the  Macedonian  had  bent  his  course.. .  Philip  having 
at  first  fixed  his  camp  at  Bryanium,  marched  thence  through 
cross-roads,  and  gave  a  sudden  alarm  to  rfie  enemy.  The 
Romans,  on  this,  removed  from  Pellina,  and  pitched  their 
camp  near  the  river  Osphagus.  The  King  also  sat  down  at 
a  small  distance,  forming  hia  entrenchment  on  the  bank  of 
the  river  Erigonus.  Having  there  received  certain  informa¬ 
tion,  that  the  Romans^  intended  to  proceed  to  Eordaea,  he 
marched  away  before  them,  in  order  to  take  possession  of 
the  defiles,  and  prevent  the  enemy  from  making  their  way, 
where  the  roads  are  confined  in  narrow  streights.  There, 
with  much  labour,  he  fortified  some  places  with  a  rampart, 
others  with  a  trench,  others  with  stones  heaped  up,  instead 
of  walls,  others  with  trees  laid  across,  according  as  the  situa¬ 
tion  required,  or  as  materials  lay  convenient;  and  thus  a 
road,  in  its  own  nature  difiicult,  he  rendered,  as  he  imagined, 
impregnable  by  the  works  which  he  drew  ^ross  every  pass. 

268 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  552. 

The  adjoining  ground  being  mostly  covered  with  woods, 
was  exceedingly  incommodious  to  the  phalanx  of  the  Mace¬ 
donians^  which  is  of  no  manner  of  use,  except  when  they 
extend  their  very  long  spears  before  their  shields,  forming^ 
as  it  were  a  palisade  ;  to  perform  which,  they  require  an 
open  plain.  The  Thracians,  too,  were  embarrassed  by  their 
lances,  which  also  are  of  a  great  length,  and  were  entangled 
among  the  branches  that  stood  in  their  way  on  every  side. 
The  body  of  Cretans  alone  was  not  unserviceable ;  ^nd  yet 
even  these,  though  in  case  of  an  attack  made- on  them,  they 
could  to  good  purpose  discharge  their  arrows  against  the 
horses  or  riders,  where  they  were  open  to  a  wound,  yet 
against  the  Roman  shields  they  could  do  nothing,  because 
they  had  neither  strength  sufficient  to  pierce  through  them, 
nor  was  there  any  part  exposed  at  which  they  could  aim. 
Perceiving,  therefore,  that  kind  of  weapon  to  be  useless,  they 
annoyed  the  enemy  with  stones,  which  lay  in  plenty  in  all 
parts  of  the  valley :  the  strokes  made  by  these  on  *their 
shields,  with  greater  noise  than  injury,  for  a  short  time  re¬ 
tarded  the  advance  of  the  Romans  ;  but  quickly  learning  to 
despise  these  weapons  also,  . some  closing  their  shields  in  form 
of  a  tortoise,  forced  their  way  through  the  enemy  in  front ; 
others  having,  by  a  short  circuit,  gained  the  summit  of  the 
hill,  dislodged  the  dismayed  Macedonians  from  their  guards 
and  posts,  and  even  slew  the  greater  part  of  them,  the  diffi¬ 
culties  of  the  ground  preventing  their  escape. 
XL.  Thus,  with  less  opposition  than  they  had  expected  to 
meet,  they  passed  the  defiles,  and  came  to  Eordaea  ;  then, 
having  laid  waste  the  whole  country,  the  consul  withdrew 
into  Elimea.  From  thence  he  made  an  irruption  into  Ores- 
tis,  and  laid  siege  to  the  city  Celetrutn,  situated  in  a  penin¬ 
sula  :  a  lake  surrounds  the  walls  ;  and  there  is  but  one  en¬ 
trance  from  the  main  land  along  a  narrow  ivsthmus.  Relying 
on  their  situation,  the  townsmen  at  first  shut  the  gates,  and 

BOOK  XXXI- 

269 

B.C.  200.] 
refused  to  submit ;  l)ut  afterwards,  when  they  saw  the  trooj^ 
in  motion,  and  advancing  under  cover  of  their  closed  shields, 
and  the  isthmus  covered  the  enemy  marching  in,  their 
courage  failed  them,  and  they  surrendered  without  hazarding 
a  struggle.  From  Ccietrum  he  advanced  into  the  country  of 
the  Dassaretians,  took  the  eity  Pelium  by  storm,  carried  off 
the  slaves  with  the  rest  of  the  spoil,  and  discharging  the  free¬ 
men  without  ransem),  restored  the  city  to  them,  after  placing 
a  strong  garrison  in  it,  for  it  lay  very  conveniently  for  mak¬ 
ing  inroads  into  Macedonia.  Having  thus  carried  devasta¬ 
tion  through  the  enemy’s  country,-the  consul  led  back  his 
forces  into  those  parts,  which  were  afready  reduced  to  obe¬ 
dience  near  Apollonia,"from  whence,  at  the  beginning  of  the 
campaign,  he  had  set  out  to  begin  his  operations.  Philip’s 
attention  had  been  drawn  to  other  quarters  by  the  iEtolians, 
Alharaanians,  and  Dardanians :  so  many  were  the  wars  that 
started  up  on  different  sides  of  him.  Against  the  Dardanians, 
who  were  now  retiring  out  qf  Macedonia,  he  «ent  Athena- 
goras  with  the  light-infantry  and  the  greater  part  of  the  ca¬ 
valry,  and  ordered  him  to  hang  on  their  rear  as  they  retreat¬ 
ed  ;  and,  by  cutting  off  their  hindmost  troops,  make  them 
more  cautious  for  the  future.of  leading  out  their  armies  from 
home.  As  to  the  iEtolians,  Damocritus,  their  praetor,  die 
same  who  at  Naupactum  had  persuaded  them  to  defer  pas¬ 
sing  a  decree  concerning  the  war,  had  in  the  next  meeting 
roused  them  to  arms,  after  hearing  of  the  battle  between  the 
cavalry  at  Octolophus  the  irruption  of  the  Dardanians  and 
of  Pleuratus,  with  the  Illyrians,  into  Macedonia  ;  of  the  ar¬ 
rival  of  the  Roman  fieet,  too,  at  Oreus  f  and  that  Macedonia, 
besides  being  beset  on  all  sides  by  so  many  nations,  was  in 
danger  of  being  invested  by  sea  also. 
XLI.  These  reasons. had  brought  back  Damocritus  and 
the  iEtolians  to  the  interest  of  the  Romans.  Marching  out, 
therefore,  in  conjunction  wHh  Amynander,  King  of  the  Atha* 

270 

HISTORY  OP  ROME. 

[Y.R.  SS2. 

manians,  they  laid  siege  tb  Cercimuin.  The  inhabitants  here 
had  shut  their  gates,  whether  of  their  own  choice  or  by  com¬ 
pulsion  is  unknown,  as  they  had  a  garrison  of  the  King’s 
troops.  However,  in  a  few  days,  Cercinium  was  taken  and 
burned  ;  and  after  great  slaughter  had  been  made,  those  who 
survived,  both  free  men  and  slaves,  were  carried  oiF  amongst 
pther  spoil.  This  caused  such  terror,  as  made  all  those  who 
dwelt  round  the  lake  Baebis,  abandon  their  cities  and  fly  to 
the  mountains  ;  and  the  JEtolians  not  finding  booty,  turned 
away  from  thence,  and  proceeded  into  Perrhaebia.  Tlrere 
they  took  Cyretiae  by  storm,  and  sacked  it  without  mercy. 
The  inhabitants  of  Malloea  making  a  voluntary  submission, 
were  received  into  alliance.  From  Perrhaebia,  Amynander 
advised  to  march  to  Gomphi,  because  that  city  lies  close  to 
Athamania,  and  there  was  reason  to  think  that  it  might  be 
reduced  without  any*  great  difficulty*  But  the  ^tolians,  for 
the  sake  of  plunder,  directed  their  march  to  the  rich  plains  of 
Thessaly,  Amynander  follow mgi  though  he  did  not  approve 
either  of  their  careless  method  of  carrying  on  their  depreda¬ 
tions,  or  of  their  pitching  their  camp  in  any  place  where 
chance  directed,  without  choice,  and  without  taking  any  care 
to  fortify  it.  Therefore,  lest  their  rashness  and  negligence 
might  be  the  cause  of  some  misfortune  to  himself  and  his 
troops,  when  he. saw  them  forming  their  camp  in  low  grounds, 
under  the  city  Thecadus,  he  took  possession,  with  his  own 
troops,  of  an  eminence  about  five  hundred  paces  distant, 
which  could  be  rendered  secure  by  a  dight  fortification*  The 
.^itolians  seemed  to  have  forgotten  that  they  were  in  an  ene¬ 
my’s  country,  excepting  that  they  continued  to  plunder,  some 
straggling  in  small  parties  without  arms,  others  spending 
whole  days  and  nights  in  drinking  and  sleeping  in  the  camp, 
neglecting  even  to  fix  guards,  when  Philip  unexpectedly  came 
upon  them.  His  approach  being  announced  by  those  who 
had  fled  out  of  the  fields  in  a  fright,  threw  Damocritus  and 

BOOK  XXXL 

B.C.  200.] 

2n 

the  rest  of^the  officers  ioto  great  confusion.  It  happened  to 
be  mid-day,  and  when  most  of  the  men  after  a  hearty  meal 
lay  fast  asleep.  Their  officers  roused  them,  however,  as  fast 
as  possible  j  ordered  them  to  take  arms  ;  despatched  some  to 
recalLthose  who  were  straggling  through  the  fields  in  search 
of  plunder,  and  so  violent  was  their  hurry,  that  many  of  the 
horsemen  went  out  without  their  swords,  and  but  few  of  them 
put  on  their  corslets.  After  marching  out  in  this  precipitate 
i^anner,  (the  whole  horse  and  foot  not  amounting  to  six  hun* 
dred,)  they  met  the  King’s  cavalry,  superior  in  number,  in 
spirit,  and  in  arms.  ^  They  were,  therefore,  routed  at  the  first 
charge  ;  and  having  scarcely  attempted  resistance,  returned 
to  the  camp  in  shameful  Afght.  Several  were  slain  ;  and 
some  taken,  having  been  cut  off  from  the  main  body  of  the 
runaways. 
XLI1«  Philip,  when  his  troops  had  advanced  almost  to 
rampart,  ordered  a  retreat  to  be  sounded,  because  both  men 
and  horses  were  fatigued,  not  so  much  by  the  action,  as  bv 
the  length  of  their  march,  and  the  extraordinary  celerity  with 
which  they  had  made.  it..  He.  therefore  despatched  the  horse¬ 
men  by  troops,  and  the  companies  of  light-infentry  in  turn, 
for  water  ;  after  whkdi  they  took  refreshment.  The  rest  he 
kept  on  guard,  under  arms,  waiting  for  the  main  body  of  the 
infantry,  which  had  marched  with  less  expedition,  on  account 
of  the  weight  of  their  armour.  As  soon  as  these  arrived, 
they  also  were  ordered  to  fix  their  standards,  and,  laying 
down  their  arms  before  them,  to  take  food  in  haste  ;  sending 
two,  or  at  most  three,  out  of  each  company,  to  provide  wa¬ 
ter.  In  the  mean  time,  the  cavalry  and  light  infantry  stood 
in  order,  and  ready,  in  case  the  enemy  should  n^ake  any  mo¬ 
tion.  The  iEtolians,  as  if  resolved  to  defend  their  fortifica¬ 
tions,  (the  multitude  which  had  been  scattered  about  the 
fields  having,  by  this  time,  returned  to  the  camp,)  posted  bo¬ 
dies  of  armed  men  at  the  gates,  and  on  the  rampart,  and  from 
this  safe  situation  looked  with  a  degree  of  cotffidence  on  the 

272 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  552. 

enemy,  as  long  as  they  continued  quiet.  But,  as  soon  as  the 
troops  of  the  Macedonians  began  to  move,  and  to  advance  to 
the  rampart,  in  order  of  battle,  and  ready  for  an  assault,  they 
all  quickly  abandoned  their  posts,  and  fled  through  the  oppo¬ 
site  part  of  the  camp,  to  the  eniinence  where  the  Athama- 
nians  were  stationed.  During  their  flight  in  this  confu¬ 
sion,  many  of  the  iEtolians  were  slain,  and  many  made 
prisoners.  Philip  doubted  not,  that,  had  there  been  day¬ 
light  enough  remaining,  he  should  have  been  able  to  make 
himself  master  of  the  camp  of  the  Athamanians  also  ;  but 
the  day  being  spent  in  the  fight,  and  in  plundering  the 
camp  afterwards,  he  sat  down  under  the  eminence,  in  the 
adjacent  plain,  determined  to’ attack  the  enemy  at  the  first 
dawn.  But  the  iEtolians,  under  the  same  apprehensions 
which  had  made  them  desert  their  camp,  dispersed,  and  fled 
d^iring  the  following  night.  Amynamder  was  of  the  greatest 
service  ;  for,  by  his  directions,  the  Athamanians,  who  ^ere 
acquainted  with  the.  roads,  conducted  them  into  jEtolia, 
whilst  the  Macedonians  pursued  them  over  the  highestmoun- 
tains,  through  unknown  paths.  In  this  disorderly  flight,  a 
few,  missing  their  way,  fell  into  the- hands  of  the  Macedo¬ 
nian  horsemen,  whom  Philip,  at  th^  first  light,  on  seeing  the 
eminence  abandoned,  had  sent  to  infest  on  their  march. 
XLIIL  About  the  same  time,  also,  Athenagoras,  one  of  the 
King’s  generals,  overtaking  the  Dardanians  in  their  retreat 
homeward,  at  first  threw  their  rear  into  disorder  :  but  these 
unexpectedly  facing  about,  and  forming  their  line,  the  fight 
became  like  a  regular  engagement.  When  the  Dardanians 
began  again  to  advance,  the  Macedonian  cavalry  and  lighj- 
infantry  harassed  those  who  had  no  troops  of  that  kind  to  aid 
them,  and  were,  besides,  burdened  with  unwieldy  arms. 
The  ground,  too,  favoured  the  assailants  ;  very  few  were 
slain,  but  many  woupded  ;  none  were  taken,  because  they 
rarely  quit  their  ranks,  but  both  fight  and  retreat  in  a  close 
body.  Thus  Philip,  having  checked  the  proceedings  of  those 

BOOK  XXXI. 

273 

B.C.  200.] 
two  nations  by  these  well-timed  expeditions^  gained  repara¬ 
tion  for  the  damages  sustained  from  the  operations  of  the 
Romans  ;  the  enterprise  being  as  spirited  as  the  issue  was 
successful.  An  accidental  occurrence  lessened  the  number 
of  his  enemies  on  the  side  of  iEtolia.  Scopas^  a  man  of  con¬ 
siderable  influence  in  his  own  country^  having  been  sent  from 
Alexandria  by  King  Ptolemy,  with  a  great  sum  of  gold,  hired, 
and  carried  away  to  Egypt,  six  thousand  foot,  and  some 
horse  ;  nor  would  he  have  suffered  one  of  the  young  iEtolians 
to  remain  at  home,  had  not  Damocritus^  (it  is  not  easy  to  say, 
whether  out  of  zeal  for  the  good  of  the  nation,  or  out  of  op¬ 
position  to  Scopas,  for  not  having  secured  his  interest  by  pre¬ 
sents,)  by  sometimes  reminding  them  of  the  war  with  which 
they  were  threatened,  at  other  times,  of  the  solitary  state 
in  which  their  country  would  be  left,  detained  some  of  them. 
Such  were  the  actions  of  the  Romans,  and  of  Philip,  during 
that  summer. 
XLIV.  In  the  beginning  of  the  same  summer,  the  fleet 
under  Lucius  Apustius,  lieutenant-general,  setting  sail  from 
Corcyra,  and  passing  by  Malea,  formed  a  junction  with  King 
Attalus,  off  Scyllseum,  which  lies  in  the  district  of  Hermionc. 
The  Athenian  state,  which  had  for  a  long  time,  through  fear, 
restrained  their  animosity  against  Philip  within  some  bounds, 
assuming  confidence  from  the  support  now  afforded  them, 
gave  full  scope  to  it  without  any  reserve.  There  are  never 
wanting  in  that  city,  orators,  who  are  ready  on  every  occa¬ 
sion  to  inflame  the  people  ;  a  kind  of  men,  who,  in  all  free 
states,  and  more  particularly  in  that  of  Athens,  where  elo¬ 
quence  flourishes  in  the  highest  degree,  are  maintained  by 
the  favour  of  the  multitude.  These  immediately  proposed  a 
decree,  ^nd  the  commons  passed  it,  that  ‘‘  all  the  statues  and 
images  of  Philip,  with  their  inscriptions,  and  likewise  those 
of  all  his  ancestors  of  both  sexes,  should  be  removed  and  de¬ 
faced  ;  that  the  festival  days,  soletnnities,  and  priests,  which 
VOL.  IV. — N  K 

2174 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[y.R.  552. 

had  been  instituted  iti  hoii<mr  uf  him  or  them,  should  all  be 
abolished  ;  and  that  even  the  ground  where  any  such  statue 
had  been  set  up,  and  inscribed  with  his  name,  should  be  held 
S^m'mable.’^  And  it  was  resolved,  that,  **  for  the  future, 
nothing  which  ought  to  be  erected  or  dedicated  in  a  place  of 
purity,  should  be  there  erected  ;  that  the  public  priests,  as 
often  as  they  should  pray  for  the  people  of  Athens,  for  their 
Lillies,  armies,  and  fleets,  So  often  should  they  utter  curses 
and  execrations  against  Philip,  his  offspring,  his  kingdom,  his 
forces  by  sea  and  land,  and  the  whole  race  and  name  of  the 
Macedonians.”  It  was  added  to  the  decree,  that,  if  any 
person  in  future  should  make  any  proposal  tending  to  throw 
disgrace  and  ignominy  on  Philip,  the  people  of  Athens  would 
ratify  it  in  its  fullest  extent:  if, on  the  contrary, any  one  should, 
by  word  or  deed,  endeavour  to  lessen  his  ignominy,  or  to  do 
him  honour,  that  whoever  slew  such  person  should  be  justified 
in  so  doing.”  Lastly,  a  clause  was  annexed,  that  ‘‘  all  the 
decrees,  formerly  passed  against  the  Piaistratidae,  should  be 
in  full  force  against  Philip.”  Thus  the  Athenians  waged  war 
against  Philip  with  writing  and  with  words,  in  which  alone 
their  power  consists. 
XLV.  Attains  and  the  Romans,  having,  from  Hermionc, 
proceeded  first  to  Piraeeus,  and  staid  there  a -few  days,  after 
being  loaded  with  decrees  of  the  Athenians,  (in  which  the 
honours  paid  to  their  allies  were  as  extravagant  as  the  ex¬ 
pressions  of  th^ir  resentment  against  their  enemy  had  been,) 
sailed  to  Andros,  and,  coming  to  an  anchor  in  the  harbour 
called  Gaureleos,  sent  persons  to  sound  the  inclinations  of 
the  townsmen,  whether  they  chose  voluntarily  to  surrender, 
rather  than  run  the  hazard  of  an  assault.  On  their  answer¬ 
ing,  that  they  were  not  at  their  own  disposal,  the  cifadel  be¬ 
ing  possessed  by  the  King’s  troops,  Attains  and  the  Roman 
lieutenant- general,  landing  their  forces,  with  every  thing  re¬ 
quisite  for  attacking  towns,  made  their  approaches  to  the  city 

B0OK  XXXI. 

275 

Ili€,2oa.] 

on  different  sides.  The  Roman  ensigns  and  anus,  which,  they 
had  never  seen  before,  together  with  the  spirit  of  the  soldiers, 
so  briskly  approaching  the  walls,  were  particularly  terrifying 
to  the  Greeks,  insomuch  that  they  immediately  fled  into  the 
citadel,  leaving  the  city  in  the  power  of  die  enemy.  After 
holding  out  for  two  days  in  the  citadel,  relying  more  on  the 
strength  of  the  place  than  on  their  arms,  on  the  third  both 
they  and  the  garrison  capitulated,  on  conditicm  of  their  being 
transported  to  Delium  in  Boeotia,  and  being  each  of  them 
allowed  a  single  suit  of  apparel.  The  island  was  yielded  up 
by  the  Romans  to  King  Att^us ;  the  spoil,  and  the  ornaments 
of  the  city,  they  themselves  carried  off.  Attalus,  desirous 
that  the  island,  of  which  he  had  got  possession,  might  not  be 
quite  deserted,  persuaded  almost  all  the  Macedonians,  and 
several  of  the  Andrians,  to  rem^  there:  and,  in  some  time 
after,  those  who,  according  to  the  capitulation,  had  been  trans* 
ported  to  Delium,  were  induced  to  return  ^om  thence  by  the 
promises  made  them  by  the  King,  in  which  they  were  dis¬ 
posed  the  more  readily  to  confide,  by  .  the  ardent  affection 
which  they  felt  for  their  native  country.  From  Andros  the 
combined  army  passed  over  to.  Cythnus  i  there  they  spent 
several  days,  to  no  purpose,  in  attempting  to  get  possesion 
of  the  city  ;  when,  at  length,  finding  it  scarcely  worth  the 
trouble,  they  departed.  At  Prasue,  a  place  on  the  main  land 
of  Attica,  twenty  barks  ,of  the  Issseans  joined  the  Roman 
fleet.  These  were  sent  to  ravs^e  the  lands  of  the  Carysthuia, 
the  rest  of  the  fleet  lying  at  Gers^tus,  a  noted  harbour  in 
Eubepa,  until  their  return  from  Carystus:  on  which,  setting 
sail  altogether,  and  steering  their  course  through  the  open 
sea,  until  they  passed  by  Scyrus,  they  arrived  at  the  island 
Icus.  Being  detained  there  for  a  few  days  by  a  violent 
northerly  wind,  as  soon  as  it  abated,  they  passed  over  to 
SciatKus,  a  city  which  had  been  lately  plundered  and  deso¬ 
lated  by  Philip.  The  soldiers,  spreading  themselves  over  the 

276 

HISTORY  OF  ROME,  [Y.R,  5^. 

country,  brought  back  to  the  ships  com  and  many  other  kinds 
of  provisions.  Plunder  there  was  none,  nor  had  the  Greeks 
deserved  to  be  plundered.  Directing  their  course  to  Cassan- 
drea,  they  first  came  to  Mendis,  a  village  on  the  coast  of  that 
state  j  and,  intending  from  thence  to  double  the  promontory, 
and  bring  round  the  fleet  to  the  very  walls  of  the  city,  they 
were  near  being  buried  in  the  waves  by  a  furious  storm. 
However,  after  being  dispersed,  and  a  great  part  of  the  ships 
having  lost  their  rigging,  they  escaped  on  shore.  This  storm 
at  sea  was  an  omen  of  the  kind  of  success  which  they  were 
to  meet  on  land  ;  for,. after  collecting  their  vessels  together, 
and  landing  their  forces,  having  made  an  assault  on  the  city, 
they  were  repulsed  with  considerable  loss,  there  being  a  strong 
garrison  of  the  King’s  troops  in  the  place.  Being  thus  obliged 
to  retreat  without  accomplishing  their  design,  they  passed 
over  to  Canastrum  in  Pallene,  and  from  thence,  doubling  the 
promontory  of  Torcma,  conducted  the  fleet  to  Acanthus. 
There  they  first  laid  waste  the  country,  then  stormed  the  city 
itself,  and  plundered  it.  They  proceeded  no  farther,  for  their 
ships  were  now  heavily  laden  with  booty,  but  went  back  to 
Sdathus,  and  from  Sciathus  to  Euboea,  whence  they  had  first 
set  out. 
XLVI.  Leaving  the  fleet  there,  they  entered  the  Malian 
bay  with  ten  light  ships,  in  order  to  confer  with  the  iEtolians 
on  the  method  of  conducting  the  war.  Sipyrrhicas,  the 
^tolian,  was  at  the  head  of  the  embassy  that  came  to  Hera- 
dea,  to  hold  a  consultation  with  the  King  and  the  Roman 
lieutenant-general.  They  demanded  of  Attains,  that,  in  pur¬ 
suance  of  the  treaty,  he  should  supply  them  with  one  thousand 
soldiers,  which  number  he  had  engaged  for  on  condition  of 
their  taking  part  in  the  war  against 'Philip.  This  was  refused 
to  the  iEtolians,  because,  on  their  part,  they  had  formerly 
showed  themselves  unwilling  to  march  out  to  ravage  Mace- 

B.C.  200.] 

BOOK  XXXL 

27r 

donia,  at  a  time  when  Philip,  being  employed  near  Pergamus 
in  destroying  by  fire  every  thing  sacred  and  profane,  they 
might  have  compelled  him  to  retire  from  thence,  in  order  to 
preserve  his  own  territori^^'  Thus,  instead  of  aid,  the  J£to- 
lians  were  dismissed  wi^itopes,  the  Romans  making  them 
large  promises.  Apustr^l?llfid  Attains  returned  to  their  ships, 
where  they  began  to  cdfi^lrt Pleasures  for  the  siege  of  Ofeus* 
This  city  was  well  secrir^kTby  fortifications ;  and  also,  since 
the  attempt  formerly  made  on  it,  by  a  strong  garrison.  After 
the  taking  of  Andros,  the  combined  fleet  had  been  joined  by 
twenty  Rhodian  ships,  all  dej:ked  vessels,  under  the  command 
of  Agesimbrotus.  This  squadron  they  sent  to  cruise  off  Ze- 
lasium,  a  promontory  of  Isthmia,  very  conveniently  situate 
beyond  Demetrias,  in  order  that,  if  the  ships  of  the  Mace¬ 
donians  should  attempt  to  come  out,  they  might  be  at  hand 
to  oppose  them.  Seraciides,  the  King’s  admiral,  kept  his 
fleet  there,  rather  with  a  view  of  laying  hold  of  any  advan¬ 
tage  which  the  negligence  of  the  enemy  might  afford  him, 
than  with  a  design  of  employing  open  force.  The  Romans 
and  King  Attains  carried  on  their  attacks  against  Oreus  on 
diff'erent  sides  ;  the  Romans  against  the  citadel  next  to  the 
•sea,  the  King’s  troops  against  the  lower  part  of  the  town, 
lying  between  the  two  citadels,  where  the  city  is  also  divided 
by  a  wall.  As  their  posts  were  different,  so  were  their  methods 
of  attack :  the  Romans  made  their  approaches  by  means  of 
covered  galleries,  some  carried  by  men,  others  moving  on 
wheels,  applying  also  the  ram  to  the  walls  ;  the  King’s  troops, 
by  throwing  in  weapons  with  the  balista,  catapulta,  and  every 
other  kind  of  engine.  They  cast  stones  also  of  immense 
weight,  formed  mines,  and  made  use  of  every  expedient, 
which!,  on  trial,  had  been  found  useful  in  the  former  siege. 
On  the  other  side,  the  Macedonian  garrison,  in  the  town  and 
the  citadels,  was  not  only  mo?re  numerous  than  on  the  former 
occasion,  but  exerted  themselves  with  greater  spirit,  in  con- 

27B 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

fY.R.  552. 

sequence  of  the  reprimands  which  they  had  rcc^yed  from 
the  King  for  their  former  misconduct,  and  also  from  remem¬ 
brance  both  of  his  threats  and  promises  with  regard  to  their 
future  behaviour ;  so  that  there  was  very  little  hope  of  its 
being  speedily  taken.  The  lieutenant-general  thought,  that, 
in  the  mean  time,  some  other  business  might  be  accomplish¬ 
ed  ;  wherefore,  leaving  such  a  nmtibert)f  men  as  seemed 
sufficient  to  finish  the  works,  he  passed  over  to  the  nearest 
part  of  the  continent,  and,  arriving  unexpectedly,  made  him¬ 
self  master  of  Larissa,  except  the  citadel, — not  that  celebrated 
city  in  Thessaly,  but  another,  which  they  call  Cremaste.  At¬ 
tains  also  surprised  Algeleos,  where  nothing  was  less  appre¬ 
hended  than  such  an  enterprise  during  the  siege  of  another 
city.  The  works  at  Oreus  bad  now  began  to  take  effect, 
while  the  garrison  within  were  almost  spent  with  unremitted 
toil  (keeping  watch  both  by  day  and  night),  and  also  with 
wounds.  Part  of  the  wall  being  loosened  by  the  strokes  of 
the  ram,  had  fallen  down  in  many  places  ;  and  the  Romans, 
during  the  night,  broke  into  the  citadel  through  the  breach 
which  lay  over  the  harbour.  Attalus,  likewise,  at  the  first 
light,  on  a  signal  given  from  the  citadel  by  the  Romans,  as¬ 
saulted  the  xity  on  his  side,  where  a  great  part  xf  the  walls 
had  been  levelled  :  on  which  the  garrison  and  townsmen 
fled  into  the  other  citadel,  and  even  that  they  surrendered  ia 
two  days  after.  The  city  fell  to  the  King,  the  prisoners  to 
the  Romans. 
XLVII.  The  autumnal  equinox  now  approached,  and  the 
Euboban  gulf,  called  Ccela,  is  reckoned  dangerous  by  mari¬ 
ners.  Choosing,  therefore,  to  remove  thence  before  the  win¬ 
ter  storms  came  on,  they  returned  to  Piraeeus,from  wh^cc 
they  had  set  out  for  the  campaign.  Apustius,  leaving  there 
thirty  ships,  sailed  by  M-alea  to  Corcyra.  The  King  was 
delayed  during  the  celebration  of  the  mysteries  of  Ceres, 
immediately  after  which  he  also  retired  into  Asia,  sending 

BOOK  XXXI. 

279 

B.C. 
home  Agqsmbrotus  and  the  Rhodians.  Such^  daring  that 
summer,  were  the  proceedings,  by  sea  and  land,  of  the  Ro¬ 
man  consul  and  lieutenant-general,  aided  by  Attains  and  the 
Rhodians,  against  Philip  and  his  allies.  Tlie  other,  consul, 
Caius  Aurelius,  on  coming  into  his  province,  and  finding  the 
war  there  already  brought  to  a  conclusion,  did  not  dissemble 
his  resentment  against  the  praetor,  for  having  proceeded  to 
action  in  his  absence ;  wherefore,  sending  him  away  to  Etru¬ 
ria,  he  led  on  the  legions  into  the  enemy’s  country,  where 
their  operations,  having  no  other  object  than  booty,  produced 
more  of  it  than  glory.  Lucius  Furius,  finding  nothing  in 
Etruria  that  could  give  him  employment,  and  at  the  same 
time  fired  with  ambition  of  obtaining  a  triumph  for  his  suc¬ 
cess  against  the  Gauls,  which  he  knew'  would  be  more  easily 
accomplished  in  the  absence  of  the  consul,  vrim  envied  and 
was  enraged  against  him,  came  to  Rome  unexpectedly,  and 
called  a  meeting  of  the  senate  in  the  temple  of  Bellona ; 
where,  after  making  a  recital  pf  the  services  which  he  had 
performed,  he  demanded  to  be  allowed  to  enter  the  city  in 
triumph. 
XLVIII.  A  great  part  of  the  senate,  induced  by  their  re¬ 
gard  for  him,  and  the  importance  of  his  services,  showed  an 
inclination  to  grant  his  request.  The  elder  part  refused  to 
agree  to  Such  grant,  both  ‘‘  because  the  army,  with  which  he 
had  aetpd,  belonged  to  another ;  and  because  be  had  left  his 
province  through  an  ambitious  desire  of  snatching  that  op¬ 
portunity  of  procuring  a  triumph,*— a  conduct  altogether  un¬ 
precedented.”  The  senators  of  consular  rank  particularly 
insisted,  that  “  he  ought  to  have  waited  for  the  consul ;  for 
that  he  might,  by  pitching  his  camp  near  the  city ,  and  there¬ 
by  securing  the  colony  without  coming  to  an  cngagemeijt, 
have  protracted  the  affair  until  his  arrival ;  and  that  what  the 
pr«tor  had  not  don^  the  senate  ought  to  do  :  they  should 
wait  for  the  consul.  After  hearing  the  business  discussed 

280 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  552. 

by  the  consul  and  praetor  in  their  presence,  they  would  be 
able,  on  better  grounds,  to  form  a  judgment  on  the  ca^e.” 
Great  part  were  of  opinion,  that  they  ought  to  consider  no¬ 
thing  but  the  service  performed,  and  whether  he  had  per¬ 
formed  it  while  in  office,  and  under  his  own  auspices.  For, 
when  of  two  colonies,  which  had  been  opposed,  as  barriers, 
to  restrain  the  tumultuous  inroads  of  the  Gauls,  one  had 
been  already  sacked  and  burned,  the  flames  being  ready  to 
spread  (as  if  from  an  adjoining  house)  to  the  other,  which  lay 
so  near,  what  ought  the  praetor  to  have  done  ?  If  it  was  im¬ 
proper  to  enter  on  any  action  without  the  consul,  then  the 
senate  had  acted  wrong  in  giving  the  army  to  the  praetor ; 
because,  if  they  chose  that  the  business  should  be  perform¬ 
ed,  not  undef  the  praetor’s  auspices,  but  the  consul’s,  thejr 
might  have  limited  the  decree  in  such  a  manner,  that  not  the 
praetor,  but  the  consul,  should  have  the  management  of  it : 
or  else  the  consul  had  acted  wrong,  who,  after  ordering  the 
army  to  remove  from  Etruria  into  Gaul,  ,did  not  meet  it  at 
Ariminum,  in  order  to  be  present  at  operations,  which  were 
not  flowed  to  be  performed  without  him.  But  the  exigen¬ 
cies  of  war  dp  not  wait  for  the  delays  and  procrastinations  of 
commanders;  and  battles  must  be  sometimes  fought,  not 
because  commanders  choose  it,  but  because  the  entemy  com¬ 
pels  it.  The  fight  itself,  and  the  issue  of  the  fight,  is  what 
ought  to  be  regarded  now.  The  enemy  were  routed  and 
slain,  their  camp  taken  and  plundered,  the  colony  relieved 
from  a  siege,  the  prisoners  taken  froro‘the  other  colony  re¬ 
covered  and  restored  to  their  friends,  and  an  end  put  to  the 
war  in  one  battle.  And  not  only  men  rejoiced  at  this  vic¬ 
tory,  but  the  immortal  gods  also  had  supplications  paid  to 
them,  for  the  space  of  three  days,  on  account  of  the  business 
of  the  state  having  been  wisely  and  successfully,  not  rashly 
and  unfortunately,  conducted  by  Lueius  Furius,  praetor. 

B»C.  200.] 

BOOK  XXXL 

281 

Besides  the  Gallic  wars  were,  by  some  fatality,  destined  to 
the  Furian  family.” 
XLIX.  By  means  of  discourses  of  this  kind,  made  by  him 
and  his  friends,  the  interest  of  the  praetor,  who  was  present, 
prevailed  over  the  respect  due  to  the  dignity  of  the  absent 
consul,  and  the  majority  decreed  a  triumph  to  Lucius  Furius* 
Lucius  Furius,  praetor,  during  his  office,  triumphed  over  the 
Gauls.  He  carried  into  the  treasury  three  hundred  and 
twenty  thousand  asses^^  and  one  hundred  and  seventy  thou¬ 
sand  pounds  weight  of  silver.  There  were  neither  any  pri¬ 
soners  led  before  his  chariot,  nor  spoils  carried  before  him, 
nor  did  any  soldiers  follow  him.  It  appeared  that  every 
thing,  except  victory,  belonged  to  the  consul.  Publius 
Scipio  then  celebrated,  in  a  magnificent  manner,  the  games 
which  he  had  vowed  when  consul  in  Africa  ;  and  with  re¬ 
spect  to  the  lands  for  his  soldiers,  it  was  decreed,  that  what¬ 
ever  number  of  years  each  of  them  had  served  in  Spain  or  in 
Africa,  he  should,  for  every  year,  receive  two  acres ;  and 
that  ten  commissioners  should  make  the  distribution.  Three 
commissioners  were  then  appointed  to  fill  up  the  number  of 
colonists  at  Venusia,  because  the  strength  of  that  colony  had 
been  reduced  in  the  war  with  Hannibal :  Caius  Terentius 
Varro,  Titus  Quintius  Flamininus,  Publius  Cornelius,  son 
of  Cneius  Scipio,  were  the  commissioners  who  enrolled  the 
colonists  for  Venusia,  During  the  same  year,  Caius  Corne¬ 
lius  Cethegus,  who,  in  the  quality  of  proconsul,  commanded 
in  Spain,  routed  a  numerous  army  of  the  enemy  in  the  terri¬ 
tory  of  Sedeta ;  in  which  battle,  it  is  said,  that  fifteen  thou¬ 
sand  Spaniards  were  slain,  and  seventy-eight  militaiy  stan¬ 
dards  taken.  The  consul,  Caiu^  Aurelius,  on  Tetuming  from 
his  province  to  Rome,  to  hold  the  elections,  made  heavy 
complaints,  not  on  the  subject  on  which  they  had  supposed 

VOL.  IV. — O  o 

1,0331.  6s.  8d, 

2S2 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  552. 

he  would,  that  the  senate  had  not  waited  for  his  coming,  nor 
allowed  him  an  opportunity  of  arguing  the  m’atter  with  the 
ptfetor  ;  but,  that  the  senate  had  decreed  a  triumph  in  such 
a  manner,  without  hearing  the  report  of  any  one  of  diose 
who  were  present  at  the  operations  of  the  war,  except  the 
person  who  was  to  enjoy  the  triumph  :  that  their  ancestors 
had  made  it  a  rule  that  the  lieutenant-generals,  the  military 
tribunes,  the  centurions,  and  even  the  soldiers,  should  be 
present  at  the  same,  for  this  reason,  that  the  reality  of  his 
exploits,  to  whom  so  high  an  honour  was  paid,  might  be  pub¬ 
licly  ascertained.  Now,  of  that  army  which  fought  with  the 
Gauls,  had  any  one  soldier,  or  even  a  soldier’s  servant,  been 
present,  of  whom  the  senate  could  inquire  concerning  the 
truth  or  falsehood  of  the  praetor’s  narrative  He  then  ap¬ 
pointed  a  day  for  the  elections,  at  which  were  chosen  con¬ 
suls,  Lucius  Cornelius  Lentulus  and  Publius  ViUius  Tappu- 
lus.  The  praetors  were  then  appointed,  Lucius  Quintius 
Flamininus,  Lucius  Valerius  Flaccus,  Lucius  Villius  Tap- 
pulus,  aed  Cneius  Baebius  Tamphilus. 
L.  During  that  year,  provisions  were  remarkably  cheap. 
The  curule  aediles,  Marcus  Claudius  Marcellus,  and  Sextus 
iElius  Paetus,  distributed  among  the  people  a  vast  quantity 
of  corn,  brought  from  Africa,  at  the  rate  of  two  asses  a 
peck.  They  also  celebrated  the  Roman  games  in  a  magnifi¬ 
cent  manner,  repeating  them  a  second  day  ;  and  erected  in 
the  treasury  five  brazen  statues  out  of  the  money  paid  as 
fines.  The  plebeian  games  were  thrice  repeated  entire,  by 
the  aediles,  Lucius  Terentius  Massa,  and  Cneius  Baebitts 
Tamphilus,  who  was  elected  prator.  There  were  also  fune¬ 
ral  games  exhibited  that  year  in  the  Forum,  for  the  space  of 
four  days,  on  occasion  of  the  death  of  Marcus  Valerius 
Laevinus,  by  his  sons  Publius  and  Marcus,  who  gave  also  a 
show  of  gladiators,  in  which  twenty -five  pairs  fought.  Mar¬ 
cus  Aurelius  Cotta,  one  of  the  ten  commissioners  for  keep- 

BOOK  XXXL 

B.C.  200.] 

2B3 

ing  the  books  of  the  Sihyi,  died,  apd  Manius  Acilius  Gla- 
brio  was  substituted  in  his  room.  It  happened  that  both  the 
curule  aediles,  lately  chosen,  were  persons  who  could  not  im¬ 
mediately  undertake  the  office  :  for  Caiu^  Cornelius  Cethe- 
gus  was  absent  when  be  was  elected,  being  then  commander 
in  Spain;  and  Caius  Valerius  Flaccus,  who  was  present, 
being  flamen  Dialis,  could  not  take  the  oath  of  observing  the 
laws ;  and  no  person  was  allowed  to  hold  any  office  longer 
than  five  days  without  taking  the  oath.  Flaccus  petitioned 
to  be  excused  ^frorn  complying  with  the  law,  on  which  the 
senate  decreed,  that  if  the  aedile  produced  a  person  approved 
of  by  the  connuls,  who  would  take  the  oath  for  him,  tfie 
consuls,  if  they  thought  proper,  should  make  application  to 
the  tribunes,  that  it  might  be  proposed  tt)  the  people.  Lucius 
Valerius  Flaccus,  praetor  elect,  was  produced  to  swear  for 
his  brother.  The  tribunes  proposed  to  the  commons,  and 
the  commons  ordered,  that  this  should  be  as  effectual  as  if 
the  aedile  himself  had  sw^orn.  With  regard  to  the  other 
sedile,  likewise,  an  order  of  the  commons  was  made*  On  the 
tribunes  putting  the  question,  what  two  persons  they  chose 
should  go  and  take  the  ccunmand  of  the  armies  in  Spain,  in 
order  that  Caius  Cornelius,  curule  aedile^  might  come  home 
to  execute  his  office,  and  that  Lucius  ManMus  Acidinus 
might  leave  that  province,  where  he  had  continued  many 
years ;  the  commons  ordered,  Cneius  Cornelius  Lentulus, 
and  Lucius  Stertinius,  proconsuls,  to  command  in  Spain. 

THK 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

4. 

BOOK  XXXIL 

Successes  of  Titus  Quintius  Flamininus  against  Philip  :  and  of  his  brother 
Lucius,  with  the  fleet,  assisted  by  Attains  and  the  Rhodians.  Treaty  of 
friendship  with  the  Ach2eans.  Conspiracy  of  the  slaves  discovered,  and 
suppressed.  The  number  of  the  prxtors  augmented  to  six.  Defeat  of 
the  Insubrian  Gauls  by  Cornelius  Cethegus.  Treaty  of  friendship  with 
Nabis,  tyrant  of  Lacedaemon.  Capture  of  several  cities  in  Macedonia. 

I,  The  consufls  and  praetors  entering  into  office  on  the  ides 
of ‘March  cast  lots  for  the  provinces.  Italy  fell  to 
B  C  199  Cornelius  Lentulus,  Macedonia  to  Pub¬ 
lius  Villius.  Of  the  praetors,  the  city  jurisdiction 
fell  to  Lucius  Quinctius,  Ariminum  to  Cneius  Baebius,  Sicily 
to  Lucius  Valerius,  Sardinia  to  Lucius  Villius.  The  consul, 
Lentulus,  was  ordered  to  levy  new  legions ;  Villius  to  receive 
the  army  from  Publius  Sulpicius  ;  and,  to  complete  its  num¬ 
ber,  power  was  given  him  to  raise  as  many  men  as  hfe  thought 
proper.  To  the  praetor  Baebius  were  decreed  the  legions, 
which  Caius  Aurelius,  late  consul,  had  commanded,  with 
directions  that  he  should  keep  them  in  their  present  situa¬ 
tion,  until  the  consul  should  come  with  the  new  army  to  sup- 

BOOK  XXXIL 

285 

B.C.  199.] 
ply  their  place ;  and  that,  cm  his  arriving  in  Gaul,  all  the 
soldiers  who  had  served  out  their  time  should  be  sent  home, 
except  five  thousand  of  the  allies,  which  would  be  sufficient  to 
protect  the  province  round  Ariminum.  The  command  was 
continued  to  the  praetors  of  the  former  year ;  to  Cneius  Sergius, 
that  he  might  superintend  the  distribution  of  land  to  the  sol¬ 
diers,  who  had  served  for  many  years  in  Spain,  Sicily  and  Sar¬ 
dinia  ;  to  Quintus  Minucius,  that  he  might  finish  the  inquiries 
concerning  the  conspiracies  in  Bruttium,  which,  while  prae¬ 
tor,  he  had  managed  with  care  and  fidelity.  That  he  should 
also  send  to  Locri,  to  suffer  punishment,  those  who  had  been 
convicted  of  sacrilege,  and  who  were  then  in  chains  at  Rome ; 
taking  care,  at  the  same  time,  that  whatever  had  been  carried 
away  from  the  temple  of  Proserpine  should  be  replaced,  and 
proper  atonement  made.  The  Latine  festival  was  repeated 
in  pursuance  of  a  decree  of  the  pontiffs,  because  ambassadors 
from  Ardea  had  complained  to  the  senate,  that,  during  the 
said  solemnity  they  had  not  been  supplied  with  meat  as  usual. 
From  Suessa  an  account  was  brought,  that  two  of  the  gates, 
and  the  wall  between  them,  were  struck  with  lightning. 
Messengers  from  Formiae  related,  that  the  temple  of  Jupiter 
was  also  struqk  by  lightning ;  from  .Ostia,  likewise,  news 
came  of  the  like  accident  having  happened  to  the  temple  of 
Jupiter  there ;  it  was  said,  too,  that  the  temples  of  Apollo 
and  Sancus,  at  Velitemum,  were  struck  in  like  manner,  and 
that  in  the  temple  of  Hercules,  hair  grew  on  the  statue.  A 
letter  was  received  froin  Quintus  Minucius,  propraetor,  from 
Bruttium,  that  a  foal  had  been  born  with  five  feet,  and  three 
chickens  with  three  feet  each.  Afterwards  a  letter  was 
brought  from  Macedonia,  from  Publius  Sulpicius,  proconsul, 
in  which,  among  other  matters,  it  was  mentioned,  that  a  lau¬ 
rel  tree  had  sprung  up  on  the  poop  of  a  ship  of  war.  On 
occasion  of  the  former  prodigies,  the  senate  had  voted,  that 
the  consuls  should  offer  sacrifices,  with  the  greater  victims. 

2S6 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  553. 

to  such  gods  as  they  thought  proper.  On  account  of  the  last 
prodigy,  aloi^,  the  aruspices  were  called  before  the  senate, 
and,  in  pui^uance  of  their  answer,  the  people  were  ordered 
by  proclamation  to  perform  a  supplication  for  one  day,  and 
woi^hip  was  solemnized  at  all  the  shrines. 
II.  This  year,  the  Carthaginians  brought  to  Rome  the  first 
payment  of  the  silver,  imposed  on  them  as  a  tribute ;  and 
the  quaestors  having  reported,  that  it  was  not  of  the  proper 
standard,  and  that,  on  the  assay,  it  wanted  a  fourth  part,  they 
borrowed  money  at  Rome,  and  made  up  the  deficiency.  On 
their  requesting  that  the  senate  would  be  pleased  to  order 
their  hostages  to  be  restored  to  them,  a  hundred  were  given 
up,  with  assurances  in  regard  to  the  rest,  if  they  continued  to 
observe  the  treaty.  They  then  farther  requested,  that  the 
remaining  hostages  might  be  removed  from  Norba,  where 
they  were  ill  accommodated,  to  some  other  place,  and  they 
were  permitted  to  remove  to  Signia  and  Terentinum.  The 
request  of  the  people  of  Gades  was  likewise  complied  with : 
that  a  governor  should  not  be  sent  tg  their  city ;  being  con¬ 
trary  to  their  stipulation  with  Lucius  Marcius  Septimus, 
when  they  came  under  the  protection  of  the  Roman  people. 
Deputies  from  Narnia  complaining,  that  they  had  not  their 
due  number  of  settlers,  and  that  several  whp  wer^e  not  o' 
their  community,  had  crept  in  among  them,  and  assumed  the 
privileges  of  colonists,  Lucius  Cornelius,  consul,  was  ordere 
to  appoint  three  commissioners  to  adjust  those  matters.  The 
three  appointed  were  Publius  and  Sextus  iElius,  both  sur- 
named  Psetus  ;  and  Gaius  Convelius  Lentulus.  The  favour 
granted  to  the  Narnians,  of  filling  up  their  number  of  co¬ 
lonists,  was  refused  to  the  people  of  Cossa,  who  applieo 
for  it, 
HI,  The  consuls,  having  finished  the  business  that  was  tc 
be  done  at  Rome,  set  out  for  their  provinces.  Publius  Vil- 
lius,  on  coming  into  Macedonia,  found  the  soldiers  in  a  vio- 

B.C,  199.] 

BOOK  XXXIL 

lent  mutiny,  signs  of  which  had  appeared  some  time  tefore. 
There  were  two  thousand  concerned  in  it.  These  troops, 
after  Hannibal  was  vanquished,  had  been  transported  from 
Africa  to  Sicily,  and  in  about  a  year  after,  into  Macedonia, 
as  volunteers  ;  they  denied,  however,  that  this  was  done 
with  their  consent,  affirming,  that  they  had  been  put  on 
board  the  ships,  by  the  tribunes,  contrary  to  their  remon¬ 
strances  ;  but,  in  what  manner  soever  they  had  become  -en¬ 
gaged  in  that  service,  whether  by  cotnpulsion  or  not,  the 
time  of  it  was  now  expired,  and  it  was  reasonable  that  some 
end  should  be  put  to  their  toils.  For  many  years  they  had 
not  seen  Italy,  but  had  grown  old  under  arms  in  Sicily,  Afri¬ 
ca,  and  Macedonia  they  were  now,  in  sliort,  worn 'out  with 
labour  and  fatigue,  and  had  lost  the  best  part  of  their  blood 
by  the  many  wounds  which  they  had  received.”  The  consul 
told  them,  that  ‘^the  grounds  on  which  they  demanded  their 
discharge,  appeared  to  him  to  be  reasonable,  if  the  demand 
had  been  made  in  a  moderate  manner  ;  but  that  neither  on 
that,  nor  on  any  other  grounds,  could  mutiny  ever  be  justi¬ 
fied.  Wherefore,  if  they  were  contented  to  adhere  to  their 
standards,  and  obey  orders,  he  would  write  to  the  senate 
concerning  their  release  ;  and  that  what  they  desired  would 
more  easily  be-  obtained  by  modest  behaviour  than  by  turbu¬ 
lence.” 
IV.  At  this  time,  Philip  was  pushing  on  the  siege  of 
Tbaumaci,  with  the  utmost  vigour,  by  means  of  mounds  ami 
engines,  and  was  ready  to  bring  up  the  ram  to  the  walls, 
when  he  was  obliged  to  relinquish  the  undertaking  by  the 
sudden  arrival  of  the  ^tolians,  who,  under  the  command  of 
Archidamus,  having  made  their  way  into  the  town  between 
the  posts  of  the  Macedonians,  never  ceased,  da)’"  or  night, 
making  continual  sallies,  sometimes  against  the  guards,  some¬ 
times  against  the  works.  They  were  at  the  same  time  favour¬ 
ed  by  the  nature  of  the  place  :  for  Thaumaci  stands  near  the 

288 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.553. 
road  from  Thermopylae,  and  the  Malian  bay,  through  La¬ 
mia,  on  a  lofty  eminence,  hanging  immediately  over  the  nar¬ 
row  pass  called  Caele.*  After  passing  through  the  craggy 
grounds  of  Thessaly,  the  roads  are  rendered  intricate  by  the 
windings  of  the  valleys,  and  on  the  near  approach  to  the  city, 
such  an  immense  plain  opens  at  once  to  view,  like  a  vast  sea, 
that  the  eye  can  scarcely  reach  the  bounds  of  the  expanse 
beneath.  From  this  surprising  prospect  it  was  called  Thau- 
maci.f  The  city  itself  is  secured,  not  only  by  the  height  of 
its  situation,  but  by  its  standing  on  a  rock,  from  the  sides  of 
which,  all  round,  the  projecting  parts  had  been  pared  off.  In 
consequence  of  these  difficulties,  and  the  prize  not  appearing 
sufficient  to  recompense  so  much  toil  and  danger,  Philip  de¬ 
sisted  from  the  attempt.  The  winter  also  was  approaching ; 
he  therefore  retired  from  thence,  and  led  back  his  troops  into 
winter- quarters,  in  Macedonia. 
V.  There,  whilst  others,  glad  of  any  interval  of  rest,  con¬ 
signed  both  body  and  mind  to  repose,  Philip,  in  proportion 
as  the  season  of  the  year  had  relieved  him  from  the  inces¬ 
sant  fatigues  of  marching  and  fighting,  found  his^  care  and 
anxiety  increase  the  more,  when  he  turned  his  thoughts  to¬ 
wards  the  general  issue  of  the  war.  He  dreaded,  not  only 
his  enemies,  who  pressed  him  hard  by  land  and  sea,  but  also 
the  dispositions,  sometimesr  of  his  allies,  at  others  of  his  own 
subjects.  The  former,  he  thought,  might  be  induced,  by 
hopes  of  friendship  with  the  Romans,  to  change  sides,  and 
the  Macedonians  themselves  be  seized  with  a  desire  of  inno¬ 
vation.  Wherefore,  he  despatched  ambassadors  to  the  Achse- 
ans,  both  to  require  their  oath,  (for  it  had  been  made  an 
article  of  their  agreement  that  they  should  take  an  oath  of 
fidelity  to  Philip  every  year,)  and  at  the  same  time  to  restore 
to  them  Orchomenos,  Heraea,  and  Triphylia.  To  the  Me- 

*  Hollows. 

f  From  thaimazein,  to  wonder. 

BOOK  XXXII. 

289 

B.e.  199.] 
galopoUtan^,  he  delivertd  up  Alipheraj  which  city,  they  in- 
ebted,  had  never  belonged  to  Triphylia,  but  ought  to  be 
restored  .to  them,  having  been  om  of  those  that  were  incor¬ 
porated  by  the  council  of  die  Arcadians  for  die  founding  of 
Megalopolis.  These  measures  had  the  desired  effect  of 
Strengthening  his  connection  with  the  Achseans.  The  affec¬ 
tions  of  the  Macedonians  he  conciliated  by  his  treatment  of 
Heraclides ;  for  finding  that,  from  having  countemuiced  this 
man,  he  had  inciirred  the  general  displeasure  of  his  subjects, 
he  charged  him  with  a  number  of  crimes,  and  threw  him  into 
chains,  to  the  great  joy  of  the  people.  In  his  preparations 
for  war,  he  exerted  the  most  vigorous  efforts  ;  exercised  both 
the  Macedonian  and  mercenary  trpops  in  arms,  and,  in  the* 
beginning  of  spring,  sent  Athenagoras,  with  ^11  the  foreign 
auxiliaries  and  light  troops,  through  Epirus  into  Chaonia,  to^ 
seize  the  pass  at  Ahtigonia,  which  t}ie  Greeks  call  Stena.  He 
followed,  in  a  few  days,  with  the. heavy  troops  ;  and,  having 
viewed  every  situation  ip.  the  country,  he  judged  that  the 
most  advantageous  post  for  fortifying  himself  was  on  the 
river  Aous.  This  river  runs  in  a  narrow  vale,  between  two 
mountains,  one  of  which  the  natives  call  the  river  Asnaus, 
affording  a  passage  of  very  litde  breadth  along  the  bank. 
He  ordered  Athenagoras,  with  the,  light  infantry,  to  take 
possession  of  Asnaus,  and  to  fortify  it.  His  own  camp  he 
pitched  on  i£ropu5.  Those .  places,  where  the  rocks  were 
were  defended  by  guards  of  n  few  soldiers  only  ;  the 
less  secure  he  strengthened,  some  with  trenches,  some  with 
rampa^,  and  others  with  towers.  A  great  number  of  en¬ 
gines,  also,  were  disposed  in  proper  places,  that,  by  means  of 
weapons  thrown  from  thei^  ^^cy  might  keep  the  enemy  at  a 
distance.  The  royal  pavilion  was  pitched  op  the  outside  of 
the  rampart,  on  the  most  conspicuous  eminence,  in  ord^,  by 
this  show  of  confidence,  to  dishearten  the  foe,  and  raise  the 
hopes  of  his  own  men. 
VOL.  IV. —  P  p 

290 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  5S3. 

VI.  The  consul  received  inteUigfbnce  from  Charopus  of 
Epirus,  that  the  King,  with  his  army,  had  posted  himsetf  in 
this  pass.  As  soon,  therefore,  as  the  spring  began  to  open, 
he  left  Corey ra,  where  he  had  passed  the  winter,  and,  sailing 
over  to  the  continent,  led  on  his  army.  When  he  came  with¬ 
in  about  five  miles  of  the  King’s  camp,  leaving  the  legions  in 
a  strong  post,  he  went  forward  in  person  with  some  light 
troops,  to  view  the  nature  of  the  country  ;  and  on  the  day 
following,  held  a  council,  in  order  to  determine  whether  he 
should,  notwithstanding  the  great  labour  and  danger  to  be 
encountered,  attempt  a  passage  through  the  defiles  occupied 
by  the  enemy,  or  lead  round  his  forces  by  the  same  road 
through  which  Sulpicius  had  penetrated  into  Macedonia  the 
year  before.  The  deliberations  on  this  question  had  la^ed 
several  days,  when  news  arrived,  that  Titus  Quintius  had 
been  elected  consul ;  that  he  had  obtained,  by  lot,  Mace¬ 
donia,  as  his  province  ;  and  that,  hastening  his  journey, 
he  had  already  come  over  to  Corcyra.  Valerius  Antias 
says,  that  Villius  marched  into  the  defile,  and  that,  as  he 
could  not  proceed  straight  forward,  because  ^ery  pass  was 
occupied  by  the  King,  he  followed  the  course  of  a  valley, 
through  the  middle  of  which  the  river  Aous  flows,  and  hav¬ 
ing  hastily  constructed  a  bridge,  passed  oVer  to  the  bank, 
where  the  King  lay,  and  fought  a  battle  with  him :  that  the 
King  was  routed  and  driven  out  of  his  camp  ;  that  twelve 
thousand  Macedonians  were  killed,  and  two  thousand  two 
hundred  taken,  together  with  a  hundred  and  thirty-two  mili¬ 
tary  standards,  and  two  hundred  and  thirty  horses.  He  adds, 
that,  during  the  battle,  a  temple  w^  vowed  to  Jupiter  in  case 
of  success.  The  other  historians^both  Greek  and  Latin,  (all 
those  at  least  whose  accounts  I  have  read,)  affirm,  that  nothing 
memorable  was  done  by  Villius,  and  that  Titus  Quintius  the 
consul,  who  succeeded  him,  found  that  no  progress  whatever 
had  been  made  in  the  business  of  the  war. 

BOOK  XXXII, 

291 

BX.  199.] 
VII.  Daring  the  time  of  these  transactions  in  Macedonia, 
the  other  consul,  Lucius  Lentulus,  ivho  had  staid  at  Rome, 
held  ,an  assembly  for  the  election  of  censors.  Out  of  many 
illustrious  men  who  stood  candidates,  were  chosen  Pub¬ 
lius  Cornelius  Scipio  Africanus  and  Publius  i£Uus  Paetus. 
These,  acting  together  with  the  most  perfect  harmony, 
read  the  list  of  the  senate,  without  passing  a  censure  on 
any  one  member ;  they  also  let  to  farm  the  port-duties  at 
Capua,  and  those  at  the  fort  of  Puteoli,  situate  where  the 
city  now  stands ;  enrolling  for  this  latter  place  three  hun¬ 
dred  colonists,  that  being  the  number  fixed  by  the  senate  ; 
they  also  sold  the  lands  of  Capua,  which  lie  at  the  foot  of 
Mount  Tifata.  About  the  same  time,  Lucius  Manlius  Aci- 
dinus,  on  his  return  from  Spain,  was  hindered  from  entering 
the  city  in  ovation  by  Marcus  Portius  Laeca,  plebeian  tribune, 
notwithstanding  he  had  obtained  permission  of  the  senate : 
coming,  then,  into  the  city,  in  a  private  character,  he  conveyed 
to  the  treasury  one  thousand  two  hundred  pounds  weight  of 
silver,  and  about  thirty  pounds  weight  of  gold.  ^  During  this 
year,  Cneius  Baebius  Tamphilus,  who  had  succeeded  to  the 
government  of  the  province  of  Gaul,  in  the  room  of  Caius 
Aurelias,  consul  of  the  year  preceding,  having,  without  pro¬ 
per  caution,  entered  the  territories  of  the  Insubrian  Gauls, 
was,  with  almost  the  whole  of  his  army,  attacked  at  disad¬ 
vantage  and^  overthrown.  He  lost  above  six  thousand  six 
hundred  men, — a  severe  blow  from  an  enemy  who  had  for 
some  time  ceased  to  be  considered  as  being  formidable. 
This  event  called  away  the  consul,  Lucius  Lentulus,  from 
the  city  ;  who,  arriving  in  the  province,  which  was  in  gene¬ 
ral  confusion,  and  taking  the  command  of  the  army,  which 
he  found  dispirited  by  its  defeat,  severely  reprimanded  the 
praetor,  and  ordered  him  to  quit  the  province,  and  return  to 
Rome.  J^Jeither  did  the  consul  himself  perform  any  consider- 

292 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  553. 
able  service,  being  called  home  to  preside  at  the  elections, 
which  were  obstructed  by  Marcus  Fulvius  and  Manius  Cu¬ 
rias,  plebeian  tribunes,  who  wished  to  hinder  Titus  Quintius 
Flamininus  from  standing  candidate  for  the  consulship,  after 
passing  through  the  office  of  quaestor.  They  alleged,  that 
‘‘  the  aedileship  and  praetorship  were  now  held  in  fconteihpt, 
and  that  the  nobility  did  not  make  their  way  to  the  consulship 
through  the  regular  gradations  of  offices  ;  but,  passing  over 
the  intermediate  steps,  pushed  at  once  from  the  lowest  to  the 
highest.”  From  a  dispute  in  the  Field  of  Mars,  the  affair 
was  brought  before  the  senate,  where  it  was  voted,  that 
when  a  person  sued  for  any  post,  which  by  the  laws  he  was 
permitted  to  hold,  the  people  had  the  right  of  choosing  who¬ 
ever  they  thought  proper.”  To  this  decision  of  the  senate, 
the  tribunes  submitted,  and  thereupon  Sextus  iElius  Patus 
and  Titus  Quintius  Flamininus  were  elected.  Then  was  held 
the  election  of  praetors.  The  persons  chosen  were  Lucius 
Cornelius  Merula,  Marcus  Claudius  Marcellus,  Marcus 
Porcius  Cato,  and  Caius  Helvius,  who  had  been  plebeian 
aediles.  These  repeated  the  plebeian  games,  and,  on  occasion 
of  the  games,  celebrated  a  feast  of  Jupiter.  The  curule 
sediles  also,  Caius  Valerius  Flaccus,^who  was  flamen  of 
Jupiter,  and  Caius  Cornelius  Cethegus,  celebrated  the  Ro¬ 
man  games  with  great  magnificence.  Servius  and  Caius  Sul- 
picius  Galba,  pontiffs,  died  this  year  ;  in  their  room,  in  the 
college,  were  substituted  Marcus  iEmilius  Lepidus  and  Cnei- 
us  Cornelius  Skipio. 
VIII.  The  new  consuls,  Sextus  iElius  Paetus  and  Titus 
^  Quintius  Flamininus,  on  assuming  the  administra- 
B  C  *198  convened  the  senate  in  the  CapitoL  and  the 
Fathers  decreed,  that  the  consuls  should  settle 
between  themselves,  or  cast  lots  for  the  provinces,  Mace¬ 
donia  and  Italy.  That  he  to  whom  Macedonia  fell  should 
enlist,  as  a  supplement  to  the  legions,  three*thousand  Roman 

B.C.  ISO.] 

BOOK  XXXII. 

293 

footmen^  and  three  hundred  horse,  and  also  five  thousand 
footmen,  and  five  hundred  horsemen  of  the  Latine  confede- 
rates.”  The  army  assigned  to  the  other  consul,  was  to  con- 
sist  entirely  of  new-raised  men.  Lucius  Lentulus,  consul  of 
the  preceding  year,  was  continued  in  command,  and  was  or¬ 
dered  not  to  depart  from  the  province,  nor  to  remove  the  old 
army,^  until  the  consul  should  arrive  with  the  new  lcgi6ns. 
The  consuls  cast  lots  for  the  provinces,  and  Italy  fell  toiElius, 
Macedonia  to  Quintius.  Of  the  praetors,  the  lots  gave  to 
Lucius  Cornelius  Merula  the  city  jurisdiction  ;^to  Marcos 
Claudius,  Sicily  ;  to  Marcus  Porcius,  Sardinia  ;  and  to  Caius* 
Helvius,  Gaul.  The  levying  of  troops  was  then  begun,  for, 
besides  the  consular  armies,  they  had  been  ordered  also  to 
enlist  men  for  the  praetors:  for  Marcellus,  in  Sicily,  four 
thousand  foot  and  three  hundred  horse  of  the  Latine  con¬ 
federates  ;  for  Cato,  in  Sardinia,  three  thousand  foot  and  two 
hundred  horse  of  the  same  country;  with  directions,  that 
both  these  praetors,  on  their  arrival  in  their  provinces,  should 
disband  the  veterans,  both  foot  and  horse.  The  consuls  then 
introduced  to  the  senate  ambassadors  from  King  Attains. 
These,  after  representing  that  their  King  gave  every  assist¬ 
ance  to.  the  Roman  arms  on  land  and  sea,  with  his  fleet  and 
all  his  forces,  and  had  hitherto  executed,  with  zeal  and  alac¬ 
rity,  every  order  of  the  consuls,  added,  that  “  they  feared  it 
would  not  be  in  his  power  to  continue  so  to  do,  as  he  was 
much  embarrassed  by  Antiochus,  who  had  invaded  his  king¬ 
dom,  when  the  sea  and  land  forces,  which  might  have  defend¬ 
ed  it,  were  removed  to  a  distance.  That  Attains,  therefore, 
entreated  the  Conscript  Fathers,  if  they  chose  to  employ  his 
army  and  navy  in  the  Macedonian  war,  then  to  send  a  body 
of  forces  to  protect  his  territories  ^  or  if  that  were  not  agreea¬ 
ble,  to  allow  him  to  go  home  for  that  purpose,  with  his  fleet 
and  troops.”  The  following  answer  was  ordered  to  be  given 
to  the  ambassadors :  that  the  senate  retained  a  due  sense  of 

294 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  554. 

Attalus’s  friendship  in  aiding  the  Roman  commanders  with 
his  fleet  and  other  forces.  That  they  wotdd  neither  send 
succours  to  Attalus,  against  Antiochus,,the  ally  and  friend  of 
the  Roman  people  j  nor  would  they  detain  the  troops,  which 
he  had  sent  to  their  assistance,  to  his  inconvenience.  That  it 
was  ever  a  constant  rule  with  the  Roman  people,  to  use  the 
aid  of  others,  so  far  only,  as  was  agreeable  to  the  will  of  those 
who  gave  it ;  and  even  to  leave  those  who  were  so  inclined, 
at  full  liberty  to  determine,  when  that  assistance  should  com¬ 
mence,  and  when  it  should  cease.  That  they  would  send 
» ambassadors  to  Antiochus  ;  to  represent  to  him,* that  Atta¬ 
ins,  with  his  fleet  and  army,  were,  at  the  present,  employed 
by  the  Roman  people,  against  Philip  their  common  enemy  ; 
and  that  they  would  request^  Antiochus,  to  leave  the  do¬ 
minions  of  Attalus  unmolested,  and  to  refrain  from  all  hos¬ 
tilities  ;  for  that  it  was  much  to  be  wished,  that  kings,  who 
were  allies  and  friends  to  the  Roman  people,  should  maintain 
friendship  between  themselves  also.” 
lx.  When  the  consul  Titus  Quin ti us  had  finished  the  le¬ 
vies,  in  making  which  he  chose  principally  such  as  had  served 
in  Spain  or  Africa,  that  is,  soldiers  of  approved  courage,  and 
when  hastening  to  set  forward  to  his  province,  he  was  de¬ 
layed  by  reports  of  prodigies,  and  the  expiations  of  them  ne¬ 
cessary  to  be  performed.  I'here  had  been  struck  by  light¬ 
ning  the  public  road  at  Veii,  a  temple  of  Jupiter  at  Lanuvium, 
a  temple  of  Hercules  at  Ardea,  with  a  wall  and  towers  at 
Capua,  also  the  edifice  which  is  caMed  Alba.  At  Arretium, 
the  sky  appeared  .as  on  fire  ;  at  Velitrse,  the  earth,  to  the  ex¬ 
tent  of  three  acres,  sunk  down,  so  as  to  form  a  vast  chasm. 
From  Suessa  Aurunca,  an  account  was  iH’Ougkt  of  a  lamb 
bom  with  two  heads  ;  from  Sinuessa,  of  a  swine  with  a  hu¬ 
man  head.  On  occasion  of  these  ill  omens,  a  supplication  of 
one  day’s  continuance  was  performed ;  the  consuls  employed 
themselves  diligently  in  the  worship  of  the  gods,  and  as  soon 

BOOK  XXXII. 

295 

B,C.  198.] 
as  these  were  appeased,  set  out  for  their  provinces.  i£lius, 
accompanied  by  Caius  Helvius,  prator,  went  into  Gaul, 
where  he  put  under  the  command  of  the  praetor  the  army 
which  he  received  from  Lucius  Lentidus,  and  which  he 
ought  to  have  disbapded,  intending  to*  carry  on  his  own  ope¬ 
rations  with  the  new  troops,  which  he  had  brought  with  him  ; 
but  he  effected  nothing  worth  recording.  The  other  consul, 
Titus  Quintius,  setting  sail  from  Brundusium  earlier  than 
had  been  usual  with  formei>consuls,  reached  Corcyra,  with 
eight  thousand  foot  and  eight  hundred  horse.  From  this 
place,  he  passed  over,  in  a  quinqueremt,  to  the  nearest  part 
of  Epirus,  and  proceeded,  by  long  joumics,  to  the  Roman 
camp.  Here  he  dismissed  Villius  ;  and  waiting  a  few  days, 
until  the  forces  from  Corcyra  should  come  up  and  join  him, 
held  a  council,  to  determine  whether^  he  should  endeavour  to 
force  his  way  straight  forward  through  the  camp  of  the  ene¬ 
my  ;  or  whether,  without  attempting  an  enterprise  of  so  great 
difficulty  and  danger,  he  should  not  rather  take  a  circuitous 
and  safe  road,  so  as  to  penetrate  into  Macedonia  by  the 
xountry  of  the  Dassaretians  and  I-ycus.  The  latter  plan 
would  have  been  adopted,  had  |ie  not  feared  that,  in  remov¬ 
ing  to  a  greater  distance  from  the  sea,  the  enemy  might  slip 
out  of  his  hands  rand  that  if  the  King  should  resolve  to  se- 
cuit.  himself  iu  the  woods  and  wilds,  a^  he  had  done  before, 
the  summer  might  be  spun  out  without  any  thing  being  ef¬ 
fected.  It  was  therefore  determined,  be  the  event  what  it 
niight,  to  attack  the  enemy  in  their  present  post,  disadvanta¬ 
geous  as  it  would  seem  to  an  assailant.  But  it  was  easier  to 
resolve  on  this  measure,  than  to  devise  any  safe  or  certain 
method  of  accomplishing  it. 
X.  Forty  days  were  passed  in  view  of  the  enemy,  without 
making  any  kind  of  effort.  Hence  Philip  conceived  hopes  of 
bringing  about  a  treaty  of  peace,  through  the  mediation  of 
the  people  of  Epirus  ;  and  a  council,  which  was  held  for  the 

296 

HISTORY  QF  ROME. 

fy.R.  554. 

purpose,  having  appointed  Pausanias  the  prsetor,And  Alex^- 
der  the  master  of  the  horse,  as  negotiators,  they  brought  the 
consul  and  the  King  to  a  conference,  on  the  banks  of  the  river 
Aous,  where  the  q^annel  was  narrowest.  The  sum  of  the 
consurs  demands  was,  that  the  King  should  withdraw  his 
troops  from  the  territories  of  the  several  states  ;  that  to  those, 
whose  lands  and  cities  he  had  plundered,  he  should  restore 
such  of  their  effects  as  could  be  found;  and  that  the  value  of 
the  rest  should  be  estimated  by  a  fair  arbitration.  Philip 
answered,  that  the  cases  of  the  several  states  differed  widely 
from  each  other.  That  such  as  he  himself  had  seized  on,  he 
would  set  at  liberty  ;  but  he  would  not  divest  himself  of  the 
hereditary  and  just  possessions  which  had  been  conveyed 
down  to  him  from  his  ancestors.  If  those,  with  whom  hos¬ 
tilities  had  been  carried  on,  complained  of  any  losses  in  the 
war,  he  was  ready  to  submit  the  matter  to  the  arbitration  of 
any  state  with  whom  both  parties  were  at  peace.’’  *  To  this 
the  consul  replied,  that  “  the  business  required  neither  judge 
nor  arbitrator :  for  who  did  not  see  clearly  that  every  in¬ 
jurious  consequence  of  the  war  was  to  be  imputed  to  the  first 
aggressor  ?  And  in  this  case  Philip,  unprovoked  by  any,  had 
first  commenced  hostilities  against  all.”  When  they  next  be¬ 
gan  to  treat  of  those  nations  which  were  to  be  set  at  liberty, 
the  Consul  named,  first,  the  Thessalians  :  on  ivhich  the  King 
indignantly  exclaimed, — What  harsher  terms,  Titus  Quin- 
tius,  could  you  impose  on  me,  if  I  were  vanquished  ?”  With 
these  words  he  retired  hastily  from  the  conference,  and  they 
were  prevented  only  by  the  river  which  separated  them,  from 
assaulting  each  other  with  missile  weapons.  On  the  follow¬ 
ing  day  many  skirmishes  took  place  between  parties  sallying 
from  the  outposts,  in  a  plain  sufficiently  wide,  for  the  purpose. 
Afterwards  the  King’s  troops  drew  back  into  narrdw  and 
rocky  places,  whither  the  Romans,  keenly  eager  for  fighting, 
penetrated  also.  These  had  in  their  favour  order  and  mill- 

BOOK  XXXII. 

297 

B.C.198.] 
tary  discipline,  while  their  arms  were  of  a  kind  well  calculated 
for  pressing  close  on  the  Macedonians,  who  had,  indeed,  the 
advantage  of  ground,  with  balistas  and  catapultas  disposed 
on  almost  every  rock  as  on  w  alls.  After  many  wounds  given 
and  received  on  both  sides,  and  numbers  being  slain,  as  in  a 
regular  engagement,  darkness  put  an  end  to  the  fight. 
XL.  While  matters  were  in  this  state,  a  herdsman,  sent 
by  Charopus,  prince  of  the  Epirots,  was  brought  to  the  con¬ 
sul.  He  said,  that  “  being  accustomed  to  feed  his  herd  in  the 
forest,  then  occupied  by  the  King’s  camp,  he  knew  every 
winding  and  path  in  the  neighbouring  mountains  ;  and  that,  if 
the  consul  thought  proper  to  send  some  troops  with  him,  he 
would  lead  them  by  a  road,  neither  dangerous  nor  difficult, 
to  a  spot  over  the  enemy’s  head.”  Charopus  sent  a  message 
to  the  Roman,  to  give  just  so  much  credit  to  this  man’s  ac¬ 
count,  as  should  still  leave  every  thing  in  his  own  power,  and 
as  little  as  possible  in  that  of  the  other.  Though  the  consul 
rather  wished  than  dared  to  give  the  intelligence  full  belief, 
and  though  his  emotions  of  joy  were  strongly  checked  by  fear, 
yet  being  moved  by  the  confidence  due  to  Charopus,  he  re¬ 
solved  to  put  to  trial  the  favourable  offer.  In  order  to  pre¬ 
vent  all  suspicion  of  the  matter,  during  the  two  following 
days  he  carried  on  attacks  against  the  enemy  without  inter¬ 
mission,  drawing  out  troops  against  them  in  every  quarter, 
and  sending  up  fresh  men  to  relieve  the  wearied.  Then,  se¬ 
lecting  four  thousand  foot  and  three  hundred  horse,  he  put 
them  under  the  command  of  a  military  tribune,  with  direc¬ 
tions  to  advance  the  horse  as  far  as  the  nature  of  the  ground 
allowed  ;  and  when  they  came  to  places  impassable  to  caval¬ 
ry,  then  to  post  them  in  some  plain  ;  that  the  infantry  should 
proceed  by  the  road  which  the  guide  would  show,  and  that 
when,  according  to  his  promise,  they  arrived  on  the  height 
over  the  enemy’s  head,  then  they  should  give  a  signal  by 
smoke,  but  raise  no  shout,  until  the  tribune  should  have  rea- 
VOL.  IV. — Qq^ 

298 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y,R.  554. 

son  to  think  that,  in  consequence  of  the  signal  received  from 
him,  the  battle  was  begun.  He  ordered  that  the  troops  should 
march  by  night  (the  moon  shining  through  the  whole  of  it), 
and  employ  the  day  in  taking  food  and  rest.  The  most  libe¬ 
ral  promises  were  made  to  the  guide,  provided  he  fulfilled 
his  engagement ;  he  bound  him  nevertheless,  and  deliver¬ 
ed  him  to  the  tribune.  Having  thus  sent  off  this  detach¬ 
ment,  the  Roman  general  exerted  redoubled  vigour  in  every 
part  to  make  himself  master  of  the  posts  of  the  enemy. 
XII.  On  the  third  day,  the  Roman  party  made  the  signal 
by  smoke,  to  notify  that  they  had  gained  possession  of  the 
eminence  to  which  they  had  been  directed  ;  and  then  the 
consul,  dividing  his  forces  into  three  parts,  marched  up  with 
the  main  strength  of  his  army,  through  a  valley  in  the  mid¬ 
dle,  and'  made  the  wings  on  right  and  left  advance  to  the 
camp  of  the  enemy.  Nor  did  these  betray  any  want  of  spi¬ 
rit,  but  came  out  briskly  to  meet  him.  The  Roman  soldiers, 
in  the  ardour  of  their  courage,  long  maintained  the  fight  on 
the  outside  of  their  works,  for  they  had  no  small  superiority 
in  bravery,  in  skill,  and  in  the  nature  of  their  arms  ;  but 
when  the  King’s  troops,  after  many  of  them  were  wounded 
and  slain,  retreated  into  places  secured  either  by  intrench- 
ments  or  situation,  the  danger  reverted  on  the  Romans, 
who  pushed  forward,  inconsiderately,  into  disadvantageous 
grounds  and  defiles,  out  of  which  a  retreat  was  difficult.  Nor 
would  they  have  extricated  themselves  without  suffering  for 
their  rashness,  had  not  the  Macedonians,  first,  by  a  shout 
heard  on  their  rear,  and  then  by  an  attack  begun  on  that  quar¬ 
ter,  been  utterly  dismayed  and  confounded  at  the  unthought- 
of  danger.  Some  betook  themselves  to  a  hasty  flight :  some 
keeping  their  stand,  rather  because  they  could  find  no  way  for 
flight,  than  that  they  possessed  spirit  to  support  the  engage¬ 
ment,  were  tut  off  by  the  Romans,  who  pressed  them  hard 
both  on  front  and  rear.  Their  army  might  have  been  en- 

BOOK  XXXII. 

299 

B.C.  198.] 
tirely  destroyed,  had  the  victors  continued  their  pursuit  of 
the  fugitives ;  but  the  cavalry  were  obstructed  by  the  nar¬ 
rowness  of  the  passes  and  the  ruggedness  of  the  ground  ; 
and  the  infantry,  by  the  weight  of  their  armour.  The  King 
at  first  fled  with  precipitation,  without  looking  behind  him  ; 
but  afterwards  when  he  had  proceeded  as  far  as  five  miles, 
he  began  from  recollecting  the  unevenness  of  the  road,  to  sus¬ 
pect,  (what  was  really  the  case,)  that  the  enemy  could  not 
follow  him ;  and  halting,  he  despatched  his  attendants  through 
all  the  hills  and  valleys  to  collect  the  stragglers  together. 
His  loss  was  not  more  than  two  thousand  men.  The  rest  of 
his  army  coming  to  one  spot,  as  if  they  had  followed  some 
signal,  marched  oflF,  in  a  compact  body,  toward  Thessaly, 
The  Romans,  after  having  pursued  the  enemy  as  far  as  they 
could  with  safety,  killing  such  as  they  overtook,  and  despoil¬ 
ing  the  slain,  seized  and  plundered  the  King’s  camp ;  to 
which,  even  when  therf  were  no  troops  to  oppose  them,  they 
could  not  easily  make  their  way.  The  following  night  they 
were  lodged  within  their  own  trenches. 
XIII.  Next  day,  the  consul  pursued  the  enemy  through 
the  same  defiles,  following  the  course  of  the  river  as  it  winds 
through  the  valleys.  The  King  came  first  to  the  Camp  of 
Pyrrhus,  a  place  so  called  in  Triphylia,  a  district  of  Melotis  ; 
and  on  the  following  day,  by  a  very  long  march,  his  fears 
urging  him  on,  he  reached  Mount  Lingos.  This  ridge  of 
mountains  belongs  to  Epirus,  and  stretches  along  between 
Macedonia  and  Thessaly  ;  the  side  next  to  Thessaly  faces 
the  east,  that  next  to  Macedonia  the  north.  These  hills  are 
thickly  clad  with  woods,  and  on  their  summits  have  open 
plains  and  springs  of  water.  Here  Philip  remained  encamp¬ 
ed  for  several  days,  being  unable  to  determine  whether  he 
should  continue  his  retreat,  until  he  arrived  in  his  own  do¬ 
minions,  or  whether  he  might  venture  back  into  Thessaly. 
At  length,  he  resolved  to  direct  his  route  into  Thessaly  ;  and, 

300 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  554. 

going  by  the  shortest  roads  to  Tricca,  he  made  hasty  excur¬ 
sions  from  thence^  to  all  the  cities  within  his  reach.  The  in¬ 
habitants  who  were  able  to  accompany  him,  he  carried  away 
from  their  habitations,  and  burned  the  towns,  allowing  the 
owners  to  take  with  them  such  of  thek  effects  as  they  were, 
able  to  carry  ;  the  rest  became  the  prey  of  the  soldiers  ;  nor 
was  there  any  kind  of  cruelty  which  they  could  have  suffered 
from  an  enemy,  that  they  did  not  suffer  from  these  their  con¬ 
federates.  The  infliction  of  such  hardships  was  irksome  to 
Philip,  even  while  he  authorised  it ;  but  as  the  country  was 
soon  to  become  the  property  of  the  foe,  he  wished  to  rescue 
out  of  it  their  persons  at  least.  In  this  manner  were  ravaged 
the  towns  of  Phacium,  Iresia,  Euhydrium,  Eretria,  and  Pa- 
Isephatus.  On  his  coining  to  Pherae,  the  gates  were  shut 
against  him,  and  as  it  would  necessarily  occasion  a  consider¬ 
able  delay,  if  he  attempted  to  take  it  by  force,  and  as  he  could 
not  spare  time,  he  dropped  the  desigi^  and  crossed  over  the 
mountains  into  Macedonia:  for  he  had  received  intelligence, 
that  the  iEtolians  too  were  marching  towards  him.  These, 
on  hearing  of  the  battle  fought  on  the  banks  of  the  river 
Aous,  first  laid  waste  the  nearest  tracts  round  Sperchia,  and 
Long  Come,  as  it  is  called,  and  then,  passing  over  into  Thes¬ 
saly,  got  possession  of  Cymine  and  Angca  at  the  first  assault. 
From  Metropolis,  they  were  repulsed  by  the  inhabitants, 
who,  while  a  part  of  their  army  was  plundering  the  country, 
assembled  in  a  body  to  defend  the  city.  Afterwards,  mak¬ 
ing  an  attempt  on  Calli there,  they  were  attacked  by  the 
townsmen  in  a  like  manner  ;  but  withstood  their  onset  with 
more  steadiness,  drove  back  into  the  town  the  party  which 
had  sallied,  and  content  with  that  success,  as  they  had  scarce¬ 
ly  any  prospect  of  taking  the  place  by  storm,  retired.  They 
then  touk  by  assault  and  sacked  the  towns  of  Theuma  and 
Calathas.  Achorrae,  they  gained  by  surrender.  Xyniae, 
through  similar  apprehensions,  was  abandoned  by  the  inha- 

BOOK  XXXII. 

301 

B.C.  198.] 
bitants.  These,  having  forsaken  their  homes,  and  going  to¬ 
gether  in  a  bpdy,  fell  in  with  a  party  of  Athamanians  em- 
^oyed  in  protecting  their  foragers  ;  all  of  whom,  an  irregn* 
lar  and  unarmed  multitude,  incapable  of  any  resistance,  were 
put  to  the  sword  by  the  troops.  The  deserted  town  of  Xyniae 
was  plundered.  The  Altolians  then  took  Cyphara,  a  fort  ccmve- 
niently  situated  on  the  confines  of  Dolopia.  All  this  the  Mto* 
lians  performed  within  the  space  of  a  few  days. 
XIV.  Amynander  and  the  Athamanians,  when  they  heard 
of  the  victory  obtained  by  the  Romans,  continued  not  inac¬ 
tive.  Amynander,  having  little  confidence  in  his  own  troops, 
requested  aid  from  the  consul ;  and  then  advancing  towards 
Gomphi,  he  stormed  on  his  march  a  place  called  Pheca,  situ¬ 
ate  between  that  town  and  the  narrow  pass  which  separates 
Thessaly  from  Athamania.  He  then  attacked  Gomphi,  and 
though  the  inhabitants  defended  it  for  several  days  with  the 
utmost  vigour,  yet,  as  soon  as  he  had  raised  the  scaling-lad¬ 
ders  to  tl^^  walls,  the  same  apprehensions  which  had  operated 
on  others,  made  them  capitulate.  This  capture  of  Gomphi 
spread  the  greatest  consternation  among  the  Thessalians ; 
their  fortresses  of  Argenta,  Pherinus,  Thimarus,  Lisinae, 
Stimon,  and  Lampsus,  surrendered,  one  after  another,  with 
several  other  garrisons  equally  inconsiderable.  While  die 
Athamanians  and  iEtolians,  delivered  from  fear  of  the  Mace¬ 
donians,  converted  to  their  own  profit  the  fruits  of  another’s 
victory ;  and  Thessaly,  ravaged  by  three  armies  at  once, 
knew  not  which  to  believe  its  foe  or  its  friend  ;  the  consul 
marched  on,  through  the  pass  which  the  enemy’s  flight  had 
left  open,  into  the  country  of  Epirus.  Though  he  well  knew 
which  party  the  Epirots,  excepting  their  prince  Charopus, 
were  disposed  to  favour,  yet  as  he  saw,  that  even  from  the 
motive  of  atoning  for  past  behaviour,  they  obeyed  his  orders 
with  diligence,  he  regulated  his  treatment  of  them  by  the 
standard  of  their  present  rather  than  of  their  former  temper, 

302 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  ^54. 

and  by  this  readiness  to  pardon^  conciliated  their  affection  for 
the  future.  Then,  sending  orders  to  Corcyra,  for  the  trans¬ 
port  ships  to  come  into  the  Ambracian  bay,  he  advanced  by 
moderate  marches,  and  on  the  fourth  day  pitched  his  camp 
on  Mount  Cercetius.  Hither  he  ordered  Amynander  to 
come  with  his  auxiliary  troops ;  not  so  much  because  he 
wanted  such  addition  of  his  forces,  as  with  design  to  use  them 
as  guides  into  Thessaly.  With  the  same  purpose,  many  vo¬ 
lunteers  of  the  Epirots,  also,  were  admitted  into  the  corps  of 
auxiliaries. 
XV.  Of  the  cities  of  Thessaly,  the  first  which  he  attacked, 
was  Phaleria.  The  garrison  here  consisted  of  two  thousand 
Macedonians,  who  made  at  first  a  most  vigorous  resistance, 
availing  themselves,  to  the  utmost,  of  every  advantage  that 
their  arms  and  works  could  afford.  The  assault  was  carried 
on,  without  intermission  or  relaxation,  either  by  day  or  by 
night,  because  the  consul  thought  that  it  would  have  a  pow¬ 
erful  effect  on  the  spirits  of  the  rest  of  the  Thessalians,  if  the 
first  who  made  trial  of  the  Roman  strength  were  unable  to  with¬ 
stand  it ;  and  this  at  the  same  time  subdued  the  obstinacy  of 
the  Macedonians.  On  the  reduction  of  Phaleria,  deputies 
came  from  Metropolis  and  Piera,  surrendering  those  cities. 
Th  them,  on  their  petition,  pardon  was*granted  ;  Phaleria 
was  sacked,  and  burned.  He  then  proceeded  to  iEginium  ; 
but  finding  this,  place  so  circumstanced,  that,  even  with  a  mo¬ 
derate  garrison,  it  was  safe  ;  after  discharging  a  few  weapons 
against  the  nearest  advanced  guard,  he  directed  his  march  to¬ 
wards  the  territory  of  Gomphi ;  and  thence,  into  the  plains 
of  Thessaly.  His  army  was  now  in  want  of  every  thing,  be¬ 
cause  he  had  spared  the  lands  of  the  Epirots  ;  he  therefore 
despatched  messengers  to  learn  whether  the  transports  had 
reached  Leucas  and  the  Ambracian  bay  ;  sending  the  cohorts, 
in  turn,  to  Ambracia  for  corn.  Now  the  road  from  Gomphi 
to  Ambracia,  although  difficult  and  embarrassed,  is  very 

BOOK  XXXIL 

303 

B.C.  198.] 

short :  so  that  few  days  provisions  were  brought  up  from 
the  sea  in  abundance.  He  then  rnarched  to  Atrax,  which  is 
about  ten  miles  from  Larissa,  on  the  river  Peneus.  The  in¬ 
habitants  came  originally  from  Perrhsebia.  The  Thessalians, 
here,  were  not  in  the  least  alarmed  at  the  first  coming  of  the 
Romans ;  and  Philip,  although  he  durst  not  himself  advance 
into  Thessaly,  yet,  keeping  his  statipn  in  the  vale  of  Tempe, 
whenever  any  place  was  attempted  by  the  enemy,  he  sent  up 
reinforcements  as  ocmioned  required. 
XVI.  About  the  tme  that  Quintius  first  pitched  his  camp 
opposite  to  Philip’s,  tnd  at  the  entrance  of  Epirus  ;  Lucius, 
the  consul’s  brother,  yhom  the  senate  had  commissioned  both 
to  the  naval  command  and  to  the  government  of  the  coast, 
sailed  over  with  two  quinqueremesto  Corey ra  ;  and  when  he 
learned  that  the  fleet  h^d  departed  thence,  thinking  any  delay 
improper,  he  followed,  and  overtook  it  at  the  island  of  Zama« 
Here  he  dismissed  Luiius  Apustius,  in  whose  room  he  had 
been  appointed,  and  theil  proceeded  to  Malea,  but  at  a  slow 
rate,  being  obliged,  for  the  most  part,  to  tow  the  vessels 
which  accompanied  him  with  provisions.  From  Malea,  after 
ordering  the  rest  to  follow  with  all  possible  expedition,  him¬ 
self,  with  three  light  quiiKjueremes,  hastened  forward  to  the 
Pirseeus,  and  took  under  his  command  the  ships  left  there  by 
Lucius  Apustius,  lieutenant-general,  for  the  protection  of 
Athens.  At  the  same  time,  two  fleets  set  sail  from  Asia ; 
one  of  twenty-four  quinqueremes,  under  King  Attalus  ^  the 
other  belonging  to  the  Rhodians,  consisting  of  twenty  decked 
ships,  and  commanded  by  Agesimbrotus.  These  fleets,  join¬ 
ing  nev  the  island  of  Andros,  sailed  for  Eubcea,  to  reach 
which  place  they  had  only  to  cross  a  narrow  channel.  I'hey 
first  ravaged  th%  lands  belonging  to  Carystus  ;  but,  judging 
that  city  too  strong,  in  consequence  of  a  reinforcement  hastily 
sent  from  Ghalcis,  they  bent  their  course  to  Eretria.  Lucius 
Quintius  also,  on  hearing  of  the  arrival  of  King  Attalus,  came 

304 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  554. 

thither  with  the  ships  which  had  lain  at  the  Piraeeus  ;  having 
left  orders,  that  his  own  ships  should,  as  they  arrived,  follow 
him  to  Euboea.  The  siege  of  Eretria  was  now  pushed  for¬ 
ward  with  the  utmost  vigour  ;  for  the  three  combined  fleets 
carried  machines  and  engines,  of  all  sorts,  for  the  demolition 
of  towns,  and  the  adjacent  country  offered  abundancl^  of  tim¬ 
ber  for  the  construction  of  new  works.  At  the  beginning  the 
townsmen  defended  themselves  with  a  ^ood  degree  of  spirit ; 
afterwards,  when  they  felt  the  effects  of  fatigue,  a  great  many 
being  likewise  wounded,  and  a  part  of  the  wall  demolished 
by  the  enemy’s  works,  they  became  dsposed  to  capitulate. 
But  they  had  a  garrison  of  Macedoniais,  of  whom  they  stood 
in  no  less  dread  than  of  the  Romais  ;  and  Philocles,  the 
King’s  general,  sent  frequent  messaga  from  Chalcis,  that  he 
would  bring  them  succour  in  due  time,  if  they  could  hold 
out  the  siege.  The  hope  of  this,  in  conjunction  with  their 
fears,  obliged  them  to  protract  the  time  longer  than  was  con¬ 
sistent  either  with  their  wishes  or  tfeir  strength.  However, 
having  learned  soon  after,  that  Ph'locles  had  been  repulsed 
in  the  attempt,  and  forced  to  fly  back,  in  disorder,  to  Chalcis, 
they  instantly  sent  deputies  to  Attalus,  to  beg  pardon  and 
protection.  While  intent  on  the  prospect  of  peace,  they  re¬ 
mitted  their  diligence  in  the  duties  of  war,  and  kept  armed 
guards  in  that  quarter  only,  where  the  breach  had  been  made 
in  the  wall,  neglecting  all  the  rest ;  Quintius  made  an  assault 
by  night  on  the  side  where  it  was  least  apprehended,  and  car¬ 
ried  the  town  by  scalade.  The  townsmen,  with  their  wives 
and  children,  fled  into  the  citadel,  but  soon  after  surrendered 
themselves  prisoners.  The  quantity  of  money,  of  gdld,  and 
silver,  taken,  was  not  great.  Of  statues  and  pictures,  the 
works  of  ancient  artists,  and  other  ornaments  of  that  kind,  a 
greater  number  was  found  than  could  be  expected,  either 
from  the  size  of  the  city,  or  its  opulence  in  other  particulars. 

BOOK  xxxn. 

305 

B.C- 198.] 
XVII.  The  design  on  Caiystus  was  then  resumed^and  the 
fleets  sailed  diither  ;  pn  which  the  whole  body  of  the  snh^i* 
tants^  before  the  troops  were  disembarked,  deserted  the  city, 
and  fled  isto^  the  citadel,  whence  they  sent  deputies  to 
protection  from  the  Roman  general.  To  the  townspeople  life 
and  liberty  were  immediately  granted ;  and  it  was  ordered, 
that  the  Macedonian?  should  pay  a  ransom  of  three  hundr^ 
drachmas*  a  head,  deliver  qp  their  arms,  and  quit  the  coun* 
try.  After  being  thus  ransomed,  they  were  transported,  un¬ 
armed,  to  Bosotia.  The  combined  fleets  having,  in  the  space 
of  a  few  days,  taken  these  two  important  cities  of  Eubcea, 
sailed  round  Sunium,  a  promontory  of  Attica,  and  steered 
their  course  to  Cenchreae,  the  grand  mart  of  the  Corinthians « 
In  the  mean  time,  the  consul  found  the  siege  of  Atra:!:,  mmre 
tedious  than  he  had  imagined,  the  enemy  making  an  unex¬ 
pected  resistance.  He  had  supposed  that  the  whole  of  the 
trouble  would  be  in  demolishing  the  wall,  and  that  if  he  could 
once  open  a  passage  for  his  soldiers  into  the  city,  the  conse¬ 
quence  would  then  be,  the  flight  and  slaughter  of  the  enemy, 
as  usually  happens  on  the  capture  of  towns.  But  when,  on 
a  breach  being  made  ip  the  wall  by  the  rams,  and  when  the 
soldiers,  by  mounting  over  the  ruins,  had^tered  the  place, 
this  proved  only  the  beginning,  as  it  were,  of  an  unusual  and 
fresh  labour.  For  the  Macedonians  in  garrison,  who  were 
both  chosen  men,  and  many  in  number,  supposing  that  they 
would  be  entitled  to  extraordinary  honour  if  they  shoidd 
maintain  the  defence  of  the  city  by  means  of  arms  and 
courage,  rather  than  by  the  help  of  walls,  formed  themselv^ 
in  a  compact  body,  strengthening  their  line  by  an  uncommon 
number  of  files  in  depth.  These,  when  they  saw  the  Romanf 
entering  by  the  breaches,  drove  them  back,  so  that  they 
entangled  among  the  rqbbfsh,  and  with  difficulty  could  effect 
•  91, 13k  9d, 
VOt.  IV. - R  R 

3(^6  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y  R.  554. 
a  retit:at.  1%is  gave  the  t^onsul  great  t:^eastties8 ;  for  he 
considered  such  a  disgrace,  not  merely  as  it  retarded  the  re¬ 
duction  of  a  single  city,  but  as  likely  to  affect  materkdly  the 
whole  process  of  the  war,  which  in  general  depends  much  on 
die  influence  of  events  in  thehiselves  <uniniportant.  Having 
tWeforc  cleared  the  ground  about  the  half  ruined  wall,  he 
brought  up  a  tower  of  extraordinary  'height,  cohsi^ing  of 
many  stories,  and  which  carried  a  great  number  of  soldiers. 
He  likewise  sent  up  the  cohorts  in  strong  bodies,  one  after 
miother,  to  force  their  way,  if  possible,  through  the  wedge  of 
the  Macedonians,  which  is  called  a  phalanx.  But  in  such  a 
confined  Space,  (for  the  wall  was  thrown  down  to  no  great 
extent,)  the  enemy  had  the  advantage,  both  in  the  kmd  of 
v^eapons  which  they  used,  and  in  the  manner  of  fighting. 
When  the  Macedonians,  in  close  array,  stretched  out  before 
them  their  long  spears  against  the  target  fence,  and  which 
was  formed  by  the  dose  position  of  their  antagonists’  shields, 
and  when  the  Romans,  after  discharging  their  javelins  with¬ 
out  effect,  drew  their  swords,  these  could  neither  press  On  to 
a  closer  combat,  nor  cut  off  the  heads  of  the  spears ;  and  if 
they  did  cut  or  break  off  any,  the  shaft  being  sharp  at  the 
part  where  it  was  broken,  filled  up  its  place  among  the  points 
of  those  which  were  unbroken,  in  a  kind  of  palisade.  Besides 
this,  the  parts  of  the  wall  still  standing  covered  safely  the 
flanks  of  the  Macedonians,  who  weref  not  obliged,  either  in 
retreating  cur  in  advancing  to"  an  attack,  to  pass  through  a 
long  space^  which  generally  occasions  disorder  in  th^ 
Ah  accidental  circumstance  also  helped  to  c^firm  their 
eburage  :  for  as  the  tower  was  moved  along  a  bank  not  suf* 
fictently  compacted,  one  of  the  wheels  sinking  into  a  rut, 
made  the  tower  lean  in  such  a  manner  that  it  appeared  to 
the  enemy  as  if  felling,  and  threw  die  soldiers  po^ed  on  it 
into  consternation  and  affright.  ' 

moK  xsjm.  aor 
XVIII.  As  none  ^  his  attempts  met  any  success,  Ae  con* 
sid  wsys  very  unwiiitiig  to  aibw  the  difference  betwecm  dia 
two  kinds  of  ^ddiery  and  their  weapmis  to*  be  manifest^  m 
such  trials ;  sMt  die  same  time,  he  could  neither  see  any  pros- 
p^t  of  reducing  the  place  speedily,  nor  smy  means  of  sub¬ 
sisting  in  winter,  at  such  a  distance  from  the  sea,  and.  In  a 
country  desolated  by  fhe  calamities  of  war.  He  tberefm'c 
raised  the  siege  ;  mid  as,  along  the  whole  coast  of  Acarnania 
and  i£t<dia,  there  was  no  port  capable  of  containing  all  the 
transports  that  brought  supplies  to  the  army,  nor .  any  plm:e 
which  aSbrjded  lodgings  to  theiegions,  he  pitched  on  Anti- 
qrra,  in  Pfaocis,  on  the  Corkithimi  gulf,  as  most  comanodious- 
ly  situated  for  his  purpose.  There  the  legicms  would  be  at 
no  great  distance  from.  Thessaly,  and  the  places  belonging  to 
the  enemy  ;  while  tiiey  woldd  have  in  front  Pelopponeaus 
separated  from  them  a  narrow  ;  on  their  rear,  ^tc^ 
and  Acamaam ;  and  on  their  sides,  Locris  and  Bceotia* 
Phanotea  and  Phocis  he  took  without  difficulty,  at  the  fir^ 
assault..  The  siege  of  Anticyra  gave  him  not  much  d^y. 
Then  Ambrysus  and  Hyampolis  were  takeipu  DauUs,  l^icg 
situated  on  a  Ic^  eminence,  could  not, be  reduced  either  by 
scabde  or  yfQtks :  he  therefore  provoked  the  g^rrisem)  by 
missile  weapons,  to  make  saUies  from  mit  iha  lawn.  Then 
by  flying  at  one  time,  pursuing  at  another,  anti  eng^gi^g  in 
sUght  skirmishes,  he  led  tiiem  into  %uch  a  degree  of  careless¬ 
ness,  and  such  a  contempt  of  him,  tl^t  at  length  the  .Romans, 
muting  with  them  as  they  ran  back,  entered  by  tiie  gates,  a^ 
stormed  the  town.  Six  <^dier  fortresses  in  Phoci^,  of  Uttk 
consequence,  came  into  his  hands,  through  fear  rather  than 
by  force  eff  arms.  Elatia  shut  its  gates,  and  the  inh^itanls 
seemed  determined  not  to  aditiit  within  their  walls  either  the 
army  or  general  of  the  Romans,  unless  compdiled  by  force. 
XIX.  While  the  consul  was  employed  in  the  siege  of 
tia,  a  prospect  opened  to  him  of  effecting  a  business  of  much 

$06 

HIST0IIY  or  ROME. 

[Y.R.5^4. 

more  ini|K)rtaiicc  :  of  being  able  td  prevail  6n  th^  Acbaeians  to 
renounce  their  alHance  with  Philips  and  attach  themselves  to 
the  Romans.  Cycliades,  the  head  of  the  Action  that  favour¬ 
ed  the  i^test  of  Philip,  they  had  now  banished  ;  and  Aris- 
taenus,  who  wished  for  a  utiion  between  his  countrymen  and 
the  Romans,  was  praetor.  The  Rom4n  fleet,  with  Attalus 
and  the  Rhodians,  lay  at  Ccnchreae,  and  were  preparing  to 
fay  si^e  to  Corinth  with  their  whole  combined  force.  The 
consul  therefore  judged  it  prudent,'  that,  before  they  entered 
on  that  affair,  ambassadors  should  be  sent  to  the  Achaean 
state,  with  assurances,  that,  if  they  came  over  from  the  King 
to  the  side  of  the  Romans,  the  latter  would  consign  Corinth 
to  them,  and  annex  it  to  the  old  confederacy  of  their  nation. 
Accordingly,  by  the  c<msttVs  direction,  ambassadors  were 
sent  to  the  Achasans,  by  his  brother  Lucius  Quintius,by  At¬ 
tains,  and  by  the  Rhodians  and  Athenians — a  general  assem¬ 
bly  being  summoned  to  meet  at  Sicyon  to  give  them  audience. 
Now  the  minds  of  the  Achaeans  laboured  with  a  complication 
of  difficulties.  They  feared  the  Lacedemonians,  their  con¬ 
stant  and  inveterate  enemies  ;  they  dreaded  the  arms  of  the 
Romans ;  th^  #ere  under  obligations  to  the  Macedonians, 
for  services  both  of  ancient  and  of  recent  date  ;  but  the  King 
himself,  on  account  of  his  perfidy  and  cruelty,  they  looked 
Upon  with  jeklous  fear,  and,  not  judging  from  tlic  behaviour 
which  he  then  assumed  for  the  tinte,  they  knei^f  that,  on  the 
conclusion  of  the  war,  they  should  find  him  a  more  tyrannic 
master.  So  that  every  one  of  them  was  not  only  at  a  loss  what 
opinion  he  should  support  in  the  senate  of  his  own  particular 
state,  or  in  the  general  diets  the  natiem  ;  but,  even  when 
they  deliberated  within  themselves,  they  could  not,  widt  any 
certainty,  determine  what  they  ought  to  wish,  or  what  to  pre¬ 
fer.  Such  was  the  unsetded  state  of  mind  of  the  members  of  the 
assembly,  when  the  ambassadors  were  introduced  to  audience. 
The  Roman  ambassador,  Lucius  Calpumius,  spoke  first ; 

BOOK  XXXIL 

309 

B.C.  198.] 
next  the  anabassadots  of  King  Attains  ;  after  them<|  those  of 
the  Rhodians  f  and  dien  Philip’s.  The  Athenians  were  hmtd 
the  last,  that  diey  asight  irfute  the  diseourses  of  the  Mace* 
donians.  These  hiveti^he^tl^ainsl  the  King  with  the  great* 
est  acrimony  of  any:|  ^^i^bthers  had  suffei^d  from  him  so 
many  and  so  severe  So  great  a  number  of  speeches 
succeeding  each  o!hcr,iN|^^?  Up  the  whole  of  the  day  )  and 
about  sunset,  the  councif  a^s  adjourned. 
XX.  Next  day  the  council  met  again  ;  and  when  the  ma* 
gistrates,  according  to  the  custom  of  the  Greeks,  gave  leave, 
by  their  herald,  to  any  person  who  chose  to  deliver  his  sen¬ 
timents,  not  one  stood  forth  ;  but  they  sat  a  kmg  time,  look* 
ing  on  each  other  in  silence.  It  was  no  wonder,  that  men, 
revedving  in  their  minds  matters  of  such  conn^adictory  ija- 
tures,  and  who  found  themselves  puzsried  and  confounded, 
should  be  involved  in  additional  perplexity  by  the  speeches 
continued  through  the  whole  preceding  day  ;  in  which  the 
difficulties,  on  ^l  sides,  were  brought  into  view,  and  stated  in 
their  full  force.  At  length  Arbtsenus,  the  praetor  of  the 
Achseans,  not  to  Aismi^  the  council  without  any  business  be* 
ing  introduced,  said  ; — Achseans,  where  are  now  those 
violent  disputes,  in  which,  at  your  feasts  and  meetings,  when¬ 
ever  mention  was  made  of  Philip  and  the  Romans,  you 
scarcely  refrained  from  blows  ?  Now,  in  a  g^eral  assembly, 
summoned  on  that  single  business,  when  you  have  heard  the 
ai^uments  of  the  ambassadors  on  botb  sides  ;  when  the  ma- 
gktrates  demand  your  opinions  j  when  the  herald  calls  you 
to  declare  your  sentiments,^you  arc  struck  duihb.  Although 
your  concern  for  the  common  safety  be  insufficient  for  deter¬ 
mining  the  matter,  cannot  the  party  zeal  which  has  attached 
you  to  oneikide  or  the  other,  extort  a  word  from  any  one  of 
you?  especially' when  none  is  so  blind  as  not  to  perceive, that 
the  time  for  declaring  and  recommending  what  each  either 
wishes  or  thinks  most  adviseable,  must  be  at  the  present  mo- 

310 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[YJR.  554u 

ment ;  Aal  is^  htiore  we  make  any  decree.  When  a  decree 
diall  be  mice  passed^  every  man,  even  such  as  at  feat  may 
have  disapproved,  the  measure,  omst  then  sup|mrt  it  as  good 
and  salutary.”  These  persuasiems  of  the  praetor,  so  far  from 
prevailing  on  any  one  person  to  declare  his  opinion,  vdid  imt 
excite,  in  afl  that  numerous  assembly,  c<41ected  out  of  so 
many  states,  so  much  as  a  murmur  or  a  whisper. 
XXI.  Then  the  praetor,  Aristaenus,  proceeded  thus:^ — 
**  Chiefs  of  Achaea,  you  are  not  more  at  a  loss  what  advice  to 
give,  than  you  are  for  words  to  deliver  it.in.j  but  eveiy  one 
is  unwilling  to  promote  the  interest  of  the  public  at  the  risk 
of  danger  to  himself.  Were  I  in  a  priva^  character,  perhaps 
I  too  should  be  s^ent ;  but,  as  prsetor,  it  4s  my  duty  to  dc* 
dare,  that  I  see  evidently,^ either  that  the  ambassadors  ought 
to  have  been  refused  an  audience  of  the  council,  or  that  they 
ought  not  to  be  dismksed  from  it  without  an  answer.  Yet, 
how  can  I  give  them  an  answer,  unless. by  a  decree, of  yours? 
And,  since  not  one  of  you  who  have  been  csdled  to  this  as¬ 
sembly  either  chooses  or  dares  to  make  known  bis  sentiment, 
let  us  examine  (as  if  they  were  opinions  proposed  to  our  conr 
sideraUon)  the  speeches  of  the  ambassadors  delivered  yester¬ 
day  ;  supposing,  for  a  moment,  the  speakers  not  to  have  re¬ 
quired  what  was  useful  to  themselves,  but  to  have  recom¬ 
mended  what  they  thought  most  conducive  to  pvtr  advantage. 
The  Romans,  the  Rhodians,  and  Attains,  request  an  aUiance 
and  friendship  with  us ;  and  they  demand  to  be  assisted  ip 
the  war  which  they  are  now  engaged  in  against  Philip. 
Philip  reminds  us  of  our  league  with  him,  and  of  the 
oUigatjon  of  onr  oath ;  be  requires,  only,  that  we  declare 
ourselves  on  his  side  ;  and  says,  he  will  be  satisfied  if  we  do 
not  intermeddle  in  the  operations  of  the  war.  Who  is  there 
so  short-sighted  sts  not  to  perceive  the  re^on  why  those  who 
are  not  yet  our  allies,  require  more  than  he  who  is  ?  This 
arises  not  from  modesty  in  Philip,  nor  from  the  want  of  it  in 

BOOK  XXXH. 

B.C-  19f  3 

sn 

the  Romans.  The  Achaean  harbours  show  what  it  is,  wfa^ch, 
while  U  bestows  confidence  to  requisitions  on  one  side, 
eludes  it  on  the  other.  We  sec  nothing  belonging  m  Philip 
but  his  ambassador  :  the  Homan  fleet  lies  at  Cenebrese,  ex- 
hibitiog  to  oar  view  the  spoils  of  the  cities  of  Euboea.  We 
behold  the  consul  and  his  legions,  at  the  distance  of  a  small 
tract  of  sea,  over-running  Phocis  and  Locris.  You  were  sur¬ 
prised  at  Philip’s  amt^ssadoT,  Cleoraedon,  showing  such  dif¬ 
fidence  yesterday  in  his  application  to  us  to  take  arms  on  the 
side  of  the  King  against  the  Romans.  But  if  we,  in  pursu¬ 
ance  of  the  same  treaty  and  oath,  the  obligation  of  which  he 
inculcated  on  us,  were  to  of  him,  that  Philip  should  pro¬ 
tect  us,  both  from  Nahis  and  his  Lacedamonians,  and  also 
from  the  Romans,  he  would  be  utterly  unable  to  find,  not  only 
a  force  for  the  purpose,  but  even  an  answer  to  return.  As 
much  so  in  truth  as  was  Philip  himelf,  who  endeavpared,  by 
promises  q£  waging  war  against  Nabts,  to  draw  away  our 
youth  iiUo  Eubcea :  but  finding  that  we  would  neither  decree 
such  assistanen  to  him,  nor  choose  to  be  embroiled  with 
Rome,  forgot  that  alhance,  on  which  he  now  lays  such  stress, 
and  left  us  to  the  Lacedemonians,  to  he  spoiled  and  plun¬ 
dered*  .  Besides,  to  me  the  arguments  of  Cleomedon  appear¬ 
ed  utterly  inconsistent  He  made  light  of  the  war  with  the 
Romans  ;  and  asserted,  that  the  issue  of  it  would  be  similar 
to  that  of  the  former,  which  they  waged  against  Philip.  If 
such  be  the  case,  why  does  he,  at  a  distance,  solicit  our  as¬ 
sistance  ;  rather  tlmn  come  hither  in  person,  and  defend  us, 
his  old  allies,  both  from  Nabis  and  from  the  Romans  ?  Us, 
do  I  say?  Why,  then,  hsis  he  suffered  Eretria  and  Caiystus 
to  be  taken  ?  Why,  so  many  cities  of  Thcssdy  ?  Why  Lo¬ 
cris  and  Phocis  ?  Why  does  he  at  present  suffer  Elatia  to 
be  besieged  ?  Did  he,  either  through  compulsion,  or  fear,  €«* 
choice,  quit  the  straights  of  Epirus,  and  th<»e  impregn2d)le 
f^^tnesses  on  the  river  Aous  j  and  why^  ab|ndoning  the  pos- 

312 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

{Y.R.  $54u 

i»$siQn  of  the  pass,  did  he  retire  into  his  own  Itingdotn  I  If, 
of  his  own  will,  he  gave  up  so  many  allies  to  the.  ravages  of 
the  e^emy,  what  objection  can  he  make  to  the«e  allies,  after 
his  example,  taking  care  of  themselves  ?  If  through  fear,  he 
ought  to  pardon  the  like  fear  in  us.  If  his  retreat  was  in 
consequence  of  a  defeat,  let  me  ask  you,  Cleomedcm,  shall 
we,  Achseans,  be  able  to  withstand  the  Roman  arms,  which 
you,  Macedonians,  have  not  withstood  I  Are  we  to  give 
credit  to  your  assertion,  that  the  Romans  do  not  employ,  in 
the  present  war,  greater  forces  or  greater  strength  than  they 
did  in  the  former,  or  are  we  to  regard  the  real  facts  ?  In 
the  first  instance,  they  aided  the  iEtolians  with  a  fleet ;  they 
sent  not  to  thc  war  either  a  consul  as  commander,  or  a  con¬ 
sular  army.  The  maritime  cities  of  Philip’s  alUcs  were  in 
terror  and  confusion  ;  but  the  inland  places  so  secure  against 
the  Roman  arms,  that  Philip  ravaged  the  country  of  the  iEto- 
lians,  while  they  in  vain  implored  succour  from  those  arms. 
Whereas,  in  the  present  case,  the  Romans,  after  bringing  to 
a  final  conclusion  the  Punic  war,  which,  raging  for  sixteen 
years  in  the  bowels,  as  it  were,  of  Italy,  had  given  them 
abundance  of  trouble,  sent  not  auxiliaries  to  the  iEtolians  in 
their  quarrels,  but,  being  themselves  principals,  made  a  hos¬ 
tile  invasion  on  Macedonia  with  land  and  sea  forces  at  once. 
Their  third  consul  is  now  pushing  forward  the  war  with  the 
utmost  vigour.  Sulpictus,  engaging  the  JCing  within  the  ter¬ 
ritory  of  Macedonia  itself,  routed  and  utterly  defeated  him  ; 
aiid  afterwards  despoiled  the  most  opulent  part  of  his  king¬ 
dom.  Then,  again,  when  he  was  in  possession  of  the  streight 
pf  Epirus,  where,  from  the  nature  of  the  ground,  his  fortifi¬ 
cations,  and  the  strength  of  his  army,  he  thought  himself  se¬ 
cure,  Quintius  drove  him  out  of  his  camp ;  pursued  him, 
he  fled  into  Thessaly  ;  and,  almost  in  the  view  <if  Philip  him¬ 
self,  stormed  the  royal  garrisons,  and  the  cities  of  his  allies. 
Supposing  that  there  were  no  truth  in  what  the  Athenian  am- 

BOOK  XXXII. 

313 

B.C.  19S,] 
hassadors  mentioned  yesterday,  respecting  the  cruelty,  ava¬ 
rice,  and  lust  of  the  King ;  supposing  the  crimes  committed, 
in  the  country  of  Attica,  against  the  gods,  celestial  and  infer¬ 
nal,  concerned  us  not  at  all ;  that  we  had  less  to  complain  of 
than  what  the  people  of  Cyus  and  Abydus,  who  are  far  dis¬ 
tant  from  us,  have  endured  :  let  us  then,  if  you  plea^,  forget 
even  our  own  wounds  ;  let  the  murders  and  ravages  commit¬ 
ted  at  Messena,  and  in  the  heart  of  Peloponnesus,  the  killing 
of  his  host  Garitenes,  at  Cyparissia,  in  the  midst  of  a  feast,  in 
contempt  of  all  laws  divine  and  human  ;  the  murder  of  the  two 
Aratuses,  of  Sicyon,  father  and  son,  though  he  was  wont  to 
call  the  unfortunate  old  man  his  parent ;  his  carrying  away 
the  son’s  wife  iitto  Macedonia  for  the  gratification  of  his  vi¬ 
cious  appetites,  and  all  his  violations  of  virgins  and  matrons; 
—let  all  these,  I  say,  be  forgotten  ;  let  all  be  consigned  to 
oblivion.  Let  us  suppose  our  business  were  not  with  Philip, 
through  dread  of  whose  cruelty  you  are  all  thus  struck  dumb ; 
for  what  other  cause  could  keep  you  silent,  when  you  have 
been  summoned  to  a  council  ?  Let  us  imagine  that  we  are 
treating  with  Antigonus,  a  prince  of  the  greatest  mildness  and 
equity,  to  whose  kindness  we  have  all  been  highly  indebted  ; 
would  he  require  us  to  perform,  what  at  the  time  was  impos¬ 
sible  ?  Peloponnesus  is  a  peninsula,  united  to  the  continent 
by  a  narrow  isthmus,  particularly  exposed  and  open  to  the 
attacks  of  naval  armaments.  Now,  if  a  hundred  decked 
ships,  and  fifty  lighter  open  ones,  and  thirty  Issean  barks, 
shall  begin  to  lay  waste  our  coasts,  and  attack  the  cities  which 
stand  exposed,  almost  on  the  very  shore  ;  shall  we  then  re¬ 
treat  into  the  inland  towns,  as  if  we  were  not  afflicted  with 
an  intestine  war,  though  in  truth  it  is  rankling  in  our  very 
bowels  ?  When  Nabis  and  the  Lacedaemonians  by  land,  and 
the  Roman  fleet  by  sea,  shall  press  us,  where  must  I  implore 
the  support  due  from  the  King’s  alliance  ;  where  the  succours 
VOL.  IV. — S  s 

314 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  554. 

of  the  MsK:edooians  ?  Shall  wc  ourselves,  with  our  owu 
arms,  defend,  again  the  Roman  forces,  the,  cities  that  will  be 
attacked  I  Truly,  in  t]he  former  war,  we  defended  Dymae 
excellently  well !  The  calamities  of  others  afford  us  abcmdant 
examples  j  let  us  not  seek  to  render  ourselves  an  example  to 
the  rest.  Do  not,  because  the  Romans  voluntarily  desire 
your  friendship,  contemn  that  which  3^ou  ought  to  have  pray¬ 
ed  for,  nay,  laboured  with  all  your  might  to  obtain.  But,  it 
is  insinuated,  that  they  are  impelled  by  fear,  in  a  country  to 
which  they  are  strangers  ;  and  that,  wishing  to  shelter  them¬ 
selves  under  your  assistance,  they  have  recourse  to  your  al¬ 
liance  in  the  hope  of  being  admitted  into  your  harbours,  and 
of  there  finding  supplies  of  provisions.  Now,  at  sea,  they 
are  absolute  masters  ;  and  instantly  reduce  to  subjection  eve¬ 
ry  place  at  which  they  land.  What  they  request,  they  have 
power  to  enforce.  Because  they  wish  to  treat  you  with  ten¬ 
derness,  they  do  not  allow  you  take  steps  that  must  lead  you 
to  ruin.  Cleomedon  lately  pointed  out,  as  the  middle  and 
safest  way,  to  maintain  a  neutrality  ;  but  that  is  not  a  middle 
way;  it  is  no  way.  For,  besides  the  necessity  of  either  em¬ 
bracing  or  rejecting  the  Roman  alliance,  what  other  conse¬ 
quence  can  ensue  from  such  conduct,  than  that,  while  we 
show  no  steady  attachment  to  either  side,  as  if  we  waited  the 
event  with  design  to  adapt  our  counsels  to  fortune,  we  shall 
become  the  prey  of  the  conqueror  ?  Contemn  not,  then, 
when  it  is  offered  to  your  acceptance,  what  you  ought  to  have 
solicited  with  your  warmest  prayers.  The  free  option  be¬ 
tween  the  two,  which  you  have  this  day,  you  will  not  always 
have.  The  same  opportunity  will  not  last  long,  nor  will  it 
frequently  recur.  You  have  long  wished  to  deliver  your¬ 
selves  out  of  the  hands  of  Philip,  although  you  have  not 
dared  to  make  the  attempt.  Those  have  now  crossed  the 
sea,  with  large  fleets  and  armies,  who  are  able  to  set  you  at 

BOOK  XXXIL 

315 

B.C.198.] 
liberty,  without  any  trouble  or  danger  to  yourselves.  If  you 
reject  such  allies,  the  soundness  of  your  understandings  may 
be  called  in  question ;  but  you  must  unavoidably  have  to  deal 
with  them,  either  as  friends  or  foes.” 
XXII.  This  speech  of  the  pr«tor  was  followed  by  a  gene¬ 
ral  murmur ;  some  declaring  their  approbation,  and  others 
sharply  rebuking  those  who  did  so.  And  now,  not  only  indi¬ 
viduals,  but  whole  states  engaged  in  altercation  ;  and  at  length 
the  magistrates,  called  Demiurguses,*  who  are  ten  in  num¬ 
ber,  took  up  the  dispute  with  as  much  warmth  as  the  multi¬ 
tude.  Five  of  them  declared,  that  they  would  propose  the 
question  concerning  an  alliance  with  Rome,  and  would  take 
the  votes  on  it ;  while  five  insisted,  that  there  was  a  law,  by 
which  the  magistrates  were  prohibited  from  proposing,  and 
the  council  from  decreeing,  any  thing  injurious  to  the  alliance 
with  Philip.  This  day,  also,  was  spent  in  contention,  and 
there  remained  now  but  one  day  more  of  the  regular  time  of 
sitting ;  for,  according  to  the  rule,  the  decree  must  be  passed 
on  the  third  day :  and,  as  that  approached,  the  zeal  of  the 
parties  was  kindled  into  such  a  fiame,  that  scarcely  did  pa¬ 
rents  refrain  from  offering  violence  to  their  own  sons.  There 
was  present  a  man  of  Pellene,  named  Rhisiasus,  whose  son, 
Memnon,  was  a  demiurgus,  and  was  of  that  party  which  op¬ 
posed  the  reading  of  the  decree,  and  taking  the  votes.  This 
man,  for  a  long  time,  entreated  his  son  to  allow  the  Achaeans 
to  take  proper  measures  for  their  common  safety,  and  not, 
by  his  obstinacy,  to  bring  ruin  on  the  whole  nation ;  but, 
finding  that  his  entreaties  had  no  effect,  he  swore  that  he 
would  treat  him,  not  as  a  son,  but  as  an  enemy,  and  would 
put  him  to  death  with  his  own  hand.  By  these  threats  he 
forced  him,  next  day,  to  join  the  party  that  voted  for  the 
question  being  proposed.  These,  having  now  become  the 

From  denuQi  public,  and  ergon,  business. 

316 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  554, 

majority,  propc^ed  the  questicm  accordingly,  while  almost 
every  one  of  the  states,  openly  approving  the  measure,  showed 
plainly  on  which  side  they  would  vote.  Whereupon  the  Dy- 
mseans,  Megalopolitans,  with  several  of  the  Argives,  rose  up, 
and  withdrew  from  the  council ;  which  step  excited  neither 
wonder  nor  disapprobation.  For  when,  in  the  memory  of 
their  grandfathers,  the  Megalopolitans  had  been  expelled 
their  country  by  the  Lacedaemonians,  Antigonus  had  rein¬ 
stated  them  in  their  native  residence  ;  and,  at  a  later  period, 
when  Dymae  was  taken  and  sacked  by  the  Roman  troops, 
Philip  ordered  that  the  inhabitants,  wherever  they  were  m 
servitude,  should  be  ransomed,  and  not  only  restored  them 
to  their  liberty,  but  Uieir  country.  As  to  the  Argives,  be¬ 
sides  believing  that  the  royal  family  of  Macedonia  derived 
its  origin  from  them,  the  greater  part  were  attached  to  Philip 
by  personal  acts  of  kindness  and  familiar  friendship.  For 
these  reasons,  when  the  council  appeared  disposed  to  order 
an  alliance  to  be  concluded  with  Rome,  they  withdrew  ;  and 
their  secession  was  readily  excused,  in  consideratitm  of  the 
many  and  recent  obligations  by  which  they  were  bouxul  to  the 
King  of  Macedon. 
XXIII.  The  rest  of  the  Achaean  states,  on  their  opinions 
being  demanded,  ratiHed,  by  an  immediate  decree,  the  al¬ 
liance  with  Attains  and  the  Rhodians.  That  with  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  as  it  could  not  be  perfected  without  an  order  of  the 
people,  they  deferred  until  such  time  as  they  could  hear  from 
Rome.  For  the  present,  it  was  resolved,  that  three  ambas¬ 
sadors  should  be  sent  to  Lucius  Quintius^  amd  that  the  whole 
force  of  the  Achaeans  should  be  brought  up  to  Corinth,  which 
city  Quintius,  after  taking  Genchreae,  was  then  besieging. 
The  Achaeans  accordingly  pitched  their  camp  opposite  to  the 
gate  that  leads  to  Sicyon.  The  Romans  made  their  ap¬ 
proaches  on  the  side  of  the  city  which  faces  Cenchreae ;  At¬ 
tains  having  drawn  his'  army  across  the  isthmus,  towards 

BOOK  XXXII, 

317 

B.C.  198.] 
Lechaeum,  the  port  on  the  opposite  sea.  At  first,  they  did 
not  push  forward  their  operations  with  any  great  degree  of 
vigour,  because  they  had  hopes  of  a  dissension  breaking  out 
between  the  townsmen  and  the  King’s  troops.  But  after* 
wards,  learning  that  they  ail  co-operated  with  unanimity  ;  that 
the  Macedonians  exerted  themselves  as  if  in  defence  of  their 
native  country  ;  and  that  the  Corinthians  submitted  to  the 
orders  of  Androsthenes,  commander  of  the  garrison,  as  if 
he  were  their  contryman,  elected  by  their  own  sufirages,  and 
invested  with  legal  authority :  the  assailants  had  no  other 
hopes  but  in  force,  arms,  and  their  works.  They  therefore 
brought  up  their  mounds  to  the  walls,  though  by  very  difficult 
approaches.  On  that  side  where  the  Romans  attacked,  their 
ram  demolished  a  considerable  part  of  the  wall;  and  the 
Macedonians,  having  run  together  to  defend  the  place  thus 
stripped  of  its  works,  a  furious  conflict  ensued.  At  first,  by 
reason  of  the  enemy’s  superiority  in  number,  the  Romans 
were  quickly  repulsed  ;  but  being  joined  by  the  auxiliary 
troops  of  Attalus  and  the  Achseans,  they  restored  the  fight 
to  an  equality  ;  so  that  there  was  no  doubt  of  their  easily 
driving  the  Macedonians  smd  Greeks  from  their  ground,  but 
that  there  were  in  the  town  a  great  multitude  of  Italian  de¬ 
serters  ;  some  of  whom  having  been  in  Hannibal’s  army^ 
had,  through  fear  of  being  punished  by  the  Romans,  follow¬ 
ed  Philip  ;  others,  having  been  sailors,  had  lately  quitted  the 
fleets,  in  hopes  of  more  honourable  employment :  despair  of 
safety,  therefore,  in  case  of  the  Romans  getting  the  better, 
inflamed  these  to  a  degree,  which  might  rather  be  called 
madness  than  courage.  Opposite  to  Sicyon  is  the  promon¬ 
tory  of  J  uno  Acraea,  as  she  is  called,  stretching  out  into  the 
main,  the  passage  to  Corinth  being  about  seven  miles.  To 
this  place  Philocles,  one  of  the  King’s  generals,  led,  through 
Bceotia,  fifteen  hundred  soldiers  ;  and  there  were  barks  from 
Corinth  ready  to  take  these  troops  on  board,  and  carry  them 

318 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  554. 

over  to  Lechaeum.  Attalus,  on  this,  advised  to  \mm  the 
works,  and  raise  the  siege  immediately :  Quiiitius  was  in¬ 
clined  to  persevere  in  the  attempt.  However;  when  he  saw 
the  King’s  troops  posted  at  all  the  gates,  and  that  the  sallies 
of  the  besieged  could  not  easily  be  withstood,  he  came  over 
to  the  opinion  of  Attains.  Thus  baffled  in  their  design,  they 
dismissed  the  Achseans,  and  returned  to  their  ships.  Atta¬ 
ins  steered  to  Pirseeus,  the  Romans  to  Corcyra. 
XXIV.  While  the  naval  forces  were  thus  employed,  the 
consul,  having  encamped  before  Elatia,  in  Phocis,  first  en¬ 
deavoured,  by  conferring  with  the  principal  inhabitants,  to 
bring  them  over,  and  by  their  means  to  effect  his  purpose ; 
but  on  their  answering  that  they  had  nothing  in  their  power, 
because  the  King’s  troops  were  more  numerous  and  stronger 
than  the  townsmen,  he  assaulted  the  city  on  all  sides  at  once 
with  arms  and  engines.  A  battering  ram  shattered  a  part  of 
the  wall  that  reached  from  one  tower  to  another,  and  this  fall¬ 
ing  with  a  prodigious  noise  and  crash,  left  much  of  the  town 
exposed.  On  this  a  Roman  cohort  made  an  assault  through 
the  breach,  while  at  the  same  time  the  townsmen,  quitting 
their  several  posts,  ran  together  from  all  parts  to  the  endan¬ 
gered  place.  Others  of  the  Romans  climbed  over  the  ruins 
of  the  wall,  and  brought  up  scaling-ladders  to  the  parts  that 
were  stonding.  As  the  conflict  attracted  the  eyes  and  atten¬ 
tion  of  the  enemy  to  one  particular  spot,  the  walls  were  scaled 
in  several  places,  by  which  means  the  soldiers  easily  entered 
the  town.  The  noise  and  tumult  which  ensued  so  terrified 
the  enemy^  that,  quitting  the  place,  which  they  had  crowded 
together  to  defend,  they  all  fled  in  a  panic  to  the  citadel,  ac¬ 
companied  by  the  unarmed  multitude.  The  consul,  having 
thus  become  master  of  the  town,  gave  it  up  to  be  plundered, 
and  then  sent  a  message  into  the  citadel,  offering  the  King’s 
troops  thcit  lives,  on  condition  of  their  laying  down  their 
arms,  and  departing.  To  the  Elatians  he  offered  their  liber- 

BOOK  XXXII. 

319 

B.C.  198.] 
ty  ;  which  terms  being  agreed  to,  in  a  few  days  after  he  got 
pt^session  of  the  citadel. 
XXV.  In  consequence  of  Philocies,  the  King’s  general^ 
timing  into  Achaia,  not  only  Corinth  was  delivered  from  the 
l^t  the  city  of  Argos  was  betrayed  into  his  hands  by 
some  of  the  principal  inhabitants,  after  they  had  first  souhded 
the  minds  of  the  populace.  They  had  a  custom,  that,  on  the 
first  day  of  assembly,  their  praetors,  for  the  omen’s  sake, 
should  pronounce  the  names  Jupiter,  Apollo,  and  Hercules  ; 
in  addition  to  which,  a  rule  had  been  made,  that,  along  with 
these,  they  should  join  the  name  of  King  Philip.  After  the 
conclusion  of  the  alliance  with  the  Romans,  the  herald  omit¬ 
ted  so  to  honour  him ;  on  which  a  murmur  spread  through 
the  multitude,  and  they  soon  became  clamorous,  calling  out 
for  the  name  of  Philip,  and  insisting  that  the  respect,  due  by 
law,  should  be  paid  as  before  ;  which  at  length  being  com¬ 
plied  with,  universal  approbation  ensued.  On  the  encourage¬ 
ment  afforded  by  this  favourable  disposition,  Philocles  was 
invited,  who  seized  in  the  night  a  strong  post  called  Larissa, 
seated  on  a  hill  which  overhangs  the  city,  and  in  which  he 
placed  a  garrison.  At  the  dawn  of  day,  however,  and  as  he 
was  proceeding  in  order  of  battle  to  the  Forum,  at  the  foot  of 
the  hill  he  was  met  by  a  line  of  troops,  drawn  up  to  oppose 
him.  This  was  a  body  of  Achseans,  lately  posted  there,  con¬ 
sisting  of  about  five  hundred  young  men,  selected  out  of  all 
the  states.  Their  commander  was  Ainesidemus,  of  Dymse. 
The  King’s  general  sent  a  person  to  recommend  to  them  to 
evacuate  the  city,  because  they  were  not  a  match  for  the 
townsmen  alone,  who  favoured  the  cause  of  Philip  ;  much 
less  when  these  were  joined  by  the  Macedonians,  whom  even 
the  Romans  had  not  withstood  at  Corinth.  This  at  first  had 
no  effect,  either  on  the  commander,  or  his  men  j  and  when 
they,  soon  after,  perceived  the  Argives  also  in  arms,  coming, 
in  a  great  body,  from  the  opposite  side,  and  threatening  them 

320 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[YJR.  m. 

with  destruction^  they  yet  seemed  determined  to  run  evofy 
hazard,  if  their  leader  would  persevere.  But  .finesidemus, 
unwilling  that  the  flower  of  the  Achaan  youth  should  be  lost, 
together  with  the  city,  made  terms  with  Philocles,  that  they 
should  have  liberty  to  retire,  while  himself  remained  armed 
with  a  few  of  his  dependents,  and  without  even  stiiring  from 
his  station.  To  a  person,  sent  by  Philocles  to  enquire  wht^ 
he  meant,  he  only  answered,  standing  widi  his  shield  held 
out  before  him,  that  he  meant  to  die  in  arms  in  defence  ctf 
the  city  intrusted  to  his  charge.  Philocles  then  ordered  some 
Thracians  to  throw  their  javelins  at  him  and  his  attendants  ; 
and  they  were,  every  man  of  them,  slain.  Thus,  notwith¬ 
standing  the  alliance  concluded  by  the  Achaeans  with  the 
Romans,  two  of  their  cities,  and  those  of  the  greatest  conse«* 
quence,  Argos  and  Corinth,  were  still  in  the  hands  of  Philip. 
Such  were  the  services  performed  in  that  campaign  by  the 
land  and  sea  forces  of  Rome  employed  in  Greece. 
XXVI.  In  Gaul,  the  consul  Sextus  iHiius  did  nothing  worth 
mention,  though  he  had  two  armies  in  the  province :  one, 
which  he  had  retained  under  their  standards,  although  it 
ought  to  have  been  disbanded  ;  and  of  this,  which  had  served 
under  Lucius  Cornelius,  proconsul,  he  had  given  the  com¬ 
mand  to  Caius  Helvius,  the  praetor:  the  other  he  had  brought 
with  him.  He  spent  nearly  the  whole  summer  in  compelling 
the  people  of  Cremona  and  Placentia  to  return  to  their  colo¬ 
nies,  from  whence  they  had  been  driven  to  various  places  by 
the  calamities  of  war.  While  Gaul,  beyond  expectation,  re¬ 
mained  quiet  through  the  whole  year,  an  insurrection  of  the 
slaves  was  very  near  taking  place  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the 
city.  The  hostages,  given  by  the  Carthaginians,  were  kept 
in  custody  at  Setia:  as  they  were  the  children  of  the  princi¬ 
pal  families,  they  were  attended  by  a  great  multitude  of 
slaves  ;  to  this  number,  many  were  added^  in  consequence  of 
the  late  African  war,  and  by  the  Seliac^  themselves  havi^ 

BOOK  XXXW. 

8X.  t9B.] 
bought,  from  amo^  the  spoil,  several  of  those  which  had 
been  captured*  Having  conspired  together,  they  sent  some 
of  their  mmber  to  engage  in  the  cause  their  fellows  of  the 
country  round  Setia,  with  those  at  Norba  and  Circeii.  When 
every  thing  was  fully  prepared,  they  determined,  durbg  the 
games  which  were  soon  to  be  solemnized  at  the  first-men* 
^med  place,  to  attack  the  people  while  intent  on  the  show, 
and,  putting  them  to  death,  to  make  themselves  masters  of 
the  city  in  the  sudden  confusion  ;  and  then  to  seize  on  Noiha 
and  Circeii.  Information  of  this  atrocious  plot  was  brought 
to  Rome,  to  Lucius  Cornelius  Merula,  the  city  praetor.  Two 
slaves  came  to  him  before  day,  and  disclosed  the  whole  pro* 
ceedings  and  intentions  of  the  conspirators*  The  praetor,  or¬ 
dering  them  to  be  guarded  in  his  own  house,  summoned  a 
mee^g  cd*  the  senate  ;  and  having  laid  before  them  the  in¬ 
formation  of  the  discoverers,  he  was  ordered  to  go  himself  to 
the  spot,  and  examine  into,  and  crush,  the  conspiracy.  Set¬ 
ting  out,  accordingly,  with  five  lieutenant-generals,  he  com¬ 
pelled  such  as  he  found  in  the  country,  to  take  the  military 
oath,  to  arm,  and  follow  him.  Having  by  this  tumultuary 
kmd  of  levy  armed  about  two  thousand  men,  before  it  was 
pcmible  to  guess  his  destination,  he  came  to  Setia.  There 
the  leaders  of  the  conspiracy  were  instantly  apprehended ; 
on  which,  the  remainder  fled  from  the  city  j  but  parties  were 
sent  through  the  country  to  search  them  out*  The  services 
of  the  two  who  made  the  di^overy,  and  of  one  free  person 
employed,  were  highly  meritorious.  The  senate  ordered  a 
present  to  the  latter  of  a  hundred  thousand  asses  ,  *  to  the 
slaves,  twenty *five  thousand  ms€s\  each,  and  their  freedom. 
The  price  was  paid  to  their  owners  out  of  the.  treasury.  Not 
long  after,  intelligence  was  received,  that  others,  out  of  the 
remaining  spirit  of  ^nspiracy,  had  formed  a  design  of 
*  3221.  m.  4^  , 
VOL.  IV.— T  T 

t  m.  14s.  7d. 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.554. 

seizing  Praneste.  The  ptaetor,  Lucitls  Cornelius,  went 
thither,  and  inflicted  punishment  on  near  five  hundred  per¬ 
sons  concerned  in  that  wicked  scheme.  The  public  were  un¬ 
der  apprehensions,  that  the  Carthaginian  hostages  and  pri¬ 
soners  fomented  these  plots ;  watches  were,  therefore,  kept  at 
Rome  in  all  the  streets,  which  the  inferior  magistrates  were 
ordered  to  go  round  and  inspect ;  while  the  triumvirs  of  the 
prison,  called  the  Quarry,  were  to  keep  a  stricter  guard 
than  usual.  Circular  letters  were  also  sent,  by  the  prsetor,  to 
all  the  Latine  states,  directing  that  the  hostages  should  be 
confined  within  doors,  and  not  at  any  time  allowed  the  liberty 
of  going  into  public  ;  and  that  the  prisoners  should  be  kept 
bound  with  fetters,  of  not  less  than  ten  pounds  weight,  and 
confined  in  the  common  jail. 
XXVII.  In  this  year,  ambassadors  from  King  Attains 
made  an  offering,  in  the  Capitol,  of  a  golden  crown  of  two 
hundred  and  fifty-six  pounds  weight,  and  returned  thanks  to 
the  senate,  because  Antiochus,  complying  with  the  requisi¬ 
tions  of  the  Romans,  had  withdrawn  his  troops  out  of  Atta- 
lus’s  territories.  During  this  summer,  two  hundred  horse¬ 
men,  ten  elephants,  and  two  hundred  thousand  pecks  of  wheat, 
were  furnished  by  King  Masinissa  to  the  army  in  Greece. 
From  Sicily  also,  and  Sardinia,  large  supplies  of  provisions 
were  sent,  with  clothing  for  the  troops.  Sicily  was  then  go¬ 
verned  by  Marcus  Marcellus,  Sardinia  by  Marcus  Porcius 
Cato,  a  man  of  acknowledged  integrity  and  purity  of  conduct, 
but  deemed  too  severe  in  punishing  usury.  He  drove  the 
usurers  entirely  out  of  the  island  ;  and  restricted  or  abolished 
the  contributions,  usually  paid  by  the  allies,  for  maintaining 
the  dignity  of  the  praetors.  The  consul,  Sextus  iElius,  com¬ 
ing  home  from  Gaul  to  Rome  to  hold  the  elections,  elected 
consuls,  Caius  Cornelius  Cethegus,  and  Quintus  Minucius 
Rufus.  Two  days  after,  was  held  the  election  of  praetors; 
and  this  year,  for  the  first  time,  six  praetors  were  appointed, 

BOOK  xxxir. 

32S 

B.C.  195^0 
in  consequence  of  the  increase  of  the  provinces,  and  the  ex¬ 
tension  of  the  bounds  of  the  empire.  The  persons  elected 
were  Lucius  Manlius  Vulso,  Caius  Sempronius  Tuditanus, 
Marcus  Sergius  Silus,  Marcus  Helvius,  Marcus  Minucius 
Rufus,  and  Lucius  Atilius.  Of  these  Sempronius  and  Hel¬ 
vius  were,  at  the  time,  plebeian  aediles.  The  curule  aediles 
were,  Quintus  Minucius  Thermus,  and  Tiberius  Sempro¬ 
nius  Longus.  The  Ronvan  games  were  four  times  repeated 
during  this  year, 
XXVIII.  When  the  new  consuls,  Caius  Cornelius  and 
Quintus  Minucius,  entered  into  office,  the  chief 
Y  R  555* 
busines  was,  the  adjusting  of  the  provinces  of  the 
consuls  and  praetors.  Those  of  the  praetors  were 
the  first  settled,  because  that  could  be  done  by  the  lots.  The 
city  jurisdiction  fell  to  Sergius;  the  foreign  to  Minucius  ; 
Atilius  obtained  Sardinia  ;  Manlius,  Sicily  ;  Sempronius  the 
Hither  Spain,  and  Helvius  the  Farther.  When  the  consuls 
were  preparing  to  cast  lots  for  Italy  and  Macedonia,  Lucius 
Oppius  and  Quintus  Fulvius,  plebeian  tribunes,  objected  to 
their  proceeding,  alleging,  that,  ‘‘  Macedonia  was  a  very  dis¬ 
tant  province,  and  that  the  principal  cause  which  had  hitherto 
retarded  the  progress  of  the  war,  was,  that  when  it  was 
scarcely  entered  upon,  and  just  at  the  commencement  of 
operations,  the  former  consul  was  always  recalled.  This  was 
the  fourth  year,  since  the  declaration  of  war  against  Mace¬ 
donia.  The  greater  part  of  one  year,  Sulpicius  spent  in  seek¬ 
ing  the  King  and  liis  army  ;  Villius,  on  the  point  of  engaging 
the  enemy,  was  recalled.  Quintius  was  detained  at  Rome, 
for  the  greater  part  of  his  year,  by  business  respecting  reli¬ 
gion  ;  nevertheless,  he  had  so  conducted  affairs,  that  had  he 
come  earlier  into  the  province,  or  had  the  cold  season  been  at 
a  greater  distance,  he  might  have  put  an  end  to  hostilities. 
He  was  then  just  going  into  winter-quarters  ;  but,  by  all  ac¬ 
counts,  he  had  brought  the  war  into  such  a  state,  that  if  he 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  555. 

3^4 
were  not  prevented  by  a  successor,  there  was  a  reasonable 
prospect  of  being  able  to  put  an  end  to  it,  in  the  course  of  the 
ensuing  summer.”  By  such  arguments  the  tribunes  so  far 
prevailed,  that  the  consuls  declared,  that  they  would  abide 
by'  the  directions  of  the  senate,  if  the  cavillers  would  agree 
to  do  the  same.  Both  parties  having,  accordingly,  referred 
the  determination  entirely  to  those  magistrates,  a  decree  was 
passed,  appointing  the  two  consuls  to  the  government  of  the 
province  of  Italy.  Titus  Quintius  was  continued  in  command, 
until  a  successor  should  be  found.  To  each,  two  legions  were 
decreed  ;  and  they  were  ordered,  with  these,  to  carry  on  the 
war  with  the  Cisalpine  Gauls,  who  had  revolted  from  the 
Romans.  A  reinforcement  of  five  thousand  foot  and  three 
hundred  horse  was  ordered  to  be  sent  into  Macedonia  to 
Quintius,  together  with  three  thousand  seamen.  Lucius 
Quintius  Flamininus  was  continued  in  the  command  of  the 
fleet.  To  each  of  the  praetors,  for  the  two  Spains,  were  graft¬ 
ed  eight  thousand  foot,  of  the  allies  and  Latines,  and  four 
hundred  horse  ;  and  they  were  ordered  to  discharge  the  vete¬ 
ran  troops  in  their  provinces,  and  also  to  fix  the  bounds  which 
should  divide  die  hither  from  the  farther  province.  Two  ad¬ 
ditional  lieutenant-generals  were  sent  to  the  army  in  Mace¬ 
donia,  Publius  Sulpicius  and  Publius  Villius,  who  had -been 
consuls  in  that  province. 
XXIX.  It  was  thought  necessary,  that  before  the  consuls 
and  pr«tors  went  abroad,  some  prodigies  should  be  expiated. 
For  the  temples  of  Vulcan  and  Summanus*;  at  Rome,  and 
a  wall  and  a  gate  at  Fregellae,  had  been  struck  by  lightning. 
At  Frusino,  during  the  night,  a  light  like  day  shone  out.  At 
Asculum,  a  lamb  was  born  with  two  heads  and  five  feet.  At 
Formiae,  two  wolves  entering  the  town  tore  several  persons 
who  fell  in  their  way  ;  and,  at  Rome,  a  wolf  made  its  way. 

Pluto,  Summus  Manium. 

BOOK  XXXII. 

325 

B.C.  197.] 
not  only  into  the  city^  but  into  the  Capitol.  Caius  Adlius, 
plebeian  tribune,  caused  an  order  to.  be  passed,  that  five  colo¬ 
nies  should  be  led  out  to  the  sea- coast ;  two  to  the  mouths  of 
the  rivers  Vultumus  and  Liternus  ;  one  to  Putcoli,  and  one 
to  the  fort  of  Salermim.  To  these  was^  added  Buxentum, 
To  each  colony  three  hundred  families  were  ordered  tp  be 
sent.  The  comntissioners  appointed  to  make  the  settlements, 
who  were  to  hold  the  office  for  three  years,  were  Marcus 
Servilius  Geminus,  Quintus  Minucius  Therm  us,  and  Tibe¬ 
rius  Sempronius  Longus.  As  soon  as  the  levies,  and  such 
other  business,  religious  and  civil,  as  required  their  personal 
attendance,  was  finished,  the  consuls  set  out  for  Gaul*  Cor- 
x^iua  took  the  direct  road  towards  the  Insubrians,  who  were 
then  in  arms,  and  had  been  joined  by  the  Cienomaiiians. 
Quintus  Minucius  turned  his  route  to  the  left  side  of  Italy, 
and  leading  away  his  army  to  the  lower  sea,  to  Genoa,  Open¬ 
ed  the  campaign  with  an  invasion  of  Liguria.  Two  tdwns, 
Clastidium  and  Litubium,  both  belonging  to  the  Ligurians, 
and  two  states  of  the  same  nation,  Celela  and  Cerdicium, 
surrendered  to  him.  And  now,  all  the  states  on  this  si4c  of 
the  Po,  except  the  Boians  among  the  Gauls,  and  the  Ilvatians 
among  the  Ligurians,  were  reduced  to  submission :  no  lesp,it 
is  sard,  than  fifteen  towns  and  twenty  thousand  men.  Hetjien 
led  his  legions  into  the  territory  of  the  Boians.  i 
XXX,  The  Boian  army  had,  not  very  long  before,  crossed 
the  Pb,  and  joined  the  Insubrians  and  Csenomanians  ;  lor, 
having  heard  that  the  consuls  intended  to  act  with  thipir 
forces  united,  they  wished  to  increase  their  own  strength  by 
this  junction.  But  when  information  reached  them,  that  one 
of  the  consuls  was  ravaging  the  country  of  the  Boians,  a  dis¬ 
pute  instantly  arose.  The  Boians  demanded,  that  all,  in  con¬ 
junction,  should  cany  succour  to  those  who  were  attacked  ; 
while  the  Isubrians  positively  refused  to  leave  their  countr\f 
defenceless.  In  consequence  of  this  dissension,  the  armies 

326 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  555. 

separated ;  the  Boians  went  to  defend  their  own  territory, 
and  ihe  Insubrians,  with  the  Csenomanians,  encamped  oif  the 
banks  of  the  river  Mincius.  About  five  miles  below  this 
spot,  the  consul  Cornelius  pitched  his  camp  close  to  the  same 
river.  Sending  emissaries  hence  into  the  villages  of  the  Cae- 
nomanians,  and  Brixia,  the  capital  of  their  tribe,  he  learned 
with  certainty  that  their  young  men  had  taken  arms  without 
the  approbation  of  the  elders  ;  and  that  the  Caenomanians  had 
not  joined  in  the  revolt  of  the ' Insubrians,  by  any  authority 
from  the  state.  On  which  he  invhed  to  him  the  principal  of 
the  natives,  and  endeavoured  to  contrive  and  concert  with 
them  the  means  of  inducing  the  younger  Caenomanians  to 
forsake  the  party  of  the  Insubrians  ;  and  either  to  march  away 
and  return  home,  or  to  come  over  to  the  side  of  the  Romans, 
This  he  was  not  able  to  effect ;  but  so  far,  he  received  solemn 
assurances  that,  in  case  of  a  battle,  they  would  either  stand 
inaefive,  or,  should  any  occasion  offer,  would  even  assist  the 
Romans.  The  Insubrians  knew  not  that  such  an*  agreement 
had  been  concluded,  but  they  harboured  in  their  minds  some 
kind  of  suspicion,  that  the  fidelity  of  their  confederates  was 
wavering.  Wherefore,  in  forming  their  troops  for.  battle,  not 
daring  to  intrust  either  wing  to  them,  lest,  if  they  should 
treacherously  give  ground,  they  might  cause  a  total  defeat, 
they  placed  them  in  reserve  behind  the  line.  At  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  the  fight,  the  consul  vowed  a  temple  to  Juno  Sospita, 
provided  the  enemy  should,  on  thatday,>be  roui:ed  arid  driven 
from  the  field  j  on  which  the  soldiers  raised  a  shout,  declar¬ 
ing,  that  they  would  ensure  to  their  commander  the  comple¬ 
tion  of  his  vow,  and  at  the  same  time  attacked  the  enemy. 
The  Insubrians  did  not  stand  even  the  first  onset.  Some  wri¬ 
ters  affirm,  that  the  Caenomanians,  falling  on  their  rear,  during 
the  heat  of  the  engagement,  caused  as  much  disorder  there 
as  prevailed  in  their  front ;  and  that,  thus  assailed  on  both 
sides,  thirty-five  thousand  of  them  were  slain,  five  thousand 

BOOK  XXXII. 

327 

B.C.  197.] 
seven  hundred  taken  prboners,  among  whom  was  HamBcar, 
a  Carthaginian  general,  the  original  cause  of  the  war;  and 
that  a  hundred  and  thirty  military  standards,  and  above  two 
hundred  wagons  were  taken.  *  On  this,  the  towns,  which  had 
joined  in  the'  revolt,  surrendered  to  the  Romans. 
XXXI.  The  "other  consul,  Minucius,  had  at  first  spread 
his  troops  through  the  territory  of  the  Boians,  committing 
violent  depredations  everywhere ;  but  afterwards,  when  that 
people  left  the  Insubrians,  and  came  home  to  defend  their 
own  property,  he  kept  his  men  within  their  camp,  expecting 
to  come  to  an  engagement  with  the  enemy.  Nor  would  the 
Boians  have  declined  a  battle,  if  their  spirits  had  not  been 
depressed,  by  hearing  of  the  defeat  of  the  Ihsubrians.  This 
so  deeply  affected  them,  that,  deserting  their  commander  and 
their  camp,  they  dispersed  themselves  through  the  several 
towns,  each  wishing  to  take  care  of  his  own  effects.  Thus 
they  obliged  the  enemy  to  alter  their  mode  of  carrying  on 
the  war :  for,  no  longer  hoping  to  decide  the  matter  by  a 
single  battle,  he  began  again  to  lay  waste  the  lands,  bum  the 
houses,  and  storm  the  villages.  At  this  time,  Clastidium 
was  burned,  and  the  legions  were  led  thence  against  the  II va- 
tian  Ligurians,  who  alone  refused  to  submit.  That  state, 
also,  on  learning  that  the  Insubriahs  had  been  defeated  in 
batdc,  and  the  Boians  so  terrified  that  they  had  not  dared  to 
risk  an  engagement,  made  a  submission.  Letters  from  the 
consuls,  containing  accounts  of  their  successes,  came  from 
Gaul  to  Rome  at  the  same  time.  Marcus  Sergius,  city  prae¬ 
tor,  read  them  in  the  senate,  and  afterwards,  by  direction  of 
the  Fathers,  in  an  assembly  of  the  people  ;  on  which  a  sup¬ 
plication^  of  four  days  continuance,  was  decreed. — By  this 
time  the  winter  had  begun, 
XXXII.  During  the  winter,  while  TitUs  Quintius,  after 
the  reduction  of  Elatia,  had  his  troops  cantoned  in  Phocis 
and  Locris,  a  violent  disseftsion  brake  out  at  Opus.  One  fac- 

328 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y,R.  55$. 

tion  invited  to  thek*  smhtmist  die  ^toluuis,  who  were  near¬ 
est  at  hand :  the  odier  the  Romaic.  The  iEtolians  arrived 
first;  but  the  other  party^  which  was  the  more  powerful, 
refused  them  admittance,  and,  desf^tchmg  a  courier  to  ^ 
Roman  general,  held  the  citadel  until  he  arrived.  The  cita¬ 
del  was  possessed  by  a  garrison  belonging  to  the  King,  and 
they  could  not  be  prevailed  on  to  give  it  up,  either  by  the 
threats  of  the  people  of  Opus,  or  by  the  commands  of  the 
Roman  consul.  What  prevented  their  being  im mediately 
attacked,  was,  the  arrival  of  an  envoy  from  the  King,  to  sedi- 
cit  the  appointing  of  a  time  and  place  for  a  conference.  This 
request  was  readily  complied  with ;  not  thsU  Quintius  did 
not  wish  to  see  war  concluded  under  his  own  auspices,  partly 
by  arms,  and  partly  by  negotiation :  for  he  knew  not,  yet, 
whether  one  of  the  new  consuls  would  be  sent  to  take  the  go¬ 
vernment  in  his  room,  or  whether  he  should  be  continued  in 
the  command  ;  »  point  which  he  had  charged  his  friends  and 
relations  to  labour  with  all  their  might.  But  he  thought  that 
a  conference  would*answer,  this  purpose  ;  that  it  would  put  it 
in  his  power  to  give  matters  a  turn  towards  war,  in  case  be  re¬ 
mained  in  the  province,  or  towards  peace,  if  he  were  to  be  re¬ 
moved*  They  chose  for  the  meeting  a  part  of  the  sea-shore,  in 
the  Malian  gulph,uear  Nicaea>  Thither  Philqi  came  from  De- 
metrias,  with  five  barks  and  one  ship  of  swat :  be  was  accom¬ 
panied  by  some  principal  Macedonians,  and  an  Achaean  exile, 
named  Cycliades,  a  man  of  considerable  note.  Wjth  the 
Roman  general,  were  King  Amynander,  Dionysidorus,  am¬ 
bassador  from  King  Attains,  Agesimbrotus,  commander  of 
the  Rhodian  fleet,  Phseneas,  prsfetor  of  the  JEtolians,  and  two 
Achaeans,  Aristenus  and  Xenophon.  Attended  by  these,  the 
Roman  general  advanced  to  the  brink  of  the  shore,  and  the 
King  came  forward  to  the  prow  of  his  vessel,  as  it  lay  at 
anchor when  the  former  said,  “  If  you  will  come  on  the 
shore,  we  shall  converse  with  greatet  ease.”  This  the  King 

BOOK  XXXIL 

SS9 

B.C.  197.] 

refused ;  ai^  on  Quintias  asking  Mm,  Whom  do  you  fear?*^ 
With  the  haughty  spirit  of  roya^,  he  replied,  “  Fear  I  have 
none,  but  of  the  immoml  gods ;  but  I  have  no  confidenee  in 
the  faith  of  those  whom  I  see  about  you,  and  least  of  aS  hi 
the  iEtolians,’’  That  danger,’’  said  the  Roman,  is  equal  in 
all  cases ;  when  men  confer  with  an  enemy,  no  cmihdence 
subsists.”  ‘‘  But,  Titus  Quintius,”  replied  the  King,  ‘‘  if 
treachery  be  intended,  the  prizes  of  perfidy  are  not  equal : 
Philip  and  Phaeneas.  For  it  will  not  be  so  difficult  for  the 
.fitolians  to  find  another  praetor,  as  for  the  Macedonians  to 
find  another  King  in  my  place.” — Silence  then  ensued. 
XXXIIL  The  Roman  expected  that  he,  who  solicited  the 
conference,  should  open  it;  and  the  King  thought,  that  he 
who  was  to  prescribe,  not  he  who  received,  terms  of  peace, 
ought  to  begin  the  conference.  At  length  the  Roman  said, 
that  “  his  discourse  should  be  very  simple  ;  for  he  would 
only  mention  those  articles,  witimut  which  no  pacification 
could  be  admitted.  These  were,  that  the  King  should  with* 
draw  his  garrisons  from  all  the  cities  of  Greece.  That  he 
should  deliver  up  to  the  allies  of  the  Roman  pedple  the  pri¬ 
soners  and  deserters ;  should  restore  to  the  Romans  those 
places  in  Illyricum  of  which  he  had  possessed  himself  by 
force,  since  the  peace  concluded  in  Epirus ;  and  to  Ptolemy, 
King  of  Egypt,  the  cities  which  he  had  seized  Bince  the 
of  Ptolemy  Philopator.  These  were  the  terms  which  he  re¬ 
quired,  on  behalf  of  himself  and  the  Roman  people :  but  it 
was  proper  that  the  demands  of  the  allies,  also,  should  be 
heard.”  The  ambassador  of  King  Attains  demanded  res¬ 
titution  of  the  ships  and  prisoners,  taken  in  the  sea-fight  at 
Cius ;  and  that  Nicephorium,  and  <he  temple  of  Venus, 
which  Philip  had  pillaged  and  defaced,  should  be  put  in  a 
state  of  thorough  repair.”  The  Rhodians  laid  claim  to  Pe- 
rsea,  a  tract  on  the  continent,  lying  opposite  to  their  island, 
%vhich  frqpi  early  times  had  been  under  their  jurisdiction  ;  md 
VOL.  IV. — U  u 

030 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  555. 

they  required,  that  ‘‘  the  garrison  should  be  withdrawn  from 
Tassus,  Bargylii,  and  Euroma,  and  from  Sestus  and  Abydus 
on  the  Hellespont ;  that  Perinthus  should  be-  restored  to  the 
Byzantians,  in  right  of  their  ancient  title,  and  that  all  the 
sea-port  towns  and  haihours  of  Asia  should  be  free.”  The 
Achseans  asserted  their  right  to  Corinth  and  Argos.  Phse- 
neas  nearly  repeated  the  demands  made  by  the  Romans,  that 
the  troops  should  withdraw  out  of  Greece,  and  the  iEtolians 
be  put  in  possession  of  the  cities  which  had  formerly  been 
under  their  dominion.  He  was  followed  by  Alexander,  a 
man  of  eminence  among  this  people,  and,  considering  his 
country,  not  uneloquent.  He  said,  that  ^  he  had  long  kept 
silence,  not  because  he  expected  -that  any  business  would  be 
effected  in  that  conference,  but  because  he  was  unwilling  to 
interrupt  any  of  the  allies  in  their  discourse.”  He  asserted, 
that  ‘‘  Philip  had  neither  treated  of  peace  with  sincerity  ;  nor 
waged  war  with  courage^  at  any  time :  that  in  negotiating, 
he  was  insidious  and  fraudulent;  while  in  war  he  never 
fought  on  equal  ground,  nor  engaged  in  regular  battles  ;  but, 
skulking  ab^ut,  burned  and  pillaged  towns,  and,  when  likely 
to  be  vanquished,  destroyed  the  prizes  of  victory.  But  not 
in  that  manner  did.. the  ancient  kings  of  Macedon  behave  i 
they  decided  theTja^q^pf  the  war  in  the  field,  and  spared  the 
towns  as  far  as  «thiy  .were  able,  in  order  to  possess  the  more 
opulent  empire/  |?Oi),%W^at  sort  of  conduct  was  it  to  destroy 
the  obje^s,*J'oiki.^^.0^9®s^ssion  of  which  the  contest  was 
waged,  ^d. AerebjitJeave  nothing  to  himself  but  fighting  ? 
Philip  jhad^  ifi  the.  last  year,  desolated  more  cities  of  his  al¬ 
lies  imXhessaiyf^han  al}  the  enemies  that  Thessaly  ever  had. 
Qn-thc  jEtolians  thqmselves,  he  had  made  greater  depreda¬ 
tions,  when  he  was  in  alliance  with  them,  than  since  he  be¬ 
came  their  enemy.  .  He  had  seized  on  Lysimachia,  after 
dislodging  the  praetor  and  garrison  of  the  iEtolians,  Cius 
also,  a  city  belonging  to  their  government,  he  razed  from  the 

BOOK  XXXII. 

331 

B.C.  19r.] 
foundation.  With  the  same  injustice,  he  held  possesskm  of 
Thebes  in  Pthiotis,  of  Echinus,  Larissa,  and  Pharsalus.” 
XXXIV.  Philip,  provoked  by  this  discourse  of  Alexander, 
pushed  his  ship  nearer  to  the  land,  that  he  might  be  the  bet¬ 
ter  heard,  and  began  to  speak  with  much  violence,  particular¬ 
ly  against  the  iEtolians.  But  Phaeneas,  interrupting  him,  smd 
that  “  the  business  depended  not  upon  words  ;  he  must  either 
conquer  in  war,  or  submit  to  his  superiors.”  That,  indeed, 
is  evident,”  said  Philip,  even  to  the  blind,”  sneering  at 
Phaeneas,  who  had  a  disorder  in  his  eyes  :  for  he  was  natu¬ 
rally  fonder  of  such  pleasantries  than  became  a  king  ;  and, 
even  in  the  midst  of  serious  business,  he  indulged  a  turn  to 
ridicule  farther  than  was  decent.  He  then  expressed  great 
indignation  at  the  “  iEtolians  assuming  as  much  importance 
as  the  Romans,  and  insisting  on  his  evacuating  Greece  j  peo¬ 
ple  who  knew  not  even  its  boundaries.  For,  of  iEtolia  itself, 
a  large  proportion,  consisting  of  the ,  Agraeans,  Apodeotians^ 
and  Amphilochians,  was  no  part  of  Greece. — Have  they  just 
ground  of  complaint  against  me,  for  not  refraining  from  war 
with  their  allies,  when  themselves,  from  the  earliest  period, 
follow,  as  an  established  rule,  the  practice  of  suffering  their 
young  men  to  carry  arms  against  those  allies,  withholding 
only  the  public  authority  of  the  state :  while  very  frequently 
contending  armies  have  iEtolian  auxiliaries  on  both  sides.  I 
did  not  seize  on  Cius  by  force,  but  assisted  my  friend  and 
ally,  Prussias,who  was  besieging  it, and  Lysimachia  I  rescued 
from  the  Thracians.  But  since  necessity  diverted  my  atten¬ 
tion  from  the  guarding  of  it  to  this  present  war,  the  Thracians 
have  possession  of  it.  So  much  for  the  iEtolians.  To  At¬ 
tains,  and  the  Rhodians,  I  in  justice  owe  nothing  j  for  not  to 
me,  but  to  themselves,  is  the  commencement  of  hostilities  to 
be  attributed.  However,  out  of  respect  to  the  Romans,  I 
will  restore  Peraea  to  the  Rhodians,  and  to  Attalus  his  ships, 
and  such  prisoners  as  can  be  found.  As  to  what  concerns 

332 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

Nicephorum,  md  the  temple  of  Venus,  what  other  answer 
can  I  make  to  those  who  require  their  restoration^  than  what 
I  should  make  in  case  of  woods  and  groves  cut  down  t  that, 
as  the  only  way  of  restoring  them,  I  will  take  on  myself  the 
trouble  and  expense  of  planting,  since  it  is  thought  lit  ^t, 
between  kings,  such  kinds  of  demands  should  be  made  and 
answered.’^  The  last  part  of  bis  speech  was  directed  to  the 
Achaeans,  wherein  he  enumerated,  first,  the  kindnesses  of 
Antigonus  j  then,  his  own  towards  their  nation,  desiring  them 
to  consider  the  decrees  themselves  had  passed  concerning 
him,  which  comprehended  every  kind  of  honour,  divine  and 
human ;  and  to  these  he  added  their  late  decree,  by  which 
they  had  confirmed  the  resolution  of  deserting  him.  He  in* 
veighed  bitterly  against  their  perfidy,  but  told  them,  that 
nevertheless  he  would  give  them  back  Argos.  “  With  re¬ 
gard  to  Corinth,  he  would  consult  with  the  Roman  general ; 
and  would,  at  the  same  time,  inquire  from  him,  whether  he 
demanded,  only,  that  be  (Philip)  should  evacuate  those  cities, 
which,  being  captured  by  himself,  were  held  by  the  right  of 
war  ;  or  those,  also,  which  he  had  received  from  his  ances¬ 
tors.” 
XXXV.  TTie  Achaeans  and  iEtolians  were  preparing  to 
answer,  but  as  the  sun  was  near  setting,  the  conference  was 
adjourned  to  the  next  day  ;  and  Philip  returned  to  his  station 
whence  he  came,  the  Romans  and  allies  to  their  camp.  On 
the  following  day,  Quintius  repaired  to  Nicsea,  which  was  the 
place  agreed  on,  at  the  appointed  time  ;  but  neither  Philip, 
nor  any  message  from  bin),  came  for  several  hours.  ,  At 
length,  when  they  began  to  despair  of  his  coming,  his  ships 
suddenly  appeared.  He  said,  that  ‘‘  the  ^rms  enjoined  were 
so  severe  and  humiliating,  that,  not  knowing  what  to  deter¬ 
mine,  he  had  spent  the  day  in  deliberation.”  But  the  general 
opinion  was,  that  he  had  purposely  delayed  the  business,  that 
the  Achaeans  and  A^tolians  might  not  have  time  to  answer 

BOOK  XXXU. 

333 

him :  and  this  opinion  he  himself  confirmed,  by  desiring^  in 
order  to  avoid  altercation,  smd  to  bring  the  affair  to  some 
c^nolusion,  that  the  others  should  retire,  and  leave  him  to 
converse  with  the  Roman  general,  F or  some  time,  this  was 
not  admitted,  lest  the  allies  should  appear  to  be  excluded 
from  the  conference.  Afterwards,  on  his  persisting  in  his 
desire,  the  Roman  general,  with  the  consent  of  all,  t^dting 
with  him  Apjnus  Claudius,  a  military  tribune,  advanced  to 
the  brink  of  the  coast,  and  the  rest  retired.  The  King,  with 
the  two  persons  whom  he  had  brought  the  day  before,  came 
on  shore,  where  they  conversed  a  considerable  time  in  pri¬ 
vate.  What  account  of  theii;  proceedings  Philip  gave  to  his 
“people  is  not  well  known  :  what  Quintius  told  the  allies  was» 
that  ‘‘  Philip  was  willing  to  cede  to  the  Romans  the  ^whok 
coast  of  lUyricum,  and  to  give  up  the  deserters  and  prison¬ 
ers,  if  there  were  any.  That  he  consented  to  restore  to  At¬ 
tains  his  ships,  and  the  seamen  taken  with  them  ;  and  to  the 
Rhodians  the  tract  which  they  call  Peraea.  That  he  refused 
to  evacuate  lassus  and  Bargylii.  To  the  iEtolians  he  was 
ready  to  restore  Pharsalus  and  Larissa ;  Thebes  he  would 
keep  :  and  that  he  would  give  back  to  the  Achseans  the  pos¬ 
session,  not  only  of  Argos,  but  of  Corinth  also.”  This  ar¬ 
rangement  pleased  none  of  the  parties  ;  neither  those  to  whom 
the  concessions  were  to  be  made,  nor  those  to  whom  they 
were  refused  ;  ‘‘  for  on  that  plan,”  they  said,  more  would 
be.  lost  than  gainedT ;  nor  could  the  grounds  of  contention 
ever  be  removed,  but  by  his  utterly  evacuating  every  part  of 
Greece.” 
XXXVI.  These  expressions,  delivered  with  eagerness  and 
vehemence  by  every  one  in  the  assembly,  reached  the  ears  of 
Philip,  though  he  stood  at  a  distance.  He  therefore  requested 
of  Quintius,  that  the  whole  business  might  be  deferred  until 
the  next  day  ;  and  then  he  would,  positively,  either  prevail 
cm  the  allies  to  accede  to  his  proposals,  or  suffer  himself  to 

334 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  555. 

be  prevailed  on  to  accede  to  theirs,  Tlic  shore  at  Tlmsnitiin 
was  appointed  for  their  meeting,  and  all  the^rtks  assembled 
there  early.  Philip  began  with  entreating  Quintius,  and  all 
who  were  present,  not  to  harbour  such  sendmen^  as  must 
tend  to  obstruct  a  pacification  ;  and  then  desired  time,  while 
he  could  send  ambassadors  to  Rome,  to  die  senate,  declaring, 
that  he  would  either  obtain  a  peace  on«the  terms  mention¬ 
ed,  or  would  accept  whatever  terms  the  senate  should  pre¬ 
scribe.”  None  approved  of  this ;  they  said,  he  only,  sought 
a  delay,  and  leisure  to  collect  his  strength.  But  Quintius 
observed,  that  such  an  objection  would  have  been  well 
founded,  if  it  were  then  summ«*,  and  a  season  fit  for  actkn ; 
as  matters  stood,  and  the  winter  being  just  at  hand,  nothing 
would  be  lost  by  allowing  him  time  to  send  ambassadors.  For, 
without  the  authority  of  the  senate,  no 'agreement  which  they 
might  conclude  with  the  King  would  be  valid  ;  and  besides, 
they  would  by  this  means  have  an  opportunity while  the 
winter  itself  wouM  necessarily  cause  a  suspension  of  arms,  to 
learn  what  terms  were  likely  to  be  approved  by  the  senate.” 
The  other  chiefs  of  the  allies  canie  over  to  this  opinion ;  and 
a  cessation  of  hostilities  for  two  months  being  granted,  they 
resolved  that  each  of  their  stat^  should  send  an  ambassador 
with  the  necessaty  information  to  the  senate,  and  in  order, 
that  it  should  not  be  deceived  by  the  misrepresentations  of 
Philip,  To  the  above  convention  was  added  an  article,  that 
all  the  King’s  troops  should  be  immediately  withdrawn  from 
Phocis  and  Locris.  With  the  ambassadors  6f  the  allies, 
Quintius  sent  Amynander,  King  of  Athamania  ;  and,  to  add 
a  degree  of  splendour  to  the  embassy,  a  deputation  from  him¬ 
self,  composed  of  Quintius  Fabius,  the  son  of  his  wife’s  sis¬ 
ter,  Quintus  Fulvius,  and  Appius  Claudius. 
XXXVII,  On  their  arrival  at  Rome,  the  ambassadors  of 
the  allies  were  admitted  to  audience  before  those  of  the  King. 
Their  discourse,  in  general,  was  filled  up  with  invectives 

BOOK  XXXIL 

335 

B.C.197.] 
agakst  Philip,  Wlkt^^ciuced  the  greatest  effect  on  the 
minds  of  the  seinUe,  was,  that^  by  pointing  out  the  rclatkc 
situations  of  the  knds  and  seas,  in  that  part  of  the  world,' 
they  n^ade  it  nuuiifeat  to  evmy  one,  that  if  the  King  held 
Z>em^ias  in  Thessaly,  Chalcis  in  Eub^a,  and  Corinth  in 
^ohaia,  Greece  could  not  he  free ;  and  they  added,  that  Phi¬ 
lip  himself,  with  not  more  insolence  than  truth,  used  to  call 
these  the  fetters  of  Greece.  The  Kingis  ambassadors  were 
then  introduced,  and,  when  they  were  beginning  a  long 
harangue,  they  were  stopped  by  a  short  question.  Whether 
he  was  willing  to  yield  up  the  three  above  mentioned  cities  ? 
They  answerjed,  that  they  had  received  no  specific  instruc¬ 
tions  on  ,that  head  :  on  which  they  were  dismissed,  without 
having  made  any  progress  towards  a  peace.  Full  authority 
was  given  to  Quintius  to  determine  every  thing  relative  to 
war  and  peace.  As  this  demonstrated,  clearly,  that  the  senate 
were  not  weary  of  the  war,  so  he  who  was  more  earnestly  de¬ 
sirous  of  conquest  than  of  peace,  tiever  afterwards  consented 
to  a  conference  with  Philip  ;  and  even  gave  him  notice,  that 
be  would  not  admit  any  embassy  from  him,  unless  it  came 
Wirii  information  that  his  troops  were  retiring  from  Greece, 
XXXVm,  Philip  now  perceived  diat  he  must  decide  the 
matter  by  arms,  and  collect  his  strength  about  him  from  all 
quarters.  Being  particularly  uneasy  in  respect  to  the  cities 
of  Achaia,  a  country  so  distant  from  him,  and  ako  of  Argos, 
even  more,  indeed,  than  of  Corinth,  he  resolved,  as  the  most 
adviseable  method,  to  put  the  former  into  the  hands  of  Na- 
bis,  tyrant  of  Lacedaemon,  in  trust  as  it  were,  on  the  terms, 
that  if  he  shoidd  prove  successful  in  the  war,  ^abis  should 
redejiver  it  to  him  ;  if  any  misfortune  should  happen,  he 
should  keep  it  himself.  Accordingly,  he  wrote  to  Philocles, 
who  had  the  command  in  Corinth  and  Argos,  to  have  a:tneet- 
ing^writh  the  tyrant.  Philocles,  besides  coming  with  a 

336 

history  of  ROME. 

[Y.R.555. 
ble  present,  added  to  that  pledge  of  future  friendship  between 
the  King  and  the  tyrant,  that  it  was  Philip’s  wish  to  unite  his 
daughters  in  marriage  to  the  sons,  of  Nabis.  The  tyrant,  at 
first,  refused  to  receive  the  city  on  any  other  terms,  than  that 
of  being  invited  by  a  decree  of  the  Argivcs  themselves :  but 
afterwards,  hearing  that  in  a  full  assembly  they  had  treated 
his  name  not  only  with  scorn,  but‘  eyen  with  abhorrence,  he 
thought  he  had  now  a  sufficient  excuse  for  plundering  them, 
and  he  accordingly  desired  Philip  to  give  him  possession  of 
the  place.  Nabis  was  admitted  into  the  city  in  the  night, 
without  the  privity  of  any  of  the  inhabitants,  and,  at  the  first 
lightf  seized  on  the  higher  parts  of  if,  and  shut  the  gates.  A 
few  of  the  principal  people  having  made  their  escape,  during 
the  first  confusion,  the  properties  of  all  who  were  absent  were 
seized  as  booty  :  those  who  were  present,  ’were  stripped  of 
their  gold  and  silver,  and  loaded  with  exorbitant  contribu¬ 
tions.  Such  as  paid  these  readily  were  discharged,  without 
, personal  insult  and’  laceration* of  their  bodies;  but  such  as 
were  suspected  of  hiding,  or  reserving  any  of  their  effects, 
were  mangled  and  tortured  like  slaves^  He  then  summoned 
an  assembly,  in  which  he  proposed  the  passing  of  two  laws  ; 
one  for  an  abolition  of  debts,  the  other  for  a  distribution  of 
die  land,  in  shares,  to  each  man^rivcr  firebrands  in  the  hands 
of  the  enemies  of  government,  for  inflaming  the  populace 
against  the  higher  ranks. 
XXXIX.  The  tyrant,  when  he  had  the  city  of  Argos  in  his 
power,  never  considering  from  whom,  or  on  what  conditions 
he  had  received  it,  sent  ambassadors  to  Elatia,  to  Quintius, 
and  to  Attalus,  in  his  winter-quarters  at  ./Egina,  to,  tell  them, 
that  he  was  in  possession  of  Argos  ;  and  that  if  Quintius 
would  come  hither,  and  consult  with  him,  he  had  no  doubt 
but  that  every  thing  might  be  adjusted  between  them.” 
Quintius,  glad  of  an  opportunity  of  depriving  Philip  of  that 

B.C.  197.] 

BOOK  XXXII. 

337 

strong  hold,  along  with  the  rest,  consented  to  come  ;  accord¬ 
ingly,  sending  a  message  to  Attains,  to  leave  iEgina,  and 
meet  him  at  Sicyon,  he  set  sail  from  Anticyra  with  ten  quin- 
queremes,  which  his  brother  Lucius  Quintius  happened  to 
bring  a  little  before  from  his  winter  station  at  Corcyra,  and 
passed  over  to  Sicyon.  Attains  was  there  before  him,  who, 
representing  that  the  tyrant  ought  to  come  to  the  Roman  ge¬ 
neral,  not  the  general  to  the  tyrant,  brought  Quintius  over  to 
his  opinion,  which  was,  that  he  should  not  enter  the  city  of 
Argos.  Not  far  from  it,  however,  was  a  place  called  Myce- 
nica  ;  and  there  the  parties  agreed  to  meet.  Quintius  came, 
with  his  brother  and  a  few  military  tribunes  ;  Attains,  with 
his  royal  retinue  ;  and  Ni costratus,  the  praetor  of  the  Achae- 
ans,  with  a  few  of  the  auxiliary  ofiicers  :  and  they  there  found 
Nabis  waiting  with  his  whole  army.  He  advanced,  armed 
and  attended  by  his  guards,  almost  to  the  middle  of  the  in¬ 
terjacent  plain  ;  Quintius,  unarmed,  with  his  brother  and  two 
military  tribunes  ;  the  King  was  accompanied  by  one  of  his 
nobles,  and  the  praetor  of  the  Achaeans  unarmed  likewise. 
The  tyrant,  when  he  saw  the  King  and  the  Roman  general 
unarmed,  opened  the  conference,  with  apologizing  for  hav¬ 
ing  come  to  the  meeting  armed  himself,  and  surrounded  with 
armed  men.  “  He  had  no  apprehensions,”  he  said,  “  from 
them  ;  but  only  from  the  Argive  exiles.”  When  they  then 
began  to  treat  of  the  terms,  on  which  friendship  was  to  be 
established  between  them,  the  Roman  made  two  demands  : 
one,  that  the  Lacedaemonian  should  conclude  a  peace  with  the 
Achaeans  ;  the  other,  that  he  should  send  him  aid  against 
Philip.  He  promised  the  aid  required  ;  but,  instead  of  a 
peace  with  the  Achaeans,  a  cessation  of  hostilities  was  obtain¬ 
ed,  to  last  until  the  war  with  Philip  should  be  ended. 
XL.  A  debate,  concerning  the  Argives  also,  was  set  on  foot 
by  King  Attains,  who  charged  Nabis  with  holding  their  city 
VOL.  IV. - X  X 

338 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  555, 

by  force,  which  was  put  into  his  hands  by  the  treachery  of 
Philocles  ;  while  Nabis  insisted,  that  he  had  been  invited  by 
the  Ar gives  themselves  to  afford  them  protection.  The  King 
required  a  general  assembly  of  the  Argives  to  be  convened, 
that  the  truth  of  that  matter  might  be  known.  To  this  the 
tyrant  did  not  object  j  but  the  King  alleged,  that  the  Lace¬ 
daemonian  troops  ought  to  be  withdrawn  from  the  city,  in  or¬ 
der  to  render  the  assembly  free  ;  and  that  the  people  should 
be  left  at  liberty  to  declare  their  real  senlinlents.  This  was 
refused,  and  the  debate  produced  no  effect.  To  the  Roman 
general,  six  hundred  Cretans  were  given  by  Nabis,  who 
agreed  with  the  praetor,  of  the  Achseans  to  a  cessation  of  arms 
for  four  months,  and  then. the  conference  broke  up.  Quintius 
proceeded  to  Corinth,  advancing  to  the  gates  with  the  cohort 
of  Cretans,  in  order  to  shew  Philocles,  the  governor  of  the 
city,  that  the  tyrant  had  deserted  the  cause  of  Philip.  Philo- 
cks,  came  out  to  confer  with  the  Roman  general ;  and,  on  the 
latter  exhorting  him  to  change  sides  immediately,  and  sur¬ 
render  the  city,  he  answered  in  such  a  manner,  as  showed  an 
inclination  rather  to  defer,  than  to  refuse  the  matter.  From 
Corinth,  Quintius  sailed  over  to  Anticyra,  and  sent  his  broth¬ 
er  thence,  to  sound  the  disposition  of  the  people  of  Acarna- 
nia.  Attains  went  from  Argos  to  Sicyon.  Here,  on  one  side, 
the  state  added  new  honours  to  those  -formerly  paid  to  the 
King  ;  and,  on  the  other,  the  King,  besides  having  on  a  for¬ 
mer  occasion  redeemed  for  them,  at  a  vast  expence,  a  piece 
of  land  sacred  to  Apollo,  unwilling  to  pass  by  the  city  of  his 
friends  and  allies  without  a  token  of  munificence,  made 
them  a  present  of  ten  talents  of  silver*,  and  ten  thousand 
bushels  of  corn,  and  then  returned  to  Cenchreie  to  his 
fleet.  Nabis,  leaving  a  strong  garrison  at  Argos,  returned 
to  Lacedaemon  ;  and,  as  he  himself  had  pillaged  the  men,  he 

1,9371.  10s. 

BOOK  XXXII. 

339 

B.C.  19r.] 
sent  his  wife  to  Argos  to  pillage  the  women.  She  invited 
to  her  house,  sometimes  singly,  and  sometimes  in  num¬ 
ber,  all  the  females  of  distinction  who  were  related  to  each 
other :  and  partly  by  fair  speeches,  partly  by  threats,  strip¬ 
ped  them,  not  only  of  their  gold,  but,  at  last,  even  of  their 
garments,  and  every  article  of  dress. 

THE 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

BOOK  XXXIII. 

Titus  Quintus  Flamininus,  proconsul,  gains  a  decisive  victory  over  Pliilip 
at  Cynoscephalae.  Caius  Sempronius  Tuditanus,  praetor,  cut  off  by  the 
Celtiberians,  Death  of  Attains,  at  Pcrgamus.  Peace  granted  to  Philip, 
and  liberty  to  Greece.  Lucius  Furius  Purpureo  and  Marcus  Claudius 
Marcelhis,  consuls,  subdue  the  Boian  and  Insubrian  Gauls.  Triumph  of 
Marcellus.  Hannibal,  alarmed  at  an  embassy  from  Rome  concerning  him, 
flies  to  Antiochus,  King  of  Syria,  who  was  preparing  to  make  war  on  the 
Romans. 

I.  SUCH  were  the  occurrences  of  the  winter.  In  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  spring,  Quintius  urged  Attains  to  join 
B*C  *  197  which  he  did,  at  Elatia  ;  and  being  anxious  to 
bring  under  his  authority  the  nation  of  the  Boeoti¬ 
ans,  who  had  hitherto  been  wavering  and  irresolute,  he 
inarched  through  Phocis,  and  pitched  his  camp  at  the  dis¬ 
tance  of  five  miles  from  Thebes,  the  capital  of  Boeotia.  Next 
day,  attended  by  one  company  of  soldiers,  and  by  Attains, 
together  with  the  ambassadors,  who  had  come  to  him  in  great 
numbers,  from  all  quarters,  he  proceeded  towards  the  city. 

BOOK  xxxm. 

34i 

B.C.  197.] 
having  ordered  the  spearmen  of  two  legions,  being  two  thou¬ 
sand  men,  to  follow  him  at  the  distance  of  a  mile.  About 
midway,  Antiphilus,  prsetor  of  the  Boeotians,  met  him  .*»  the 
rest  of  the  people  stood  on  the  walls,  watching  the  arrival  of 
the  King  and  the  Roman  general.  Few  arms  and  few  sol¬ 
diers  appeared — the  hollow  roads,  and  the  v allies,  concealing 
from  view  the  spearmen,  who  followed,  at  a  distance.  When 
Quintius  drew  near  the  city,  he  slackened  his  pace,  as  if  with 
intention  to  salute  the  multitude^  who  came  out  to  meet  him  : 
but  the  real  motive  of  his  delaying  was,  that  the  spearmen 
might  come  up.  The  townsmen  pushed  forward,  in  a  crowd, 
before  the,  lictors,  not  perceiving  the  band  of  soldiers  who 
were  following  them  close,  until  they  arrived  at  the  general’s 
quarters.  Then,  supposing  the  city  betrayed  and  taken, 
through  the  treachery  of  Antiphilus,  their  praetor,  they  were 
all  struck  with  astonishment  and  dismay.  It  was  now  evi¬ 
dent  that  no  room  was  left  to  the  Bceotians  for  a  free  discus¬ 
sion  of  measures  in  the  assembly,  which  was  summoned  for 
the  following  day.  However  they  concealed  their  grief, 
which  it  would  have  been  both  vain  and  unsafe  to  have  dis¬ 
covered. 
II.  When  the  assembly  met,  Attains,  first,  rose  to  speak, 
and  he  began  his  discourse  with  a  recital  of  the  kindnesses 
conferred  by  his  ancestors  and  himself  on  the  Greeks  in  ge¬ 
neral,  and  on  the  Boeotians  in  particular.  But,  being  now  too 
old  and  infirm  to  bear  the  exertion  of  speaking  in  public,  he 
lost  his  voice,  and  fell  ;  and  for  some  time,  while  they  were 
carry  ing  him  to  his  apartments,  (for  he  was  dcpri\ed  of  the 
use  of  one  half  of  his  limbs,)  the  proceedings  of  the  assembly 
were  stopped.  Then,  Aristsenus  spoke  on  the  part  of  the. 
Achseans,  and  was  listened  to  with  the  greater  attention,  be¬ 
cause  he  recommended  to  the  Boeotians  no  other  measures 
than  those  which  he  had  recommended  to  the  Achaeans,  A 
few  words  were  added  by  Quintius,  extolling  the  good  faith 

342 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  555. 

rather  than  the  arms  and  power  of  the  Romans.  A  resolu¬ 
tion  was  then  proposed,  by  Dicaearchus  of  Plataea,  for  form¬ 
ing  a  treaty  of  friendship  with  the  Roman  people,  which  was 
read  ;  and  no  one  daring  to  offer  any  opposition,  it  passed  by 
the  suffrages  of  all  the  states  of  Boeotia,  When  the  assembly 
broke  up,  Qaintius  made  no  longer  stay  at  Thebes  than  the 
sudden  misfortune  of  Attalus  made  necessary.  When  he 
found  that  the  force  of  the  disorder  had  not  brought  the 
King’s  life  into  any  immediate  danger,  but  had  only  occa¬ 
sioned  a  weakness  in  his  limbs,  he  left  him  there,  to  use  the 
necessary  means  for  recovery,  and  went  back  to  Elatia. 
Having  now  brought  the  Boeotians,  as  formerly  the  Achseans, 
to  join  in  the  confederacy,  while  all  places  were  in  a  state  of 
tranquillity  and  safety,  he  bent  his  thought  arid  attention 
towards  Philip,  and  the  remaining  business  of  the  war. 
III.  Philip,  on  his  part,  as  his  ambassadors  had  brought  no 
hopes' of  peace  frorii  Rome,  resolved,  as  soon  as  spring  began*, 
to  levy'  soldiers  through  every  town  in  his  dominions  :  but  he 
found  a  great  scarcity  of  young  men  ;  for  successive  wars, 
through  several  generations,  had  very  much  exhausted  the 
Macedonians,  and,  even  in  the  course  of  his  own  reign,  great 
numbers  had  fallen,  in  the  naval  engagements  with  the  Rho¬ 
dians  and  Attalus,  and  in  those  on  land  with  the  Romans. 
Mere  youths,  therefore,  from  the  age  of  sixteen,  were  en¬ 
listed  ;  and  ev  en  those  ^who  had  served  out  their  time,  pro¬ 
vided  they  had  anV  remains  of  strength,  were  recalled  to 
their  standards.  Having,  by  these  means,  filled  up  the  num¬ 
bers  of  his  army  about  the  vernal  equinox,  he  drew  together 
all  his  forces  to  Dius  ;  he  encamped  them  there  in  a  fixed 
post ;  and,  exercising  the  soldiers  every  day,  waited  for  the 
enemv.  About  the  same  time  Quiiitiusleft  Elatia,  and  came 
bv  Thronium  and  Scarphea  to  Thermopyl^.  There  he  held 
an  assembly  of  the  iEtolians,  which  had  been  summoned  tb 
meet  at  Heraclea,  to  dcternfuie  what  number  of  men  they 

BOOK  XXXIIL 

343 

B.C.  19r.] 
should  send  to  assist  the  Homans*  On  the  third  day,  haying 
learned  the  determination  of  the  allies,  he  proceeded  from 
Heraclea  to  Xyniae ;  and,  pitching  his  camp  on  the  confines 
between  the  iEniai^  and  Thessalians,  waited  for  the  iEtolian 
auxiliaries.  The  iEtolians  occasioned  no  delay.  Two  thou¬ 
sand  foot,  and  four  hundred  horse,  under  the  command  of 
Phgeneas,  speedily  joined  him ;  and  then  Quintius,  to  show 
plainly  what  he  had  waited  for,  immediately  decamped.  On 
passing  into  the  country  of  Phthiotis,  he  was  joined  by  five 
hundred  Cretans  of  Gortynium,  whose  commander  was  Cy- 
dates,  with  three  hundred  Apollonians,  armed  nearly  in  the 
same  manner  ;  and  not  long  after,  by  Amynander,  with  one 
thousand  two  hundred  Athamanian  foot. 
IV.  Philip,  being  informed  of  the  departure  of  the  Ho¬ 
mans  from  Elatia,  and  considering  that,  on  the  approaching 
contest,  bis  kingdom  was  at  hazard,  thought  it  adviseable  to 
make  an  encouraging  speech  to  his  soldiers;  in  which,  after 
he  had  expatiated  on  many  topics  often  insisted  on  before, 
respecting  the  virtues  of  their  ancestors,  and  the  military 
fame  of  the  Macedonians,  he  touched  particularly  on  two 
things,  which  at  the  time  threw  the  greatest,  damp  on  their 
spirits,  laying  great  stress  upon  such  as  might  revive  their 
cou^ge,  and  give  them  some  degree  of  confidence.  To  the 
defeat  suffered  at  the  river  Aous,  where  the  phalanx  of  the 
Macedonians  was  thrown  into  consternation  and  disorder,  he 
opposed  the  repulse  given  by  main  force  to  the  Romans  at 
Atrax:  and  even  with  respect  to  the  former  case,  when  they 
had  not  maintained  possession  of  the  pass  leading  into  Epi¬ 
rus,  he  said,  the  first  fault  was  to  be  imputed  to  those  who 
had  been  negligent  in  keeping  the  guards ;  and  the  second,  to 
the  light-infantry  and  mercenaries  in  the  time  of  the  engage¬ 
ment  ;  but  that,  as  to  the  phalanx  of  the  Macedonians,  it  had 
stood  firm  on  that  occasion  j  and  would  for  ever  remain  in¬ 
vincible,  on  equal  ground,  and  in  regular  fight.”  This  body 

344 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[YM.SSS, 

consisted  of  sixteen  thousand  men,  the  prime  strength  of  the 
army,  and  of  the  kingdom.  Besides  these,  he  had  two  thou¬ 
sand  targeteers,  called  Peltastae  $  of  Thracians  and  Illyrians, 
of  the  tribe  called  Trallians,  the  like  number  of  two  thou¬ 
sand  ;  and  of  hired  auxiliaries,  collected  out  of  various  na¬ 
tions,  about  one  thousand  ;  and  two  thousand  horse.  With 
this  force  the  King  waited  for  the  enemy.  The  Romans  had 
nearly  an  equal  number  in  cavalry 'they  - had  a  superiority, 
by  the  addition  of  >the  iEtolians. 
V.  Quintius,  marching  to  Thebes  in  *  Phthiotis,  sat  down 
before  it ;  and  having  received  encouragement  to  hope,  that 
the  city  would  be  betrayed  to  him  by  Timon,  a,  leading  man 
in  the  state,  he  came  up  close  to  the  walls,  with  only  a  small 
number  of  cavalry  and  some  lighNinfantry.  So  entirely  were 
his  expectations  disappointed,  that  he  was  not  only  obliged 
to  maintain  a  fight  with  the  enemy,  who  sallied  out  against 
him,  but  would  have  been  in  extreme  danger,  had  not  both 
infantry  and  cavalry  been  called  out  hastily  from  the  camp, 
and  come  up  in  time.  Not  meeting  with  that  success  which 
his  too  sanguine  hopes  had  led  him  to  expect,  he  desisted 
from  any  farther  attempt  on  the  city  at  present.  He  had  re¬ 
ceived  certain  information  of  the  King  being  in  Thessaly  ; 
but  as  he  had  not  yet  discovered  into  what  part  of  it  be  had 
come,  he  sent  his  soldiers  round  the  country,  with  orders  to 
cut  timber  and  prepare  palisades.  Both  Macedonians  and 
Greeks  had  palisades  ;  but  the  latter  had  not  adopted  the 
most  convenient  mode  of  using  them,  either  with  respect  to 
carriage,  or  for  the  purpose  of  strengthening  their  posts. 
They  cut  trees,  both  too  large,  and  too  full  of  branches  for  a 
soldier  to  carry  easily  along  with  his  arms :  and  after  they 
had  fenced  their  camp  with  a  line  of  these,  to  demo^lish  them 
was  no  difficult  matter ;  for  the  trunks  appearing  to  view, 
with  great  intervals  between  them,  and  the'  numerous  and 
strong  shoots  affording  the  hand  a  good  hold,  two,  or  at  most, 

BOOK  XXXttL 

345 

t^ee  young  WJn,  uniting  their  used  to  puK  out  one 
tt^ylvMch  being  removed,  left  a  breach  as  wide  as  a  gate, 
and  there  was  nothiiig  at  hand  ivilh  which  it  could  be 
ped  up.  But  the  Romans  cut  light  stakes^  mostly  of  one 
fork,  with  three  or,  at  the  most,  four  branches^;  so  that  a  see¬ 
dier,  withTiis  arms  slung  at  his  back,  can  carry  sevend  df 
them  together  ;  and  then  they  stick  d>em  down  so  cfosdy, 
and  interweave  the  branches  in  such  a  manner,  that  it  cannot 
be  seen  to  what  ei^ent  miy  bradch  belongs;  besides  which, 
the  boughs  are  so  sharp,  and  wrought  so  intimately  with  each 
other,  as  to  leave  no  room  for  a  hand  to  be  thrust  between, 
consequently  an  enemy  cannot  lay  hold  of  any  thing,  or,  if 
that  could  be  done,  could  be  draw  out  the  branches  thus  in* 
tertwined,  and  which  mutuaUy^bind  each  other.  Nay,  even 
if,  by  accident,  one  should  be  puHed  out,  it  leaves  but  a  smaU 
opening,  which  is  very  easily  idled  up. 
VI.  Next  day  Quintius^  cmisitig  his  men  to  carry  pali¬ 
sades  with  them,  that  they  might  be  ready  to  ^camp  on  any 
spot,  marched  a  short  way,  and  took  post  about  six  miles 
from  Pherat ;  whence  he  sent  scouts,  to  discover  in  what  part 
of  Thessaly  the  King  waa,  and  what"  appeared  to  be  his  in¬ 
tention.  Philip  was  then  near  Larissa,  and  as  soon  as  he 
learned  that  the  Roman  general  had  removed  from  Thebes, 
being  equally  impatient  for  a  decisive  engagement,  he  pro¬ 
ceeded  towards  the  enemy,  and  pitched  his  camp  about  four 
miles  from  Phem.  On  the  day  following,  some  light  troops 
went  out  from  both  camps,  to  seize  on  certain  hills  which 
eweriooked  the  city.  When,  nearly  at  equal  distances  from 
the  summit  which  was  intended  to  be  seized,  they  came  with¬ 
in  sight  of  each  other,  they  halted  ;  and  sending  messengers 
to  t^iri^pective  camps  for  directions,  how  they  were  to 
proceed  on  this  unexpected  meeting,  waited  their  return  ha 
quiet.  For  that  day,  they  were  recalled  to  their  camps,  with¬ 
out  having  come  to  action.  On  the  following  day  there  wa» 
VOL.  IV. —  Y  Y 

'  346 

HISTORY  OF  ROME- 

[Y.R.  555- 

an  engagement  between  the  cavalry,  i^car  the  same  hills,  in 
which  the  iEtoIians  bore  no  small  part ;  and  in  which  die 
King’s  troops  were  defeated,  and  driven  within  their  trenches, 
Both  Janies  were  greatly  impeded  in  the  action,  by  the  ground 
being  thickly  planted  with  trees  ;  by  the  gardens,  of  which 
there  were  many  in  a  place  so  near  the  city;  and  by^he  roads 
being  inclosed  between^  walls,  and  in  s^me  places  shut  up, 
The  commanders,,  therefore,  were  .equally  desirous  of  remov¬ 
ing  out  of  that  quarter  j  and,  as  if  they  had  preconcerted  the 
matter,  they  both  directed  their  route  to  Scotussa :  Philip 
hoping  t6  find  there  a  supply  of  corn ;  the  Roman  intending 
to  get  before  him,  and  destroy  the  crops.  The  armies 
marched  the  whole  day  without  having  sight  of  each  other 
in  any  place,  the  view  being  intercepted  by  a  continued  range 
of  hills  between  them.  The  Romans  encamped  at  Eretria, 
in  Phthiotis  ;  Philip,  on  the  ^ver  Onchestus.  But  though 
Philip,  lay  at  Melambrius,  in  the  territory  of  Scotussa,  and 
Quintius  near  Thetidium,  in  Pharssdia,  neither  party  knew 
with  any  certainty,  where  his  antagonist  was.  On.th^  third 
day,  there  felLa  violent  rain,  which  was  succeeded  by  dark¬ 
ness  equal  to  that  of  night,  and  this  confined  the  Romans  to 
their  camp,  through  fear  of  an  ambuscade. 
VII.  Philip,  intent  on  hastening  his  march,  suffered  not 
himself  to.  be  delayed  by  the  clouds,  which,  after  the 
rain,  covered  the  face  of  the  country,  but  ordered  his  troops 
to  march :  and  yet  so  thick  a  fog  had  obscured  the  day, 
that  neither  the  standard  bearers  could  see  the  road,  nor 
the  soldiers  the  standards ;  so  that  :all,  led  blindly  by  the 
shouts  of  uncertain  guides,  fell  into  disorder,  like  men  wan¬ 
dering  by  night.  When  they  had  passed  ovier  the  hills  called 
Cynoscepbalae,  where  diey  left  a  strong  guard  of  foot  and 
horse,  they  pitched  their  camp.  Although  the  Roman  gene¬ 
ral  staid  at  Thetidium,  yet  he  detached  ten  troops  of  hor^e, 
and  one  thousand  foot,  io  find  out  where  the  enemy  lay ; 

BOOK  xxxni. 

B.C.  197.} 

Uf 

warning  thcm^  howcvfcr,  against  ambuscades,  which  the  daJrk- 
n^s  of  the  day  would  cover,  even  in  an  open  country.  When 
these  arrived  at  the  hills,  where  the  enemy’s  guard  was  post¬ 
ed^  struck  with  mutual  fear;  both  partks  stood,  as  if  depriv¬ 
ed  of  the  power  of  motion*  They  then  sent  back  messengers 
to  their  respective  commanders  j  and  when  the  first  surprise 
subsided,  they  proceeded  to  action  without" more  delay.  The 
fight  was  begun  by  stn^li  advanced  parties ;  and  afterwards 
the  number  of  the  combatants  were  increased  by  reinforce¬ 
ments  sent  to  support  those  who  gave  way.  But  the  Romans, 
far  inferior  to  tkeir  adversaries,  \etit  message  after  message 
to  the  general,  that  they  were  in  danger. of  being  overpower¬ 
ed  :  on  'which  he  hastily  s^nt  five  hundred  horse,  and  two 
thousand  foot,  mostly  iEtolians,  under  the  command  of  two 
military  tribunes,  who  relieved  them,  and  restored  the  fight. 
The  Macedonians,  distressed  in  turn  by  this  change  of  for^ 
tiine,  sent  to  beg  succour  from  thrir  Kings  but  as,  on  account 
of  the  genferal  darkness  from  the  fbg^  he  had  expected  nothing 
less,  on  that  day,  than  a  battle,  and  had  therefore  sent  a  great 
number  of  men,  of  every  kind,  to  forage,  he  was,  for  a  con¬ 
siderable  time  in  great  perplexity,  and  unable  to  form  a  reso¬ 
lution.  The  jnessengers '  still  continued  to  urge  him  ;  the 
covering  of  clouds  was  novr  removed  from  foe  tops  of  the 
mountains,  and  the  Macedonian  party  was  in  view,  having 
been  driven  up  to  the  highest  summk,  and  trusting  for  safety 
rather  to  the  nature  of  the  ground,  than  to  their  arms.  He 
therefore  thought  it  necessary,  at  all  events,  to  hazard  foe 
whole,  in  order  to  prevent  the  loss  of  a  part,  for  want  of  sup¬ 
port  f  and,  accordingly,  he  sent  up  Athenagoras j  general  of 
the  mercenaries,  with  all  the  auxiliaries,  except  the  Thra¬ 
cians,  joined  by  the  Macedonian  and  Thessalian  cavalry.  On 
their  arrival  the  Rommas  were  forced  from  the  top  of  the  hUI*, 
and  did  not  face  about  until  they  came  to  the  level  plain.  The 
principal  support  which  saved  them  from  being  driven  down 

S4S 

HISTORY  OF  HOME. 

[Y.R.  SSS. 
in  disorderly  flight,  was  the  iEtolian  horsemeii.  The  Mu>~ 
lians  were  then  by  far  the  best  cavalry  in  Greece ;  in  infant¬ 
ry,  they  were  surpassed  by  some  of  their  neighbours. 
ym.  The  accounts  pf  this  affair,  which  were  brought  to 
the  King,  represented  it  in  a  more  flattering  light  than  the 
advantage  gained  could  warrant ;  for  people  came,  one  after 
another,  and  calling  out,  that  the  Romans  were  flying  in  a 
panic  :  so  that,  notwithstanding  it  was  against  his  judgment, 
and  he  demurred,  declaring  it  a  rash  proceeding,  and  that  he 
liked  not  either  the  place  or  the  time,  yet  he  was  prevailed 
upon  to  draw  out  his  whole  force  to  battle.  The  Roman 
general  did  the  same,  induced  by  necessity,  rather  than  by 
the  favourableness  of  the  occasion. .  Leaving  the  right  wing 
as  a  reserve,  having  the  elephants  posted  in  front,  he,  with 
the  left,  and  all  the  light  infantry,  advanced  against  the  ene¬ 
my  ;  at  the  same  time  reminding  his  men,  that  ‘‘  they  were 
going  to  fight  the  same  Macedonians  whom  they  had  fought 
in  the  passes  of  Epirus,  fenced)  as  they  were,  with  mountains 
and  rivers,  and  whom,  after  conquering  die  natural  difficul¬ 
ties  of  the  ground,  they  had  dislodged  and  vanquished  ;  the 
same,  in  short,  whom  they  had  before  defeated  under  the 
command  of  Publius  Sulpicius,  when  they  opposed  their  pas¬ 
sage  to  Eordsea.  That  the  kingdom  of  Macedonia  had  been 
hitherto  supported  by  its  reputation^  not  by  real  strength. 
Even  that  reputation  had,  at  length,  vanished.”  Quintius,soon 
reached  his  troops,  who  stood  in  the  bottom  of  the  valley  j  and 
they,  on  the  arrival  of  their  general  and  the  army,  renewed 
the  fight,  and,  making, a  vigorous  onset,  compelled  the  enen^ 
again  to  turn  their  backs.  Philip,  with  the*  torgeteeris,  and 
the  right  wing  of  infimtry  (the  main  strength  of  the  Macedo¬ 
nian  army,  called  by  them  the  phalanx),  advanced  in  a  quick 
pace,  having  ordered  Nicanor,  one  of  his  courtiers,  to  bring 
up  the  rest  of  his  forces  with  all  speed.  On  reaching  the 
top  of  the  hill,  from  a  few  arms  and  bodies  lying  there,  he 

BOOK  XXXHL 

349 

B.C,  197.] 
perceived  that  there  bad  been  an  engagement  on  spot,  and 
that  the  Romans  had  been  repulsed  from  it.  When  he  like¬ 
wise  saw  the  fight  now  going  on  close  to  the  enemy’s  works, 
he  was  elated  beyond  measure  :  but  presently,  observing  his 
men  flying  back,  and  the  danger  his  own,  he  was  much  em- 
barrassed,  and  hesitated  for  some  time,  whether  he  should 
eause  his  troops  to  retire  into  the  camp.  He  was  sensible 
that  his  part} %  besides  the  losses  which  they  suffered  as  they 
fled,  must  be  entirely  lost,  if  not  speedily  succoured  ;  and  as, 
by  this  time,  a  retreat  would  be  unsafe,  he  found  himself 
compelled  to  put  all  to  hazard,  before  he  was  joined  by  the 
other  division  of  his  forces.  He  placed  the  cavalry  and  light- 
infantry  thirt  had  been  engaged,  on  the  right  wing ;  or¬ 
dered  the  targeteers,  and  the  phalanx  of  Macedonians,  to  lay 
aside  their  spears,  which  their  great  length  rendered  unser¬ 
viceable,  and  to  manage  the  business  with  their  swords :  at 
the  same  time,  that  his  line  might  not  be  easily  broken,  he 
lessened  the  extent  of  the  front  one  half,  and  doubled  the  files 
in  depth.  He  ordered  them  also  to  close  theijr  files,  so  that 
men  and  arms  should  touch  each  other. 
IX.  Quintius,  having  received  among  the  standards  and 
ranks  those  who  had  been  engaged  with  the  enemy,  gave  the 
signal  by  sound  of  trumpet.  It  is  said,  that  such  a  shout  was 
raised,  as  was  seldom  heard  at  the  beginning  of  any  battle  ;  for 
it  happened,  that  both  armies  shouted  at  once  ;  not  only  the 
troops  then  engaged,  but  also  the  reserves,  and  those  who  were 
just  then  coming  into  the  field.  The  King,  fighting  from 
the  higher  ground,  had  the  better  on  the  right  wing,  by  means 
chiefly  of  the  advantage  of  situation.  On  the  left;  all  was 
disorder  and  confusion ;  particularly  when  that  division  of 
the  phalanx,  which  had  unlatched  in  the  tear,  was  coming  up* 
The  centre  stood  spectators  of  the  fight,  as  if  it  no  way  con* 
cemed  them.  The  phalanx,  just  arrived,  (a  column  rather 
than  a  line  of  battle,  md  fitter  for  a  march  than  for  a  fight,} 

350  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R,  555. 
had  scarcely  mminted  the  top  of  the  hHl :  before  these  could 
form,  Quintius,  though  he  saw  his  men  in  wing  giv¬ 
ing  way,  charged  the  enemy  furiously,  first  driving  on  the 
elephants  against  them,  for  he  judged  that  one  part  being 
routed  would  draw  the  rest  after.  There  was  no  dispute. 
The  Macedonians,  unable  to  stand  the  first  shock  of  ^he  ele¬ 
phants,  instantly  turned  their  backs ;  and  thh  rest,  as  had  been 
foreseen,  followed  them  in  their  retreat.  Then,  one  of  the 
military  tribunes,  forming  his  design  in  the  instant,  took  with 
him  twenty  companies  of  men  ;  left  that  part  of  the  army 
which  was  evidently  victorious  ;  and  making  a  small  circuit, 
fell  on  the  rear  of  the  enemy’s  right  wing.  Any  army  what¬ 
ever  must  have  heen  disordered  by  his  charge".  Such  charge 
and  disorder  is,  indeed,  incident  to  all  armies  in  general,  but 
there  was  in  this  case  a  circumstance  particularly  aggravating. 
The  phalanx  of  the  Macedonians  being  heavy,  could  not  rea¬ 
dily  face  about ;  nor  would  they  have  been  suffered  to  do  it 
by  their  adversaries  in  front,  who,  although  they  gave  way  to 
them  a  little  before,  on  this  new  occasion  pressed  them  vigor¬ 
ously.  Besides,  they  ky  under  another  inconvenience  in  re¬ 
spect  of  the  ground  ;  for,  by  pursuing  the  retreatiifg  enemy 
down  the  face  of  the  hill,  they  had  left  the  top  to  the  party 
who  came  round  on  their  rear.  Thus  attacked  on  both  sides, 
they  were  exposed  for  some  time  to  great  slaughter,  and  then 
betook  themselves  to  flight,  most  of  them  throwing  away  their 
arms. 
X.  Philip,  with  a  small  party  of  horse  and  foot,  ascended 
a  hill  somewhat  higher  than  the  test,  to  take  a  view  of  the 
situation  of  his  troops  on  the  left.  Then,  when  he  saw  them 
flying  in  confusion,  and  all  the  hills  around  glittering  with 
Roman  standards  and  &rms,  he  withdrew  frOm  the  field. 
Quintius,  as  he  was  pressing  on  the  retreating  enemy,  ob¬ 
served  the  Macedonians  suddenly  raising  up  their  spears,  and 
not  knowing  what  they  meant  thereby,  he  ordered  die  troops 

BOOK  XXXIIL 

351 

Bx,  m.} 
to  halt.  Then,  on  being  told  that  this  was  Ae  practice  of  the 
.Macedonians^  tntimatiDg  an  intention  of  surrendering  them* 
selves  he  was  disposed  to  spare  the  vanquished ; 
butthe  tro0]^  BOt  being  apprised,  either  of  the  enemy  having 
ce^d  hghung,or  of  the  general’s  intenticai,  made  a  charge 
on  them,  and  the  foremost  being  soon  cut  down,  the  rest  dis¬ 
persed  themselves  and  fled.,  Philip  hastened  with  all  possi¬ 
ble  speed  to  Tempe,  and  Acre  halted  one  day  at  Gonni,  to 
pick  up  Aose  who  might  have  survived  the  battle.  The  vic¬ 
torious  Romans  rushed  into  the  Macedonian  camp  with  hopes 
of  spoil,  but  found  it^  for  the  most  part,  plundered  already  by 
the  iEtolians.  Eight  thousand  of  the  enemy  were  killed  on 
that  day,  five  thousand  taken.  Of  Ae  victors,  about  seven 
hundred  fell,  Valerius  Antias,'who  on  every  occasion  ex¬ 
aggerates  numbers  enormously,  says  that  the  killed  of  the 
enemy  on  that  day  amounted  to  forty  thousand  ;  the  prison¬ 
ers  taken  (in  which  article  the  deviation  from  truth  is  less  ex¬ 
travagant),  to  five  thousand  seven  hundred,  with  two  hundred 
and  forty-one  military  standards,  Claudius  also  asserts,  that 
thirty-two  Aousand  of  Ae  enemy  were  slain,  and  four  thou¬ 
sand  three  hundred  taken.  We  have  not  given  entire  credit, 
even  to  the  smallest  of  thoae  numbers,  but  have  followed 
Polybius,  a  writer  whose  testimony  may  be  depended  on  with 
respect  to  all  the  Roman  affairs,  but  especially  those  which 
were  transacted  in  Greece. 
XI.  Philip  having  collected,  after  the  flight,  such  as,  hav¬ 
ing  been  scattered  by  the  various  chances  of  Ae  battle,  had 
followed  his  steps,  and  having  sent  people  to  Larissa  to  burn 
the  records  of  the  kingdom,  lest  ,  they  should  fall  into  Ae 
hsuads  of  the  enemy,  retired  into  Macedonia.  Quintius  set 
up  to  salt^  a  part  of  the  prisoners  and  booty,  and  part  he  be¬ 
stowed  on  the  soldiers  ;  and  then  proceeded  to  Larissa,  with¬ 
out  having  yet  received  any  . certain  intelligence  to  what  quar¬ 
ter  Philip  had  betaken  himself,  ot  what  were  his  designs.  To 

352 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

[Y.R,  555. 

this  place  came  a  hs^d  from  the  King,  apparently  to  obtain 
a  truce,  until  those  who  had  fallen  in  battle  should  be'  remov- . 
ed  and  buried,  but  in  reality  to  i«t|U€«t  pcrmissicm  to  send 
ambs^adors.  Both  were  obtained  from  the  Roman  general ; 
who,  besides,  desired  the  messenger  to  tell  the  King,  “  not  to 
be  too  much  dejected.”  This  expression  gave  much  olFencc, 
particularly  to  the  iEtolians,  who  were  become  very  assuming, 
and  who  complained,  that  the  general  was  quite  altered  by 
success.  Before  the  battle,  he  was  accustomed  to  transact  all 
business,  whether  great  or^mall,  in  concert  with  the  allies^ 
but  they  had,  now,  no  share  in  any  of  his  counsels ;  he  con¬ 
ducted  all  affairs  entirely  by  his  own  judgment  j  and  was 
even  seeking  an  occasion  of  ingratiating  himself  personally 
with  Philip,  in  order  that,  after  the  iEtolians  had  laboured 
through  all  hardships  and  difficulties  of  the  war,  the  Roman 
might  assume  to  himself  all  the  merit  and  all  the  fruits  of  a 
peace.”  Certain  it  is,  that  he  had  treated  them  with  less  re-  * 
spect  than  formerly,  but  they  were  ignormt  of  his- motives  for 
slighting  them.  They  imagined  that  he  was  actuated  by  an 
expectation  of  presents  from  the  King,  though  he  was  of  a 
spirit  incapable  of  yielding  to  a  passion  of  that  kind  ;  but  he 
was,  with  good  reason,  displeased  at  the  iEtoUans,  account 
of  their  insatiable  greediness  for  plunder,  and  of  their  arro¬ 
gance  in  assuming  to  themselves  the  honour  of  the  victory-^ 
a  claim  so  ill  founded,  as  to  offend  the  ears  of  all  who  heard 
it.  Besides  he  foresaw,  that,  if  Philip  were  removed  out  of 
the  way,  and  die  Strength  of  the  kingdom  of  Macedonia  en^ 
tirely  broken,  the  iEtobans  would  bold  the  place  of  masters 
of  Greece.  For  these  reasons,  on  many  occasions,  he  took 
pains  to  lessen  their  importance  and  reputation  in  the  judg¬ 
ment  of  the  other  states. 
XI 1.  A  truce  for  fifteen  days  was  granted  to  the  Macedo¬ 
nians,  and  a  conference  with  the  King  appointed.  Before 
the  day  arrived  on  which  this  was  to  be  held,  the  Roman 

BOOK  XXXIII, 

35S 

197.] 
general  called  a  council  of  the  allies,  and  desired  their  o{>inioxi8 
respecting  the  terms  of  peace,  proper  to  be  prescribed.  Amy- 
Bander,  King  of  Athamania,  delivered  his  opinion  in  a  few 
words  ;  that  the  conditions  of  peace  ought  to  be  adjusted 
in  such  a  manner,  as  that  Greece  might  havfe  sufficient  power, 
even  without  the  interference  of  the  Romans,  to  maintain  the 
peace,  and  also  its  own  liberty.”  The  sentiments  delivered 
by  the  A/tolians  were  more  harsh  ;*  for,  after  a  few  introduc¬ 
tory  observations  on  die  justice  and  propriety  of  the  Roman 
genersd’s  conduct,  in  communicating  his  plans  of  peace  to 
those  who  had  acted  with  him  as  allies  in  the  war,  they  in¬ 
sisted,  that  he  was  utterly  mistaken,,  if  he  supposed  that  he 
could  leave  the  peace  with  the  Romans,,  or  the  liberty  cf 
Greece,  on  a  permanent  footing,  unless  he  deprived  Philip, 
either  of  his  life,  or  of  the  throne  ;  both  which  he  could  easily 
accomplish,'  if  he  chose  to  pursue  his  present  success.” 
Quintius,  in  reply,  said,  that  the  iEtolians,  in  giving  such 
advice,  attended  not  either  to  the  maxims  of  the  Roman 
policy,  or.  to  the  consistency  of  their  own  conduct.  For,  in 
all  the  former  councils  and  conferences,  wherein  the  condi¬ 
tions  of  peace  were  discussed,  th^y  never  once  urged  the 
pushing  of  the  war  to  the  utter  ruin  of  the  Macedonian :  and, 
as  to  the  Romans,  besides  that  they  had,  from  the  eaf$bst 
periods,  observed  the  max;im  of  sparing  the  vanquished,  they 
had  lately  given  a  signal  proof  of  their  clemency  in  the  peace 
granted  to  Hannibal  and  the  Carthaginians.  ^  But,  not^to  insist 
on  the  case  of  the  Carthaginians,  how  often  had  the  confede¬ 
rates  met  Philip  himself  in  conference,  yet  no  mentioh  was 
evpr  made  of  his  resigning  his  kingdom  :  and,  because  he 
had  been  defeated  in  battle,  was  that*  a  reason  that  their  ani¬ 
mosity  should  become  implacable  ?  Against  an  armed  foe, 
men  ought  to  engage  with  hostile  resentment ;  towards  the 
vanquished,  he  that  showed  most  clemency,  showed  the 
greatest  spirit.  The  Kings  of  Macedonia  were  thought  to 
VOL.  IV. — Z  2 

354 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  555. 

be  dangerous  to  the  liberty  of  Greece.  Suppose  that  king¬ 
dom  and  nation  extirpated,  the  Thracians,  Illyrians,  and,  in 
time,  the  Gauls,  (nations  uncivilized  and  savage,)  would  pour 
themselves  into  Macedonia  first,  and  then  into  Greece.  He 
therefore  warned  them,  not,  by  removing  inconveniencics 
which  lay  nearest,  to  open  a  -passage  to  others  ~  greater  "and 
more  grievous,’^  Here  he  was  Interrupted  ly  Phaeneas,  pree- 
toT  of  the  -/Etoli^is,  who  Called  on  the  assembly  to  remember 
the  warning  he  gave  them  ;  that  ‘‘  if  Philip  escaped  now,  he 
would  soon  raise  a  new  and  more  dangerous  wan”  On  which 
Quintius  said,— Cease  wrangling,  when  you  ought  to  de¬ 
liberate.  The  peace  shall  not  be  incurpbered  with  such  con¬ 
ditions  as  will  leave  it  in  his  power  to  raise  a  war.’’ 
XIII.  The  convention  was  then  adjourned  ;  and,  next  day, 
the  King  came  to  the  pass  at  the  entrance  of  Tempe,  the  ap¬ 
pointed  place  of  meeting  ;  and  the  third  day  following  was 
fixed  for  introducing  him  to  a  full  assembly  of  the  Rom^^ 
and  allies. '  On  this  occasion  Philip,  with  great  prudence, 
avoided  the  mention  of  any  of  those  particulars,  without 
which  peace  could  not  be  obtained  •  and 'he  declared,  that  he 
was  ready  to  comply  with  all  the  articles  which,  in  the  for¬ 
mer  conference,  were  either  prescribed  by  the  Romans  or 
demanded  by  the  aHies  ;  and  to  leave  all  other  matters  to  the 
determination, of  the  senate.  Although  he  seemed  to  have 
hereby  precluded  every  objection,  even  from  the  most  inve¬ 
terate  of  his  enemies,  yet,  all  the  rest  remaining  silent,  Phae- 
neas,  the  iEtolian,  said  to  him;— What !  Philip,  do  you  at 
last  restore  to  us  Pharsalus  and  LariSsa,  with  Cremaste, 
Echinus,  Imd  Thebes  in  Phthiotis  Piwlip  answered,  that 
he  would  give  no  obstruction  to  their  retaking  the  posses¬ 
sion  of  them.”  On  which  a  dispute  arose  between  the  Ro¬ 
man  general  and  the  iEtolians  about  Thebes ;  for  Quintius 
affirmed,  that  it  became  the  property  of  the  Roman  people  by 
the*  laws  of  war:  because,  when,'  before  the  commencement 

BOOK  XXXIII. 

355 

B.C. 1970 
of  hostilities,  he  marched  his  army  thither,  and  invited  the 
inhabitants  to  friendship  ;  they,  although  at  full  liberty  to  re¬ 
nounce  the  King’s  party,  yet  preferred  an  alliance  with  Philip 
to  one  with  Rome.  Ph«neas  alleged,  that,  in  consideration 
of  their  being  confederates  in  the  war,  it  was  reasonable,  that 
whatever  the  iEtolians  possessed  before  it  began,  should  be 
restored  ;  and  that,  besides,  there  was,  in  the  first  ti^eaty,  a 
provisional  clause  of  that  purport,  by  which  the  spoils  of  war, 
of  every  kind  that  could  be  carried  or  driven,  were  to  belong 
to  the  Romans  ;  the  lands  and  captured  cities  to  the  iEto- 
lianrs;  Yourselves,”  replied  Quintius, ‘‘  annulled  the  con¬ 
ditions  of  that  treaty,  when  ye  deserted  us,  and  made  peace 
with  Philip  ;  but,  supposing  it  still  remained  in  force,  yet 
that,  clause  could  affect  only  captured  cities.  Now,  the  states 
of  Thessaly  submitted  to  us  by  a  voluntary  act  of  their 
own.” — These  words  were  heard  by  the  allies  with  universal 
af^robation  ;  but  to  the  iEtolians  they  were  highly  displeasing 
at  the  present,  and  proved  aftet^wards  the  cause  of  a  war,  and 
of  many  great  disasters  attending  it.  The  terms  settled  with 
Philip  were,  that  he  should  give  his  son  Demetrius,  and  some 
of  his  friends,  as  Hostages  ;  should  pay  two  hundred  talents* ; 
and  send  ambassadors  to  Rc5me,  to  adjust  the  other  articles  ; 
for  which  purpose  there  should  he  a  cessation  of  arms  for 
four  tnonths.  An  engagement  was  entered  into,  that,  in  case 
the  senate  should  refuse  to  conclude  a  treaty,  his  money  and 
hostages  should  be  returned  to  him.  We  are  told,  that  one 
of  the  principal  reasons'  which  made  the  Roman  general  wish 
to  expedite  the  conclusion  of  a  peace,  was,  that  he  had  re¬ 
ceived  certain  information  of  Antioch  us  intending  to  com¬ 
mence  hostilities,  and  to  pass  over  into  Europe. 
XIV.  About  the  same  time,  and,  as  some  writers  say,  on 
the  same  day,  the  Achseans  defeated  Androsthencs,the  Kmg’s 

*  38,7501 

S56 

HISTORSr  ©F  ROME. 

[Y.R, 

commander,  in  a  general  engagement  near  Corinth.  Philip, 
intending  to  use  this  city  as  a  citadel,  awe  the  states  of 
Greece,  had  invi^  the  principal  inhabitants  to  a  conference, 
under  pretence  of  setding  with  them  the  number  of  horsemen 
which  the  Corinthians  could  supply  towards  the  war,  and 
these  he  detained  as  hostages.  Besides  the  force  already 
there,  consisting  of  five  hundred  Macedonians,  and  eight 
hundred  auxiliaries  of  various  kinds,  he  had  sent  thither  one 
thousand  Macedonians,  one  thousand  two  hundred  Illyrians, 
and  of  Thracians  and  Cretans  (for  these  served  in  both  the 
opposite  armies),  eight  hundred.  To.  these  were  added  Bteo-* 
tians,  Thessalians,  and  Acarnanxans,  to  the  amount  of  one 
thousand,  all  carrying. bucklers  ;  with  as- many  of  the  young 
Corinthians  themselves,  as  filled  up  the  number  of  six  thou¬ 
sand  effective  men, — a  force  which  inspired  Androsthenes 
with  such  confidence,  as  to  wish  for  a  meeting  with  the  enemy 
in  the  field.  Nicostratus,  praetor  of  the  Achaeans,  was  at 
Sicyon,  with  two  thousand  foot  and  one  hundred  horse  ;  but, 
seeing  himself  so  inferior,  both  in  the  number  and  kind  of 
troops,  he  did  not  go  outside  the  walls  :  the  King’s  forces,  in 
various  excursions,  ravaged  the  lands  of  Pelfene,  Phliasus, 
and  Cleone.  At  last,  reproaching  the  enemy  with  cowardice, 
they  passed  over  into  the  territory  of  Sicyon,  and,  sailing 
round  Achaia,  wasted  the  whole  coast.  As  the  enemy,  while 
thus  employed,  spread  themselves  about  too  widely,  and  too 
carelessly  (the  usual  consequence  of  too  much  confidence 
Nicostratus  conceived  hopes  of  attac'king  them  by  surprise. 
He  therefore  sent  secret  directions  to  2l\  the  neighbouring 
states,  as  to  what  day,  and  what  number  from  each  state, 
should  assemble  in  arms  at  Apelaurus,  a  place  an  the  territory 
of  Stymphalia.  All  being  in  readiness  at  the  time  appointed,  he 
marched  thence  immediately  :  and,  without  communicating 
his  intentions  to  any  one,  came  by  night  through  the  territory 

BOOK  XXXIU. 

BX.  197.] 
of  the  Phliaskma  to  Cleone*  He  had  with  him  five  thoos^iiid 
foot,  of  whom  were  light*armed,  and  three 
hundred  horse  j  with  this  force  he  waited  there,  having  des¬ 
patched  scouts  to  watch  on  what  quarter  the  enemy  should 
make  their  irregular  inroads. 
XV.  Androstbenes,  utterly  i|^rant  of  all  these  proceed¬ 
ings,  left  Corinth,  and  encamped  on  the  Neinea,  a  river  run¬ 
ning  between  the  confines  of  Corinth  and  Sicyon.  Here,  dis¬ 
missing  one  half  of  his  troops,  he  divided  the  remainder  into 
three  parts,  and  ordered  all  the  cavalr}’^  of  each  part  to  march 
in  separate  divisions,  and  ravage,  at  the  same  time,  the  ter¬ 
ritories  of  Pellene,  Sicyon,  and  Phliasus.  Accordingly,  the 
three  divisions  set  out  by  different  roads.  soon  as  Nicos- 
tratus  received  intelligence  of  this  at  Cleone,  he  instantly 
sent  forward  a  numerous  detachment  of  mercenaries,  to  seize 
a  strong  pass  at  the  entrance  into  the  territory  of  Corinth ; 
and  he  himself  quickly  followed,  with  his  troops  in  two  co¬ 
lumns,  the  cavalry  proceeding  before  the  head  of  each,  as 
advanoed^guardsi  In  one  column,  inarched  the  mercenary 
soldiers  and  light-infantry  ;  in  the  other,  the  shield -bearers 
of  the  Achseans,  and  other  states,  who  composed  the  princi¬ 
pal  strength  of  the  army.  Both  infantry  and  cavalry  were 
now  within  a  small  dist^ce  of  the  camp,  and  some  of  the 
Thracians  attacked  parties  of  the  enemy,  who  were  straggling 
and  scattered  over  the  country,  when  the  sudden  alarm  reach- 
od  their  tents.  The  commander,. there,  was  thrown  into  the 
utmost  perplexity„ ;  .for,  having  never  had  a  sight  of  the 
Achaeans,  except  once  or  twice  on  the  hills  before  Sicyon, 
when  they  did  not  venture  down  into  the  plains,  he  had  never 
imagined  that  they  would  come  so  far  as  Cleone.  He  order¬ 
ed  the  stragglers  to  be  recalled  by  sound  of  trumpet ;  com¬ 
manded  the  soldiers  to  take  arms  with  all  haste  ;  and,  march- 

f  In  the  original  the  number  is  .omitted  or  lost. 

358 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  555. 
ing  out  at  the  head  of  thin  battalions,  drew  up  his  line  on  the 
bank  of  the  river*  "  His  other  troops,  having  scarcely  had 
time  to  be  collected  formed,  did  not  withstand  the  ene¬ 
my’s  first  onset :  but  the  Macedonians  had  attended  their 
standards  in  greater  numbers,  and  now  kept  the  battle  a  long 
time  doubtful.  At  length,  being  left  exposed  by  the  flight  of 
the  rest,  and  pressed  by  two  bodies  of  the  enemy  on  different 
sides,  by  the  light-infantry  on  Aeir  flank,  and  by  the  shield* 
bearers  and  targeteers  in  front,  and  seeing  victory  declare 
against  them,  they  at  first  gave  ground ;  soon  after,  being 
vigorously  pushed,  they  turned  their  backs  j  and,  most  of 
them  throwing  away  their  arms,  and  having  lost  all  hope  of 
defending  their  camp,  made  the  best  of  their  way  to  Corinth. 
Nicostratus  sent  the  mercenaries  in  pursuit ;  and  the  auxiliary 
Thracians  against  the  party  deployed  in  ravaging  the  lands 
of  Sicyon  :  both  of  which  detachments  slew  great  numl^rs, 
greater  almost  than  were  slain  in  the  battle  itself.  those 
who  had  been  ravaging  Pellene  and  Phthius,  seme,  returning 
to  their  camp,  ignorant  of  all  that  had  happened,  and  without 
any  regular  order,  fell  in  with  the  advanced  guards  of  the 
enemy,  where  they  expected  their  own.  Others,  from  the 
bustle  which  they  perceived,  suspecting  the  cause,  fled  and 
dispersed  themselves  in  such  a  manner,  that,  as  they  wander¬ 
ed  up  and  down,  they  were  cut  off  by  the  very  peasants. 
There  fell,  on  that  day,  one  thousand  five  hundred  5  three 
hundred  were  made  prisoners.  The  great  fears,  under  which 
all  Achaia  had  hitherto  laboured,  were  thus  removed. 
XVI.  Before  the  battle  at  Cynoscephalse,  Lucius  Qumtius 
had  invited  to  Corcyra  some  chiefs  of  the  Acamanians,  the 
only  state  in  Greece  which  had  continued  to  maintain  its  al¬ 
liance  with  the  Macedonians  ;  and.  hi  concert  with  them,  laid 
some  kind  of  scheme  for  a  change  of  measures.'  Two  causes 
principally,  had  retained  them  in  friendship  with  the  King  : 
one  was  a  principle  -of  honour,  natural  to  that  nation  ;  the 

BOOK  XXXIfl, 

359 

B.c.  m.] 
otheff,  their  fear  and  hatred  of  tl^  iEtolians.  A  gen^^al  as- 
senrrbly  was  summoned  to  meet  at  but  neither  did 
all  the  states  of  Acarnania  come  thiA^^nor  were  those  who 
did  ^ttend^  agreed  in  opinion.  However,  the  magistrates  and 
leading  men  prevailed  so  far,  as  to  get  a  decree  passed,  cm 
the  authority  of  a  majority  of  those  present,  for  joining  in 
alliance  with  the  Romans.  This  gave  great  offence  tO:  those 
who  had  not  been  present ;  and,  in  this  ferment  of  the  nation, 
Androcles  and  Echedemus,  tw'O  men  of  distinction  among 
the  Acarnanians,  being  employed  by  Philip,  gained  so  much 
influence  as  to  prevail  on  the  assewj^y,  not  only  to  repeal 
the  decree  for  an  alliance  with  Rome,  but  alscrto  condemn, 
as  guilty  of  treason,  Archesilaus  and  Bianor,both  inen  of  the 
first  rank  in  Acarnania,  who  bad  been  the  advisers  of  that 
measure ;  and  to  deprive  Zeuxidas,  th^  praetor,  of  his  office, 
for  havmg  put  it  to  the  vote.  The  persons  condemned  took 
a  course  apparently  desperate,  but  successful  in  the  issue ; 
for,  while  their  friends  advised  them  to  yield  to  the  times, 
and  withdraw  ^to  Corcyra,  to  the  Romans,  they  resolved  to 
present  themselves  to  the  multitude  ;  and  either,  by  that  act, 
totnollify  their  resentment,  or  endure  whatever  might  befall 
them.  They  came,,  accordingly,  into  a  full  assembly;  on 
Which,  at  first,  a  murmur  arose,  expressive  of  surprise ;  but 
presently  silence  took  place,  partly  from  respect  to  their  for¬ 
mer  dignity,  partly  from  commiseration  of  their  present 
situation:  They  were 'even  indulged  with  the  liberty  of 
speaking.  At  first,  they  addressed  the  assembly  in  a  sup¬ 
pliant  manner  ;  *but,  in  the  progress  of  their  discourse,  when 
they  came  to  xefute  the  charges  made  against  them,  they 
spoke  with  that  degree  6f  confidence  which  innocence  in¬ 
spires.  At  last,  they  even  ventured  to  utter  some  complamts, 
and  to  charge  the  proceedings  against  them  with  injustice 
and  cruelty  ;  this  had  such  an  effect  on  the  minds  of  all  pre¬ 
sent,  that,  with  one  consent,  they  annulled  all  the  decrees 

360 

HISTCmy  OP 

[y.R.  S5S. 

pass^  against  them,  lie^erthek^  resolu« 
to  renc^ce  the  friendship  of  the  imd  return 
to  the  attiaiKie  with  Philip. 
XVU.  These  decrees  were  passed  at  Leucas,  the  capital 
of  Acarnania^  the  place  where  all  the  states  usually  ^ct  m 
council.  As  soon^  therefore,  as  the  news  of  this  sudden 
change  reached  the  lieutenant-general  Flamininus,  in  Cor- 
cyra,  he  instantly  set  sail  with  the  fleet  for  Leucas  ;  and  com¬ 
ing  to  an  anchor  at  Herseas,  advanced  thence  towards  the 
walls  with  every  kind  of  machme  used  in  the  attacking  of 
cities ;  supposing  thaj^the  first  appearance  of  danger  might 
bend  the  minds  of  the  inhabit^ts  to  submission.  But  seeing 
no  prospect  of  efiFecting  any  thing,  except  by  force,  he  began 
to  erect  towers^  and  to  bring  up  the  battering  rams  and  other 
engines  to  the  walls.  The  whole  of  Acamania,  being  situated 
between  ^tolia  and  Epirus,  faces  towards  the  west  and  the 
Sicilian  sea.  Leucadia,  now  an  isl^d,  separated  from  Acar« 
nama  by  a  shallow  streight,  and  which  is  the  work  of  art, 
was  then  a  peninsula,  united  on  its  eastern  side  to  Acamania 
by  a  narrow  isthmus  ;  this  isthmus  was  .about  five  hundred 
paces  in  length,  and  in  breadth  not  above  one  hundred  and 
twenty.  At  the  entrance  of  this  niirrow  neck  stands  Leucas, 
stretching  up  part  of  a  hill  which  faces  the  east  and  Acar- 
nania ;  the  lower  part  of  the  town  is  level,  lying  along  the 
sea,  which  divides  Leucadia  from  Acamania.  Thus  it  lies 
open  to  attacks,  boih  from  the  sea  and  from  the  land  ;  for  the 
channel  is  more  like  a  marsh  than  a  sea,  and  all  the  adjacent 
ground  has  a  depth  which  renders  the  construction  of  works 
easy.  In  many  places,  therefore,  at  once,  the  walls  were  either 
undermined,  or  demolished  by  the  ram.  But  all  the  advan¬ 
tages  which  the  nature  of  the  place  aiFt>rded  to  the  besiegers, 
were  amply  counterbalanced  by  the  invincible  spirit  of  the 
besieged  ;  night  an,d  day  they  employed  themselves  busily  in 
repairing  the  shattered  parts  of  the  wall ;  and,  stopping  up 

/ 

361 

B.C.  m.}  XXXIU. 
Ae  made,  fought  the  enemy  witJi  great 
spirit,  a  wish  to  defend  the  walk  by  their  arms 
rather  tlmh  themselves  by  the  walls.  And  they  woulH  c^- 
taittly  have  protracted  the  siege  to  a  length  unexpected  by 
the  Romans,  had  not  some  exiles  of  Italkm  birth,  who  resided 
in  Leucas,  admitted  a  band  of  soldiers  into  the  citadel :  not¬ 
withstanding  which,  when  those  troops  ran  down  from  the 
higher  ground  with  great  tumult  and  uproar,  the  Leucadians, 
drawing  up  in  a  body  in  the  Forum,  withstood  them  for  a 
considerable  time  in  regular  fight.  Meanwhile,  the  walk 
were  scaled  in  m^y  places  j  and  the  besiegers,  climbing  over 
the  rubbish,  entered^  the  town  through  the  breaches.  And 
now  the  lieutenant-general  himself  sunrounded  the  comba¬ 
tants  with  a  powerful  force.  Being  thus  hemmed  in,  many 
were  slain,  the  rest  laid  down  their  arms,  and  surrendered 
to  the  conqueror.  In  a  few  days  after,  on  hearing  of  the  bat¬ 
tle  at  Cynoscephalae,  all  the,  states  of  Acarnania  made  their 
submission  to  the  lieutenant-gener^. 
XVIII.  About  this  time,  fortune  depressing  the  same  par¬ 
ty  in  every  quarter  at  once,  the  Rhodians,  in  order  to  recover 
from  Philip  the  tract  on  the  continent  called  Pirsea,  which  had 
been  in  possession  of  their  ancestors,  sent  thither  their  prsetor, 
Pausistratus,  with  eight  hundred  Achsean  foot,  and  about 
one  thousand  nine  hundred  men,  made  up  of  auxiliaries  of 
various  nations.  These  were  Gauls,  Nisuetans,  Pisuetans, 
Tamians,  Areans  from  Africa,  and  Laodicenians  from  Asia* 
With  this  force  Pausistratus  seized  by  surprise  Tendeba,  in 
the  territory  of  Siratonice,  a  place  exceedingly  convenient  for 
his  purpose.  A  reinforcement  of  one  thousand  Achasan  foot, 
and  one  hundred  horse,  called  out  for  the  same  expedition, 
came  up  at  the  very  time,  under  a  commander  called  The- 
oxenus.  Dinocrates,  the  King’s  general,  with  design  to  re¬ 
cover  the  fort,  marched  his  army  first  to  Tendeba,  and  then 
to  another  fort  called  Aslragon,  which  also  stood  in  the  ter- 
voL.  IV. — A  A  a 

362 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.555. 

rltoiy  of  Stratonice.  Then,  caUmg  in  all  the  garrisons,  which 
were  scattered  in  many  diffemu  places,  and  the  'I^essalian 
auxiliaries  from  Stratonice  itself,  be  proceeded  to  Alabanda, 
where  the  enemy  lay.  The  Rhodians  were  no  way  averse 
from  a  battle,  and  the  camps  being  pitched  near  each  other, 
both  parties  immediately  came  into  Ae  field.  Dinocrates 
placed  five  hundred  Macedonians  his  right  wing,  and  the 
Agrians  on  his  Irft ;  the  centre  he  formed  of  the  troops 
which  he  had  drawn  together  out  of  the  garrisons  of  the 
forts  ;  these  were  meetly  Carians  ;  and  he  covered  the  flanks 
with  the  cavalry,  and  the  Cretan  and  'JThracian  auxiliaries. 
The  Rhodians  had  on  the  right  wing  the  Achsea:ns ;  on  the 
left  mercenary  soldiers  ;  and  in  the  centre  a  chosen  band  of 
infantry,  a  body  of  auxiliaries  composed  of  troops  of  various 
nations.  The  cavalry,  and  what  light-infantry  they  had,  were 
posted  on  the  wings.  During  that  day  both  armies  remained 
on  the  banks  of  a  rivulet,  which  ran  bett^een  them,  and,  after 
discharging  a  few  javelins,  they  retired  intb  their  camps. 
Next  day,  being  drawn  up  m  the  same  order,  they  fought  a 
more  obstinate  battle  than  could  have  been  expected,  consi¬ 
dering  the  numbers  engaged  ;  for  there  were  not  more  than 
three  thousand  infantry  on  each  side,  and  about  one  hundred 
horse  :  but  they  were  not  only  on  an  equality  with  respect  to 
numbers,  and  the  kind  of  arms,  which  they  used,  but  they  also 
fought  with  equal  spirit,  and  equal  hopes.  First,  the  Ach«. 
ans,  crossing  the  rivulet,  made  an  attack  on  the  AgrianS  ; 
then  the  whole  Hne  passed  the  riVer,  almost  at  full  speed. 
The  fight  continual  doubtful  a  long  time  :  the  Achaeans,  one 
thousand  in  number,  drove  back  the  one  thousand  eight  hun¬ 
dred  Agrians.  Then  the  whole  centre  gave  way.  On  their 
right  wing,  composed  of  Macedonians,  no  impression  could 
be  made,  so  Icmg  as  their  phalanx  preserved  its  order,  ei^ 
man  clinging  m  it  were  to  another  :  but  when^  in 
quenee  of  their  flank  being  left  exposed,  they  endeavoured  to 

BOOK  XXXML 

363^ 

B,C.  197.] 

turn  their  spears  against  the  encmy^  who  were  advwcing 
upon  tiait  side,  they  imaaediately  broke  their  ranks*  *this 
first  ca^d  disorder  ahiong  themselves  ;  they  then  turned 
their  backs,  and  at  last,  throwing  away  their  arms,  and  flying 
with  precipitation,  made  the  best  of  their  way  to  BargylS. 
To  the  same  place  Dinocrates  also  made  hm  escape.  The 
Rhodians  continued  the  pursuit  as  long  as  the  day  lasted,  and 
then  retired  to  their  camp*  There  is  every  reason  to  believe^ 
that,  if  the  victors  had  proceeded  with  speed  to  Stratoniec, 
that  city  would  have  been  gained  without  a  contest ;  but  the 
opportunity  for  effecting  this  was  neglected,  and  the  time 
wasted,  m  taking  possession  of  the  forts ^ and  villages  in  Pe- 
r®a.  In  the  mean  time,  the  courage  of  the  troops  in  garrison, 
at  Stratonice  revived,  and,  shortly  after,  Dinocrates,  with  the 
troops  which  had  escaped  from  the  battle,  came  into  the  town, 
which,  after  that,  was  besieged  and  assaulted  without  effect ; 
nor  could  it  be  reduced  until  a  long  time ,  after  that,  when 
Antioch  us  took  it.  Such  were  the  events  that  took  place  in 
Thessaly,  in  Achaia,  and  in  Asia,  all  about  the  same  time* 
XIX.  Philip  was  informed  that  the  Dardanians,  expecting 
to  make  an  easy  prey  of  his  kingdom,  after  the  many  shocks  it 
had  suffered,  had  passed  the  frontiers,  and  were  spreading 
devastation  through  the  upper  parts ;  on  which,  though  he 
was  hard  pressed  in  almost  every  quarter  of  the  globe.  For¬ 
tune  on  all  occasions  defeating  his  measures,  and  those  of  his 
friends,  yet,  thinking  it  more  intolerable  than  death  to  be  ex¬ 
pelled  from  the  possession  of  Macedonia,  he  made  hasy  le¬ 
vies  through  the  cities  of  bis  dominions  ;  and,  with  six  thou¬ 
sand  foot  and  five  hundred  horse,  surprised  and  defeated  the 
enemy  near  Stobi  in  P^onia.  Great  numbers  were  killed  in 
the  fight,  and  greater  numbers  of  those  who  were  scattered 
about  in  quest  of  plunder.  As  to  such  as  found  a  road  open 
for  flight,  they  never  thought  of  trying  thfc  chance  of  an  en-’ 
gagement,  but  hastened  back  to  their  own  country*  After 

364 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  sss. 

this  enterprise,  executed  with  a  degree  of  success  beyond 
what  he  met  in  the  rest  of  his  attempts,  and  which  raised  the 
drooping  courage  of  his  people,  he  retired  to  Thessalonica. 
Seasonable  as  was  the  termination  of  the  P.unic  war,*  in  ex¬ 
tricating  the  Romans  from  the  danger  of  a  quarrel  with  Phi¬ 
lip,  the  recent  triumph  over  Philip  happened  still  more  op¬ 
portunely,  when  Antiochus,  in  Syria,  was  almost  ready  to 
commence  hostilities.  For  besides  that  it  was  easier  to  wage 
war  against  them  separately  than  against  their  combined 
strength,  a  violent  insurrection  had,  a  little  before  this  time, 
broke  out  in  Spain.  Antiochus,  though  he  had  in  the  preced¬ 
ing  summer  reduced  under  his  power  all  the  states  in  Cffilc- 
syria  belonging  to  Ptolemy,  and  retired  into  winter-quarters 
at  Antioch,  yet  allowed  himself  no  rest.  For  resolving  to 
exert  the  whole  strength  of  his  kingdom,  he  collected  a  most 
powerful  force,  both  naval  and  military  ;  and  in  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  spring,  sending  forward  by  land  his  two  sons,  Ardues 
and  Mithridates,  at  the  head  of  the  army,  with  orders  to  wait 
for  him  at  Sardis,  he  himself  set  out  by  sea  with  a  fleet  of 
one  hundred  decked  ships,  besides  two  hundred  lighter  ves¬ 
sels,  barks  and  fly -boats,  designing  to  attempt  the  reduction 
of  all  the  cities  under  the  dominion  of  Ptolemy  along  the 
whole  coast  of  Caria  and  Cilicia  ;  and,  at  the  same  time,  to 
send  troops  and  ships  to  the  assistance  of  Philip,  in  the  then 
sul^isting  war.  >  . 
XX.  The  Rhodians  have  signalized  their  faithful  attach¬ 
ment  to  the  Roman  people,  and  their  aflection  for  the  whole 
race  of  the  Greeks,  1:^  many  honourable  exertions,  both  on 
land  and  sea  j  but  never  was  their  gallantry  more  eminently 
conspicuous  than  on  this  occasion,  when,  nowise  dismayed  at 
the  formidable  magnnude  of  the  impendmg  war,  they  sent 
ambassadors  to  tell  the  King,  that  if  he  attempted  to  bring 
his  forces  beyond  Nephelis,  which  is  a  promontory  of  Cilicia, 
remarksdble  for  bemg  a  bcamdary  mentioned  in  an  old  treaty 

^4 

B,C.197,]'  BOOK  XXXilL  365 
with  the  Athenians,  they  would  meet  him  there  and  oppose 
him,  not  out  of  any  ili-will,  but  because  they  would  not  suf¬ 
fer  him  to  join  Philip  and  obstruct  the  Romans,  who  were 
restoring  liberty  to  Greece.  At  this  time  Antiochus  was 
pushing  on  the  siege  of  Coracesium  by  regular  approaches  ; 
for,  after  he  had  got  possession  of  Zephyr ium,  Sola,  Aphro- 
distas,  and  Corycus,  and,  doubling  Anemurium,  another  pro¬ 
montory  of  Cilicia,  had  taken  Selinus  ;  when  all  these,  and 
the  other  fortresses  on  that  coast,  had,  either  through  fear  or 
inclination,  submitted  without  resistance,  Coracesium  shut 
its  gates,  and  gave  him  a  delay  which  he  did  not  expect. 
Here  he  gave  audience  to  the  Rhodians,  and  although  the 
purport  of  their  emba^y  was  such  as  might  kindle  passion  in 
the  breast  of  a  King,  yet  he  stifled  his  resentment,  and 
swered,  that  he  would  send  ambassadors  to  Rhodes,  and 
would  give  them  instructions  to  renew  the  old  treaties,  made 
by  hUn  and  his  predecessors,  with  that  state  ;  and  to  assure 
them,  that  they  need  not  be  alarmed  at  his  approach ;  that  it 
would  be  in  no  respect  detrimental  or  injurious  either  to  them 
or  their  allies  ;  for  he  was  determined  not  to  violate  the 
friendship  subsisting  between  himself  and  the  Romans  : 
of  this,  his*Qwn  late  embassy  to  that  people,  and  the  senate’s 
answers  and  deciees,  so  honourable  to  him,  ought  to  be  deemed 
sulEcient  proof.”  Just  at  that  time  his  ambassadors  hap¬ 
pened  to  retutTi  from  Rome,  where  they  had  been  heard  and 
dismissed  with  courtesy,  as  the  juncture  required  ;  the  event 
of  the  war  with  Philip  being  yet  uncertain.  While  the 
King’s  ambassadors  were  haranguing  to  the  above  purjKjse, 
in  an  assembly  of  the  people  at  Rhodes,  >a  courier  arrived 
with  an  account  of  the  battle  of  Cynoscephal*  having  finally 
decided  the  fate  of  the  war.  In  consequence  of  this  intelli¬ 
gence,  the  Rhodians,  now  freed  fiom  all  apprehensions  of 
danger  from  Phaip,  resolved  to  oppose  Antioefaus  with  their 
fleet.  Nor  did  they  neglect  anoAer  object  required  their 

366 

HISTORY  OF  HOME. 

[Y,R,  535. 

attention ;  the  protection  of  the  freedom  of  the  cides  in  aU 
liance  with  Ptolemy,  which  were  threatened  with  war  bjr 
Antiochus.  For,  some  they  assisted  with  men,  others  by 
forewarning  them  of  the  enemy’s  designs ;  by  which  means, 
they  enabled  the  Cauneans,  Mindians,  H^icamassians,  and 
Samians,  to  preserve  their  liberty.  It  were  needless  to  at¬ 
tempt  enumerating  all  the  transactions,  as  they  occurred  in 
that  quarter,  when  I  am  scarcely  equal  to  the  task  of  recount¬ 
ing  those  which  immediately  concern  the  war  in  which.Rome 
was  engaged. 
XXI.  At  this  time  King  AttaluS,  having  fallen  sick  at 
Thebes,  and  been  carried  thence  to  Pergamus,  died  at  the 
age  of  seventy-one,  after  he  had  reigned  forty-four  years*^  To 
this  man  Fortune  had  given  nothing  which  could  lead  him  to 
form  pretensions  to  a  throne,  except  riches.  By  a  prudent, 
and,  at  the  same  time,  a  splendid  use  of  these,  he  begat,  in 
himself  first,  and  then  in  others,  an  opinion, that  he  was  not 
undeserving  of  a  crown.  Afterwards,  having,  in  one  battle, 
utterly  defeated  the  C^auls,  which  nation  was  then  the  more 
terrible  to  Asia,  as  having  but  lately  made  its  appearance 
there,  he  assumed  the  title  of  King,  and  ever  after  supported 
a  spirit  equal  to  Ae  dignity  of  the  station.  He  governed  his 
subjects  with  the  most  perfect  justice,  atnl  was' singularly 
faithful  to  his  engagements  with  his  allies,  gentle  and  bounti¬ 
ful  to  his  friends  ;  his  wife  and  four  sons  survived  him  ;  and 
he  left  his  government  established  on  such  solid  and  firm  foun¬ 
dations,  that  the  possession  of  it  descended  to  the  third  ge¬ 
neration,  While  this  was  the  posture  of  affairs  in  Asia, 
Greece,  and  Macedonia,  the  war  with  Philip  being  scarcely 
ended,  and  the  peace  certainly  not  yet  perfected,  a  desperate 
in^metion  took  place  in  the  Farther  Spain.  Marcus  Hel- 
v.his  was  governor  of  that  province.  He  informed  the  senate 
by  letter,  that  two  chieftains,  Colca  and  Luscinus,  were  in 
arms  j  that  Colca  was  joined  by  sevcntcen  towns,  and  Lus- 

BOOK  XXXIII, 

367 

B.C,  197.] 
cinus  by  tlie  powerful  cities  of  Cardo  airi  Bardo  ;  and  that 
the  people  of  the  whole  sea^coast^  who  had  not  yet  manifest¬ 
ed  their  disposition.  Were  ready  to  rise  on  the  first  memoir  of 
their  neighbours.’’  On  this  letter  being  read  by  Marcus 
Sergius,  city  prsetor,  the  senate  decreed,  that,  as  soon  as  the 
eketion  of  praetors  should  be  finished,  the  one  to  whose  lot 
the  government  of  Spain  fell,  should,  without  delay,  comnlt 
the  senate  respecting  the  commotions  in  that  province. 
^  XXll.  About^  the  same  time  the  consuls  came  home  to 
Rome,  and,  on  their  holding  a  meeting  of  the  senate  in  the 
temple  of  Bellona,  and  demanding  a  triumph,  in  considera¬ 
tion  of  their  successes  against  the  enemy,  Caius  Atinius  La- 
beo,  and  Caius  Ursanius,  plebeian  tribunes,  insisted,  that 
“  they’  should  propose  their  claims  of  a  triumph  separately, 
for  they  would  not  suffer  the  question  to  be  put  on  both  jdte- 
ly,  lest  equal  honours  might  be  conferred  where  the  merila 
were  unequal.”  Mmucius  urged,  that  they  had  been  both 
appointed  to  die  government  of  one  province,  Italy  ;  and  tlmt, 
through  the  course  of  their  administratiem,  his  colleague  ^d 
himself  had  been  united  in  sentiments  and  in  counsels  i 
which  Cornelius  added,  that,  when  the  Boians  were  passing 
the  Fo,  to  assist  the  Insubrians  and  Cseimmaniai^  against 
him,  they  were  forced  to  return  to  defend  dieir  own  country, 
from  Miiiucius  ravaging  their  towns  and  lands.  In  reply  the 
tribunes  acknowledged,  that  the  services  performed  in  the  war 
by  Cornelius  were  so  great,  that  “no  more  doubt  could  be 
entertained  respecting^his  triumph,  than  respecting  the  praise 
to  be  given  to  the  imnkortai^ods.”  Nevertheless  they  insist- 
that  “  neither  he  nOr  any  other  member  of  the  community 
should  possess  such  power  and  influence  as  to  be  abi^,  after 
detaining  such  honoUt  for  himself,  to  bestow  the  saom  a 
colleague,  who,  in  claiming  it,  had  betrayed  zn  entire  want  pi 
modesty.  The  exploits  of  Quintus  Minucius  in  Liguria  were 
trifling  skirmishes,  scarcely  deserving  mention  ;  and  in  Gaul 

868 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [YJt  m, 
he  had ,  kwt  great  numbers  of  soldiers.”  They  mexuicnp^ 
even  mUitaiy  tribunes,  Titus  |uvencius  and  Cneius  Labeo, 
the  plebeian  tribune’s  brother,  who  had  fallen,  together  with 
many  other  brave  men,  both  citizens  and  allies :  and  they  as- 
s^rted^that  pretended  surrenders  of  a  few  towns  and  vil- 
lages,  fabricated  for  the  occasion,  had  been^  made,  without 
any  pledge  of  fidelity  heipg  taken,”  These  altercations  be¬ 
tween  the  consuls  and  tribunes  lasted  two  days  :  at  last  Ae 
consuls,  overcome  by  the  obstinacy  of  the  tribunes,  proposed 
their  claims  separately. 
^  XXIII.  To  Cndus  Cornelius  a  triumph  was  unanimously 
decreed:  and  the  inhabitants  of  Placentia  and  Cremona 
addcid  to  the  applause  bestowed  on  th9^  consul,  by  returning 
him  thanks,  and  mentioning,  to  his  honour,  that  they  bad 
been  delivered  by  him  from  a  siege  ;  and  that  very  many  of 
them,  when  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  had  been  rescued 
from  captivity.  Quintus  Minucius  just  tried, how  the  pro- 
.  posal  of  his  claim  would  be  received,  and  finding  the.  whole 
aenate  averse  from  it,  declared,  that  by  the  authority  of  his 
office  of  consul,  and  pursuant  to  the  example  of  many  illus¬ 
trious  men,  he  would  triumph  on  the  Alban  mowt.  Cains 
Cornelius,  being  yet  in  office,  triumphed  over  the  Insubriati 
and  Csenoraanian  Gauls.  He  produced  a  great  number  of, 
military  standards,  and  carried  in  the  procession  abundance 
of  Gallic  spoils  in  captured  chariots.  Many  Gauls  of  dis¬ 
tinction  were  led  before  his  chariot,  and  along,  with  them, 
some  writers  say,  Hamilcar,  the  Carthaginian  general.  But 
what,  more  than  all,  attracted  the  eyes  of  the  public,  was,  a 
crowd  of  Cremonians  and  Placentians,  with  caps  of  liberty 
cm  their  heads,  following  his  chariot.  He  carried  in  his 
triumph  two  hundred  and  thirty-seven  thousand  five  hun¬ 
dred  and  of  silver  denariuses,  stamped  with  a  chariot, 

76a  18s.  6Jd. 

BOOK  XXXIIL 

369 

,  Aousiuid^.  He  distfitmied  ip  each  )mwal* 
dU(^  seveaiy  to  a  horsemaa  dembie  that 
centi^oa  trtpk.  Qoimus  Miaucii^^  coastdy  U4tjaa|di€4  M 
the  Alb«^  mount,  over  the  Xiigunaa  and  Boian  Gauls.  Al*  > 
though  this  triumph  was  h^ps  respectable,  ia  regard  to  ^ 
place,  and  the  fame  of  his  exploits,  and  because  aH  kueiHr  due 
expense  was  not  issued  from  the^treasury ;  yet,  in.  regard  id 
the  number  of  standards,  chariots,^  and'  spoiis,  k  wSs  nesuijr^ 
equal  to  the  other.  The  amount  of  the  money  alsa  was 
nearly  equal.  Two  hundred  and  fifty ^four  thousand 
were  conveyed  to  the  treasury,  and  of  skver  denaritu^, 
stamped  with  a  chariot,  fifty^three  dmosand  two  hundred* 
He  likewise  gave  to  the  soldiers,  hor^men,  and  centmic^,^ 
the  same  sums  that  his  ooUeague  liad  given. 
XXIV.  Afte^  die  triumph,  the  eketii^  of  consuls  came 
on.  The  p^sons  chosen  were  JLucius  Furius  Purpurea, 
and  Marcus  Claudius  Marcellas.  Next  day,  the  fcdfaiwkg 
were  eketed  preetors  :  Quintus  Fabius  Buteo,  Tiberius 
pronius  Longus,  Quintus  Minucius  Thermos,  Manius  Aei* 
lius  Glabrio^  Lucius  Apustius  Fullo,  and  Caius  Lsdius. 
Toward  the  close  of  this  year,  a  kttcr  came  from  Tkus 
QuintiuS,  with  information  that  he  had  fought  a  pitched  l^t« 
tie  with  Philip  in  Thessaly,  and  had  totdiy  defeated  him. 
This  kttcr  was  read  by  Sergius,  the  praetor,  first  in  the 
senate,  and  then,  by  their  direction,  in  a  general  assembly  f 
and  supplications  of  fiy^e  days  oontinuance  were  decreed  on 
account  of  those  successes.  Soon  after,  arrived  the  ambas^ 
sadors,  bodi  from  Titus  Quintius,  and  from  the  King.  The 
Maced<mians  were  conduced  out  of  the  city  to  the  Vikt 
PuWitm,  where,  kdgings  and  every  other  accommodatimt 
were  provided  for  themi  and  the  senate  met  in  the  temple  of 
Bellona.  Not  many  words  passed;  for  the  Macedonians 
*  2,5^1,  Os.  lOd.  t  4®-  t  830L  4«.  2d.  §  1,7171. 18s.  4d. 
VOL.  IV.— B  B  b 

370 

rilSTORY  OF  ROME. 

[t.R;  sss. 
declared,  that  whatever  terms  the  Semite  Acmld  |ire^iihe^ 
the  Kiiig  was  ready  to  comply  with  rhem.  It  was  dect^d^ 
thaty  t^mloimidily  to  aocmt  {mctice,  ten  ambsmi^ors  diooM 
be  appmnted,  and  thta,  in  council  with  them,  general, 
lilas  Qiwtius,  should  grant  t^nns  of  peace  to  Philip sasd 
a  clause  waw  added,  tliat,  in  i^e  number  of  these  ambassa^- 
dbrs,  should  be  Puldkis.Salptctus  and  Pubtius  YUlius,  who, 
in  dieh?  constdsbips,  laid  held  ibt  pr^ince  of  Macedemia. 
Ou  the  day  die  inhs^itants  of  Cossa  presented  a  ^^ti* 
turn,  faaying,  that  the  number  cd*  their  oilmiists  might  be 
enharged ;  and  an  order  was  accordingly  pmed,  that  one 
thcniiamd  slmuld  be  added  to  die  list,  widi  a  provision,  that 
no  pmon  should  he  admitted  into  that  niurher,  who,  at  any 
time  since  the  consulate  of  Pidilius  CotneUi^  and  Tiberias 
Semprcmios,  had  ai^ed  as  an  enemy  to  the  state.  '  _  . 
XXV.  This  year  the  R&mm  games  were  eshibitfed  in  the 
Cirois,  and  on  the  singe,  by  the  curuk  wdiles,  PuUius  Cat^ 
nelios  Stipio,  and  Cneius  Maidius  Vulso,  with  an  unusual 
degree  df  splendour,  and  were  beheld  whh  tim  'greater  de<* 
light,  in  consequence  of  the  late  suece^es  m  war.  They 
were  thrice  repeated  entire,  and  the  plebeian  galoes  screen 
times.  These  were  exhibited  by^Acilius  ijdabrio  and  Cains 
Lsritus,  who  also,  out  of  the  money  arising  fiN>m  fines,  ^ect« 
ed  three  brazen  statues,  to  Cem,  L^ber«  and  Li- 
Y  R  556 
B  C  196*  l-uciu8  Furius  md  Marcus  Chmdius  Mar¬ 
cellos,  having  entered  on  tbetxinsulship,  when  the 
distribution  of  the  provinces  cam6  to  be  agitated,  and  die 
senate  apf^ared  disposed  to  vote  Italy  the  province  of  bc^, 
pedtioned  for  liberty  to  put  that  of  Macedonia  to  tl^  lot 
akmg  with  Italy.  MarceUus,  who  of  the  two  Vim  die  more 
eager  for  that  province  ;  by  assertions,  diat  the  pein:e  was 
merely  a  feigned  obe^  and  that  if  the  army  were  Withdraw^ 
thence,  the  King  would  renew  the  war,  caused  some  per¬ 
plexity  in  the  minds  ci  the  senate.  The  consuls  would  pro- 

BOOK  XXXIIL 

B.C.  tm} 

5ri 

hMy  have  carried  pointy  had  not  Quintus  Marehm  prx^ 
a^  Cams  Labeo,  plebeian  ^'ibunes,  declared^  lAat 
they  yrould-enter  their  protest,  unless  they  were  allowed,  be«* 
fore  any  fo^her  proceeding,  to  take  the  sense  of  the  people, 
wh^herit  was  their  wiH  and  order  that  peace  be  concluded 
with  Philip.  The  question  was  put  to  the  people  in  the 
Capitol,  and  every  one  of  the  thirty-five  tribes  voted  4m  foe 
affirmative  side^  The  public  found  foe  greater  reason  to  re* 
joice  at  foe  ratification' of  the  |^ace  wkh  Mlicefo>nla,  a»  me* 
lanchdy  news  was  brought  frekn  Spain ;  mid  a  was 
mack  puUic,  announcing'  that  ^  the  praetor,  Catus  3efii|WO« 
nius  Tiiditanus,  had  been  defeated  in  in  foeilifoer 
Spain;  that  fats  atmy  had  been  utterly  footed  and  dispen^, 
and  several  men  of  distinction  slam  in  the  fi^t^  TImt  Tu- 
ditaups,  having  been  grievously  wounded,  and  carried  <mt  of 
the  field,  expired  soon  after.’*  Italy,  was  decreed  tl^  pm- 
vioce  of  both  conmik,  hi  which  they  were  to  employ 
same  legions  which  the  preceding  consuls  had ;  and  they 
were  fo  raise  four  ibew  legions,  that  two  mig^t  be  in  r^^i- 
ness  to  go  wherever  foe  s^ate  should  direct.  Titus  Qdm- 
iius  Plamimtiuswas  ordered  to  continue  in  foe  gwemmetit 
of  \m  ^province,  wifo  foe  anny  of  two  legions,  then  mi  the 
spot.  The  former  prolongation  of  his  command  was  deen^d 
sufficient.  J 
XXVr.  The  pnetors  then  cast  lots  for  their  provinces. 
Lucius  Apusticis  Fidio  tfotatned  the  pity  jurisdii^iofr;  Ma^ 
nius  Acilius  Gkbrio,  that  between  natives  and  foreigners; 
Quintus  Fabius  Buteo,  Farther  Spain  $  Quintius  Mhucins 
Thermus,  Hither  ^pain;  Calus  Lselius,  Sicily;  TibKtiius 
Sempronius  Longus,  Sardinia.  To  Quintus  Fabius  Bmeo 
and  Quintas  Minucius,  to  whom  the  government  of  the  two 
Spains  had  fallen,  it  wmi  decreed,  that  the  consuls^  out  of  foe 
four  legions  raised  by  them,  should  give  one  each,  together 
with  four  thousand  foot  and  three  hundred  horse  of  the  allies 

sri  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R;5^6. 
and  cmfederates  ;  and  th<^e  praetors  were  ordered  to 
repair  to  their  province  (brAwith.  This  war^in  Spam  br<dce 
out  in  the  fifth  year  after  the  fotlater  bad  been  ended, 
thcr  with  the  Puiuc  war.  The  Spaniards,  now,  for  the  fir^ 
tiine,  had  taken  arms  in  their  own  name,  nnetmn^ted  with 
any  Carthaginian  commander.  Before  tlie  consuls  stirroi 
jfrdm  the  city,  however,  they^were  ordered,  as  usuat,  to  ex¬ 
piate  the  reported  prodigies.  Luchis  *  Julius  Sequcslris,  on 
the  noad  to  Sabinia,  was  killed  by  li^tning,  together  wiA 
hb  horse.  The  templciof  Fenonia,  in  the  Capenatian  di»-» 
trict,  was  struck  by  lightning--  At  the  temple  of  Moneta, 
the  shafts  of  two  speam  tookvfirc  and  burned.  A  wolf, 
coming  in  through  the  ‘Esquiline  gate,  and  running  through 
the  most  frequented  part  of  the  t:ity,  down  into  the  Forum, 
passed  thence  through  the  Tuscan  and  Mselian  ^eets  ;  and 
scarcely  receiving  a  sm>ke^  made  its  escape  out  of  the  Cape- 
man  gate.  These  .prodigies  were  expiated  widi  victims  of 
the  larger  kinds.  '  ^ 
XXVIL  About  the  same  time  Gneius  Cmtielhis  JLentolus, 
who  had  held  the  government  of  Hither  l^ain  befme  Sem- 
pronius  Tuditanus,  entered  the  city  in  ovation,  {mrsuant  to 
a  d^rce  of  the  senate,  and  <^ried  m  the  procession  one 
Uiousand  five  hundred  and  fifteen  pounds  weight  of  gold, 
twenty  thousand  of  silver ;  and  in  coin,  thirty-four  thousand 
five  hundred  and  fifty  denariuses.d  l.uctus  Stretitmis,  fr^m 
the  Fardier  Spain,  without  making  any  pretensiems  to  a,  tri- 
umfdif  carried  ihte  the.  treasury  4fty  thousand  ppimds  weig^ 
of  silver  ;  and  out  of  th^  spoib  ^ken,  b^lt  two  archeain  tl^ 
oKde-market,  at  the  fronts  of  the  tcihplc  of  Fortune  mui 
Modier  Matuta,  atid  one  in  the  great  Circus ;  and  these 
arches  placed  gilded  statues.  These  were  the  principal  oc- 
curren^s  during  the  winter.  At  this  tune  Quintius  was  in 
ISs.  SK  _ 

BOOR  XXXtit 

BX,  m.] 

sn 

quaitcrs  at-Elatia/ "  Ammg  mmf  maijie  to  Mm  by 
tte  aUks,  was  ttaft  x}{  ike  Boeotians,  finely  that  their  tsom^ 
trymen,  who  had  serv^  in  the' army  with  Philip,  might  bo 
re^i^ed  to  them.  With  readily  complied  ;  ndt 
bec^se  he  thought  thei|t>«fy  deservittg,  hut,  at  a  time  when 
there  was  reason  to  be  lap^hensive  of  the  desigtis^  of  Anti* 
ochus^  he  judged  kad^keabk  to  concHlak  et^iy  state  ift  fa- 
vQfUr  of  the  Roman  interest;  It  quickly  appeat'cd  how  t^ry 
little  gratitude  the  .B<9k>tians  felt  on  the  occasion  :  for  they 
not  mily  sent  i^rscms  to  give  thanks  to  Philip^  for  the  resto¬ 
ration  of  their  fellows,  as  if  that  Com^ment  had  been 
to  him  by  Quintias  smd  foe  Romans^  but,  at  the  next  clec- 
tioB,  raised  to  the  office  of  Bedomreh  a  man  named  Bracbyh 
las,  for  no  othcr^eafen®  than  because  be  bad  been  commander 
of  the  Bteotiaos  serving  in  foe  army  of  Philip  ;  passing  by 
Zeuxippusi  Fisistratas  and  the'  others^  who  had  promoted 
the  alliance  with  Rome.  ’  Tliese  men  were  both  offended  M 
the  present,  and  alarmed  abotft  foe  future  consequences  t  for 
if  such  tKings  were  do^  *when  a  Roman  atmy  lay  altm^  at 
their  gatfes^  whSt  t^ld  heemne  of '  foem  when  foe  Ronrans 
should  have  gone  aWay  to  Italy,  and  Philip,  from  a  situation 
so  should  support  hJs  own  associates,  and  vent’his  re- 
sratment  bnrfoose  of  the  opposite  party, 
XXVIII.  It  was  resolved,  while  they  bad  the  Roman  ar- 
near  at  hat^,  to  ferke  off  Brachyllas,  who  was  the  prin¬ 
cipal  leader^  the  faction  which  favoured  the  Kmg;  and  they 
chose  an  opportunity  for  the  deed,  when,  after  having  beep 
at  a  public  feast, -he  was  returning  to  bk  bouse,  mebriated, 
and  accompanied  by  ifome  of  his  debaOebed  companiems, 
who,  for  the  mke  of  merriment,  had  been' admitted  to  the 
crowded  entertain metit.  He  was  surrounded  and  assa^ina- 
ted  by  six  men,  of  whom  three  were  Italians  and  three  iEtO- 
lians.  His  companions  fledy  crying  out  for  help  ;  and  a  gieat 
nproar  ensued  among  the  people,  who  ran  up  and  down. 

sr4  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  SS^. 
through  ot  the  eky^  wldi  Ughtss  Ih^  assassios 
made  their  «faipe  . through  nearest  gale.  At  the  fim 
dawn^v^  fras  cal^d  toother  in  the  dieatre,'  hjr 
the  voice^^  a  crier,  as-  if  aome  discovery  had  he«i  made. 
Many  opei%  clamoured  that  Brachyllas  was  iiUed  by  those 
detestable  wi^tches  who  accompanied  him;;  but  their  private 
conjectures  pomt^  to  Zeuxip^us,  as  audior  of  the  murden 
It  waaresdived,  however,  that  thp^  who  had  been  in  vmn^ 
pany  with  him  slmuld  be  seized,  and  exatnihedi  While  tfiey 
were  under  examination,  Zeuxippus,  with  his  usual  compo*> 
sure,  came  into  the  asseodaly,  for  the  purpose  of  aver|ip|^he 
charge  from  himself ;  yet  said,  ijmt  people  were  fo 
supposing  that  so. daring  a  murder  wsm  die  act  of  su^'eflEem'* 
inate  wretches  as  those  who  were  charged  with  it,*-urgiiig 
many  plausible  argumente  to  the  ^ame  purpose.  By  which 
behaviour  he  led  several  lo  believe,  that,  if  he,  werctcmiscious 
of  guik,  he  v^ouid  never  Jbavo.presemed  himsclf-i^cforc  the 
multitude,,  pr,  uncalled  *upon,  have  made  any^memion.of  die 
murder..  Others,  Were  convinced  tlmt  he  intended,  by  th^s 
pushing  impudently  forward^  to  throw  all  suspicion  from 
himself.  Soon  after,  those  men  whO,w^  innocent  were  put 
to  the  torture ;  and,  as  they  knew  the  mii vernal  opinion,  they 
gave  information  conforroabte  to  it,  Zeuxippus  and 
Bistratus ;  but  they  produced  no  proof  to  show  they 
knew  any  thing  of  the  matter.  Zeuxtppus,  hciwever,  acemn* 
pamed  by  a  man  named  Stratonidi^  fled  night'U>’'Tan^ 
gra  alarmed  by  hSs  own  conscieuce  i^hcr  than  by  the 
tions  of  men  who  Were  pri  vy  to  no  ope  clrcum^ance  of  the 
affair.  .  Pisistratusf  despising  the  informers,  remained  Jtt 
Thebes.  A  slave  of  Zeiixippus  had  carried  messages 
wards  and  fbrwanis,  and  had  h^n  intrusted  in  the  mmiage^ 
ment  of  die  whede  busmess. ,  From  this  man  Pisistratus 
dreaded  a  discovery  j^and,  by  that  very  dread,  forced  him, 
against  his  wifl,  to  make  one.  He  sent  aietter  to  Zeuxip- 

BOOK  XliXHlv 

375 

B.C.  1%,] 
pus,  desimg  lum  to  ^  put  out  of  the  way  tli^  wb^  was 
privy  to  their  ttimt  j  for  he  4id  not  hetiew  %im  aa  wdil 
qualified  for  the  conceaiaiefit  of  the  was  the 
peipetration  ef  it.^’  He  ordered  the  bei^^  of  this- letter  to 
deHver  it  to  Zeuad^tm  as  soon  as  posstUc  ^^1^  not  foid^* 
ing  mx  opportunity  of  meeting  him^  put  it  into  foe  bands  of 
the  very  slave  in  question,  whom,  hef  believed  to  be  the  mmt 
faithful  to.hia  mastor  of  any ;  and  added,  ilmt  it  came  from 
Phistr^us  about  business  of  the  utmost  consequence  to 
Zeusippus.  Struck  by  consciousness  of  guilt,  the  slave,  after 
protowing  to  deliver  the  letter,  immediately  open^  it ;  mid, 
on  readhig  the  contents,  fted  in  a  ftright  to  Thebes.  Zeiudp* 
pus,  al^itoied  by  this  his  flight,  withdrew  to  Athens,  where 
he  thought  he  might  liye  in  eaile  with  greater  safety.  Pisis- 
tratos,  after  ^  being  examined  several  dmes  by  torture;  was 
pto  to  death.  ;  .  ‘ 
XXIX. .  The  murder,  and  particuhfoly  the  circumsiamce  ef 
Zeuxippus,  one  of  the  first  men  of  the  nation,  having  suh- 
omed  such  a  deed,  exasperated  the  Thebans,  and  -ril  the 
Bcec^ians,  fo  ^the  mt^t  rafleorous  animosity  against  the  Ro* 
mans.  To  recommence,  a  war,  they  had  neither  strength  nor 
a  leader;  but  foey  had  recourse  to  private  massacres,  and  cut 
off  many  of  the  sohMers,  some  aS  they  came  to  lodge  in  their 
housed,  others  as  foey  travelled  from  one  cantonment  to  ano¬ 
ther  cm  various  business.^  &>me  were  killed  on  the  roads  by 
parties  lymg  in  w^  in  lurking  places  ;  oth&rs  were  seduced 
and  carried  away  to  mns,  which  were  kft  uninhabited,  and 
foere  put  to  ckath,^  At  last  they  conumtted  these  crim^, 
not  merely  out  of  hatred,  but  likewise  from  a  desire  of 
booty ;  fiar  the  soldiers,  on  furlough,  generally  carried  money 
in  their  parses  for  the  purpose;  of  mading.  At  fitst,  a  few  at 
a  time  ;  afterwards,^  greater  numbers  used  to  he  missed,  un¬ 
til  all  Boeotia  became  notorious  for  those  practices,  and  a  sol¬ 
dier  was  more  afraid  to  go  beyond  the  bminda  of  the  camp 

HISTORY  OE^^ME. 

[YM.SS6. 

are 
than  ail  eiietny^a  j^mniins  then  sent  deputies 
rcrund  the  states,  ta  oaake  inqnh:^  .concerning  the  murders 
commuted.  The  gre«yu^tinuiiiber  of  foot  soldiers  irere  found 
about  the  lake  called  Co^s^  there  the  bodies  were  dog  out 
of  fhe  mud,  and  drawn  up  out  of  the  marsh,  having  had 
earthen  jars  or  stones  tied  to  spo,  as  to  sink  by  tbe 
we^ht.  ’  Many  deeds,  "of  this  sort,  were  discovered  to  have 
been  perpetrated  Acrophia  and.^ronea.  Quintius  at  first 
insisted  that  the  persmis  guilty  should  be  given  up  to  him, 
and  that  for  five  hundred  soldiers  (for  so  many  had  been  cut 
off,)  the  Boeotians  should  pay  five  hundred  talents.^  Neith^^ 
of  dtdse  requisitums- being  cpmpHed  with,  and  the  states  oidy 
making  verbsd  apokgrhs,^  declarmg,  that  none  of  those 
had  been  audiori^e^  by  the  public ;  ^uintius  firstaent 
bassadors  to  Athens^'and  Achaiai^  to  satisfy  the  aMies,  that 
the  war  which,  he^was  about  to  make  on  the  Bccotians,  iwas 
cmiformahle  to  justice  and  piety  ;  anddien,  ordering  Puldius 
Claudius  to  march  tVith  one-hsdf  of  die  troops  to  Atrophia, 
he  himself,  with  the  remainder,  invested  Corcmea  ;  and  these 
two  bodies,  marching  by  different  roads  from  Elatia,  laid 
waste  all  the  country  through  which  they  passed.  The 
tions,  dismayed  by  these  losses,  while  every  ^acib  was  filled 
with  fugitives,  and  whUe  the  terror  became  uni vershls  aent 
ambassadors  to  the  camp,  who  were  refund  admittance ; 
and,  just  at  this  juU^ure,  arrived  the  Aefeteans  and  Athe¬ 
nians.  ^  Tho  Aehaeans  bad  the  greater  as  interces¬ 
sors  ;  and  they  weits  resolved,  in  case  thejr  could  not  procure 
peace  for  the  Bcsbuaiis,- to  join  them  in  the  war.  Through 
the  mediation  of  the  Achaeans,  however,  the  Boeotians  ob¬ 
tained  an  audience  of  the  Roman  general ;  who,  ordering 
them  to  deliver  up  tfie  guHty,  and  to  pay  thirty  taketsf  as  a 
fine,^  granted  them  peace,  and  raised  the  siege. 

•  9^,drSL 

.  t  5,812L  10ft. 

BOOK  XXXIH, 

mi 

196.] 
XXX.  A  few  dafs  after  this,  the  ten  ambassadors  arrimd 
from  Rome,  icf  pursuance  of  whose  counsel,  peace  was^gxl»at- 
ed-to  Philip  on  the  following* conditions :  **  That  all  the  Gre¬ 
cian  stales,  as  well  theme  in  'Asia,  as^  those  in  Europe,  shoidd 
enjoy  liberty,  and  their  oWn  laws  ;  That  from  such  of  them 
as  were  in  the  possession  of  Philip,  he  should  withdraw  his 
garrisons,  f  particularly- from  the  following  places  in  Asia.; 
Euromus,  Pedasi,  Bargylii,  lassus,  Myrina,  Abydus^  and 
from  Thassus  and  Perinthos,  for  it  was  determine  that 
these  likewise  should  be  free  :  That,'  wi^h  respect  to  the  free¬ 
dom  of  Cius,  Quintius  would  Write  to  Prusias,  King  of  Bithy- 
hia^  the  resolutions  of  the  senate,  and  of  the  ten  ambassadors : 
Th^  jPhilip  should  retum>to  the  Romans  the  prisoners  and 
^(i^ers,  and  delw^er  up  all  his  decked  ships,  not  excepting 
even  the  royal  galley,— -of  a  si^Ec  almost  unmanageable,  being 
moved  by<  sixteen  banks  of  oars  ;  That  he  should  not  keep 
more' than  five  himdred  soldiers,  nor  any  elephant:  That  he 
should  not  wage  war  beyond  the  bounds'  of  Macedonia  with¬ 
out  pertuission  from  the  senate:  That  he  should  pay  to  the 
Roman  people  one  thousand  talents:*  one  half  at  present, 
the  other  by  instalments,  within  ten  years.”  Valerias  An- 
tias  writes,  that  there  was  imposed  on  him  an  annual  tribute 
of  four  thousand  pounds  weight  of  silver,  for  ten  years,  and 
an  immediate  payment  of  twenty  thousand  pounds  weight. 
The  same  author  says,  that  an  article  was  expressly  inserted, 
that  he  should  not  make  war  on  Eumenes,  Attalus’s  son,  who 
had  lately  come  to  the  throne.  For  the  performance  of  these 
conditions  hostages  were  received,  among  whom  was  De-^ 
metrius,  Philip’s  son.  Valerius  Antias  adds,  that  the  island 
of  iEgina,  and  the  elephants,  were  given  as^  a  present  to  At- 
talus,  who  was  absent;  to  the  Rhodians,  Stratanice  in  Caria, 
and  ofticr  cities  which  had  been  in  the  possession  of  Philip  ^ 

VOL.  IV. — C  c  c 

*  193,7501.. 

m  HISTOKY  OF  ROME.  [Y*R.  556, 
litidto  tbe  Albenians,  the '  isiatids  of  Paros,  Delos, 
and  Scyros.  j 
XXXI,  While  all  the  states  of  Greeceexpressi^  their 
approbation X)f  these  terms,of  peace,  the  iE^lians,  afene,  in 
private  murmurs,  made  Severe  strictures  on  determina¬ 
tion  of  the  ten  ambassadors.  They  said^-“  it  consisted  merely 
of  an  empty  piece  of  writing,  varnished  over  with  a  fallaci¬ 
ous  appearance  of  liberty.  For  why  should  some  dfci^  be 
put  into  the  hands  of  the  Romans  without  being .  named, 
while  others  were  particularized,  and  ordered  to  be  enfran* 
chtsed  without  such  consignment  *  unless  the  intent  was,tlmt 
those  in  Asia,  which,  from  their  distantsituation,  were  more 
secure  from  danger,  should  be  free  y  but  those  ih  Greece,  no* 
being  specified,  should  be  jnade  d^ir  propertyj  Corinth, 
Chalcis,  and  Oreum  :  with  Erctria,  and  Demetrias.^’  Nor 
was  this  charge  entirely  without  foundation  t  for  there  was 
some  hesitatkm  with  respect  to  Corinth,  Chalcis,  ^and  Deme* 
trias  ;  because,^  in  the  decree  of  the  senate,  in  pursuance  of 
which  the  ten  ambassadors  had  been  sent  from  Rome,  all 
Greece  and  Asia,  except  these  three,  were  expressly  ordered 
to  be  set  at  liberty  ;  but,- with  regard  to  these,  ambassadors 
were  instructed,  that,  whatejve rather  measures  ther exigen¬ 
cies  of  the  state  might  render  expedient,  the  present  -they 
should  determine  to  pursue  in  conformity  to  the  public  good 
and  their  own  honour^  Now,  they  had  evei^  reason  to  be¬ 
lieve,  that  Antioch  us  mtended,  as  soon  as  he  should  be  able 
to  arrange  his  affairs  at  home,  to  pass  into  Europe ;  andithey 
were  unwilling  to  let  these  cities,  the  possession  of  which 
would  be  so  adv^tageoiis  to  him,  lie  open  U)  his  attacks. 
Quintius,  with  the  ten  ambassadors,  sailed  from  Elatia  to 
Aaticyra,  and  thence  to  Oorinth.  Here  the  plans  they  hiul 
laid  down,  were  discussed.  Quintius  frequently  urged,  that 
‘‘every  part  of  Greece  ought  to  be  set  at  liberty,  if  they  wish¬ 
ed  to  refute  the  cavils  of  the  J£tolians  ;  if  they  wished,  that 

BOOK  XXXOL 

sr9 

sincere  ^ectite  snid  respect  for  the  Roman  nation  shd^d  be 
universally  entertained ;  or  if  they  wished  to  convince  the 
woHd  that  th^^^d  creased  the  sea,  with  the  design  of  liber¬ 
ating  Oreei^,  tkk  of  transferring  the  sovereignty  of  it  from 
Philip  to  themselves.”  The  Macedonians  alleged  nothing  in 
opposittbn  'to  the  arguments  made  use  of  in  favour  of  the 
freedom  of  the  cities  ;  but  “  they  thought  it  safer  for  those 
cities  to  remain,  for  a  time,  under  thre  protection  of  Roman 
garrisons,  than  to  be  obliged  to  receive  Antiochus  for  a  mas¬ 
ter  in  the  room  of  Philip.”  Their  final  determination  was, 
th4t  Corinth-be  restored  to  the  Achiabs,  but  that  the  Ro- 
nian  force  should  continue  in  the  citadel ;  and  that  Chalcis 
and  Demetriar  be  re^ined^  until  their  af^rehensions  respect¬ 
ing  Antiochus  shdul^  cease 
XXXil.  The  stated  solemnity  of  the  IsthmiaU  g^mes  was 
at  hand.  These  have  ever  been  attended  by  very  numerous 
meetings,  for  two  reasons  :  first,  out  of  the  universal  fondness 
entertained  by  the  Corinthians  for  shows,  wherein  are  seCn 
trials,  of  sWll  in  arts  of  every  kind,  besides  contests  in 
strength  and  swiftness  of  foot ;  and  secondly,  because  people 
can  come  thither  from  every  quarter  of  Greece  by  the  means  of 
oire,  or  other,  of  the  two  opposite  seas.  But  on  this  oc^sion, 
all  were  led,  by  an  curidsity,  to  learn  what  was  j  thend^ 
forward,  to  be  the  state  of  Greece,  and  what  their  own  con¬ 
dition  ;  while  many  at  the  same  time  not  only  formed  opi¬ 
nions  within  themselves,  but  uttered  their  conjectures  in  con¬ 
versation.  The  Homans  took  their  seats,  as  spectators  ;  and 
a  herald,  preceded  by  a  trumpeter,  according  to  custom,  ad¬ 
vanced  into  the  centre  of  the  theatre,  where  notice  of  the 
commencement  of  the  g^mes  is  usually  made,  in  a  set  form 
of  words.  Silence  being  commanded  by  sound  of  trumpet^ 
he  uttered  aloud  the  following  proclamation  i  the  senate 
AND  PEOPLE  OF  ROME,  AND  TITUS  QUINTIUS,  THEIR  GENE¬ 
RAL,  HAVING  SURDtfED  RHILIP  AND  THE  MACEDONIANS, 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

(YJl.  556. 

S80 
O©  HJSSrEBT  ORDSa  THAT  THE  F01,EOWlNG  STATES  BE  FREE, 
URDEPBKDEKTj  AN0  RULED  BY  OWM  LAWS:  THB 
COBfIHTKIAKS,  PHOCIAITA,  AND  ALL  THE  LOCRIANS  ;  THE 
ISLAND  Of  EUBOSA,  AND  THE  MAGNESIANS^  THE  THESSA¬ 
LIANS,  PERRHiEBlANS,  ,AND  THE  ACH.€A|4S  Of,  PHTHIOTIS. 
He  then  read  a  list  of  all  the  states  >¥hkh  had  under  sub-o 
jcction  to  King  Philip.  The  joy  occasioned  by  h^ri^ig  these 
words  of  the  herald  was  so  great,  that  the  peopk’s  tninds 
were  unable  to  couoeive  the  matter  at  once..  Scarcely  could 
diey  believ^that  they  had  heard  them  ;  and >  they  looked  at 
each  other  with  amazement,  as  jf  all  were  the:  illusion  of  a 
dream.  Each  inquired  of  others  about  wh^t  immetbately 
concerned  himself.  Every  one  being  desirous,  not  only  of 
hearing,  but  of  seeing,  the  messengeriof  liberty,  the  herald  was 
called  out  again }  and  he  again  repeated  the  proclamation. 
When  dtey  were  thus  insured  of  tl^  re^ty  of  the  joyful 
dings,  they  raised  such  ^  shou^  and  clapping  of  bands,  and 
repeated  them  so  often,  as  clearly  dememstrated,  that  of  all 
earthly  blessings  none  is  more  grateful  to  the  mnltkudc  t^n 
liberty.  The  games  were  then  proceeded  through*'  with 
hmry  ;  for  nrithcr,  the  thoughts  nor  eyes  of^ny  attended  to 
exhibitions,  so  entirely  had  the  single  passion^of  joy  pre- 
Oppupied  their  minds,  as  to  exclude  the  sense  vof  ^11  pthcr 
pleasures. 
XKXllL^&ut,  when  the  games  were  finished,  every  one 
eagerly  pressed  towards  the  Roman  general ;  so  that  by  the 
c^wd  rt^fiing  toone  spot,  all  wishing  to  come  near  him,  and 
tO;tovu;h.his  right  haiid,  and  throwing  ^rlands  ^d  ribbands, 
he  was  in  some  degree  of  danger.  He  was  then  about  thirty- 
three  year^  of  age ;  and  besides  the  vi^or  of  youth,  the 
gratid'ul  sensatkms,  eACttedby  acknowledgm^ts  so  eminently 
glorious  to  him,  incre^ed  his  strength.  Nor  did  the  gene¬ 
ral  exulution  last,  only,  for  th^,^|^'  ;  but,  through  the  spiice 
of  many  was  continually  ^bed  by  sentiiMts  and  ex- 

BOOK  XXXIil. 

m 

B.C.  1^] 
pre$$kms  There  was  n  imtkm  in  the 
they  said^  whkh,  at  m  own  expense,  with  its  own  lsyb!^i 
and  at  its  pwn  ri^  wi^ed  war^  Cor  ^  liberty  of  o^hets* 
And  this  k  performed,  not  n^ely  for  eondguous  states,  or 
nem:  aelgh%»urs,  or  for  countries  that  ma^.  parts  of  the  san^ 
continent  |  bat  even  cr<^8ed  the  seas  for  the  (purpose,  that  no 
ua^wfui  power  should  subsist  on  the  face  of  the  whole  earth  $ 
hot  th4t  justice,  right,  and  law,  should  every  where  have 
sovereign  sway.  By  one  sentence,  prorounced  hy  a  herald, 
all  the  cities. of  Greece  and  Asia  had  b«^n  set  at  liberty.  To 
have  conceived  hopes  cd  this,  argued  a  daring  spirit  $  to  have 
carried  it  into  effect,  was  a  proof  of  dte  most  consummate 
bravery  and  good  fdrtuhe.’\ 
XXXIV.  'Qinndils  and  the  ten  ambassadors  then  gave  au^ 
dience  to  the  embassies  of  the  several  hings,  nations,  and 
spates.  First  ^  all,  the  ambassadors  of  King  Anticg^hus  were 
called.  Their  proceedings,  here,  were  nearly  the  same  as  at 
;  a  mere  di^lay  of  words  unsupported  by  facts.  But 
the  answer  given  them  was  not  ambiguous  as  formerly,  daring 
the  uncertainty  of  affairs,  and  before  die  conquest  of  Philip  i 
for  the  King  was  required,  in  express  terms,  to  evacuate  the 
cities  of  Asia,  which,  had  been  in  possesion  either  of  Philip 
or  Ptolemy  |  not  to  meddle  with  the  free  cities,  or  any 
longing  to  the  Greeks.  Aboye  all  it  was  insisted  on,  tb^  he 
should  ntsither  come  himself  into  •  Europe,  nor  transport 
army  thither.  The  King^s  anabassadors  being  dismissed,  a 
general  convention,^  d^^nauomand  states  was  immediately 
held ;  and  the  hu^ine^  despatched  with  the  greater  .ex* 
pedition,  because  the  t^s^d^ions  of  the.  ten  ambassadois  men^ 
tioned  the  several  stams  by  name.  To  the  people  of  Orestk, 
a  district  of  Maeedcmm,  in  consideration  of  their  having  been 
the  first  who  came  over  from  , the  side. of  the  King,  their  own 
laws  were  granted.  ThetH^nttians,  Perrhaebians,  and  Do* 
lopians,  were  likewise  de^pfep^  free.  To  the  nalion  of  the 

382 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R,  556* 

Thess^ianS)  besides  ^  enjoyment  of  liberty,  the  Achaean 
part  of  Phthioti9  was  granted,  excepting  Phthiotian  Thebes 
and  Pharsalus.  The  iEtoUans,  demanding  that  Pharsalus 
^and  Leucas  should  be  restored  to  them  in  conformity  to  4ke 
treaty,  were  referred  to  the  senate  :  but  the  council  united  to 
these,  by  authority  of  a  decree,  Phocis  and  Locris,  places 
which  had  formerly  been  annexed  to  them.  Corinth,  Triphy- 
lia,  and  Her®a,  another  city  of  Pelopcainesus,  were  restored 
to  the  Ach«aiis.  The  ten  ambasssaiors  were  inclined:  to  giVe 
Oreum  and  Eretria^to  King  Eumenes,  sOn  of  Attains ;  but 
Quintius  dissenting,'  the  matter  came  under  the  tietermina- 
tion  of  the  senate,  and  the  senate  declared  those  cities  free  ; 
adding  to  them  Carystus.  Lycus  and  Parthinia,  Illyrian  states, 
which  had  been  under  subjection  to  Philiji,  were  p^en  to 
Pleuratus.  Amynander  was  ordered  to  re^in  posses^n 
of  the  fcHTts,  which  he  had  taken  from  Philip  during  the 
war.  , 
XXXV.  When  the  convention  broke  up,  the  ten  ambassa- 
dors,  dividing  the  business  umong  them,  set  out  by  different 
routes  to  give  liberty  to  the  several  cities  within  their  re¬ 
spective  districts.  Publius,  Lentulus  went  to  Bargylii  Lu¬ 
cius  Stertinius,  to  Hephaestia,  Thassua,  and  the  cities  of 
Thrace;  Publius  Villius  and  Lucius  Terentius,  to  King 
Antiochus ;  and  Cneius  Cornelius  to  Philip.  The  last  of 
these,  after  executing  his  commission  with  respect  to  smal¬ 
ler  matters,^  asked  Philip,  whether  he  was  disposed  to 
listen  to  advice,  not  only  useful  but  highly  salutary.  To 
which  the.  king  answered  that  he  was,  and  would  g^ve  him 
thanks  besides,  if  he  mentioned  any  thing  conducive  to  his 
advantage.  He  then  earnestly  recommended  to  him,  since 
he  had  obtained  peace  with  the  Romam^  to  send  ambassa¬ 
dors  to  Rome  to  solicit  their  alliance  and  friendship ;  lest,  in 
case  of  Antiochus  pursuing  any  hostile  mea^res,  benight 
be  suspected  of  lying  in  wait,  and  watching  the  opportunity 
of  the  times  for  reviving  hostilities.  This  meeting  with  Phi- 

BOOK  XXXHL 

38S 

B.C- 196.] 
lip  was  at  T«mpc  in  Thes^y  I  and  on  his  answering  tl^lie 
would  send  ambassadors  .without  delay,  Cornelius  proceeded 
to  Themiopyfee,  wheroall  the  states  of^Ojeece  are  accuslonv* 
cd  to  meet  in  general  assembly  on  certain  stated  days.  This  Is 
calkd  the  Pylaick  assembly.  Here  he  admonished  the  iEto- 
lians,  in  particjalar,  const^tly  and  firmly  to  maintain  the 
friendship  estab^shed  between  them  and  the  Romans  ;  but 
some  of  the  principal  of  these  interrupted  him  with  complaints, 
that  the  disposition  of  the  Romans  towards  their  nation  was 
not  the  same  since  the  victory,  that  it  had  been  during  the 
war  ;  while  otbers  censured  them  with  greater  boldness,  and 
in  a  reproachful  manner  asserted^  that,  without  the  aid  of 
the  ^tolians,  the  Romans  could  neither  have  conquered  Phi¬ 
lip,  nor  even  have  made  good  their  pass^e  into  Greece.’’ 
To  such  discourses^tbe  Ih^man  forbore  giving  an  answer,  lest 
the  matten  . might  end  in  an  altercation,  anjd  only  said,  that 
if  they  sent  ambassadors^  to  -'Rome,  every  thing  that  was 
reasonable  would  be  grsmted  to  them.  Accordingly,  they 
passed  a  decree  for  such  mission,  agreeable  to  his  direction. 
In  this  manner  was  the  war  with  Philip  concluded. 
XXXVI.  While  these  transactions  passed  in  Greece,  Mace¬ 
donia,  and  Asia,  Etruria  was^  near  being  converted  into  a 
scene  of  hostilities  by  a  conspiracy  among  the  slaves.  To 
examine  into' and  suppress  this,.  Manias  Acilius  the  pr»tor, 
whose  province  was  the  administration  of  justice  between 
natives  and  foreigners,  was  sent  at  the  head  of  one  of  the  two 
city  legions.  A  number  of  them,  who  were  by.  this  time 
formed  in  a  body,  he  reduced^by  force  of  arms,  killing  and 
mking  many.  Some,  who  had  been  the  ringleaders  of  the 
conspiracy,  he  scourged  with  rods,  and  then  crucified  ;  some 
he  returned  to  their  masters.  .  The  consuls  repaired  to  their 
provinces*  Just  as  Marcellos  entered  the  frontiers  of  the 
Boians,  and  while  his  men  were  fatigued  with  marching  the 
whole  length  of  the  day,  and  as  he  was  pitching  his  camp  cm 
a  rising  ground,  Corolam,  a  chieftain  of  the  Boians,  attacked 

^84 

HISTORY  OF  HOME. 

[Y.R.556. 

him  with  a  very  tititnerous  force,  and  slew  three  thousand  of 
his  m^n  several  persems  of  distinction  fell  in  that  tumultu* 
ary  engagement :  a>iTiongst  others,  Tiberius  Sempronius  Grac* 
chus  and  Marcus  Junius  ^iianus,  prsefects  of  the  allies  ;  and 
Aulus  Ogulnius  and  Publius  Claudiui^  nailitary  tribunes  in 
the  second  legion.  The  Homans,  noiiffdis^ndmg,  had  cou¬ 
rage  enough  to  finish  the  fortification  of  camp,  and  to 
defend  it,  in  spite  of  an  assault  madi  the  enemy,  af¬ 
ter  their  soctess  in  the  field.  Marcellas  remained  for  some 
time  in  the  same  post,,  until  the  wounded  were  cifrcd^and  the 
spirits  of  his  men  revived,  after  such  a  disheartening  blow. 
The  Boians,  a  nation  remarkably,  impatient>,of  delay,  and 
quickly  disgusted  at  a  state  of  inaction,  separated,  and  with¬ 
drew  to  their  several  forts  and  viUages.  Marcellus  then, 
suddenly  crossing  the  Po,  led  bis  legions  into  the  territory 
of  Comuin,  where  the  Insiibrians,  after  rousing  the  people  of 
the  country  to  arms,  lay  encamped.  They  attacked  him  on  his 
march,  and  their  first  onset  was  so  vigorous,  as  to  mSfke  a  con¬ 
siderable  impression  on  his  van*  On  perceiving  which,  and 
fearing  lett,  if  his  men  should-  once  give  ground,  they  would 
be  obliged  to  quit  the  field,  be  brought  up^  cohort  of  Mar- 
sians  against  the  enemy,  and  ordered  every  troop  of  the  La- 
tine  cavalry  to  charge  them.  The  first  and  second  charge  of 
these  having  checked  the  fierceness  of  the  assaul^  the  other 
troops  in  the  Roman  line,  resuitiing  courage,  advariced  brisk¬ 
ly  on  the  fpe*  The  Gauls  no  longer  maintained  the  contest, 
but  turned  Jtheir  backs-  and  fled  in  confusion.  Valerius  An¬ 
ti  as  relates,  that  in  that  batde  above  forty  thousand  men  were 
killed,  five  hundred  and  keven  military  standards  taken,  with 
four  hundred  and  thiity-two  chariots,  and  a  great  number  of 
gold  chains,  one  of  which,  of  great  weight,  Claudius  savs, 
was  deposited  as  an  offering  to  Jupiter,  in  his  temple  in  the 
Capitol*  The  camp  of  the  Gauls  was  taken  and  plundered 
the  same  day  ;  and  the  town  of  Comum  vms  reduced  in  a 

BOOK  x^xin. 

385 

B.C.  196.] 
few  days  after.  In  a  little  time,  twenty-eight  forts  came 
over  to  the  consul.  There  is  a  dfoubt  among  writers,  whe¬ 
ther  the  Consul  led  his  legions,  first,  against  the  Boians,  or 
against  the  Insubrians  ;  so  as  to  determine,  whether  the  vic¬ 
tory  obtained  G^aaum  obliterated  the  disgrace  of  the  de¬ 
feat  by  the  Boians,  Cc  if  that  obliterated  the  honour  arising 
from  the  presmt  success* 
XXXVII.  fibtm  after  those  matters  had  passed,  with  such 
variety  of  fortune,  Lucius  Furius  Purpureo,  the  other  consul, 
came  into  the  country  of  the  feoiahs,  through  the  Sapp inian 
tribe.  He  proceeded  almost  to  the  fort  of  Mutilus,  when, 
beginning  to  apprehend  that  he  might  be  inclosed  between 
the  Boians  and  LigUrians,  he  marched  back  by  the  road  he 
came  ;  and,  making  a  long  circuit,  through  an  open  and  safe 
country,  arrived  at  the  camp  of  his  colleague.  After  this  junc¬ 
tion  of  their  forces,  they  over-ran  the  territory  of  the  Boians, 
spreading  devastation  as  far  as  the  city  of  Felsina.  This  city, 
with  the  other  fortresses,  and  almost  all  the  Boians,  except¬ 
ing  only  the  young  men  who  kept  arms  in  their  hands 
for  the  sake  of  plunder,  and  were  at  that  time  skulking  in 
remote  woods,  made  suljmission.  The  army  was  then  led 
aWay  against  the  Ligurians.  The  Boians  thought  that  the 
Romans,,  as  supposing  them  at  a  great  distance,  would  be  the 
more  careless  in  guarding  their  rear,  and  thereby  afford  an 
t^portunity  of  attacking  them  unawares  :  with  this  expecta¬ 
tion,  they  followed  them  by  secret  paths  through  the  forests. 
Th^  did  not  overtake  them  :  and  therefore,  passing  the  Po 
suddenly  in  ships,  they  ravaged  all  the  country  of  the  Lae  vans 
and  Libuans  ;  whence,  as  they  were  returning  with  the  spoil 
of  the  country,  they  fell  in  with  the  Roman  army  on  the  bor¬ 
ders  of  Liguria.  A  battle  was  begun  with  more  speed,  and 
with  greater  fury,  than  if  the  parties  had  with  their  minds 
prepared,  and  at  an  appointed  time  and  place.  This  occur¬ 
rence  showed  to  what  degree  of  violence  anger  can  stimulate 
VOL.  IV.-*— D  D  d 

HISTOBY  or  BQME* 

[Y.R, 

men :  for  ^  Romans  were  so  intent  on  skng^ter^  that  the^ 
scarcely  left  one  of  the  enemy  to  carry  the  news  of  their  de-  ~ 
feat*  On  account  of  these  successes,  when  the  letters  of,  die 
consuls  were  brought  to  Rome,  a  supplication  for  three  days 
was  decreed.  Soon  after,  Marcellas  came  to  Romeyandhad 
a  triumph  decreed  him  by  an  unanimom  vote  of  the  senate.  He 
triumphed,  ^hile  in  office,  over  the  Insubrians  and  Comans. 
The  chum  of  a  triumph  over  the  Boians  be  left  to  his  col¬ 
league,  because  his  o^n  arms  had  been  unfortunate  in  diat 
cotintry ;  those  of  his  colleague  successful.  Large  quantities 
of  spoils,  taken  from  the  enemy,  were  carried  in  the  proces¬ 
sion,  in  captured  chariots,  and  many  military  standards  ;  also, 
three  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  asses  of  brass^,  twohmi- 
dred  and  thirty-four  thousand  of  silver  denariusesf^  stamped 
with  a  chariot.  Eighty  were  bestowed  on  each  foot 
soldkr,  and  thrice  that  value  on  each  horsemam  and  centu* 
rion.  .  .  , 
XXXVIIL  Dumg  that  year.  King  Antiochus,  hav¬ 
ing  spent  the  winter  at  Ephesus,  took  measures  for  reducing, 
under  his  dominion,  all  the  cities  of  Asia,  which  had  form¬ 
erly  been  members  of  the  empire#^  As  to  the  rest,  being 
either  situated  in  jdains,  or  having  neither  waUs,  arms,  nor 
men  in  whom  they  could  confide,  he  supposed  they  would, 
without  difficulty,  receive  the  yoke.  But  Smyrna  and  Lamp- 
sacus  openly  asserted  their  independence  t  yet  if  he  osmpUed 
with  the  claims  of  these,  whom  he  fesuedj  there  would  be 
reason  to  apprehend,  that  the  rest  of  the  dries  in  £tcdia  and 
Ionia  would  foUow  the  example  of  Smyrna ;  andlho^cm  tl^ 
Hellespont,  that  of  Lampaacus.  Wherefore  he  sei^  mi  army 
from  Ephesus  to  invest  Smyrna  ;  smd  ordered  tihe  ^CK>ps, 
which  were  at  Abydus,  to  leave  there  only  a  smalt  gafrison, 
and  to  go  and  lay  siege  to  Lampsaci:^.  Nor  was  force  the 

1,0331.  ^  8d. 

t  .2,3311.  2s.  6d. 

^  2hl*^ 

BOOK  xxxni. 

ZB7 

B.C  196-3 
*ots!fy  means  tKat  he  used  to  brtug  them  to  submii^ion.  By 
anting  ambassadors,  to  make  gentle  remonstrances,  and  re* 
prove  the  rashness  and  crf>8tinacy  of  their  conduct,  he  endea¬ 
voured  to  give  them  hopes,  that  they  might  soon  obtain  the 
otject  of  their  wishes  ;  hiit  not  until  it  should  appear  clearly, 
both  to  themselves  andt^  all  the  world,  that  th^  had  gained 
their  liberty  through  rfie  kindness  of  the  King,  and  not  by 
any  violent  efforts  of  their  own.  In  answer  to  which,  they 
said,  that  ‘‘  Antiochus  ought  neither  to  hp  surprised  nor  dis¬ 
pleased,  if  they  did  not  very  patiently  stiffer  the  establishint^^t 
of  their  liberty  to  be  deferred  to  a  distant  period.^*  He  him¬ 
self,  with  his  fleet,  set  sail  from  Ephesus  in  the  beginning  of 
spring,  and  steered  towards  the  Hellespont.,  His  a^'my  he 
,  transported  to  Madytus,  a  city  in  the  Chersonese,  and  there 
joined  his  land  and  sea  forces  together.  The  inhabkants 
having  shut  their  gates,  he  invested  the  town  ;  and  when  he 
was  just  bringing  up  his  machines  to  the  walls,  it  capitulated- 
This  difiused  such  fear  through  the  inhabitanis  of  the  other 
cities  of  th^  Chersonese,  as  induced  them  to  submit.  He 
then  came,  With  the  whole  6f  bis  uhhed  forces,  to  Lyshnachia ; 
which  finding  deserted,  arid  ^mOst  buried  in  ruins,  (for  the 
Thracians  had,  a  few  yeai^  before,  taken,  sacked,  and  burned 
it,)  he  conceived  a  wish  to  rebuild  a  city  so  celebrated,  and 
so  cdmmodiously  situated.  Accordingly,  extending  his  care 
to  every  object  at  once,  he  set  sSxmt  repairing  the  walls  and 
houses,  ransomed  some  of  the  Lysimachians  who  were  in 
captivity^  semgfat  out  and  brought  home  others,  who  had  fled 
and  dispersed  themselves  trough  the  Chersonese  and  Hel- 
lespontus,  enrolled  new  colotrists,  whom  he  invited  by  pros- 
peem  of  advantages,  and  med  every  ineaUs  to  repcOple  it  ful¬ 
ly.  At  ^  same  time,  to  remove  aH  fear  of  the  Thracians, 
he  went,  in  person,  wiA  one  half  of  the  land  forces,  to  lay 
waste  the  nearest  provinces  of  Thrace ;  leaving  the  other 

388  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  5S6. 
half,  and  all  dje  crews  pf  the  ships,  employed  in  the  rc^airar 
of  the  place, 
XXXIX.*  About  this  time,  .Lucius  Cornelius,  who  Imd  been 
commissioned  by  the  senate  to  accommodate  the  diflferenc^ 
between  the  Kings  Antiachus  and  Ptolemy,  stopped  at  Sc- 
lymbria  ;  and,  of  the  ten  ambassadors,  Publius  Lentulusfrom 
Bargylii,  and  Publius  Villius  and  Lucius  Terentius,  from 
Thassus,  came  to  Lysimachia.  Hither  came,  likewise,  Lu¬ 
cius  Cornelius,  from  Selymbria,  and,  a  few  days  after.  An* 
tiochus,  from  Thrace.  His  first  meeting  with  the  ambassa¬ 
dors,  and  an  invitation  which  he  afterwards  gave  them,  were 
friendly  and  hospitable  ;  but,  when  the  business  of  their, em¬ 
bassy,  and  the  present  state  of  Asia,  came  to  be  treated  of, 
the  minds  of  both  parties  were  exasperated.  The  Romans 
did  not  scruple  to  declare,  that  every  one  of  his  proceedings, 
from  the  time  when  he  set  sail  from  Syria,  was^displeasing  to 
the  senate  ;  and  they  required  restitution  to  be  made,  to 
Ptolemy,  of  ail  the  cifie§  which  had  been  under  bis  dominion. 
“  For,  as  to  what  related  to  the  cities^  which  ^had  been  in  the 
possession  of  Philip,  and  which  Antiochus,  taking  advantage 
of  a  season  when  Philip’s  attention  was  turned  to  the  war 
with  Rome,  had  seized  into  his  own  hands,  it  would  surely 
be  an  intolerable  hardship,  if  the  Romans  were  to  have  un¬ 
dergone  such  toils  and  dangers,  on  land  and  sea,  for  so  many 
years,  and  Antiochus  to  appropriate  to  himself  the  prizes  in 
dispute.  But,  though  his  coming  into  Asia  might  be  passed 
over  unnoticed  by  the  Romans,  as  a  matter  not  pertaining  to 
them,  yet  when  he  proceeded  so  far,  as  to  pass  over  into 
Europe  with  all  his  land  and  naval  forces,  how  much  was  this 
short  of  open  war  with  the  Romans  ?  Doubtless,  had  he  even 
passed  into  Italy,  he  would  deny  that  intention.” 
XL.  To  this  the  King  replied,  that  “  for  some  time  past 
he  plainly  perceived,  that  the  Romans  made  it  their  business 
to  inquire  what  ought  to  be  done  by  King  Antiochus;  but 

38^ 

BX.196.3  BOOK  XXXIH.  . 
how  far  they  ^emselves  ought  to  ^vaxKse  <m  kadi  or^a 
they  never  considered.  Asia  was  no  concernment  of  ^  Ro* 
mans,  in  any  shape  ;  nor  had  they  any  more  right  to  inqnii^, 
what  Antiochus  did  in  Asia,  than  Antiochus  had  to  inquire, 
what  the  Roman  people  did  in  Italy.  With  respect  to  Ptole¬ 
my,  from  whom,  they  said,  cities  had  been  taken,  Idmne  was 
a  friendly  connection  imbsisting  between  him  and  Ptolemy, 
and  he  was  taking  measures  to  effect  speedily  a  connection  of 
affinity  also  ;  neither  had  he  sought  to  acquire  any  spoilsfrom 
the  misfortunes  of  Philip,  nor.  had  he  come  into  £urope 
against  the  Romans,  but  to  recover  the,  cities  and  lands  of  the 
Chersonese^  which^  having  been  the  property  of  Lysimachus^^ 
he  considered  as  part  of  his  own  dominions  ;  because,  when 
Lysimachus  was  subdued,  all  things  belonging  to  him  be¬ 
came,  by  the  right  of  conquest,  the  property  of  Seleucus. 
That,  at  times,  when  his  predecessors  occupied  by  va- 
♦  rious  cares  of  different  kinds,’  Ptolemy  first,  and  afterwards 
Philip,  usurping  the  rights  of  others,  possessed  them^lvea  of 
several  of  these  places,  as  likewise  of  some  of  the  nearest 
parts  of  Thrace,  which  were  indubitably  belonging  to  Lysw 
machus.  To  restore  these  to  their  ancient  state,  was  the  * 
tent  ^  his  coming,  and  to  build  Lysimachia  anew,  (it  havit^ 
been  destroyed  by  an  inroad  of  the  Thracians,)  in  order  that 
his  son,  Seleucus,  might  have  it  for  the  scat  of  his  empire.” 
XLI.  These  disputes  had  been  earned  on  for  several  days, 
when  a  rumour  reached  them,  but  without  any  authority,  that 
Ptolemy  was  dead  ;  which  prevented  the  conferenaea  coming 
to  any  issue  :  for  both  parties  made  a  secret  of  then*  having 
heard  it ;  and  Lucius  Conaelius,  who  was  charged  with  the 
^bassy  to  the  two  kings,  Antiochus  and  Ptolemy,  requested 
to  be  allowed  a  short  space  of  time,  in  which  he  could  have 
4  meeting  with  the  latter ;  because  ht  wished  to  arrive  in 

Here  is  a  chasm  in  the  onginal,  which  is  supplied  from  Polybius. 

^90 

HISTORY  0F  ROME. 

[Y.R.556. 

Egj^  before  my  thange  of  should  ^ke  place^  in 
ailise^ts^ice  of  the  netv^  soccesuddn  to  the  crown :  while  An- 
beKeved,  that  if  suck  ,an  event  had  teally  happened, 
Egypt  would  be  his  own.  Wherefore,  having  dismissed  the 
Romans,  and  left  his  son  Seleucus,  with  the  land  forces,  to 
fymh  the  rebuildini^  of  Lysimachia  ;  he  sailed,  with  his  whole 
fleel,  to  Ephesus  ;  sent  ambassadors  to  Quintius  totteatwhth 
turn  about  an  alllsmce  ;  and  then,  coasting  along  the  shore  of 
Asia,  proceeded  to  Lycia.  Having  learned  at  Patarse,  that 
Ptolemy  was  living,  he  dropped  the  design  of  sailing  to  Egypt, 
but  nevertheless  steered  towards  Cyprus ;  and,  when  he  had 
passed  the  promontory  of  Chelidonium,  was  detained  some 
little  time  in  Pamphylia,  near  the  river  Eurymedon,  by  a 
mutiny  among  his  rowers.  When  he  had  sailed  thence  as 
far  as  the  head-lands,  as  they  are  called,  of  Sarus,  such  a 
dreadful  storm  ax%se  as  almost  buried  him  and  his  whole 
fleet  in  the  deep.  Many  ships  were  cast  on  shore ;  many 
swallowed  so  entirely  in  the  sea,  that  not  one  man  of  rireir 
crews  escaped  to  land.  Great  numbers  of  his  men  perished 
on  this  occasion  ;  not  only  persons  of  mean  rank,  rowers  ami 
soldiers,  but  even  of  his  particular  friends  in  high  stations. 
When  he  had  collected  the  relics  of  the  ^neral  wreck,  being 
in  no  capacity  of  making  an  attempt  on  Cyprus,  be  returned 
to  Sdeucia,  with  his  force  greatly  diminished  since  his  de¬ 
parture.  Here  he  ordered  the  ships  to  be  hauled  ashore,  for 
the  winter  W£»  now  at  hand,  and  proceeded  to  Antioch, 
where  he  intended  to  pass  the  winter. — ^In  this  posture  stood 
the  ifairs  of  the  kings. 
XLII.  At  Rome,  in  this  year,  for  the  first  time,  were 
created  cheers  called  trhtmvirt  epuhnes  these  were  Cains 
« I«tcliiiws  EucuUus,  who,  as  tribune,*  had  proposed  the  law  for 
Afcdbr  Itwation  ;  Publius  Manlius,  and  Publius  Porcius  Lseca. 

It  was  their  office  to  reguiate  foaats  of  the 

BOOK  KKXllt 

BX.  196;] 

39% 

These  triumvirs,  as  well  as  the  pontiSs^  were  ^^lowed  hf 
the  privilege  of  wearing  Ac  purple-bordered  gowp^ 
body  of  the  pontiQs  had,  Ais  yc^ar,  a  wsu-m  dispute  wi^lNihie 
city  quaestors,  Quintus  Fabius  Labeo  and  Lucius  Aure- 
liua.  Money  was  wanted ;  an  order  having  been  passed  for 
making  the  last  payment  to  private  perscms  of  that  which  had 
hmt  rmsed  for  the  support  of  the  war :  and  Ae  quaestors  de¬ 
manded  it  from  the  augurs  and  pontiffs,  because  they  had  not 
contributed  their  share  while  the  war  subsisted.  Ifte  prieste 
in  vain  appealed  to  Ae  tribunes ;  and  the  contribution  was 
exacted  for  every  year  in  which  they  had  not  paid.  During 
the  same  year  two  pontiffs  died,  and  others  were  substiuited 
in  their  room :  Marcus  Marcellos,  the  consul,  in  Ae  room  of 
CaiusSempronius  Tuditanus,  who  died  a  praetor  in  Spain  j 
ami  Lucius  Valerius,  in  Aeroom  of  Marcus  Comehus  Ceth- 
egus.  An  augur  also,  Quintius  Fabius  Maximus,  died  veiy 
young,  before  he  had  attained  to  any. public  office ;  but  Ho 
augur  was  appointed  in  his  place  during  that  year.  The  con^ 
sular  Section  was  then  held,  by  the  consul  Marcellas..  The 
persons  chcwen  were,  Lucius  Valerius  Flaccus  and  JVf^cus 
Porcius  Cato.  Then  were  elected  praetors,  Caius  Fabriciua 
Luscinus,  Caius  Atioius  Labeo,  Cneius  Manlius  Vulso,  Ap- 
pius  Claudius  Nero,  Publius  Manlius,  and  Publius  Porcius 
Laeca.  The  curule  aediks,  Marcus  Fulvius  NobUior  and 
Caius  Flaminius,  made  a  distribution  to  the  people  of  ime 
million  pecks  of  wheat,  at  the  price  of  two  asses.  This  com 
Ae  Sicilians  had  brought  to  Rome,  out  of  respect  to  Caius 
Flaminius  and  his  faAer  ;  and  he  gave  share  of  the  credit  to. 
his .  colleague.  The  Roman  games  were  solemnized  wiA 
magnificence,  and  exhibited  thriqe  entire.  The  pld^ian 
aediles,  Cneius  Domitius  iEnobarbus  and  Caius  Scribonius,,^ 
chief  curio,  brought  many  farmers  of  the  public  pastures  to, 
trial  before  the  peopk.  Three  of  these  were  convicted 
misbehaviour ;  and  out  of  the  money  accruing  from  fines 

392 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.It  SS7. 

imposed  on  them,  they  built"  a  temple  of  Faunas  in  the  island. 
The  plebeian  games  were  ^hibited  for  two  days,  and  there 
wasf  a  feast  on  occasion  of  the  games. 
X£iin.  Lucius  Valerius  Flaccus  and  Marcus  Porcius,  on 
the  day  of  their  entering  into  office,  consulted  the 
B  C  195  respecting  the  provinces;  who  resolved, 
that  whereas  the  war  in  Spain  was  g^rown  so  for* 
mtdable,  as  to  require  a  consular  army  and  commander ;  it 
was  their  opinion,  therefore,  that  the  consuls  should  either 
settle  between  themselves,  or  cast  lots,  for  Hither  Spain  and 
Italy,  as  their  provinces.  That  he,  to  whom  Spain  fell, 
should  carry  with  him  two  legions,  five  thousand  of  the  La- 
tine  confederates,  and  five  hundred  horse ;  together  with  a 
fleet  of  twenty  ships  of  war.  That  the  other  consul  should 
raise  two  legions ;  for  these  would  be  sufficient  to  maintain 
tranquillity  in  the  province  of  Gaul,  as  the  spirits  of  the  In- 
subrians  and  Boians  had  been  broken  the  year  before.”  The 
lots  gave  Spain  to  Cato,  and  Italy  to  Valerius.  The  prxtors 
then  cast  lots  for  their  provinces  ;  to  Caius  Fabricius  Lusci- 
nus  fell  the  city  jurisdiction;  Caius  Atinius  Labeo  obtained 
the  foreign;  Cneias  Manlius  V  also,  Sicily;  Appius  Clau¬ 
dius  Nero,  Farther  Spain;  Publius  Porcius  Laeca,  Pisa,  in 
order  that  be  might  be  at  the  back  of  the  Ligurians ;  and 
Publius  Manlius  was  sent  into  Hither  Spain,  as  an  assistant 
to  the  consul.  Quintius  was  continued  in  command  for  the 
year,  as  apprehensions  were  entertained,  not  only  of  Antio- 
chus  and  the  but  likewise  of  Nabis,  tyrant  of  La¬ 
cedaemon  ;  and  it  was  ordered,  that  he  should  have  two  le¬ 
gions,  for  which,  if  there  was  any  deficiency  in  their  num¬ 
bers,  the  consuls  were  otdered  to  raise  recruits,  and  send 
them  into  Macedonia.  Appius  Claudius  was  permitted  to 
raise, ^n  addition  to  the  legion  which  Quintius  Fabiqs  had 
commanded,  two  thousand  foot,  and  two  hundred  horse. 
The  like  number  of  new  raised  foot  and  horse  was  assigned 

BOOK  XXXIII- 

393 

B.C.  195.] 
ta  Publius  Manlius,  for  Hither  Spain ;  and  the  legion  was 
given  to  hinij  which  had  been  under  the  command  of  Minu- 
cius,  praekir.  To  Publius  Porcius  Laeca,  for  Etruria^  near 
Pisa,  were  decreed  two  thousand  foot,  and  five  hwdred 
horsc^  out  of  the  army  in  Gaul.  Sempronius  Longus  was 
continued  in  command  in  Sardinia. 
XLIV .  The  provinces  being  thus  distributed,  the  consuls, 
before  their  departure  from  the  city,  proclaimed  a  sacred 
spring,  which  A  ulus  Cornelius  Mammula,  praetor,  had  vow- 
ed  in  pursuance,  of  a  vote  of  the  senate,  and  an  order  of  the 
people,  in  the  consulate  of  Cneius  Servilius  and  Caius  Fla- 
minius.  It  was  celebrated  twenty-one  years  after  the  vow 
had  been  made.  About  the  same  time,  Caius  Claudius  Pul- 
cher,  son  of  Appius,  was  chosen  and  inaugurated  into  the 
office  of  augur,  in  the  room  of  Quintus  Fabius  Maximus, 
who  died  the  year  before.  While  people,  in  general,  won¬ 
dered  that  so  little  notice  was  taken  of  Spain  being  in  arms, 
a  letter  was  brought  from  Quintus  Minucius,  announcing, 
that  ‘‘  he  had  fought  a  pitched  battle  with  the  Spanish  gene¬ 
rals,  Budar  and  Besasis,  near  the  town  of  and  had 
gained  the  victory :  that  twelve  thousand  of  the  enemy  were 
slain  ;  their  general,  Budar,  taken  ;  and  the  rest  routed  and 
dispersed.”  The  reading  of  this  letter  allayed  people’s  fears 
with  respect  to  Spain,  where  a  very  formidable  war  had  been 
apprehended.  The  whole  anxiety  of  the  public  was  directed 
towards  King  Antiochus,  especially  after  the  arrival  of  the 
ten  ambassadors.  These,  after  relating  the  proceedings  wiA 
Philip,  and  the  conditions  on  which  peace  had  been  granted 
him,  gave  information,  that  **  there  still  subsisted  a  war  of 
no  less  magnitude  to  be  waged  with  Antiochus :  that  he 
had  come  over  into  Europe  with  a  very  numerous  fleet,  and 
a  powerful  army  ;  that,  had  not  a  delusive  prospect,  of  an 
opportunity  of  invading  Egypt,  raised  by  a  more  delusive 
rumour,  diverted  him  to  another  quarter,  all  Greece  would 
VOL.  IV. — E  E  e 

HISTORY-OF  ROME, 

394 

[Y.R,  5^7, 

have  quickly  been  involved  in  the  flames  of   5ar.  Nor 
would  even  the  jEtolians  remain  quiet,  a  race  by  nature  rest¬ 
less,  and  at  that  time  full  of  anger  against  the  Romans4  That, 
besides,  there  was  another  evil,  of  a  mc^t  dangerous  nature, 
lurking  in  the  bowels  of  Greece  ^  Nabis,  tyrant  at  present  of 
Lacedaemon,  but  who  would  soon,  if  suffered,  become  tyrant 
of  all  Greece,  equalling  in  avarice  and  cruelty  all  the  tyrants 
most  remarkable  in  history.  For,  if  he  were  allowed  to  keep 
possession  of  Argos,  which  served  as  a  citadel  to  awe  the 
Peloponnesus,  when  the  Rom^  armies  should  be  brought 
home  to  Italy,  Greece  would  reap  no  advantage  from  being 
delivered  out  of  bondage  to  Philip  ;  because,  instead  of  that 
king,  who,  supposing  no  other  difference,  resided  at  a  distance, 
she  would  have  for  a  master,  a  tyrant  close  to  her  side.” 
XLV.  On  this  intelligence  being  received,  from  men  of 
^such  respectable  authority,  and  who  had,  besides,  examined 
into  all  the  matters  which  were  reported,  the  senate,  although 
they  deemed  the  business  relating  to  Antiochus  the  more 
important,  yet,  as  the  King  had,  for  some  reason  or  other, 
gone  home*  into  Syria^  they  thought  that  the  affair  respecting 
the  tyrant  required  more  immediate  consideration.  After 
debating,  for  a  long  time,  whether  they  should  judge  the 
grounds,  which  they  had  at  present,  sufficient  whereon  to 
found  a  decree  for  a  declaration  of  war,  or  whether  they 
should  empower  Titus  Quintius  to  act,  in  the  case  respecting 
Nabis  the  Lacedaemonian,  in  such  manner  as  he  should  judge 
conducive  to  the  public  interest ;  they  at  length  invested  him 
with  full  powers.  For  they  thought  the  business  of  such  a 
nature,  that,  whether  expedited  or  delayed,  it  could  not  very 
materially  affect  the  general  interest  of  the  Roman  people. 
It  was  deemed  more  important  to  endeavour  to  discover, 
what  line  of  conduct  Hannibal  and  the  Carthaginians  would 
pursue,  in  case  of  a  war  breaking  out  with  Antiochus.  Per¬ 
sons,  of  the  faction  which  opposed  Hannibal,  wrote  continu- 

BOOK  XXXIII. 

ms 

B.C.  195.] 
ally  to  their  seyeral  friends,  among  the  principal  men  in  Rome, 
that  ^  messages  and  letters  were  sent  by  Hannibal  to  Antic- 
chus,  and  that  envoys  came  secretly  from  the  King  to  him. 
That,  as  some  wild  beasts  can  never  be  tamed,  so  the  Car¬ 
thaginian’s  temper  was  irreclaimable  and  implacable.  That 
he  sometimes  complained,  that  the  state  was  debilitated  by 
ease  and  indolence,  and  lulled  by  sloth  into  a  lethargy,  from 
which  nothing  could  rouse  it,  but  the  sound  of  arms.”  These 
accounts  were  d^bmed  probable,  when  people  recollected  the 
former  war  being  not  only  continued,  but  first  set  on  foot,  by 
the  efforts  of  that  single  man.  Besides,  he  had,  by  a  recent 
act,  provokbd  the  resentment  of  many  men  in  power. 
XL  VI.  The  order  of  judges  possessed,  at  that  time,  abso¬ 
lute  power  in  Carthage  ;  and  this  was  owing  chiefly  to  their 
holding  the  office  during  life.  The  property,  character,  and 
life,  of  every  man  was  in  their  disposal.  He  who  incurred 
the  displeasure  of  one  of  that  order,  found  an  enemy  in  all  of 
them  ;  nor  were  accusers  wanting,  in  a  court  where  the  jus¬ 
tices  were  disposed  to  condemn.  While  they  were  in  pos¬ 
session  of  this  despotism,  (for  they  did  not  exercise  their  ex¬ 
orbitant  power  with  due  regard  to  the  rights  of  others,) 
Hannibal  was  elected  praetor  ;  and  hp  summoned  the  quaes¬ 
tor  before  him.  The  quaestor  disregarded  the  summons,  for 
he  was  of  the  opposite  faction ;  and  besides,  as  the  practice 
was,  that,  after  the  quaestorship,  men  were  advanced  into  the 
order  of  judges,  the  most  powerful  of  all,  he  already  assu¬ 
med  a  spirit  suited  to  the  authority  which  he  was  shortly  to 
obtain.  Hannibal,  highly  offended  hereat,  sent  an  officer  to 
apprehend  the  quaestor  ;  and,  bringing  him  forth  into  an  as¬ 
sembly  of  the  people,  he  made  heavy  charges,  not  against  him 
alone,  but  on  the  whole  order  of  judges  ;  who,  in  the  fulness 
of  their  arrogance  and  power,  set  at  nought  both  the  magis¬ 
tracy  and  the  laws.  Then,  perceiving  that  his  discourse  was 
favourably  attended  to,  and  that  the  conduct  of  those  men  was 

S96 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  557. 

oflFensive  to  the  interest  and  freedom  of  the  lowest  elasses,  he 
proposed  a  law,  and  procured  it  to  be  enacted,  that  the 
judges  should  be  elected  annually  ;  and  that  no  person  should 
hold  the  office  two  years  successively.”  But,  whatever  de¬ 
gree  of  favour  he  acquired  among  the  commons,  by  this  pro¬ 
ceeding  he  roused,  in  a  great  part  of  the  nobility,  an  equal 
degree  of  resentment.  ^This  was  followed  by  another  act,  by 
which,  while  he  served  the  people,  he  provoked  personal  en- 
mity  against  himself.  The  public  revenues  were  partly  wasted 
through  neglect,  partly  embezzled,  and  divided  among  some 
leading  men  and  magistrates  ;  insomuch,  that  there  was  not 
money  sufficient  for  the  regular  annual  payment  of  the  tri¬ 
bute  to  the  Romans,  so  that  private  persons  seemed  to  be 
threatened  with  a  heavy  tax. 
XL VII.  When  Hannibal  had  informed  himself  of  the 
amount  of  the  revenues  arising  from  taxes  and  port  duties, 
for  what  purposes  they  were  issued  from  the  treasury,  how 
much  was  consumed  by  the  ordinary  expenses  of  the  state, 
and  how  much  lost  by  embezzlement,  he  asserted  in  an  as¬ 
sembly  of  the  people,  that  if  payment  were  enforced  of  the 
money  unapplied  to  public  uses,  the  taxes  might  be  remitted 
to  the  subjects  ;  and  that  the  state  would  be  still  rich  enough 
to  pay  the  tribute  to  the  Romans :  which  assertion  he  proved 
to  be  true.  But  now  those  persons,  who,  for  several  years 
past,  had  maintained  themselves  by  plundering  the  public, 
were  greatly  enraged  ;  as  if  this  were  ravishing  from  them 
their  own  property,  and  not  as  dragging  out  of  their  hands 
their  ill-gotten  spoil.  Accordmgly,  they  laboured  to  draw 
down  on  Hannibal  the  vengeance  of  the  Romans,  who  were 
seeking  a  pretext  for  indulging  their  hatred  against  him.  A 
strenuous  opposition  was,  however,  for  a  long  time  made  to 
this  by  Scipio  Africanus,  who  thought  it  highly  unbecoming 
the  dignity  of  the  Roman  people  to  make  themselves  a  party 
in  the  animosities  and  charges  against  Hannibal ;  to  interpose 

BOOK  xxxni. 

397 

B.C.  195.] 
the  public  authority  among  factions  of  the  Carthaginians, 
not  remaining  content  with  having  conquered  that  command- 
cr  in  the  held,  bat  to  become  as  it  were  his  prosecutors*  in 
a  judicial  process,  and  preferring  an  action  against  him.  Yet 
at  length  the  point  waa  cmried,  that  on  embassy  should  be 
sent  to  Carthage  to  represent  to  the  senate  there,  that  Hanni¬ 
bal,  in  concert  whh  King  Antiochus,  was  forming  plans  for 
kindling  a  war.  Three  ambassadors  were  sent,  Caius  Ser- 
vilius,  Marcus  Claudius  Marcellos,  and  Quintus  Terentius 
Culleo.  These,  on  their  arrival,  by  the  advice  of  Hannibal’s 
enemies,  ordered,  that  any  who  inquired  the  cause  of  their 
coming  should  be  told,  that  they  came  to  determine  the  dis¬ 
putes  subsisting  between  the  Carthaginians  and  Masinissa, 
King  of  Numidia  ;  and  this  was  generally  bdieved.  But 
Hannibal  was  not  ignorant  that  he  was  the  sole  object  aimed 
at  by  the  Romans  ;  and  that,  though  they  had  granted  peace 
to  the  Carthaginians,  their  war  against  him,  individually, 
would  ever  subsist  with  unabated  rancour.  He  therefore 
determined  to  give  way  to  fortune  and  the  times  ;  and,  hav¬ 
ing  already  made  every  preparation  for  Sight,  he  showed 
himself  that  day  in  the  Forum,  in  order  to  guard  against 
suspicion  ;  and,  as  soon  as  it  grew  dark,  went  in  his  common 
dress  to  one  of  the  gates  with  two  attendants,  who  knew 
nothing  of  his  intention. 
XLVIII.  Finding  horses  in  readiness  at  a  spot  where  he 
had  ordered,  he  made  a  haMy  journey  by  night  through  a 
district  of  the  territory  of  Voca,  and  arrived,  in  the  morning 
of  the  following  day,  at  a  castle  of  his  own  between  AchoUa 
♦  Suifscribere  actioni  is  to  join  the  prosecutor  as  an  asastant ;  and  the 
prosecutors  were  obliged  calummam  jurarcy  to  swear  that  they  did  not 
carry  on  the  prosecution  through  malice,  or  a  vexatious  design.  Scipio, 
therefore,  means  to  reprobate  the  interference  of  the  Homan  state,  which 
would  bring  it  into  the  situation  of  a  common  prosecutor  in  a  court  of 
justice. 

6^ 

HISTOEY  OF  ROME. 

and  Thapsus*  There  4i  ship,  re^y  fitted  and  furnished 
widi  rowers,  took  him  on  Imrd;  In  this  manner  did  H^ni- 
hal  kave  Afriqs,  km^dng  die  misfortunes  of  his  country 
oikner  thati  his  own.  He  sail^  over,  the  same  day,  to  the 
island  of  Cercina,  where  he  found  in  the  port  a  number  of 
merchant  ships  with  their  cargoes  ;  smd  cm  landing  was  sur¬ 
rounded  by  a  concourse  of  pe^le,  who  came  to  pay  their 
respects  to  him  :  on  which  he  gave  orders,  that,  in  answer 
to  any  inquiries,  it  should  he  said  that  he  wbs  going  ambas¬ 
sador  to  Tjo^e.  Fearing,  howerm-,  lest  some  of  these  ships 
might  sail  in  the  night  to  Thapsus  or  AehoUa,  and  carry 
information  of  his  being  seen  at  Cercina,  he  ordered  a  sacri¬ 
fice  to  be  prepared,  and  the  masters  of  the  ships,  with  the 
merchants,  to  be  invited  to  the  entertainment,  and  that  the 
sails  and  yards  should  be  collected  out  of  the  ships  to  fqnn  a 
shade  on  shore  for  the  company  at  supper,  as  it  happeni^  to 
be  the  middle  of  summer.  The  feast  of  the  day^vriis  as 
sumptuous,  and  the  guests  as  numeroi^,  as  the  time  cir¬ 
cumstances  allowed,  and  the  entertainment  was  prolonged, 
with  plenty  of  wine,  until  late  in  the  night.  As  soon  as  Han¬ 
nibal  saw  an  opportunity  of  escaping  the  notice  of  those  who 
were  in  the  harbmur,  he  set  sail.  The  rest  were  fast  asleep, 
nor  was  it  early,  next  day,  when  they  arose,  heavily  sick  from 
the  preceding  day’s  excess  ;  and  then,  when  it  was  too  late, 
they  set  about  replacing  the  sails  in  the  ships,  and  fitting  up 
the  rigging,  which  emptoyed  several  hours.  At  Carthage, 
those  who  were  accustomed  to  visit  Hannibal,  met.  In  a  crowd, 
at  the  porch  of  his  house  ;  and,  when  it  was  publicly  known, 
that  he  was  not  to  be  found,  the  whole  multitude  assembled 
in  the  Forum,  eager  to  gain  intelligence  of  the  man  who  was 
considered  as  the  first  in  the  state.  Some  surmised  that  he 
had  fted,  as  the  Case  was ;  others,  that  he  had  been  put  to 
death  through  the  treachery  of  the  Romans  ;  and  there  was 
visible  in  the  expression  of  their  countenances,  that  variety 

BOOK  XXXIII. 

399 

B^.  195,} 
which  might  naturally  be  expected  in  a  state  divided  into 
factions,  whereof  each  supported  a  different  interest.  At 
length  an  account  was  brought,  that  he  had  been  seen  at 
Cercina. 
XLIX.  The  Roman  ambassadors  represented  to  the  coun¬ 
cil,  that  proof  had  been  laid  before  the  senate  of  Rome, 
that  formerly  King  Philip  had  been  moved,  principally  by 
the  instigation  of  Hannibal,  to  make  war  on  the  Roman 
people ;  and  that  lately,  Hannibal  had,  besides,^  sent  letters 
and  messages  to  King  Antiochus.  That  he  was  a  man  who 
would  never  be  content,  until  he  had  excited  war  in  every 
part  of  the  globe.  That  such  conduct  ought  not  to  be  suffer¬ 
ed  to  pass  with  impunity,  if  the  Carthaginians  wished  to  con¬ 
vince  the  Roman  people,  that  none  of  those  things  were  done 
with  their  consent,  or  with  the  approbation  of  the  statc.’^ 
The  Carthaginians  answered,  that  they  were  ready  to  do 
whatever  the  Romans  required  of  them. 
H^isEdbal,  after  a  prosperous  voyage,  arrived  at  Tyre, 
where,  in  consideration  of  his  illustrious  character,  he  was 
received  by  those  founders  of  Carthage  with  every  demon¬ 
stration  of  respect,  as  if  he  were  a  native  of  their  country, 
and  here  he  staid  a  few  days.  He  then  sailed  to  Andoch  j 
where,  bearing  that  the  King  had  already  left  the  place,  he 
procured  an  interview  with  his  son,  yrho  was  celebrating  the 
anniversary  games  at  Daphne,  and  who  treated  him  with 
much  kindness  ;  after  which,  he  set  sail  without  delay.  At 
Ephesus  he  overtook  the  King,  whose  judgment  was  still 
wavering  and  undetermined  respecting  a  war  widi  Rome ; 
but  the  arrival  of  Hannibal  proved  an  incentive  of  no  small 
efficacy  to  the  prosecution  of  that  design.  At  the  same  time 
the  inclinations  of  the  iEtolians  also  became  unfavourable  to 
the  continuance  of  their  alliance  with  Rome,  in  consequence 
of  the  senate  having  referred  to  Quintius  their  ambassadors, 
who  demanded  Pharsalus  and  Leucas,  and  some  other  cities, 
in  conformity  to  the  first  treaty. 

BOOK  XXXIV. 

The  Oppian  law,  respecting  the  dress  of  the  women,  after  nme^ 
repealed,  notwithstanding  it  was  strenuously  supported  by  Bdhypcus 
cius  Cato,  consul.  The  consul’s  successes  in  Spain.  Titus 
Flamimnus  finishes  the  war  with  tlie  Lacedaemonians  and  the 
Nabis;  makes  peace  with  them,  and  restores  liberty  to  Argos. 
rate  seats  at  the  public  games,  for  the  first  time,  appointed  for  the  sena> 
tors.  Colonies  sent  forth.  Marcus  Forcius  Cato  tnumphs  on  account  of 
his  successes' in  Spain.  Farther  successes  in  Spain  against  the  Boians 
and  Insttbrian  Gauls.  Titus  Quintius  Flamininus  having  subdued  Philip, 
King  of  Macedonia,  and  Nabis  the  Lacedaemonian  tyrant,  and  restored 
ail  Greece  to  frewlom,  triumphs  for  three  days.  Carthaginian  ambas¬ 
sadors  bring  intelligence  of  the  hostile  designs  of  Antiochus  and  Han¬ 
nibal. 
I.  AMID  the  serious  concerns  of  so  many  important  wars, 
some  scarcely  ended,  and  others  impending,  an 
B  C  195  intervened,  which  may  seem  too  tnvial 
to  be  mentioned ;  but  which,  through  the  zeal  of 
the  parties  concerned,  occasioned  a  violent  contest  Marcus 
Fundanius  and  Lucius  Valerius,  plebeian  tribunes,  proposed 
to  the  people  the  repealing  of  the  Oppian  law.  This  law, 

BOOK  XXXIV. 

401 

B.C.  195j 
which  had  been  introduced  by  Cains  Oppius,  plebeiafn  tri« 
bune,  in  die  consuh^c  of  Quintus  Fabius  and  Tiberius  Sem* 
pftmiusv  during  the  heat  of  the  Punic  war,  enacted,  that  **  no 
woman  should  possess  more  than  half  an  ounce  of  gold,  or 
wear  a  garment  of  various  colours,  or  ride  In  a  carriage  drawn 
by  horses,  in  a  city,  or  any  town,  or  any  place,  nearer  thereto 
than  one  mile ;  except  on  occasion  of  some  public  religious 
solemnity.’^  Marcus  and  Publius  Junius  Brutus,  plebeian 
tribunes,  supported  the  Oppian  law,  and  declared,  that  they 
would  never  suffer  it  to  be  repealed  ^  while  many  of  the  no¬ 
bility  stood  forth  to  argue  for  and  against  the  motion  pro¬ 
posed.  The  Capitol  was  filled  with  crowds,  who  favoured 
or  opposed  the  law ;  nor  could  the  matrons  be  kept  at  home, 
by  advice  or  shame,  nor  even  by  the  commands  of 
htmbands ;  but  beset  every  street  and  pass  in  the  city ; 
the  men  as  they  went  down  to  the  Forum,  that  in 
present  flourishing  state  of  the  commonwealth,  when  the 
prosperity  was  daily  increasing,  they  would  suffer  the 
UNMen  so  far  to  partake  of  it,  as  to  have  their  former  orna¬ 
ments  of  dress  restored.  This  throng  of  women  increased 
daily,  for  they  arrived  even  from  the  country  towns  and  vil¬ 
lages  ;  and  had  at  fength  the  boldness  to  come  up  to  the  con¬ 
suls,  praetors,  and  other  magistrates,  to  urge  their  request. 
One  of  the  consuls,  however,  they  found  inexorable^ — Mar¬ 
cus  Porcius  Cato,  who,  in  support  of  the  law  proposed  to  be 
repealed,  spoke  to  this  effect:— 
II.  “  If,  Romans^  every  individual  among  us  had  made  it 
a  rule  to  maintain  the  prerogative  and  authority  of  a  husband 
with  respect  to  his  own  wife,  we  should  have  less  trouble  with 
the  whole  sex.  But  now,  our  privileges,  overpowered  at 
home  by  female  contumacy,  are,  even  here  in  the  Forum, 
spumed  and  trodden  umler  foot ;  and  because  we  are  unable 
to  withstand  each  separately,  we  now  dread  their  collective 
body.  I  was  accustomed  to  think  it  a  fabulous  and  fictiiittes 
VOL,  IV. — F  F  f 

402 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y,R.  55jr. 

tale,  that,  in  a  certain  island,  the  whole  race  of  males  was 
utterly  extirpated  by  a  conspiracy  of  the  women.  ,  But  the 
utmost  danger  may  be  apprehended  equally  from  either  sex, 
if  you  suffer  cabals  and  secaret  consultations  to  be  held; 
scarcely,  indeed,  can  I  determine,  in  my  own  mind,  whether 
the  act  itself,  or  the  precedent  that  it  affords,  is  of  more  per¬ 
nicious  tendency.  The  latter  of  these  more  particularly  con¬ 
cerns  us  consuls,  and  the  other  magistrates ;  the  former,  you, 
my  feUow-citizens.  For,  whether  the  measure,  proposidl  to 
your  consideration,  be  profitable  to  the  state  or  not,  is  U>  be 
determined  by  you,  who  are  to,  vote  on  the  occasion.  As  to 
the  outrageous  behaviour  of  these  women,  whether  it 
merely  an  act  of  their  own,  or  owing  to  your  instigatiems, 
Marcus  Fundanius  and  Lucius  Valerius,  it  unquestionably 
implies  culpable  conduct  in  magistrates,  I  know  not  whether 
it  reflects  greater  disgrace  on  you,  tribunes,  or  on  the  con¬ 
suls  ;  on  you  certainly,  if  you  have  brought  these  women 
hither  for  the  purpose  of  raising  tribunitian  seditions  j  oit  us, 
if  we  suffer  laws  to  be  imposed  on  us  by  a  secession  of 
women,  as  was  done  formerly  by  that  of  the  common  people. 
It  was  not  without  painful  emotion  of  shame,  that  1,  just 
now,  made  my  way  into  the  Forum,  through  the  midst  of  a 
band  of  women.  Had  I  not  been  restrained  by  respect  for 
the  modesty  and  dignity  of  some  individuals  among  them, 
rather  than  of  the  whole  number ;  and  beeq  unwilling  that 
they  should  be  seen  rebuked  by  a  consul,  I  should  not  have 
refrained  from  saying  to  them,  ‘  What  sort  of  practice  is  this, 
of  running  out  into  public,  besetting  the  streets,  and  address¬ 
ing  other  women’s  husbands  ?  Could  not  each  have  made 
the  same  request  to  her  husband  at  home  ?  Are  your  blan¬ 
dishments  more  seducing.in  public  thm  in  private  ;  and  with 
other  women’s  husbands  than  with  your  own  ?  Although  if 
females  would  let  their  modesty  confine  them  within  the  li¬ 
mits  of  their  own  rights,  it  did  not  become,  you,  even  at 

BOOK  XXXIV. 

40S 

B.C.  195.] 
home,  to  concern  yourselves  about  any  laws  that  might  be 
passed  or  repealed  here.’  Our  ancestors  thought  it  not  pro¬ 
per  diat  women  should  perform  any,  even  private  business, 
without  a  director  ;  but  that  they  should  be  ever  under  the 
control  of  parents,  brothers,  or  husbands.  We,  it  seems, 
suffer  them,  now,  to  interfere  in  the  management  of  state  af¬ 
fairs,  and  to  thrust  themselves  into  the  Forum,  into  general 
assemblies,  and  into  assemblies  of  election.  For,  what  are 
they'  doing,  at  this  moment,  in  your  streets  and  lanes  ?  What 
bat  arguing,  some  in  support  of  the  motion  of  tribunes ; 
odters,  contending  for  the  repeal  of  the  law  ?  Will  you  give 
the  reins  to  their  intractable  nature,  and  then  expect  that 
thonselves  should  set  bounds  to  their  licentiousness,  and 
without  your  interference  !  This  is  the  smallest  of  the  in¬ 
junctions  laid  on  them  by  usage  or  the  laws,  all  which,  wo¬ 
men  bear  with  impatience;  they  long  for  entire  liberty  ^nay, 
to  speak  the  truth,  not  for  liberty,  but  for  unbounded  free¬ 
dom  in  every  particular.  For  what  will  they  not  attempt,  if 
they  now  come  off  victorious  ?  Recollect  all  the  institutions 
respecting  the  sex,  by  which  our  forefathers  restrained  their 
profligacy,  and  subjected  them  to  their  husbands  ;  and  yet, 
even  with  the  help  of  all  these  restrictions,  they  can  scarcely 
be  kept  within  bounds.  If,  then,  you  suffer  them  to  throw 
these  off  one  by  one,  to  tear  them  all  asunder,  and,  at  last,  to 
be  set  on  an  equal  footing  with  yourselves  ;  can  you  imagine 
that  they  will  be  any  longer  tolerable  ?  Suffer  them  once  to 
arrive  at  an  equality  with  you,  and  they  will  from  that  mo¬ 
ment  become  your  superiors. 
III.  “  But,  indeed,  they  only  object  to  any  new  law  being 
made  against  them:  they  mean  to  deprecate,  not  justice,  but 
severity.  Nay,  their  wish  is,  that  a  law  which  you  have  ad¬ 
mitted,  established  by  your  suffrages,  and  found  in  the  prac¬ 
tice  and  experience  of  so  many  years  to  be  beneficial,  should 
XK>w  be  repealed ;  and  that  by  abolishing  one  law,  you  shoidd 

4M 

HISTORY  OF 

[Y-R.  S$T. 

we^tn  dl  the  rest.  No  l$w  iierfectly  suits  the  convcuiew:^ 
of  every  member  of  Uie  commuiuty :  the  cmly  coosiiicratioii 
is,  whether,  upon  the  whole,  il  be  profitable  to  the  greater 
part.  If,  bec^se  a  law  proves  obnoxious  to  a  private  indi* 
vtdual,  it  mmt  therefore  be  cancelled  and  annulled,  to  what 
purpose  is  it  for  the  community  to  eni^t  laws,  which  those, 
whom  they  were  particularly  intended  to  compreheirf,  could 
presently  repeal  ?  Let.  us,  however,  imfuire  what  this  im¬ 
portant  affair  is  which  has  induced  the  matrons  thi»i  to  na» 
out  into  public  in  Ais  indecorems  m^i^r,^  scarcely  j^^train- 
ing  from  pushing  into  the  Forum  mid  the  assembfy  the 
^ple.  fa  it  to  solicit  that  their  pm^nts,  their  husbands, 
cMldre&,  aiKi  brothers,  may  he  ransomed  from  captivity  un¬ 
der  Haimibal  ?  By  no  mernis :  and  far  be  ever  from  the 
commonwealdi  so  unfortunate  a  situation.  Yet,  when  such 
was  the  case,  you  refuted  this  to  the  prayers  which,  upon 
timt  occasitm,  then*  duty  dicmted.  But  it  is  not  duty,  nor 
solicitude  for  their  friends  ;  it  is  religion  that  has  collected 
diem  together^  They  arc  about  to  receive  the  Idasan  Mo¬ 
ther,  coming  out  of  Phrygia  from  Pessinus.  What  motive, 
tJiat  even  common  decency  wiU  allow  to  be  mendimed,  is 
pretended  for  this  female  insurrection?  Hear^the  answer; 
That  we  may  shine  in  gold  and  purple  i  that,  both  on  fe$ti- 
val  and  common  days,  we  may  ride  through  the  city  in 
chariots,  triumphing  over  vmiquished  and  d>roga^d  law,  af¬ 
ter  having  captured  and  wrested  frmn  you  your  suffmges ; 
and  that  there  may  be  no  bounds  to  our  exposes  and  our 
luxury.  Often  have  you  heard  me.  complain  of  the  profuse 
expenses  of  the  w<mien---often  of  those  of  the  men ;  ax^  that 
not  only  of  men  in  private  stations, -but  of  the  magistrate; 
and  that  the  state  was  endangered  by  two  opposite  vices,  luxu¬ 
ry  and  avarice  ;  those  pests,  which  have  ever  been  the  rum 
of  every  great  state.  These  I  dread  the  more,  as  the  circum¬ 
stances  of  the  commonwealdi  grow  dady  more  j^osperous 

BOOK  XXXIV, 

40$ 

BX,  195.] 
md  happy :  a»  the  empire  increases ;  as  we  have  .pa«se4  over 
into  Greece  and  Asia,  places  aboip4ing  with  every  kmd  ^ 
lemp^ion  that  can  inflame  the  passions ;  mid  as  we  have  he^ 
gun  to  handle  even  royal  treasures:  for  I  greatly  fear  tbi^ 
thes^  matters  will  rathef  bring  us  into  captivity,  than  we  them. 
Believe  me,  tbpse  statues  from  Syracuse  made  their  way  into 
this  city  with  hostile  effect.  1  already  Ifear  too  many  com* 
meudii^  smd  admiring  the  decorations  of  Athens  and  Coring 
mid  ri#culing  the  earthen  images  pf  wxr  Rmnan  gods  that 
stand  Bn  tl^  fronts  of  tbehr  tem{des.  For  my  part  1  fH'efer 
these  j|p^y*-*propitious  as  they  are,  and  I  h<^e  will  continue, 
if  we  allow  them  to  memain  in  their  own  mansiom.  lu 
memory  of  our  fathers,  Pyrrhus,  by  bis  ambassacbr  Cmeiis, 
made  trial  of  the  dispositions,  not  only  of  our  omen,  of 
our  women  also,  by  offers  of  presents :  at  that  time  die  Op- 
pian  law,  for  restraining  female  luxury, bad  not  been  made: 
and  yet  m^t  one  woman  accepted  a  present.  What,  think 
you,  was  the  reason  i  That  for  which  oar  ancestors  made 
no  provi^on  by  law  on  this  subject  z  there  was  no  Inquiry  ex¬ 
isting  which  might  be  restrained.  As  diseases  mast  neces¬ 
sarily  be  known  before  their  remedies,  so  passions  come  into 
being  before  the  laws,  which  prescribe  limits  to  diem.  What 
called  forth  the  Lictman  law,  restricting  esta^  to  five  hun¬ 
dred  acres,  but  the  unbounded  desire  for  enlarging  estates  i 
What  tbeXincian  law,  concerning  gifts  mid  presents,  but  diat 
the  plebeians*  had  become  vassals  and  tributaries  to  the  sei> 
nate?  It  4s  not  therefore  in  any  degree  surprising,  that  no 
want  of  die  Oppian  law,  ,m'  of  any  other,  to  limit  die  expen¬ 
ses  of  the  women,  was  feh  at  that  time,  when  they  refused  to 
*  JPrerlaus  to  the  passii^  of  the  Cincisn  Uw,  shout  ten  yem  bea^re  this 
time,  the  advocates  who  pleaded  in  the  courts  received  fees  and  presents  ; 
and  as  all  or  most  of  these  were  senator^  the  plebeians  are  here  represent¬ 
ed  as  tributary  to  the  senate.  By  the  above  law  they  were  forbidden  U> 
leeeive  diUier  fees  m*  ^^ts. 

406 

HISTORY  OP  ROME. 

[YR.  ssr. 

l^ceivc  gold  and  purple  that  was  thrown  in  their  way,  and 
offered  to  their  accep^ce.  If  Cines»  were  now  to  go  round 
die  city  with  his  presents,  he  would  find  numbers  of  wcmien 
standing  in  the  public  streets  to  receive  them. 
IV.  ‘‘  There  are  some  passions,  the  causes  or  motives  of 
which  I  can  no  way  account  for.  To  be  debarred  of  a  liberty 
in  which  another  is  indulged,  may  perhaps  naturally  excite 
some  degree  of  shame  or  indignation  ;  yet,  when  the  dress 
of  all  is  alike,  what  inferiority  in  appearance  can  any  one  be 
ashamed  of?  Of  all  kinds  of  shame,  the  worst,  surely,  is  the 
being  ashamed  of  frugality  or  of  poverty  ;  but  the  law  relieves 
you  with  regard  to  both  ;  you  want  only  that  which  it  is  un¬ 
lawful  for  j^ou  to  have.  This  equalization,  says  the  rich 
matron,  is  the  very  thing  that  I  cannot  endure.  Why  do  not 
I  make  a  figure,  distinguished  with  gold  and  purple  ?  Why 
is  the  poverty  of  others  concealed  under  this  cover  of  a  law, 
so  dial  it  should  be  thought,  that,  if  the  law  permitted,  they 
would  have  such  things  as  they  are  not  now  able  to  procure. 
Romans,  do  you  wish  to  excite  among  your  wives  an  emula¬ 
tion  of  this  sort,  that  the  rich  should  wish  to  have,  what  no 
other  can  have  ;  and  that  the  poor,  lest  they  should  be,  des¬ 
pised  as  sudi,  should  extend  their  expenses  beyond  their  abi¬ 
lities  ?  Be  jassured  that  when  a  woman  once  begins  to  be 
ashamed  of  what  she  ought  not  to  be  ashamed  of,  she  wiQ 
not  be  ashamed  of  what  she  ought.  She  who  can,*  will  pur¬ 
chase  out  of  her  own  purse  ;  she  who  cannot,  will  ask  her 
husband.  Unhappy  is  the  husband,  both  he  who  complies 
with  the  request^  and  he  who  does  not ;  for  what  he  will  ndt 
give  himself,  another  wfll.  Now,  they  openly  solicit  favours 
from  other  women’s  husbands  ;  and,  what  is  more,  solicit  a 
law^and  votes.  From  some  they  obtain  them ;  although,  with 
regard  to  you,  your  property,  or  your  children,  you  would 
find  it  hard  to  obtmn  any  thing  from  them.  If  the  law  ceases 
to  limit  the  expenses  of  your  wife,  you  yourself  wUl  never  be 

BOOK  XXXIV. 

B.C.  195.] 

4or 

able  to  limit  them.  Do  not  suppose  that  the  matter  wUl 
hereafter  be  in  the  same  state  in  which  it  was  before  the  law 
was  made  on  the  subject.  It  is  safer  that  a  wicked  man 
should  never  be  accused,  than  that  he  should  be  acquitted  5 
and  luxury,  if  it  had  jjevcr  been  meddled  with,  would  be 
more  tolerable  than  it  will  be,  now,  like  a  wild  beast,  irri¬ 
tated  by  having  been  chained,  and  then  let  loose.  My  opinicm 
is,  that  the  Oppian  law  ought,  on  no  account,  to  be  repealed. 
Whatever  determination  you  may  come  to,  I  pray  all  the  gods 
to  prosper  it.” 
V.  After  him  the  plebeian  tribunes,  who  had  declared 
their  intention  of  protesting,  added  a  few  words  to  the  same 
purport.  Then  Lucius  Valerius,  who  made  the  motion, 
spoke  thus  in  support  of  it : — If  private  persons  only  had 
stood  forth  to  argue  for  and  against  the  proposition  which 
we  have  submitted  to  your  consideration,  I,  for  my  |Mirt, 
thinking  enough  to  have  been  said  on  both  sides,  would  have 
waited  in  silence  for  your  determination.  But  since  a  per¬ 
son  of  most  respectable  judgment,  the  consul,  Marcps  Por¬ 
cius,  has  reprobated  our  motion,  not  only  by  the  influence  of 
his  opinion,  which,  had  he  said  nothing,  would  carry  very 
grtat  weight,  but  also  in  a  long  and  laboured  discourse,  it  be¬ 
comes  necessary  to  say  a  few  words  in  answer.  He  has  spent 
more  words  in  rebuking  the  matrons,  than  in  arguing  against 
the  measure  proposed ;  and  even  went  so  far  as  to  mention  a 
doubt,  whether  the  conduct  which  he  censured  in  them,  arose 
from  themselves,  or  from  our  instigation.  I  shall  defend  the 
measure,  not  ourselves :  for  the  consul  threw  out  those  in¬ 
sinuations  against  us,  rather  for  arguments  sake,  than  as  a 
serious  charge.  He  has  made  use  of  the  terms  cabal  and  se¬ 
dition  ;  and,  sometimesy  secession  of  the  women ;  because 
the  matrons  had  requested  of  you,  in  the  public  street,  that, 
in  this  time  of  peace,  when  the  commonwealth  is  flourishing 
and  happy,  you  would  repeal  a  law  that  was  made  against 

408 

HISTOaY  OF  ROME, 

[Y.R,  557. 

them  during  a  war,  and  in  ri^es  of  distress,  I  know  that  to 
declaim  is  an  easy  task  i  that  strong  expressions,  for  the  pur¬ 
pose  of  exaggeradoh,  are  easily  found ;  and  that,  mild  as  Mmr- 
fcus  C^o  is  in  his  disposition,  and  gentle  in  his  manners,  yet 
in  his  speeches  he  is  not  only  vehement,  but  sometimes  even 
austere.  What  new  thing,  let  me  ask,  have  the  matrons 
done  in  coming  out  into  public  in  a  body  ?  Have  they  never 
before  appeared  in  public  ?  I  will  tom  over  your  own  Anti- 
qoities^,  and  quote  them  against  you.  Heaf  now,  how  often 
they  have  done  the  same,  and  always  to  the  advantage  of  the 
public.  In  the  earliest  period  of  our  Iristory,  even  in  the  reign 
of  Romulus,  when  the  Capitol  had  been  taken  by  the  Sa¬ 
bines,  and  a  pitched  battle  was  fought  in  the  Forum,  was  hot 
the  fight  stopped  by  the  matrons  running  in  between  the  tWo 
armies  ?  When,  after  the  expulsion  of  the  Kings,  the  legions 
of  the  Volscians,  under  the  command  of  Marcius  Coriolanus, 
were  encamped  at  the  fifth  stdne,  did  not  the  matrons  turn 
away  that  army,  which  would  have  overwhelmed  this  city  ? 
Again,  when  the  city  was  taken  by  the  Gauls,  whence  was 
the  gold  procured  for  the  ransom  of  it  ?  Did  not  the  matrons, 
by  unanimous  agreement,  bring  it  into  the  public  treasury  ? 
In  the  l^e  war,  not  to  go  back  to  remote  antiquity,  when 
there  was  a  want  of  money,  did  not  the  widows  supply  the 
treasury  ?  And  when  new  gods  were  invited  hitherto  the  re¬ 
lief  of  our  distressed  affairs,  did  not  the  matrons  out  in  a 
body  to  the  sea-shore  to  receive  ^he  Idsean  Mother  ?  The 
cases,  he  says,  are  dissimilar.  It  is  not  my  purpose  to'  pro¬ 
duce  similar  instances ;  it  is  sufficient  that  I  clear  these 
women  of  having  done  any  thing  new.  Now,  what  nobody 
wondered  at  their  doing,  in  c^es  which  concerned  all  in 
common,  both  mm  and  women,  can  we  wonder  at  theli:  do¬ 
ing,  in  a  case  peculiarly  affecting  themselves  ?  But  what  have 
♦  Aliodlfig  to  a  ti%ati«e  by  Cato,  upon  the  andqmties  of  eatitlcd 
**  Origenes,**  which  is  the  word  used  here  by  ViJerius, 

BOOK  XXXIV. 

40^ 

B.C.  195.] 
they  done  ?  We  have  proud  ears,  truly,  if,  though  masters 
disdain  not  the  prayers  of  slaves,  we  are  offended  %t  being 
asked  a  favour  by  honourable  women. 
VI.  ‘‘  I  come  now  to  the  question  in  debate,  with  respect 
to  which  the  consul’s  argument  is  two-fold :  for,  first,  he  is 
dis(^eased  at  the  thought  of  any  law  whatever  being  repealed ; 
and  then,  particularly,  of  that  law  which  was  made  to  restrain 
female  luxury.  His  mode  of  arguing,  .on  the  former  head, 
in  support  of  the  laws  in  general,  appeared  highly  becoming 
of  a  consul ;  and  that,  on  the  latter,  against  luxury,  was  quite 
conformable  to  the  rigid  strictness  of  his  morals.  Unless, 
therefore,  I  shall  be  able  to  point  out  to  you  which  of  his 
arguments,  on  both  heads,  are  destitute* of  foundation,  you 
may,  probably,  be  led  away  by  error .  For  while  I  acknow¬ 
ledge,  that  of  those  laws  which  are  instituted,  not  for  any 
particular  time,  but  for  eternity,  on  account  of  their  perpetual 
utility,  not  one  ought  to  be  repealed  ;  unless  cither  experience 
evince  it  to  be  useless,  or  some  state  of  the  public  affairs  ren¬ 
der  it  such  ;  I  see,  at  the  same  time,  that  those  laws  which 
particular  seasons  have  required,  are  mortal  (if  I  may  use 
the  term),  and  changeal>le  with  the  times.  Those  made  in 
peace,  are  generally  repealed  by  war  ;  those  made  in  war,  by 
peace  ;  as  in  the  management  of  a  ship,  some  implements  arc 
useful  in  good  weather,  others  in  bad.  As  these  two  kinds 
are  thus  distinct  in  their  nature,  of  which  kind,  do  you  think, 
is  that  law,  which  we  now  propose  to  repeal  ?  Is  it  an  ancient 
law  of  the  kings,  coeval  With  the  city  itself?  Or,  what  is 
next  to  that,  was  it  written  in  the  twelve  tables  by  the  de¬ 
cemvirs,  appointed  to  form  a  code  of  laws  ?  Is  it  one,  with¬ 
out  which  our  ancestors  thought  that  the  honour  of  the  female 
sex  could  not  bC  preserved  ;  and,  therefore,  we  also  have 
reason  to  fear,  that,  together  with  it,  we  should  repeal  the 
modesty  and  chastity  of  our  females  ?  Now,  is  there  a  man 
among  you  who  does  not  know  that  this  is  a  new  law,  passed 
VOL.  IV, — G  G  g 

410 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

[Y.R,  557. 

more  than  twenty  years  ago,  in  the  eonsnlate  of  Quintus  Fa- 
bius  and*  Tiberius  Setnpronius  I  And  as,  widiOUt  it,  our  ma-* 
trons  sustained,  for  such  a  number  of  years,  tibe  most  virtu« 
ous  characters,  what  danger  is  there  of  their  abandoning 
themselves  to  luxury  on  its  being  repesded  ?  For,  if  the  de¬ 
sign  of  passing  that  law  was  to  check  the  passions  of  the 
sex,  there  would  be  reason  to  fear  lest  the  repeal  of  it  might 
operate  as  an  incitement  to  them.  But  the  real  reason  of  its 
being  passed,  the  time  itself  will  show;  Hannibal  was  then 
in  Italy,  victorious  at  Cannae,  possessed  of  Tarentum,  of 
Arpi,  of  Capua,  and  seemed  ready  to  bring  up,  his  army  to 
the  city  of  Rome.  Our  allies  had  deserted  us.  We  had 
neither  soldiers  to  fill  up  the  legions,  nor  seamen  to  man  the^ 
fleet,  nor  money  in  the  treasury.  Slaves,  who  were  to  be 
employed  as  soldiers,  were  purchased  on  condition  of  their 
price  being  paid  to  the  owners,  at  the  end  of  the  war.  The 
fanners  of  the  revenues  declared,  that  they  would  contract 
to  supply  corn  and  other  matters,  which  the  exigencies  of  the 
war  required,  to  be  paid  for  at  the  same  time.  We  gave  up 
our  slaves  to  the  oar,  in  numbers  proportioned  to  our  proper¬ 
ties,  and  paid  them  out  of '  our  own  pockets.  All  our  gold 
and  silver,  in  imitation  of  the  example  given  by  the  senators, 
we  dedicated  to  the  use  of  the  public.  Widows  and  minors 
lodged  their  money  in  the  treasury.  We  Were  prohibited 
from  keeping  in  our  houses  more  than  a  cer^in  quantity  of 
wrought  gold  or  silver,  or  more  than  a  certain  sum  of-coined 
silver  or  brass.  At  such  a  time  as  this,  were  the  matrons  so 
eagerly  engaged  in  luxury  and  dress,  that  the  Oppian  law 
was  requisite  to  repress  such  practices  ?  When  the  senate, 
because  the  sacrifice  of  Ceres  had  been  omitted,  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  all  the  matrons  being  in  mourning,  ordered  the 
mourning  to  end  in  thirty  days.  Who  does  not  clearly  see, 
that  the  poverty  and  distress  of  the  state  requiring  that  every 
private  person’s  money  should  be  converted  to  the  use  of  the 

BOOK  XXXIV. 

411 

B.e.  195.] 
puUic,  enacted  that  law,  with  intent  that  it  should  remain  in 
force  so  long  only  as  the  cause  of  enacting  it  should  remain  ? 
For,  if  dl  the  decrees  of  the  senate,  and  orders  of  the  peo* 
pie,  which  were  then  made  to  answer  the  necessities  of  the 
times,  are  to  be  of  perpetual  obligation,  why  do  we  refund 
their  money  to  private  persons  ?  Why  do  wc  pay  ready  mo¬ 
ney  to  contractoi^  for  public  services  ?  Why  are  not  slaves 
brought  to  serve  in  the  army  ?  Why  do  we  not,  private  sub¬ 
jects,  supply  rowers  as  we  did  then  ? 
VII.  “  Shall,  then,  every  other  class  of  people,  every  in- 
dividual,‘'feel  the  improvement  in  the  state ;  and  shall  our 
wives  alone  reap  none  of  the  fruits  of  the  public  peace  and 
tranquillity  ?  Shall  we  men  have  the  use  of  purpl?,  wearing 
the  purple^bordered  gown  in  magistracies  and  priests’  offices  ? 
Shall  our  children  wear  gowns  bordered  with  purple  ?  Shall 
we  allow  the  privilege  of  such  a  dress  to  the  magistrates  of 
the  colonies  and  borough  towns,  and  to  the  very  lowest  of 
them  here  at  Rome^  the  superintendants  of  the  streets  ;  and 
not  only  of  wearing  such  an  ornament  of  distinction  while 
alive,  but  of  being  buried  with  it  when  dead ;  and  shall  we 
interdict  the  use  of  purple  to  women  alone  ?  And  when  you, 
the  husband,  may  wear  purple  in  your  great  coat,  will  you 
not  suffer  your  wife  to  have  a  purple  cloak  ?  Shall  the  furni¬ 
ture  of  your  hot^e  be  finer  than  your  wife’s  clothes  ?  But 
with  respect  to  purple,  which  will  be  worn  out  and  consumed, 
I  can  see  an  unjust,  indeed,  but  still  some  sort  of  reason,  for 
parsimony  ;  but  with  respect  to  gold,  in  which,  excepting  the 
price  of  the  workmanship-  there  is  no  waste,  what  motive  can 
there  be  for  denying  it  to  them  ?  It  rather  serves  as  a  useful 
fund  for  both  public  and  private  exigencies,  as  you  have  ab 
ready  experienced.  He  says  there  will  be  no  emulation  be¬ 
tween  individuals,  when  no  one  is  possessed  of  it.  But,  in 
truth,  it  will  be  a  source  of  grief  and  indignation  to  all,  when 
they  s6e  those  omaments  allowed  to  the  wives  of  the  Latine 

412 

HISTORY  OP  ROME. 

[Y.R. 

confederates  which  have  been  forbidden  to  themselven  ;  when 
they  see  those  riding  through  the  city  in  their  carriages^  and 
decorated  .with  gold  and  purple,  while  they  are  obliged  to  fol¬ 
low  on  foot,  as  if  empire  were  seated  in  the  ctwintry  of  the 
others,  not  in  their  own.  'ITiis  would  hurt  the  feelings  even 
of  men,  and  what  do  you  think  must  be  its  effect  on  those  of 
weak  women,  whom  even  trifles  can  disturb  ?  Neither  offices 
of  state,  not  of  the  priesthood,  nor  triumphs,  nor  badges  of 
distinction,  nor  military  presents,  nor  spoils,  can  fall  to  their 
share.  Elegance  of  appearance,  and  ornaments,  and  dress, 
these  are  the  women’s  badges  of  distinction  ;  in  these  they 
delight  and  glory ;  these  our  ancestors  called  the  women’s 
world.  What  other  change  in  their  apparel  do  they  utake, 
when  in  mourning,  except  the  laying  aside  their  gold  and  pur¬ 
ple  ?  And  what,  when  the  mourning  is  over,  except  resuming 
them  ?  How  do  they  distinguish  themselves  on  occasion  of 
public  thanksgivings  and  supplications,  but  by  adding  unusual 
s^endour  to  their  dress  ?  But  then,  if  you  repeal  the  Oppian 
law,  should  you  choose  to  prohibit  any  of  those  particulars 
which  the  law  at  present  prohibits,  you  will  not  have  it  in 
your  power  ;  your  daughters,  wives,  and  even  the  sisters  of 
some,  will  be  less  under  your  control.  The  bondage  of  wo¬ 
men  is  never  shaken  off,  without  the  loss  of  their  friends ; 
and  they  themstlves  look  with  horror  on  that  freedom  which 
is  purchn^d  with  the  loss  of  a  husband  or  parent.  Their 
wish  Is,  that  their  dress  should  be  under  your  regulation,  not 
under  that  of  the  law;  and  it  ought  to  be  your  wish  to  hold 
them  in  control  and  guardianship,  not  in  bondage ;  and  to 
prefer  the  title  of  father  or  husband,  to  that  of  master.  The 
consul  just  now  made  use  of  some  invidious  terms,  calling  it 
a  female  sedition  and  secession  ;  because,  I  suppose,  there  is 
danger  of  their  seizing  the  sacred  mount,  as  formerly  the 
angry  plebeians  did  ;  or  the  Aventine.  Their  feeble  nature 
must  submit  to  whatever  you  think  proper  to  enjoin  ;  and. 

BOOK  XXXIV. 

413 

B.C.  195.] 
the  greater  power  you  possess^  the  more  nKHlel^te  ought  you 
to  be  in  the  exercise  of  your  authority.” 
VIII.  Notwithstanding  all  these  arguments  against  the 
motion^  the  women  next  day  poured  out  into  public  in  much 
greater  numbers,  and,  in  a  body,  beset  the  doors  of  the  pro¬ 
testing  tribunes  ;  nor  did  they  retire  until  the  tribunes  with¬ 
drew  their  protest.  There  was  then  no  farther  demur,  but 
every  one  of  the  tribes  voted  for  the  repeal.  Thus 
law  annulled,  in  the  twentieth  year  after  it  had  been  mado. 
The  consul,  Marcus  Porcius,  as  soon  as  the  business  of 
Oppian  law  was  over,  sailed  immediately,  with  twenty-ftl^ 
ships  of  war,  of  which  five  belonged  to  the  allies,  to  thepo^ 
of  Luna,  where  he  ordered  the  troops  to  assemble  ;  and 
iog  sent  an  edict  along  the  sea-ebast,  to  collect  ships  of  eirery 
description,  at  bis  departure  from  Luna  he  left  orders,  i^at 
they  should  follow  him  to  the  harbour  of  Pyrenaus, 
intended  to  proceed  thence,  against  the.  enemy  with  aH  ^e 
force  that  he  could  muster.  They  accordingly,  after 
by  the  Ligurian  mountains  and  the  Gallic  bay,  joined 
there  on  the  day  appointed.  From  thence  they 
Rhoda,  and  dislodged  a  garrison  of  Spaniards  that  in 
that  fortress.  From  Rhoda  they  proceeded  with  a  iavoiSfa- 
ble  wind  to  £m{K>ria,  and  there  landed  all  the  forces,  mmept- 
ing  the  crews  of  the  ships. 
IX.  At  that  time,  as  at  present,  Emporiae  consisti^bsf  tm 
towns,  separated  a  wall.  One  was  inhabited  by  Greeks, 
from  Phocaea,  whence  the  Massilians  also  derive  their  origin  ; 
the  other  by  Spaniards.  The  Greek  town,  being  open  towards 
the  sea,  had  but  a  small  extent  of  wall,  not  above  four  hun¬ 
dred  paces  in  circuit ;  but  the  Spanish  town,  being  farther 
back  from  the  sea,  had  a  wall  three  thousand  paces  in  cir¬ 
cumference.  A  third  kind  of  inhabitants  was  added  fay  the 
deified  C«esar  settling  a  Roman  colony  there,  after  the  final 
defeat  of  sons  of  Pompey.  At  present  they  are  all  in- 

414 

HISTORY  ©F  ROME. 

[Y*R.  55r, 

corporated  m  case  mas^ ;  the  Spaniards  first,  smd,  at  length, 
the  Greeks  ;  having  been  admitted  to  the  privilege  of  Roman 
citizens.  Whoever  had,  at  that  period,  ohicrved  the  Greeks 
expe^^  on  one  side  to  the  open  sea,  and  on  the  other  to  the 
Sjmniards,  a  fierce  and  warlike  race,  would  have  wondered 
by  what  cause  they  were  preserved,  deficient  in  strength, 
they  guarded  against  danger  by  regular  discipline  j  of  which, 
among  even  more  powerful  people,  the  best  preservative  is 
fear.  That  part  of  the  wall  which  faced  the  country^  they 
kept  strongly  fortified,  having  but  one  gate,  at  which  some  dF 
the  magistrates  was  continually  on  guard.  Ihtring  the  ni^t, 
a  third  part  of  the  citizens  kept  watch  on  the  walls,  posting 
their  watches,  and  going  their  rounds,  not  merely  from  die 
force  of  custom,  or  in  compliance  with  the  law,  but  with  as 
much  vigilance  as  if  an  enemy  were  at  their  gates.  They 
never  admitted  any  Spaniard  into  the  city,  nor  did  they  go 
outside  the  walls  without  precaution.  The  passage  to  the  sea 
was  open  to  every  one  ;  but,  through  the  gate,  next  to  the 
%»imsh  town,  none  ever  passed,  but  in  a  large  body  ;^dle8e 
were  generally  the  third  division,  which  had  watched  on  the 
walls  the  preceding  night.  The  cause  of  their  going  out  was 
diis  :  the  Spaniards,  ignorant  of  maritime  aSairs,  were  fond 
of  trafficking  with  them,  and  glad  of  an  opportunity  of  ptir* 
chasing,  for  their  own  use,  the  foreign  goods,  which  die  others 
imported  in  their  ships ;  and,  at  the  same  time,  of  finding  a 
.market  for  the  produce  of  their  Imids.  Seimible  of  the  ad* 
vantages  resulting  from  a  ^mutual  intercourse,  the  Spainhirds 
gave  the  Greeks  freej  admittance  into  dieir  city..  Another 
thing,  which  contributed  to  their  safety,  was,  being  sheltered 
under  the  friendship  of  the  Romans,  which-they  cultivated 
with  as  much  cordial  zeal,  though  not  possessed  of  equsd 
abilities,  as  die  Massilians.  On  diis  ^ount  they  received 
the  consul,  and  his  ^rmy,  with  every  demonstration  of  cour¬ 
tesy  and  kindness.  Cato  staid  diere  a  few  days,  until  he 

BOOK  XXXIV. 

415 

B.C.  195.] 
^  couid  learn  what  forte  the  enemy  had,  and  where  they  lay  ; 
and,“  not  to  be  idle  during  even  that  short  delay,  he  spent  <He 
whole  time  in  exercising  his  men.  It  happened  to  be  the 
season  of  the  year  when  people  have  the  com  in  their  bams. 
He  therefore  ordered  the  purveyors  npt  to  purchase  any 
com,  and  sent  them  home  to  Rome,  saying,  that  the  war 
would  maintain  itself.  Then,  setting  out  from  Emporise,  he 
laid  waste  the  lands  of  the  enemy  with  fire  and  sword,  spread- 
ing  terror  and  desolation  over  the  whole  country. 
X.  At  the  same  time,  as  Marcus  Helvius  was  going  home 
from  Farther  Spain,  with  an  escort  of  six  thousand  men, 
given  him  by  the  praetor,  Appius  Claudius,  the  Celtiberians, 
with  a  very  numerous  array,  met  hhn  near  the  city  of  liliturgi. 
Valerius  says,  that  they  had  twenty  thousand  effective  men  j 
that  twelve  thousand  of  them  were  killed,  the  town  of  Illi- 
turgi  taken,  and  ail  the  adult  males  put  to  the  sword.  Hel¬ 
vius,  soon  after,  arrived  at  the  camp  of  Cato  ;  and  as  he  had 
now  no  danger  to  apprehend  from  the  enemy,  in  the  country 
through  which  he  was  to  pass,  he  sent  back  the  escort  to  Far¬ 
ther  Spain,  and  proceeded  to  Rome,  where,  on  account  of  his 
successful  services,  he  received  the  honour  of  an  ovation. 
He  carried  into ’the  treasury,  of  silver  bullion,  fourteen  thou¬ 
sand  pounds  weight;  of  coined,  Seventeen  thousand  and 
twenty-three  denariuses  and  Oscanf  denari  uses,  twenty 
thousand  four  hundred  and  thifty-eight4  The  reason  for 
which  the  senate  refused  him  a  triumph  was,  because  he 
fought  under  the  auspices,  an"d  in  the  province,  of  another. 
As  he  had  not  come  home  until  the  second  year  after  the  ex¬ 
piration  of  his  office,  because,  after  he  bad  resigned  the  gov¬ 
ernment  of  the  province  to  Quintius  Minucius>  he  was  de- 
•  5491. 14s.  * 
f  Osca,  now  Huesca,  was  a  city  in  Spain,  remarkable  for  silver  mines 
near  it. 
i  6591.  Il8.  nd. 

416 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

I:y.r.  55r. 

tained  there,  during  die  succeediug  year^  by  li  severe  and 
tedious  sickness,  he  entered  the  city  in  ovation,  only  two 
months  before  the  triumph  of  his  successor.  The  latter 
brought  into  the  treasury  thirty-four  thousand  eight  hundred 
pounds  weight  of  silver,  scfVenty-cight  thousand  denariuscs,* 
and  of  Oscan  denariuses  two  hundred  and  seventy-eight 
thousand.! 
XL  Meanwhile,  in  Spain,  the  consul  lay  encamped  itt  n 
small  distance  from  Emporiae.  Thither  tame  three  ambas¬ 
sadors  from  Bilistages,  chieftain  of  the  Ilergetians,  one  of 
whom  was  his  son,  representing,  that  their  fortresses  were 
besieged,  and  that  they  had  bo  hopes  of  being  able  to  hold 
out^  unless  the  Romans  sent  them  succour.  Five  thousand 
men,”  they  said,  would  be  sufficient  j”  and  they  added, 
that,  if  such  a  force  came  to  their  aid,  the  enemy  would 
evacuate  th^  country.”  To  this  the  consul  answered,  that 
he  was  truly  concerned  for  their  danger  and  their  fears  ; 
but  that  his  army  was  far  from  feeing  so  numerous,  as  that, 
while  there  lay  in  his  neighbourhood  such  a  powerful  force 
of  the  ettemy,  with  whom  he  daily  expected  a  general  en¬ 
gagement,  he  could  safely  diminish  his  strength  by  dividing 
his  forces.”  The  ambassadors,  on  hearing  this,  threw  them¬ 
selves  at  the  consul’s  feet,  and  with,  tears  conjured  him  not 
to  forsake  them  at  such  a  perilous  juncture*  For,  if  rejected 
by  the  Romans,  to  whom  could  they  apjdy  i  They  had  no 
other  allies,  other  hope  on  earth.  They  might  have  es¬ 
caped  the  present  hazard,  if  t^y  had  consented  to  forfeit 
their  faith,  and  to  conspire  with  the  rest ;  but  no  menaces,  no 
appearance  of  danger  had  been  able  to  shake  their  constancy  $ 
because  they  hoped  to  fend  in  the  Romans  abundant  succour 
and  support.  If  there  was  no  farther  prospect  of  this  ;  if  it 
was  refused  them  by  the  consul,  they  called  gods  and  men 

•  2,4301.  Il8.  3d. 

t  8,8891.  68.  9d. 

SOOK  XXXIV. 

B.C.  195.] 

4tf 

to  witness,  tteit  k  was  contrary  to  thsit  inclination,  and  in 
compliance  with  necessity,  that  they  should  change  sides,  to 
avoid  such  sniFerings  as  the  Saguntines  had  undergone ;  and 
that  they  would  perish  together  with  the  other  states  of  Spain, 
rather  than  alone.’^ 
XII.  They  were,  that  day,  dismissed  without  any  positive 
answer.  During  the  following  night;  the  consul’s  thoughts 
greatly  perplexed  and  divided.  He  was  unwilling  to 
abandon  these  allies,  yet  equally  so  to  diminish  his  army, 
which  might  either  oblige  him  to  decline  a  battle,  or  render 
an  engagement  too  hazardous.  At  length,  he  determined  not 
to  lessen  his  forces^  lest  he  should  suffer  some  disgrace  from 
the  enemy ;  and  therefore  he  judged  it  expedient,  instead  of 
real  succour,  to  hold  out  hopes  to  the  allies^  For  he  consU 
dered  that,  in  many  cases,  but  especially  in  war,  mere  ap* 
pearances  have  had  all  the  effect  of  realities  ;  and  that  a  per¬ 
son,  under  a  firm  persuasion  that  he  can  command  resources,' 
virtually  has  them  ;  that  very  prospect  inspiring  him  With 
hope  and  boldness  in  his  exertions.  Next  day  he  told  the 
ambassadors,  that  **  although  he  had  many  objections  to  lend¬ 
ing  a  part  of  his  forces  to  others,  yet  he  considered  their  cir¬ 
cumstances  and  danger  more  than  his  own.”  He  then  gave 
orders  to  the  third  part  of  the  soldiers  of  every  cohort,  to 
make  haste  and  prepare  victuals,  which  they  were  to  carry 
with  them  on  board  ships,  which  he  ordered  to  be  got  in  rea¬ 
diness  against  the  third  day;  He  desired  two  of  the  ambas¬ 
sadors  to  carry  an  account  of  these  proceedings  to  Bilistages 
and  the  Ilergetians ;  but,  by  kind  treatment  and  presents, 
he  prevailed  on  the  chieftain’s  son  to  remain  with  him.  The 
ambassadors  did  not  leave  the  place  until  they  saw  the  troops 
embarked  on  b«ard  the  ships ;  then  reporting  this  at  home, 
they  spread,  not  only  among  their  own  people,  but  likewise 
among  the  enemy,  a  confident  assurance  of  the  approach  of 
Roman  succoOrs. 
VOJL.  IV. — H  H  h 

[YM.m. 

XJII.  The  coBsdlf  irl^  teamed i^^j^rance^ 
aa  he  thought  sufficicpt,  to  citp%  %4>eUef  of  iuteuding 
ftend  md,  ordered  the  aoldiera  to  bt  again  from  the 
idiipa  I  and,  as  ^  a^a^n  of  tt»kfiprip«^  approached,  when 
it  wcHild  be  profW  to  enter  on  s^i^,  he  pitched  a  winter 
camp  at  the  distance  of  a  mile  from  Emporia.  From  diis 
post  he  frequently  led  out  his  troops  to  rava^  the  enemy’s 
country ;  sometimes  to  one  quarter,  sometimes  to  another,  as 
opportunity  offered,  leaving  only  a  small  guard  in  the  camp* 
They  generally  began  their  march  in  the  nighty  that  they  might 
proceed  as  far  as  possible,  and  surprise  die  enemy  unawares ; 
by  which  practice,  the  new-raised  seddiera  gained  a  know- 
fedge  of  discipline,  and  great  numbers  of  the  enemy  were  cut 
so  that  they  no  longer  dared  to  venture  bc^’ond  the  walla 
gf  their  forts.  When  he  had  made  himself  thoroughly  ac- 
qumnted  with  the  temper  of  the  enemy;  and  of  his  own  men, 
he  ordered  the  tribunes  and  the  prefects,  with  all  the  horse¬ 
men  and  centurions,  to  be  c^ed  together,  and  addressed 
them  thus :  ‘‘  The  time  is  arrived,  which  you  have  often 
wished  for,  when^youmight  have. an. opportunity  of  di^lay- 
ing  your  valour.  .  Hitherto  you.  have  waged  war,  radber  as 
marauders  than  as  regular  troops ;  you  shall  now  meet  your 
cmemies  face  to  face,  in  regular  fight.  Henceforward  you  wiU 
have  it  in  your  power,  instead  of  pillaging  Country  places,  to 
rifle  the  treasure  of  cities.  Our  fathers,  at  a  time  when  the 
Carthaginians  had  In  Spain  both  commanders  and  armies,  mid 
they  themselves  had  neither  com^^^er  nor  smldier  there, 
neva#^ss  insisted  on  its  being  an  article  treaty,  that  the 
river  Ibenis  a^ndd  be  the  boundary  of  their  empire.  Now, 
when  two  prsetors  of  the  Romans,  mae  of  their  consuls,  and 
three  armies  are  employed  in  Spain,  and,  for  near  ten  yearn 
past,  no  Carthaginian  has  been  in  eithet  of  its  provinces,  yet 
we  have  lost  that  empire  on  the  hither  side  of  the  Iberus* 
I'his  it  is  your  duty  to  recover  by  your  valour  and  arms ;; 

M 

B.C,  t9S.]  »OOK  30011^4  V 
nd  to  compd  Als  nation,  vht^  ki  ni  a  state  ratherof  g^kly 
insurrection  of  steady  to  receive  again  die  yoke 
which  it  has  shaken  ^ddter  theui  exhorting  them,  he 
gave  notice,  that  to  minrch  by  night  to  the 
enemy’s  camp ;  and  dismissed  tbm  to  take  refresh* 
mmt. 
XIV,  At  midnight,  after  having  duly  performed  what  re¬ 
lated  to  the  auspices,  he  began  his  march,  that  he  might  take 
pps^ssion  of  such  giound  as  he  chose,  before  the  enemy 
should  observe  him.  Having  led  his  troops  beyond  their  camp, 
he  formed  them  in  order  of  battle,  and  at  the  first  light  sent 
three  cohorts  close  to  their  very  ramparts.  The  barbarians, 
surprised  at  the  Romans  appearing  on  their  rear,  ran  hastUy 
to  arms.  In  the  mean  time,  the  consul  observed  to  his  men, 
“  Sokliers,.you  have  no  room  for  hope,  but  in  your  own  c<m- 
rage  ;  and  I  have,  purposely,  taken  care  that  it  should  be  so. 
The  enemy  arc  between  us  and  our  tents  ;  behind  us  is  an 
enemy’s  country.  What  is  most  honouraUe,  is  likewise  safi 
cst:  to  place  all  our  hopes  in  our  own  valour.”  He  then  orcfered 
the  cohort  to  retreat,  in  order  to  draw  out  the  barbariaeis  by 
the  appearance  of  light.  Every  thing  happened,  as  he  had 
expected.  The  enemy,  tfainkbg  that  the  Romans  retired 
through  fear,  mshed  out  of  dw  gate,  and  filled  the  whole 
space  between  their  own  camp  and  the  line  their  adversa¬ 
ries,  While  tl^y  were  hastily  marshalling  their  troops,  tte 
G<»»ul,*who  had  all  his  in  readiness,  and  in  regular  array,  at¬ 
tacked  them  before  they  could  be  properly  formed.  He  caused 
die  cavalry  feom  both  wings  to  advance  fiist  to  t 
but  those  on  tl^  ri^^t  were  immediately  i^pid^d,rSaKl,  re¬ 
tiring  in  disorder,  spread  confusion  among  the  iafuntry  also. 
On  Meing  this,  the  consulvordered  two  chdsen  cohorts  to 
march  round  the  right  lank  of  the  cu^tny,  and  show  them¬ 
selves  OB  their  rear,  before  the  two  lines  of  infantry  should 
ch^.  The  alarm,  which  this  gave  the  enemy,  remedied  the 

HISTORy  OF.  ROME. 

lYJSL.  m. 

4m 
cMsadvaatage  (Kxasioned  by  the  of  the  ca^ry,  and 
restored  die  fight  ^  an  eqiedily.  a  p^ek  bad  ta« 
ken  possession  of  Jio^  the  cavalry  and  infimtiy  of  the  right 
wing,  that  die  .consul  was  obliged  to  lay  hold  of  several  udth 
his  own  hsmd,  and  turn  them  about,  with 
enemy.  As  long  as  the  fight  was  carii^  iW"  missile 
weapons,  success  was  douMFui ;  and,  Oil  wihg, 
where  the  disorder  and  flight  had  first  be|pi%^ 
with  difficulty  kept  Uieir  ground.  On  their  lefit^Wing,  the 
barbarians  were  hard  pressed  in  front  and  looked  back,  widi 
dread^  at  the  cohorts  that  threatened  their  rear.  But  when, 
after  discharging  their  iron  darts  and  large  Javelins,  they 
drew  their  swords,  the  battle,  in  a  manner,  began  anew.  They 
were  no  longer  wounded  by  random  blows  from  a  distaiice, 
but  clewing  foot  to  foot,  {flaced  ail  their  Impe  in  courage  and 
strength. 
XV.  When  the  consul’s  men  were  now  spent  widi  fatigue, 
he  reanimated  their  courage,  by  bringing  up  into  the  fight 
some  subsidiary  cohorts  from  the  second  line.  These  formed 
a  new  front,  and  being  fresh  theiiiselves,.and  wtdi  fresh  wea*- 
pons  attacking  wearied  enemy  in  the  fi3rin  of  a  wedge, 
a  furious  onset  thi^  first  made  thefn  give  ^oond  :  and  then, 
when  they  were  once  broken^  put  them  completely  to  Aight, 
smd  compelled  them  to  seek^heir  camp  with,  all  the  speed 
dmy  could  make.  When  Cam  saiy  the-rout  become  gene* 
nd,  he  rode  back  to  the  second  Ibgiosi,  which  had  been  post* 
ed  in.re&terve,and  ordered  it  to  advani^  in  quidli  motion,  and 
aUack  the  camp  of  the-eaemy.  If  my  of ^hetuv  through  too 
much  eagerness,  pushed  forward  heyosAhia  wmU,  he  himself 
rose  up  and  struck  them  wi^  his  Jtvelin,  ami.  ako  ordeied 
the  tribunes  and  centuriems  to  chaatke  Uiem«  By  this  time  die 
camp  was  attacked,  though  the  Romans  were  kept  off  from 
the  works  by  stones  poi^,  mid  wea^ns  of  every  sort.  ^  But, 
on  the  arrival  of  the  fresh  assumed  new 

-  ^  - 

BX.  195.1  mom  xsMV.  m 
courage^  and  the  fought  ^ith  redouUed  ftiiy  j»  de¬ 
fence  of  dieir  rapaiplirt.  The  consul  at^nttvely  ei^tnafeal 
every  ^lace  himself,  :^at  he  might  make  his  push  where^he 
Mia00  the  weakest  resistance.  At  a  gate  on  the  left,  he  C^erv- 
edil^t  was  thin,  and  thither  he  led  the  hrsWank 
inerr  im<tj^^ill«n  of  the  second  legion.  The  part|^  posted 
at  not  able  to  withstand  their  assault  |>  while 
the  rest^^ei^  the  enemy  within  the  rampart,  ab^ukn^ 
the  deface  of  the  camp,  and  threw  away  their  smm^ds  and 
arms.  Great  numbers  were  killed  at  the  gates,  beiOg  stopped 
in  the  narrow  parages  by  the  throng;  and  the  skiers cf 
the  second  cut  off  the  hindmost,  while  the  rest  were  ha 
search  of  plunder.  According  to  the  account  of  Valerias 
Antias,  there  were  above  forty  thousand  of  the  enemy  killed 
on  that  day.  Cato  himself,  who  #as  not  apt  to  be  too  spar¬ 
ing  in  his  own  praise,  says  that  a  great  many  were  killed,  tnit 
he  specifies  no  numter. 
XVI.  The  conduct  of  Cato  on  that  day  is  judged  deserv¬ 
ing  of  commendation  in  three  particulars.  First,  in  leading 
round  his  army  so  far  from  his  camp  and  fleet,  as  to  put  the 
enemy  between  it  and  them,  when  he  engaged,  that  his  men 
might  look  for  no  safety  but  in  their  courage.  Secondly,  in 
tln*owing  the  cohorts  On  the  enemy’s  rear.  Thirdly,  in  order¬ 
ing  the  second  legion,  when  all  the  rest  were  disordered  by 
the  eagerness  of^their  purser,  to  advance  at  a  fullpace  mthe 
gate  of  the'  camp";  in  compact  and  regular  order  under  their 
standards.  He  delayed  not  to  improve  his  victory ;  but  hav¬ 
ing  sounded  a  retreat,  and  brought  back  his  men  laden  vtilk 
spoil,  he  allowed  them.g  few  hours  of  the  night  for  rest ;  md 
then  led  them^t  to  ravage  the  country.  They  spread  their 
depredations  the  widef^^as  the  enemy  were  dispersed  in  their 
flight ;  and  this  dtsaster,^Qperatmg  not  less  forcibly  than  the 
defeat  of  the  preceding  ^ay,  obliged  the  Spaniards  of  Em- 
porias;  and  those  of:;^^si#g^}boarhoo^  to  make  a  submis- 

m  BISTORT  m  ftOME.  CY*».  SSf. 
belonging  otter  states,  mho  hsul  n^de 
Itek  escape  lo^£teporiae,  surrendered ;  ^  wtem  the  con¬ 
sul  m^ycd  teidness^  and  after  refreditng  them  with 
viotnals  and  wii^,  dismissed  to  their  several  homes.  He 
if^ieklf  de^^p^  thence,  and  wherever  the  army  proceeded 
on  its  maitb,  he  was  met  by  ambassadors^  surrendering  their 
respective  m  diat,  by  >the  time  whm  he  arrived  at  Tar- 
racOydA  Spmn  on  this  side  of 'the  Iberus  mm  m  astate  of  per- 
£ect  sub|eot^  S  and  the  Roman  pris<mers,  and  those  of  their 
allies  and  the  Latine  ccmfederates,  who,  by  various  chances, 
bad  fallen  into  the  bands  of  the  enemies  in  S^tn,  Were 
teoiight  back  by  the  barbarians,  mid  presented  to  the  consul. 
A  rumour  afterwards  spread  abroad,  that  Cato  intended  to 
lead  his  army  into  Tardetania ;  and  it  was  given  out  with 
equal  falsehood,  that  be  meant  to  .  proceed  to  the  remote  in¬ 
habitants  of  the  mountains.  On  this  groundless,  unauttenti* 
cated  report,  seven  forte  of  the  Bergiatans  revolted  5  but  the 
Romany  marching  thither,  reduced  them  to  sub^ctimi  with¬ 
out  much  fighting.  In  a  short  time  after,  when  the  consul 
returned  to  Tarraco,  and  befc^e  be  removed  to  any  other 
the  same  persons  revolted  again.  ^They  were  again 
shbdued;  but,  on  this  second  reduction,  met  not  the  same 
mild  treatment;  they  were  sbld  by  auctimx,  to  puC  an^ud 
to  their  continual  rebellions.  , 
XVII.  In  the  mean  time,  the  prsettnr,  Publius  Manlius, 
having  received  the  army  from  Quintus'Minucius,  whom  he 
had  succeeded,  and  joined  t<r  it.  the  tdd  army  of  Appius 
Claudius  Nero,  from  farther  Spain,  marched  into  Tm-deta* 
nia.  Of  all  the  Spsmiards,  the  Tutdetanians  are  reckoned 
tbo  least  warlike ;  nevertheless,  retying  on  their  great“^Dum- 
beta,  they  went  to  oppose  ^thc  maixh  of  the  Roman.  Ode 
charge  of  the  cavidry  imn^diateiy  broke  ^eir  line ;  and,  with 
the  inftetry,  there  was  hardly  any  dispute.  The  veteran  sol¬ 
diers,  well  acquainted  with  the  enemy^  and  their  manner  of 

BGOK  XXXIV. 

B.C,  195.J 

4^ 

ighting,  efFectuiklly  decided  the  b^e.  This 
however,  did  sot  termiaate  the  wai'.  Tim  TmdxdmmM^ 
ten  thoasasid  Geltiberiaos,  md  prepared  oa  the 
with  foreign  troops.  The  consul,  meanwtdle,  ahirmed  at  dbe 
rebellion  of  the  Bergtstans,  imd  sospectii^  dial  the  other 
states  would  act  in  like  mannor,  when  occasum  offiered,  took 
away  their  arms  from  all  die  Spaniaids,  on  this  mde  of  the 
Iberus ;  which  proceeding  affected  them  so  deeply^  that  many 
laid  violent  hands  on  themselves,  thinking,  accorfing  to  the 
noticms  of  that  fferce  race,  that,  without  arms,  life  was  no* 
thing.  When  tins  was  reported  to  the  consul,  he  summoned 
before  him  the  senators  of  every  one  of  the  states,  to  whom 
be  spoke  dius:  ^  It  is  not  more  our  interest,  than  it  is  your 
own,  that  you  should  not  rebel ;  since  your  insurrections  have^ 
hitherto,  always  drawn  more  misforOme  on  the  Spaniards, 
than  labour  on  the  Roman  armies.  To  prevent  such  things 
happening  in  future,  I  Icnow  but  cme  method,  which  is,  to  put 
it  out  of  your  power  to  rebel.  I  wish  to  effect  this  in  the 
gendest  way,  and  that  you  would  assist  me  therein  with  your 
advice.  I  will  follow  none  with  greater  pleasure,  than  what 
yourselves  shall  offer.  They  all  remained  silent ;  and  iJtmn 
he  told  them  that  he  would  give  them  a  few  days  dme  to 
consider  the  matter*  They  were  again  called  together ;  but, 
even  in  the  second  meeting,  they  uttered  not  a  word.  On 
which,  in  one  day,  he  nuted  the  walls  df  all  their  fortresses ; 
and^  marching  against  those  who  had  not  yet  submitted,  he 
received,  in  every  coutttry  as  he  passed  through,  the  submis¬ 
sion  of  all  the  neighbouring  states.  Segestica  alone,  a  strong 
mid  opulent  dty,  he  reduced  by  a  regular  siege. 
XVIII.  Cato  had  greater  difficulties  to  surmount,  in  sub¬ 
duing  the  enemy,  than  had  tho^se  commanders  who  came  first 
into  Spain ;  for  this  reason,  that  the  Spaniards,  through  dis¬ 
gust  at  the  Carthaginian  government,  came  over  to  their  side ; 
whereas,  he  bad  the  task  of  enforcing  their  submission  to 

424 

HISTORY  OF  RCWSfB. 
in  a  maimer,  after  they  had  been  tti  hM 
<if  libetl^^  Beside,  he  fonnd  the  whole  provM^  hi  a  sSle 
of  commo^oti,  insomuch,  that  some  w^e  in  arms,  an^Miers, 
because  they  refused  to  job  m  the  revidt,  a^e  held  be¬ 
sieged,  and  would  not  hare  hi^n  able  to  hold  out,  if  ^hey 
had  not  received  timely  succour.  But  so  vigorous  was  the 
spirit  and  capacity  of  the  consul,  that:  there  Was  no  kind  of 
business,  whether  great  or  small,  which  he  did  not  himself 
attend  to  and  perfmtn  ;  and  he  nof  only  planned  and  order¬ 
ed,  but  generally  executed  m  p^on,  such  measures  as  were 
expedient ;  nor  did  he  practice  greater  strictness  and  severity 
over  any  one  than  over  himself.  In  spare  diet,  watching  ahd 
labour,  he  vied  with  the  meanest  of  his  soldiers ;  nor,  ex¬ 
cepting  the  honour  of  his  post,  and  die'  command,  had  he 
peetdiar  distinction  above  the  rest  of  the  army. 
XIX.  'fbe  Celtibcrians,  hired  by  the  enemy  as  sd^vemen- 
tioned,  rendered  the  war  in  Turdetania  difficult  to  the  prae¬ 
tor,  Publius  Manlius.  The  consul,  therefore,  in  compliance 
with  a  letter  from  the  praetor,  led  his  legions  thither.  The 
Celtiberians  and  Turdetanians  were  lying  in^sej^rate  camps 
at  the  approach  of  the  Romans,  who  began  immediately  to 
^irmtsh  with  the  Turdetanians,  making  attacks  on  their  ad¬ 
vanced  guards ;  and  they  constantly  came'  off  victorious, 
though  sometimes  they  engaged  too  rashly:  The  consul 
dered  some  military  tribunes  to  ent^r  into  a  confefesce  with 
the  Celtibcrians,  and  to  c^er  xhtxn  their  choice  of  three  pro¬ 
posals  :  first,  to  come  over  to  the  Romans,  and  receive  double 
the  pay  for  which  they  .bad  agreed  with4:hc  Turdetanians  :  the 
second,,  to  depart  to  their  own  homes,  oh  receiving  assuran^ 
under  the  sanction  of  the  public  faith i  that  no  resentment 
should  be  shown  of  thcir  behavkmr  in  joining  the  enemies-t^ 
the  Romans :  the  third  was*,  that,  if  they  wi^rV  absolutely  dc- 
termfa^ld  cm  war,  they  should  appoint  a  day  and  place  to 
decide^ ^limRer  with  ham  by  arms.  The  Cehiberians  de- 

mdK  xxxiv-  4m 
a  lor  consideradoo ;  but  miml^^rof  die 
mixing  in  their  as^mbly,  m  gmskt  a 
to  prevent  them  ^from  forming  smy  resoludcm. 
Althou^  It  was  uncertain  whetl^i^^re  was  to  be  war  iw 
peace  with  the  Cejctberians,  Homans  nevertheless,  just  as 
though  the  latter  were  determineii  on^  brought  proviskuis 
from  lands  and^^ts  the  enemy,  and  soon  vetuured,^ 
go  within  their  forttfications,  relying  cm  private  truces,  aa 
they  would  on  a  common  intercourse  es^blished  i>y  authoi^* 
ty.  Wben  the  consul  found  that  he  could  not  entice  the  ene¬ 
my  to  a  battle,  he  first  led  out  a  number  of  colK>rts,  light^ 
accoutred,  in  regular  order,  to  ravage  a  part  of  the  country, 
which  was  yet  unhurt ;  then  hearing  that  all  the  ba^^age  of 
the  Celtiberians  was  deposited  at  Saguntia,  be  proceeded 
thither  to  attack  that  town,  but  was  unahlet  notwidtslaiidi^<^ 
to  provoke  them  to  stir.  Paying,  therefore,  his  own  troops, 
and  .those  of  Minucius,  he  left  the  bulk  of  his  army  in  the 
prsetor^s.  Cfoip,  and,  with  seven  cohorts,  returned  to  the 
Iberus. 
XX.  With  that  small  force  he  took  several  towns*  Hie 
Sldetonians,  Ausetanians,  and  Suessetaniaus  catWe  over  to 
his  side.  The  Lacetaniatis,  a  remote  and  wild  nation,  sitU 
remained  in  arms ;  pairtly  through  the^r  natural  fm^city,  md 
partly  through  consciousness  of  guilt,  in  having  laid  was^, 
by  sudden  incursions,  the  country  of  the  allies,  while  the 
consul  and  his  army  were  employed  in  the  war  with  the  Tur- 
detanians.  He  therefore  marched  to  attack  their  capitsd,  not 
only  with  the 'Rom^  cohorts,  but  also  with  the  troops  of  tlm 
idltes,  who  were  ju^y  incensed  against  them.  The  town  i0ms 
sketched  out  into  considerable  length,  but  had  not  propor- 
tiohalde  breadth.  At  the  distance  of  about  four  hundred 
paces  from  it,  he  ^]ced|  and  leaving  there  a  party  composed 
pf  chosen  cohorts,  he  charged  them  not  to  stir  from  dia^  spot 
until  he' himself  should  come  to  them ;  and  then  ^ied  nmind 
VOL.  IV. - 1  I  i 

m  HisToair  OF  at3®«E.  [YM.ssr. 
the  rest  of  the  men  tp  tW  farther  aide  ’dT  The 
greater  pstrt  of  hts  auxiliary  troops  ivere  Sueaaetaiiiana,  aud 
these  he  ordered  to  advance  and  assatdt  the  wall.  The  Lace- 
tanianslttiowing  thdr  ams  and  standards,  and  remembering 
how  often  they  had,  diemselves,  with  impuni^,  committed 
e^rery  kind  of  outi^gt  and  insult  in  their  territory,  how  often 
defeated  and  routed  them  in  pished  b^tks,  hastily  thnsw 
open  a  gate,  and  all,  m'mie  body,  ru^ed  om  against  them. 
The  Suessetanim^  scarcely  stood  their  shout,  much  less  their 
onset;  and  the  consul,  on  seeing  diia  happen  as  he  had 
foreseen,  galloped  back  under  tlm  enemy’s  wall  fohistrohoits, 
brought  them  tpsiickly  to  that  side,  where  ^  was  silence 
and  solitude,  in  consequence  of  the  Lacetanians  having  sfi^ 
lied  out  on  die  Suessetanians,  led  them  into  the  town,  and 
took  poss^ssimi  of  eveiy  part  of  it  before  the  return  of  its 
people,  who,  having  nothkig  now  left  but  their  arms,  s6<m 
surrendered  themselves  also. 
XXI.  The  conqueror  marched  then^,  without  delays  to 
the  fort  of  Vergiutn,  which  being  now  converted,  almost  en« 
tirely,  into  a  recepUH:}e  dF  robbcis  and  plundereiU,  incurstons 
were  made  on  the  peaceable  pans  of  the  province.  One  of 
the  principal  inhsdiitaiits  deserted  put  ojf  the  place  to  the 
consul,  and  endeavoured  to  excuse  fiimself  and  his  tountry^ 
men  ;  aOeging,  that  **  the  management  ot  affairs  was  i^t  iu 
their  hands  ;  for  the  robbers,  having ‘gmned  admittance,  had 
reduced  foe  fort  entirely  under  their  own  podrer.”  The  con- 
art  ordered  him  totettim  home,  and  pretend  Kime  plausiMe 
reason  for  having  been  absent;  and  then,  **  when  he  sliortd 
see  hin^  advancing  to  the  walls,  and  the  rolfocrs' intent  on 
making  a  defence,  to  seiae  the  citadel  with  such  men  as  fa¬ 
voured  his  part}^”  This  was  executed  according  to  his  di¬ 
rections.  The  double  alarm,-  from  the  scaling  the 
walls  in  front,  and  the- citadel  being  seized  cm  foeir  rear,  at 
entirely  cortbunded  foe  barbariims.  Th^comul,  having 

moK  XXXIV* 

42^. 

taken  pf  the  place*  ordered,  t^t  tbc3^  who  ha#^ 
secured  the  ^ptadel,  should*  with  their  relations,  be  aa  at 
liberty*  and  enjoy  their  property ;  tl^  rest  of  the  natives^  |je 
commanded  the  qusestor  to  sell;  and  he  put  the-  robbers  to. 
death.  Having  restored  quiet,  he  settled  the  iron  and  silver 
mines  on  such  a  footing,  that  they  ^oduced  a  large  revenue^ 
and,,  in  consequence  of  the  regulations  then  made,  the  pro.-» 
vinee  daily  increased  in  riches.  On  account  of  these  services 
performed  in  Spam,  the  senate  decreed  a  supplication  for 
three  days.  Dating  this  summer,  die  other  consul,  Lucius 
Valerius  Flaccus,  fought  a  pitched  battle  with  a  body  of  tt« 
Bpians  in  Giml,  near  the  forest  <rf  Litinse,  and  gained  a  com¬ 
plete  victory.  We  arc  told,  that  eight  tiumsand  of  the 
Gauls  were  killed,  the  rest,  desisting  from  fm-tber  opposition* 
retired  to.  their  several  villages  and  lands.  During  the  re¬ 
mainder  of  the  sM^ason,  the  consul  kept  his  army  near  the  JPq, 
at  Placentia  and  Crpmon^  and  repaired  the  buddings  in  these 
cities,  which  had  been,  ruined  in  the  war.  ^ 
XXII.  While  the  affairs  of  Italy  an4  Spain  were  in  this 
postiwe,  Titus  Quindus  bad  spent  the  winter  in  Greece,  in 
such  a  manner,  that,  excepting  the  JEtolians,  who  neither  had 
gained  rewards  of  victory  adequate  to  their  hopes,  imr  were 
capable  of  being  long  contented  widi  a  state  of  quiet,  all 
Greece,  being  ip  full  enjoyment  of  the  blessings  of  peace  and 
liberty,  were  highly  pieced  wijth  their  present  stale ;  and 
they  admired  not  more  the  Jipman  geperal’s  bravery  in  arms, 
than  bis  temperance,  justice,  and  moderation  in  success.  And 
now,  a  decree  of  the  senate  was  brought  to  him,  containing 
a  denunciation  of  war  against  Nabis,  the  Lacedaemonian. 
On  reading  it.  Quin tt us  summoned  a  convention  of  deputies 
from  all  the  allied  states,  to  be  held,  on  a  certain  day,  at 
Corinth.  Accordingly,  many  persons  of  the  first  rank  came 
together,  from  all  quarters,  forming  a  very  full  assembly, 
from  which  evem  the,  dEtplians  were  not  absent.  He  then 

4^8 

HISTORY  dF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  55r. 
»Mresse^  Aetn  in  tliis  mminer: — Altbou^  the  Romans 
and  Greeks,  in  the  war  which  they  waged  against  Philip, 
were  united  in  affections  and  counsels,  yet  they  had  each 
their  separate  reasons  for  entering  into  it*.  He  bad  violated 
friendship  with  the  Romans ;  first,  by  aiding*  Our  enemies, 
the  Carthaginians  5  and  t^en,  by  attacking  our  allies  here : 
and,  towards  you,  his  ifondact  was  such,  that  even  if  we 
#cre  willing  to  forget  ctor  own  injuries,  thbse  offered  by  him 
t6  you  would  be  reason  sufficient  to  make  m  declare  war 
a^inst  him.  But  the  business  to  be  considered  this  day, 
rests  wholly  on  yourselves ;  for  the  subject  which  I  propose 
to  your  consideration  is,  whether  you  choose  to  suffer  Ar¬ 
gos,  which,  as  you  know,  has  been  seized  by  Nabis,  to  re¬ 
main  under  his  dominion ;  or  whether  you  judge  it  reasona¬ 
ble,  tirat  a  city  of  such  high  reputation  and  antiquity,  seated 
in  tiic  centre  of  Greece,  should  be  restored  to  liWrty,  4nd 
placed  in  the  same  state  with  the  rest  of  the  cities  of  Pelo¬ 
ponnesus  and  of  Greece.  This  question,  as  you  see,  merely 
respects  yourselves ;  it  concerns  not  tiie  Romans  in  any  de¬ 
gree,  e:acepting  so  far  as  the  one  city  being  left  in  subjection 
to  tyranny,  hinders  their  glory,  in  having  hberated  Greece, 
from  being  full  and  complete.  If,  however,  you  arc  not 
moved  hy  regard  for  that  city,  nor  by  the  example,  nor  by 
the  danger  of  the  contagion  of  that  evil  spreading  wider,  we, 
for  our  l^arts,  shall  rest  content.  On  this'  subject  I  desire 
your  opinions,  resolved  to  abide  by  whatever  the  majority 
of  you  shall  determine.” " 
XXIII.  When  the  Roman  general  had  ended  his  discourse, 
the  several  deputies  proceeded  to  give  their  opinions.  'The 
ambassador  of  the  Athenians  extolled,  to  the  utmost  of  his 
power,  and  expressed  the  greatest  gratitude  for  the  kindness 
of  the  Romans  towards  Greece,  in  havii^,  when  applied 
to  for  assistance,  brought  them  succours  a^te^l^ilip ;  and 
now,  without  being  applied  to,  vdluntarflyl^^^assistance 

BOOK  XXXfV. 

. 

B.a  195.] 
agj|fii5t  tht  tyrant  Nabis.”  He  at  the  same  time^  Severely 
c'dbsured  the  tonduict  of  some^  who-,  in  their  discotlrses^ 
‘‘  depreciated  those  kindnesses,  and  propagated  evH  surmises 
of  the.  future,  when  it  would  better  become  them  rather  to 
return  thanks  for  the  past.”  It  was  evident  that  this  was 
jw>inted  at  the  iEtoHans :  wherefore  Alexander,  deputy  of 
that  nation,  began  with  inveighing,  against  tl^  Athenians, 
who,  having  formerly  been  the  nmst  strenuous  supporters 
liberty,  now  betrayed  the  general  cause,  for  the  sake  of  re* 
commending  thctoselveS  by  flattery.  He  then  complahied 
that  “  the  Achseans,  formerly  soldiers  of  Philip,  and  la^‘ly, 
on  the  decline  of  his  fortune,  deserters  from  him,  bad  re¬ 
gained  possession  of  Corinth,  and  were  aiming  at  the  posses¬ 
sion  of  Argos  ;  while  the  iEtolians,  who  had  first  opposed 
their  arms  to  Philip,  who  had  always  been  allies  of  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  and  who  had  stipulated  by  treaty,  that,  on  the  Mace* 
doniafn  being  conquered,  the  lands  and  cities  should  be  theirs, 
were  defrauded  by  Echinus  and  Pharsalus.”  He  charged 
the  Romans  with  insincerity,  because  while  they  made 
empty  professions  of  establishing  universal  liberty,  they  held 
forcible  possession  of  Demetrias  and  Chalcis ;  though,  when 
Philip  hesitated  to  withdraw  his  garrisons  from  those  places, 
they  always  urged  against  him,'  that  the*  Grecians  would 
never  be  free,  while  Demetrias,  Cbalcis,  and  Corinth  were 
in  the  hands  of  others.  And  lastly,  that  they^named  Argos 
awd  Nabis  merely  as  a  pretext  for  remaining  in*  Greece,  and 
keeping  their  armies  there.  Let  them  cariy  home  their  le¬ 
gions  ;  and  the  iStolians  were  ready  to  undertake,  cither 
that  Nabis  should  voluntarily  evacuate  Argos,  on  terms  j  or 
they  would  compel  him,  by  force  of  arms,  to  comply  with 
the  unanimous  judgment  of  Greece.” 
XXIV.  This  arrogant  Speech  called  up,  first,  Aristasaus, 
praetor  olj^Sie  Allans,  who  said  ; — Forbid,  it  Jupiter,  su- 
premcly^pi^Jis^  great,  and  imperial  Juno,  the  tutelar  deity 

[Y.R.  557. 

430  HISTORY  OF  R0M£. 
of  Argos,  that  that  city  sl:^uld  lie  as  a  prixc,  bctweco  the 
l^aced^moDiaa  tyraot,  and  the  iEtolian  pjiuidcreins,  under 
such  unhappy  circuiastances,  that  its  being,  retaken  by  us 
should  be  productive  of  mote  calamitous  conseqi^nces  than 
its  capture  by  him.  Titus  Quintius,  the  sea  lying  between 
us,  does  not  secure  us  from  those  rollers ;  what  then  lyill 
l^ome  of  us,  should  they  procure  themselves  a  strong  hold 
m  the  centre  of  Pelo^imesus  ?  They  have  nothing  Grecian 
but  the  luiD^uage,  as  they  have  nothing  human  shape* 
hke  beaste  of  prey,  and  are,  in  their  manners 
rites,  more  brutally  savage  than  any  barbarians.  Wherefore 
Rmnans,  we  beseech  you,  not  only  to  recover  Argos  from 
Nid>is,  but  also  to  establish  the  affairs  of  Greec^  uu^  such  a 
fo^Vngf  a*  leave  these  countries  in  a  static J^V^curity 
from  the  robberies  of  the  -fitolians.”  The^rest  ameurring 
in  these  censures  on  the  jEtolians,  the  Roman,  general  said, 
that  ‘‘he  had,  himself,  intended  to  h^e  answered  them, 
but  that  he  perceived  all  so  highly  incensed  agaimt  those 
people,  that  the  general  resentment  required  rather,  to  be  ap¬ 
peased  than  irritated.  Satisfied,  therefore,  with  the  senti¬ 
ments  entertained  of  the  Romans,  smd  of  the  iEtolians,  he 
would  simply  put  this  question  ;  What  was  the  general  opi¬ 
nion  concerning  war  with  Nabis,  in  case  of  his  lousing  to 
restore  Argc»  to  the  Achasans  Every  onc/voted  for  war 
whereupon,  he  recommended  to  them,  to  send  in  dieir  shares 
of  auxiliary  troops,  f ach  state  in  proportion  to  its  ability.  He 
even  sent  an  ambassador  to  the  iEtolians  ;  rather  to  make 
them  disclose  their  sentiments,  in  which  , be  succeeded,  thaH; 
with  any  hope  of  obtaining  their  concurrence.  He  gave  or-? 
ders  to  the  military  tribunes,  to  bring. up  the  mnoy  from  Ela^ 
tia.  To  the  ambassadors  of  Aotiochus,  who  at  fois  time, 
propo^d  to  treat  qf  an  alliance,  he  he  could 
say  nothing  on  the  subject  in  the  absents  of  the  ten  amlm- 
sadors.  They  must  go  to  Rome,  and  apply  to  the  senate.” 

BOOK  XXXIV. 

431 

B.C.  t9$q 
XXV.  As  soon  as  the  troops  amved  fitm  Elaiift,  Qutn* 
tius  put  himself  at  dieir  head,  and  began  his  march  ^mnrd 
Argos.  Near  Glcose  he  was  met  by  the  prfetor,  Aristaetius, 
With  ten  thousand  Achaean  foot,  and  one  thousand  horse  ; 
and  having  joined  forces,  they  pitched  their  camp  srt  a  small 
distance  from  ’  thciw:e.  Next  day  they  marched  down  inta 
the  plains  of  Argos,  and  fixed  their  post  about  four  mites 
from  that  city.  The  commander  of  the  LaCedarmonian 
tison  was  #y thagoras,  the  tyrant^s  son-in4aw,  and  hk 
toller  ;  who,  oa  the  approach  of  the  Romans, 
guards  in  both  citadels,  for  Argos  has  two,  and  in 
other  place  tbiM;  was  commodious  for  defence,  or  exposed  to 
danger.  Itot,  while  thus  employed,  he  could  by  no  means 
di^emble  the  dread  inspired  by  the  approach  of  the  Romans ; 
and,  to  die  alarm  from  abrbad,  was  added,  an  insurrectiem 
within.  There  was  an  Argivc,  named  Damocles,  a  youth  of 
more  spirit  than  prudence,  who  held  conversations,  with  juti- 
per  persons^  on  a  design  of  expelling  the  garrison,  at  first  with 
the- precaution  of  imposing  an  oath,  but  afterwards,  through 
his  eager  dCsire  to  add  strength  to  the  conspiracy,  he  trusted 
to  people’s  sincerity  with  too  litdc  reserve.  White  he  was 
in  conference  widv  his  accomplices,  an  c^er,  sent  by  the 
commaudter  of  the  garrison  summ<med  him  to  appear  before 
him,  and  this  convinced  him  that  hte  plot  was  betrayed  $  on 
which,  exhorting  die  conspiialors^  who  were  present,  to  take 
arms  with  him,  rather  than  be  tprtured  toc  death,  he  went  on 
wkh  a  few  companions  towards  the  Porum,  crying  out  to  ail 
who  wished  the  preservation  of  the  state,  to  Jallow  him  :  he 
wouldlead  them  to  liberty,  and  assert  its  cause.  ,Hc  could 
prevail  on  none  to  join  him  ;  for  they  saw  no  prospect  of  any 
attainable  advantage,  and  much  less  any  support  on  which 
dicy  could  rely.  While  he  acclaimed  in  this  manner,  the 
Lacedttmoniai^  surrounded  him  and  his  party,  and  put  them 
to  deadi.  Bimiy  others  were  afterwards  seized,  the  greater 

43S 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  5^f. 
jMMt  of  whom  were  executed,  and  tHe  remaining  few  thrown 
into  prison.  During*^  the  following  night,  great  numbers,  let¬ 
ting  themselves  down  from  the  walls  by  ropes,  came  over  W 
the  Romans.  .  - 
XXVI.  These  men  affirmed,  that  if  the  Roman  army  had 
been  at  the  gai^,  the  commotion  would  imt  have  ended  with¬ 
out  effect ;  and  that,  if  the  camp  was  brought  nearer,  the 
townsmen  would  not  remain  inactive.  Quintius,  therefore, 
seat  some  horse nten  and  infantry  Ughdy  atccoulered^  who, 
mating  at  the  Cylarabis,  a  plate  of  less  than  three 
himdred  paces  from  the  city,  a  party  oll^^hwonians,  who 
saQied  out  of  a  gate,  engaged  them>  an# wMioat  match  diffi¬ 
culty  drove  them  back  into  the  town  ;  and  the  Roman  geuife- 
ral  encamped  on  the  very  spot  where  the  battle  was  fought* 
There  he  passed  ode  day,  watching  if  any  new  commotima 
might  arise  ;  but  perceiving  that  the  inhabitants  were  quite 
disheartened,  he  called  a  council  to  determine  whether  he 
should  lay  siege  to  Argos.  AU  the  deputies  of*  Greece,  e3fc- 
cept  Aristaenus,  were  of  one  opinion,  that,  as  tl^tcity  was  the 
sole  object  of  the  war,  with  it  die  liw  should  commence. 
This  was  by  rio  means  agreeable  to  Quintiu8,  but  he  listened, 
with  evident  marks  of  approbation,  to  Aristaenus,  arguing  in 
opposition  to  the  joirit  opibian  of  all  the  rest ;  while  be  him¬ 
self  added,  diat  as  the  War  was  undertaken  in  favour  of  the 
Argives,  against  the  tyrant,  what  could  be  less  proper  than 
to  icaiNS  the  enctny  jn  quiet,  and  lay  siege  to  Argos  ?  For  his 
part,  he  was  rcsidved  to  point  his  arms  against  the  main  ob¬ 
ject  of  the  war,lyac«dafemdn  and  Nabis.”  He  then  ^smissed 
the  meeting,  and  sent  out  light  armed  cohorts- to  collect  fear- 
age.  Whatei^rwm  ripe  in  Ac  adjacent  country,  they  reaped, 
and  brought  ;  and  what  was  green  they  trod  down 
and  destrn^ii^l^  being  of  use  to  the  tmemy* 
He  then  pfweeded  JParthenius,  and,  passing^hy 
Tyg«a,  encamped  su  Carj  ae,  where  hctwaiv 

BOOK  XXXIV. 

433 

B.C.  195.] 
cd  for  the  auxUiary  troops  olf  the  allies,  before  he  entered  the 
enemy’s  territory.  Fifteen  hundred  Macedonians  came  from 
Philip,  and  four  hundred  horsemexr  from  Thessaly  $  and  now 
the  Roman  general  had  no  occasion  to*wait  for  more  au:uli- 
aries,  having  abundance  ;  but  he  was  obliged  to  stop  for  sup¬ 
plies  of  provisions,  which  he  had  ordered  the  neighbouring 
cities  to  furnish.  He  was  joined  also  by  a  powerful  naval 
force  j  Lucius  Quintius  came  from  Leucas,  with  forty  ships, 
as  did  eighteen  ships  of  war  from  the  Rhodians  $  and  King 
Eumenes  was  cruisti^  among  the  Cyclades,  with  ten  decked 
ships,  thirty  barks^  and  smaller  vessels  of  various  sorts.  Of 
the  Laced^mcmians  themselves,  also,  a  great  many,  who  had 
been  driven  from  home  by  the  cruelty  of  the  tyrants,  came 
into  the  Roman  camp,  in  hopes  of  being  reinstated  in  their 
country ;  for  the  number  was  very  great  of  those  who  had 
been  banished  by  the  several  despots,  during  many  genera¬ 
tions,  •since  they  first  got  Lacedaemon  into  their  power.  The 
principal  person  among  the  exiles  was  Agesipolis,  to  whom 
the  crown  of  Lacedaemon  belonged  in  right  of  his  birth  ;  but 
who  had  been  driven  out  when  an  infant  by  Lycurgus,  after 
the  death  of  Cleomenes,  the  first  tyrant  of  Lacedaemon. 
XXVII.  Although  Nabis  was  inclosed  between  such  pow¬ 
erful  armaments  on  land  and  sea,  and  who,  on  a  comparadve 
view  of  his  own  and  his  enemy’s  strength,  could  scarc^^ 
conceive  any  degree  of  hope ;  yet  neglected  not  preparii^ 
for  a  defence,  but  brought,  from  Crete,  a  thousand 
young  men  of  that  country,  in  addition  to  a  thousand^^^n 
he  had  before  ;  he  had,  besides,  under  arms,  three  tl^Nisaad 
mercenary  soldiers,  and  ten  thousand  of  his  countrymcSi,  witli 
the  peasants,  who  were  vassals  to  the  proprietors  of  lan^^ 
He  fortified  the  city  with  a  ditch  and  rampart ;  and,  to  pre¬ 
vent  any  intestine  commotion,  curbed  the  people’s  spirits  by 
»  These  were  the  Helotcs,  kept  in  a  state  of  siaveiy. 
VOL.  IV. — K  K  k 

434 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  55r. 

fear,  punishing  them  with  extreme  severity.  As  he  could 
not  hope  for  good  wishes  towards  a  tyrant,  and  had  reason 
to  suspect  some  designs  against  his  person,  he  drew  out  all 
bis  forces  to  a  held  called  Dromos  (the  course),  and  ordered 
the  Lacedaemonians  to  be  called  to  an  assembly  without  their 
arms.  He  then  formed  a  line  of  armed  men  round  the  place 
where  they  were  assembled,  observing  briefly, ‘‘  that  he  ought 
to  be  excused,  if,  at  such  a  juncture,  he  feared,  and  guarded 
against  every  thing  that  might  happen ;  and  that,  if  the  present 
state  of  affairs  subjected  any  to  suspicion,  it  was  their  advan¬ 
tage  to  be  prevented  from  attempting  any  design,  rather  than 
to  be  punished  for  the  attempt :  he  therefore  intended,”  he 
said,  to  keep  certain  persons  in  custody,  until  the  storm, 
which  then  threatened,  should  blow  over ;  and  would  dis¬ 
charge  them  as  soon  as  the  country  should  be  clear  of  the 
enemy,  from  whom  the  danger  would  kss,  when  proper 
precaution  was  taken  against  internal  treachery.”  He  then 
ordered  the  names  of  about  eighty  of  the  principal  young 
men  to  be  called  over,  and  as  each  answered  to  his  name,  he 
put  them  in  custody.  On  the  night  following  they  were  all 
put  to  death.  Some  of  the  Ilotans,  or  Helotes,  a  race  of  rus¬ 
tics,  who  have  been  vassals  even  from  the  earliest  times,  be- 
in^  charged  with  an  intention  to  desert,  they  were  driven 
V^h  stripes  through  all  the  streets,  and  put  to  death.  The 
terror  which  this  excited  so  enervated  the  multitude,  that 
thje|r,.gave  up  all  thoughts  of  any  attempt  to  effect  a  revolu- 
He  kept  his  forces  within  the  fortifications,  know- 
he  was  not  a  match  for  the  enemy  in  the  field, 
Insides,  he  was  afraid  to  leave  the  city,  while  all  men’s 
minds  were  in  a  state  of  such  suspense  and  uncertainty. 
XXVIII.  Quintius,  having  finished  every  necessary  pre¬ 
paration,  decamped,  and,  on  the  second  day,  came  to  Sella- 
sia,  on  the  river  (Enus,  on  the  spot  where  it  is  said  Antigo- 
nus,  King  of  Macedonia,  fought  a  pitched  battle  with  Cleo- 

BOOK  XXXIV. 

455 

B.C.  195.] 
manes,  t3rrant  of  Laced^mon.  Being  told,  that  the  ascent 
from  thence  was  through  a  difficult  and  narrow  pass,  he  nsade 
a  short  circuit  by  the  mountains,  sending  forward  a  party  to 
make  a  road,  and  came,  by  a  broad  and  open  passage,  to  the 
river  Eurotas,  where  it  flows  almost  immediately  under  the 
walls  of  the  city.  Here,  the  tyrant’s  auxiliary  troops  attack* 
ed  the  Romans,  while  they  were  forming  their  camp  ;  toge¬ 
ther  with  Quintius  himself,  (who,  with  a  division  of  cavalry 
and  light  troops,  had  advanced  beyond  the  rest,)  and  threw 
all  into  fright  and  confusion  ;  for  they  had  not  expected  any 
impe^ment  on  their  whole  march,  they  had  met  no  kind  of 
molestation;  passing,  as  it  were,  through  the  territory  of 
friends.  The  disorder  lasted  a  considerable  time,  the  infan¬ 
try  calling  for  aid  on  the  cavalry,  and  the  cavalry  on  the  in¬ 
fantry,  each  relying  on  the  others  more  than  on  themselves. 
At  length,  the  foremost  ranks  of  the  legions  came  up  ;  and 
no  sooner  had  the  cohorts  of  the  vanguard  taken  part  in  the 
fight,  than  those,  who  had  lately  spread  terror  round  them, 
were  driven  back  into  the  city.  The  Romans,  retiring  so  far 
from  the  wall  as  to  be  out  of  the  reach  of  weapons,  stood 
there  for  some  time,  in  battle  array,  and  then,  none  of  the 
enemy  coming  out  against  them,  retired  to  their  camp.  Next 
day  Quintius  led  on  his  army  in  regular  order  along  the  bank 
of  the  river,  passed  the  city,  to  the  foot  of  the  mountain  of 
Menelaus,  the  legionary  cohorts  marching  in  front,  and  the 
cavalry  and  light-infantry  bringing  up  the  rear.  Nabis  kept 
his  mercenary  troops,  on  whom  he  placed  his  whole  reliance, 
in  readiness,  and  drawn  up  in  a  body,  within  the  walls,  in¬ 
tending  to  attack  the  rear  of  the  enemy  ;  and,  as  soon  as  the 
last  of  their  troops  passed  by,  these  rushed  out  of  the  town, 
from  several  places  at  once,  with  as  great  fury  as  the  day  be¬ 
fore.  The  rear  was  commanded  by  Appius  Claudius,  who 
having,  beforehand,  prepared  his  men  to  expect  such  an  event, 
that  they  might  not  be  disconcerted  when  it  happened,  in- 

456 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y,R.55r, 
stantly  made  his  troops  face  about,  and  presented  an  entire 
front  to  the  enemy.  A  regular  engagement,  therefore,  took 
place,  as  if  two  complete  lines  had  encountered,  and  it  lasted 
a  considerable  time  ;  but,  at  length,  Nabis’s  troops  betook 
themselves  to  Sight,  which  would  have  been  attended  with 
less  dismay  and  danger,  if  they  had  not  been  closely  pressed 
by  the  Achseans,  who  were  well  acquainted  with  the  ground. 
These  made  dreadful  havock,  and  dispersing  them  entirely, 
obliged  the  greater  part  to  throw  away  their  arms.  Qnintius 
encamped  near  Amyclae,  and,  afterwards,  when  he  had  utter¬ 
ly  laid  waste  all  the  pleasant  and  thickly  inhabited  country 
round  the  city,  the  enemy  not  venturing  out  of  the  gates,  he 
removed  his  camp  to  the  river  Eurotas,  From  thence,  he 
sent  out  parties  that  ravaged  the  valley  lying  under  Taygc- 
tus,  and  the  country  reaching  as  far  as  the  sea. 
XXIX.  About  the  same  time,  Lucius  Quintius  got  posses- 
Sian  of  the  towns  on  the  sea-coast ;  of  some  by  their  volun¬ 
tary  surrender,  of  others,  by  fear  or  force.  Thpn,  learning 
that  the  Lacedaemonians  made  Gythium  the  repository  of  all 
their  naval  stores,  and  that  the  Roman  camp  was  at  no  great 
distance  from  the  sea,  he  resolved  to  attack  that  town  wHh 
his  whole  force.  It  was,  at  that  place  of  considerable 
strength ;  well  furnished  with  great  numbers  of  native  in¬ 
habitants  and  settlers  from  other  parts,  and  with  every  kind 
of  warlike  stores.  Very  seasonably  for  Quintius,  at  th® 
commencement  of  an  enterprise  of  no  easy  nature.  King 
Eumenes  and  the  Rhodian  fleet  joined  him.  The  vast  mul¬ 
titude  of  seamen,  collected  out  of  the  three  fleets,  finished  in 
a  few  days  all  the  works  requisite  for  the  siege  of  a  city  so 
strongly  fortified,  both  on  the  land  side  and  on  that  next  the 
sea.  Covered  galleries  were  soon  brought  up^  0m  wall  was 
undermined,  and,  at  the  same  time,  shaken  witih  'battering 
rams.  By  the  frequent  shocks  given  with  these,  one  of  the 
towers  was  thrown  down,  and,  by  its  fall,  the  adjoining  wall 

BOOK  XXXIV, 

4sr 

B.C,  195,3 
on  each  side  was  laid  flat.  The  Romans,  on  this,  attempted 
to  force  in,  both  on  the  side  next  the  port,  to  which  the  ap¬ 
proach  was  more  level  than  to  the  rest,  hoping  to  divert  the 
enemy’s  attention  from  the  more  open  passage,  and, at  the  same 
time,  to  enter  the  breach  caused  by  the  falling  of  the  wall. 
They  were  near  effecting  their  design,  of  penetrating  into  the 
town,  when  the  assault  was  suspended  by  a  proposal  of  a 
capitulation  ;  which,  however,  came  to  nothing.  Dexagori* 
das  and  Gorgopas  commanded  there,  with  equal  authority. 
Dexagoridas  had  sent  to  the  Roman  general  the  proposal  of 
surrendering,  and,  after  the  time  and  the  mode  of  proceed¬ 
ing  had  been  agreed  on,  he  was  slain  as  a  traitor  by  Gorgopas, 
and  the  defence  of  the  city  was  maintained  with  redoubled 
vigour  by  this  single  commander.  The  farther  prosecution  of 
the  siege  would  have  been  much  nfore  difficult,  had  not  Ti¬ 
tus  Quintius  arrived  with  a  body  of  four  thousand  chosen 
men.  He  showed  his  army  in  order  of  battle,  on  the  brow 
of  a  hill  at  a  small  distance  from  the  city  ;  and,  on  the  other 
side,  Lucius  Quintius  plied  the  enemy  hard  with  his  engines, 
both  on  the  quarter  of  the  sea,  and  of  the  land  ;  on  which 
Gorgopas  was  compelled  to  follow  the  plan,  which,  in  the 
case  of  another,  he  had  punished  with  death.  After  stipu¬ 
lating  for  liberty  to  catty  away  the  soldiers  whom  he  had 
there  as  a  garrison,  he  surrendered  the  city  to  Quintius.  Pre¬ 
vious  to  the  surrender  of  Gythium,  Pythagoras,  who  com¬ 
manded  at  Argos,  left  that  place,  intrusting  the  defence  of 
the  city  to  Timocrates  of  Pellene  ;  and,  with  a  thousand  mer¬ 
cenary  soldiers,  and  two  thousand  Argives,  came  to  Lacedae¬ 
mon  and  joined  Nabis, 
XXX.  Although  Nabis  had  been  greatly  alarmed  at  the 
first  arrival  of  the  Roman  fleet,  and  the  loss  of  the  towns  on 
the  seeh^ast,  yet,  as  long  as  Gythium  was  held  by  hts  troops, 
the  small  degree  of  hope,  which  that  afforded,  had  helped  to 
quiet  his  apprehensions  ;  but,  when  he  heard  that  Gythium 

438 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  SS7. 

too  was  given  up  to  the  Romans,  and  saw  he  had  no 
room  for  any  kind  of  hope  on  the  land,  where  every  place 
round  was  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  and  that  he  was  totally 
excluded  from  the  sea,  he  found  himself  under  the  necessity 
of  yielding  to  fortune.  He  first  sent  an  officer,  with  a  wand 
of  parley,  into  the  Roman  camp,  to  learn  whether  permission 
would  be  given  to  send  ambassadors.  This  being  consented 
to,  Pythagoras  came  to  the  general,  with  no  other  commis* 
sion  than  to  propose  a  conference  between  that  commander 
and  the  tyrant.  A  council  was  summoned  on  the  proposal, 
and  every  one  present  agreeing  in  opinion,  that  a  conference 
should  be  granted,  a  time  and  place  were  appointed.  They 
came,  with  moderate  escorts,  to  some  hills  in  the  interjacent 
ground  ;  and  leaving  their  cohorts  there,  in  posts  open  to  the 
view  of  both  parties,  .th#y  went  down  to  the  place  of  meet¬ 
ing  f  Nabis  attended  by  a  select  party  of  his  life-guards  ; 
Quintiusby  his  brother,  King  Eumenes  ;  Sosilaus,  the  Rho¬ 
dian  ;  Aristsenus,  praetor  of  the  Achaeans,  and  a  few  military 
tribunes. 
XXXI.  Then  the  tyrant,  having  the  choice  given  him  to 
speak  either  before  or  after  the  Roman,  began  thus :  Titus 
Quintius,  and  you  who  arc  present ;  if  I  could  collect,  from 
xny  own  reflections,  the  reason  of  your  having  either  declared, 
or  actually  made  war  against  me,  I  should  have  waited  in  si¬ 
lence  the  issue  of  m\  destiny.  But  in  the  present  state  of 
things,  I  could  not  repress  my  desire  of  knowing,  before  lam 
ruined,  the  cause  for  which  my  ruin  is  resolved  on.  And  in 
truth,  if  you  were  such  men  as  the  Carthaginians  are  repre¬ 
sented, — men  who  considered  the  obligation  of  faith,  pledged 
in  alliances^  as  in  no  degree  sacred,  I  should  not  wonder,  if 
you  were  the  less  scrupulous  with  respect  to  your  conduct 
towards  me.  But,  instead  of  that,  when  1  look  at  you,  I  per¬ 
ceive  that  you  are  Romans  :  men  who  allow  treaties  to  be 
the  mo^t  solemn  of  religious  acts,  and  faith,  pledged  therein, 

BOOK  XXXIV, 

439 

B.C,  195.] 
the  strongest  of  human  ties.  Hien,  when  I  look  back  at  my¬ 
self,  I  am  confident  I  am  one  who,  as  a  member  of  the  com¬ 
munity,  am^  in  common  with  the  rest  of  the  Lacedaemonians, 
included  in  a  treaty  subsisting  with  you,  of  very  ancient  date ; 
and  likewise  have,  lately,  during  the  war  with  Philip,  con¬ 
cluded  anew,  in  my  own  name,  a  personal  friendship  and  al¬ 
liance  with'  you.  But  I  have  violated  and  cancelled  that 
treaty,  by  holding  possession  of  the  city  of  Argos.  In  what 
manner  shall  I  defend  this  ?  By  the  consideration  of  the  fact, 
or  of  the  time  ?  The  consideration  of  the  fact  furnishes 
me  with  a  twofold  defence :  for,  in  the  first  place,  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  an  invitation  from  the  inhabitants  themselves,  and 
of  their  voluntary  act  of  surrender,  I  accepted  the  possession 
of  that  city,  and  did  not  seize  it  by  force.  In  the  next  place, 
I  accepted  it,  when  the  city  was  in  league  with  Philip,  not  in 
alliance 'with  you.  Then  the  consideration  of  the  time  ac¬ 
quits  me,  for  this  reason  :  that  when  I  was  in  actual  posses¬ 
sion  of  Argos,  you  entered  into  an  alliance  with  me,  and  sti¬ 
pulated  that  I  should  send  you  aid  against  Philip,  not  that  I 
should  withdraw  my  garrison  from  that  city.  In  this  dispute, 
therefore,  so  far  as  it  relates  to  Argos,  I  have  unquestiona¬ 
bly  the  advantage,  both  from  the  equity  of  the  proceeding,  as 
I  gained  possession  of  a  city  which  belonged  not  to  you,  but 
to  your  enemy  ;  and  as  I  gained  it  by  its  own  voluntary  act, 
and  not  by  forcible  compulsion  ;  and  also  from  your  own  ac¬ 
knowledgment  :  since,  in  the  articles  of  our  alliance,  you  left 
Argos  to  me.  But  then,  the  name  of  tyrant,  and  my  conduct, 
are  strong  objections  against  me :  that  I  call  forth  slaves  to 
a  state  of  freedom  ;  that  I  carry  out  the  indigent  part  of  the 
populace,  and  give  them  settlements  in  lands.  With  respect 
to  the  title  by  which  I  am  styled,  I  can  answer  thus :  That, 
let  me  be  what  I  may,  I  am  the  same  now,  that  I  was,  at  the 
time  when  you  yourself,  Titus  Quintius,  concluded  an  alli¬ 
ance  with  me.  I  remember,  that  I  was  then  styled  King  by 

440 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  557. 

you ;  now,  I  see^  I  am  called  tyrant.  If,  therefore,  I  had 
since  altered  the  style  of  my  office,  I  might  be  charge^ffile  with 
fickleness :  as  you  chose  to  alter  it^  the  charge  falls  on  you. 
As  to  what  relates  to  the  augmenting  the  number  of  the 
populace,  by  giving  liberty  to  slaves,  and  the  distribution  of 
lands  to  the  needy :  on  this  head  too,  I  might  defend  myself 
on  the  ground  of  a  reference  to  the  time  of  the  facts  charged. 
These  measures,  of  what  complexion  soever  they  are,  I  had 
practised  before  you  formed  friendship  with  me,  and  received 
my  aid  in  the  war  against  Philip.  But,  if  I  did  the  same 
things,  at  this  moment,  I  would  not  say  to  you,  how  did  I 
thereby  injure  you,  or  violate  the  friendship  subsisting  be- 
tween  us  ?  but,  I  would  insist,  that  in  so  doing,  I  acted  agree¬ 
ably  to  the  practice  and  institutions  of  my  ancestors.  Do  not 
estimate  what  is  done  at  Lacedaemon,  by  the  standard  of  your 
own  laws  and  constitution.  I  need  not  compare  every  par¬ 
ticular  ;  you  are  guided  in  your  choice  of  a  horseman,  by  the 
quantity  of  his  property  ;  in  your  choice  of  a  foot  soldier,  by 
the  quantity  of  his  property ;  and  your  plan  is,  that  a  few 
should  abound  in  wealth,  and  that  the  body  of  the  people 
should  be  in  subjection  to  them.  Our  law-giver  did  not 
choose  that  the  administration  of  government  should  be  in 
the  hands  of  a  few,  such  as  you  call  a  senate  ;  or  that  this  or 
that  order  of  citizens  should  have  a  superiority  over  the  rest: 
but  he  proposed,  by  equalizing  the  property  and  dignity  of 
all,  to  multiply  the  number  of  those  who  were  to  bear  arms 
for  their  country.  I  acknowledge  that  I  have  enlarged  on 
these  matters,  beyond  what  consists  with  the  conciseness  cus¬ 
tomary  with  my  countrymen,  and  that  the  sum  of  the  whole 
might  be  comprised  in  few  words :  that,  since  I  first  c<^m- 
menced  a  friendship  with  you,  I  have  given  you  no  just 
cause  of  displeasure.^’ 
XXXII.  The  Roman  general  answered :  We  never  con¬ 
tracted  any  friendship  or  alliance  with  you,  but  with  Pelops, 

^  m&K  xx^- 

441 

B,C.  195.] 
the  rig^  and  lawful  HKiag  df  Lac^dfl^moli  ;  whdM 
wiitle  CarthagtsdaQ^  Gallic,  and  other  wars,  ^cceeding 
oac  «iotiier,  u$  coBstantfy^emplojred,  the  tyrants,  who 
him  held  Lacedwmoh  under  forced  sid>jecticm,  usurp^^ 
iato  their  own  handa,  as  did  you  also  during  the  kte  way 
mth  Macedonia*  For  what  coaid  be  less  c<mi^ent  widi 
propriety,  thaa  that  we,  who  were  waging  waragaimt  Piwlip, 
in  ^voor  td’the  liberty  cd  Greece,  shouW  ccmtiact  friendship 
wkfa  a  tyratni,  and  a  tyrant  who  carried  his  violence  and  cru¬ 
el^  towards  his  subjects  to  as  great  an  excess  as  any  that 
ever  existed.  But,  even  supposing  that  you  had  not  either 
seized  or  held  Argofs  by  iniquitous  means,  it  wookl  be  in* 
cumbent  on  us,  when  we  are  giving  lib^y  to  nil  Greece,  to 
reinsuute  JUacedwmon  also  in  its  ancient  freedom,  nnd  the  en¬ 
joyment  of  its  own  laws,  which  you  jtmt  now  spoke  of,  as  if 
you  were  another  Lycurgus.  Shad  we  tahe  pains  to  make 
Philipps  garrisons  evacuate  Ta^us  mid^ar^Iii;  and  shall 
we  leave  jLacedsemon  and  Argos,  those  two  most  illustrious 
cides,  fonnerly  tl^  lights  of  Greece,  wider  your  feet,  that 
their  continuance  in  bondage  may  tomish  our  title  of  delive* 
rers  of  Greece?  But  the  Argives  took;  part  with  Philip:  we 
excuse  you  from  taking  any  eemeem  in  that  cause,  so  that 
you  need  not  he  angry  with  diem  on  our  behalf.  We  have 
received  sufficient  proof^  that  the  guilt  of  that  proceeding  is 
chargeabfe  on  two  <mly,  or,  lU  most,  three  per$oi»,  and  not 
on  ^  state  ;  just,  indeed,  as  ut  tte  case  of  the  invitation  gi¬ 
ven  to  you  and  to  your  army,  ami  your  reception  in  the  town, 
not  one  step  was  taken  by  public  authority.  We  know  that 
the  Thessalians,  Phocians,  and  Locrians,  to  a^man,  unani¬ 
mously  joined  in  espousing  the  cause  of  Philip  ;  and  when, 
notwithstanding  this,  we  have  given  liberty  to  all  the  rest  of 
Greece,  how,  I  ask  you,  canycm  suppose  we  shall  conduct  our¬ 
selves  towards  the  Argives,  who  are  acquitted  of  havingpt^ 
liciy  authorised  your  mtsctmduct  ?  You  said,  that  your  iuvi* 
VOL.  IV. - L  L  1 

443 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  557* 

ting  slav^  to  Ubertjr^  and  the  d^tributicm  of  lands  among  the 
indigent,  were  objected  to  you  a$  crimes ;  and  crimes,  surely, 
they  are,  of  no  small  magnitude.  But  what  are  they,  in  com¬ 
parison  with  those  atrocious  deeds,  that  daily  pcrpetnUed 
by  you  and  your  adherents,  in  continual  successimi  ?  Show 
us  a  free  assembly  of  the  people,  cither  at  Argos  or  Lacedae¬ 
mon,  if  you  wish  to  hear  a  true  recitid  of  the  crimes  of  the 
most  abandoned  tyranny.  To  omit  dl^cHher  instances  of  older 
date,  what  a  massacre  did  your  aon-in-law,  P3Khagoras, 
make  at  Argos,  almost  before  my  eyes  ?  What  another  did 
you  yourself  perpetrate,  when  I  was  on  the  borders  of  Laco¬ 
nia  ?  Now,  give  orders,  that  the  persons  whom  you  took  out 
of  the  midst  of  an  s^sembly,  and  committed  to  prison,  after 
declaring,  in  the  hearing  of  all  your  counuymen,  that  you 
would  keep  them  in  custody,  be  produced  in  their  chains,  that 
their  wretched  parents  may  know  that  they  are  alive,  and 
have  no  cause  for  their  mourning.  Well,  but  you  say,  though 
all  these  things  were  so,  Romans,  how  do  they  cemeem  you  ? 
Can  you  say  this  to  the  deliverers  of  Greece  ?  m  people  who 
crossed  the  sea  in  order  to^  deliver  it,  and  have  maintained  a 
war,  on  sea  and  land,  to  effect  its  deliverance  ?  Still  you  tell 
us,  you  have  not  directly  violated  the  alliance,  or  the  friend¬ 
ship  established  between  us.  How  many  instances  must  I 
produce  of  your  having  done  so  ?  But  I  will  not  go  into  a 
long  detail :  I  will  bring  the  matter  to  a  ^ort  issue.  By 
what  acts  is  friendship  violated  ?  Most  effectually  by  these 
two  ;  by  treating  our  friends  as  foes,  and  by  uniring  yourself 
with  our  enemies.  Now,  which  of  riiese  has  not  been  done 
by  you  ?  For  Messene,  which  had  been  united  to  us  in  friend¬ 
ship,  by  one  and  the  same  bond  of  alliance  with  Lacedsemon, 
you,  while  professing  yourself  our  ally,  reduced  to  subjection 
by  force  of  arms,  though  you  knew  it  was  in  alliance  with 
us  ;  and  you  contracted  with  Philp,  our  professed  enemy,  not 
only  an  alliance,  but  even  an  affinity,  through  the  intervention 

BOOK  XXXIV. 

BX.195.3 

44^ 

of  his  general,  Philocles ;  and  waging  actual  war  us, 
with  your  piratical  ships,  you  made  the  sea  round  Malea  un¬ 
safe,  and  you  captured  and  slew  more  Roman  citizens  almost, 
than  Philtp  himself ;  and  it  was  less  dangerous  for  our  ships 
to  bring  supplies  for  our  armies,  by  the  coast  of  Macedonia, 
than  by  the  promontory  of  Malea.  Cease,  therefore,  to  vaunt 
your  good  faith,  and  the  obligations  of  treaties  ;  and,  drop¬ 
ping  your  affectation  of  popular  sentiments,  speak  as  a  tyrant, 
and  as  an  enemy.” 
XXXIII.  Aristaenus  then  began,  at  first,  to  advise,  and 
afterwards  even  to  beseech  Nabis,  while  it  was  yet  in  his 
power,  and  while  the  state  of  allairs  permitted,  to  consider 
what  was  best  for  himself  and  his  interests.  He  then  men¬ 
tioned  the  names  of  several  tyrants  in  the  neighbouring 
states  who  had  resigned  their  authority,  and  restored  liberty 
to  their  people,  and  afterwards  lived  to  old  age,  not  only  in 
safety,  but  with  the  respect  of  their  countrymen.  After  diis 
conversation  had  passed,  the  approach  of  night  broke  up  the 
conference.  Next  day  Nabis  said,  that  he  was  willing  to  cede 
Argos,  and  withdraw  his  garrison,  since  such  was  the  desire 
of  the  Romans,  and*  to  deliver  up  the  prisoners  and  desert- 
ere  j  and  if  they  demanded  any  thing  farther,  he  requested 
that  they  would  set  it  down  in  writing,  that  he  might  delibe¬ 
rate  on  it  with  his  friends.  Thus  the  tyrant  gained  dme  lor 
consultation,  and  Quintius  also,  on  his  part,  called  a  council, 
to  which  he  summoned  the  chiefs  of  the  allies.  The  great¬ 
est  part  were  of  opinion,  that  ‘‘  they  ought  to  persevere  in 
the  war  until  the  tyrant  should  be  stripped  of  all  power ; 
otherwise  the  liberty  of  Greece  would  never  be  secure.  That 
it  would  have  been  much  better  never  to  have  entered  on  the 
war,  than  to  drop  it  after  it  was  begun  ;  for  this  would  be  a 
kind  of  approbation  of  his  tyrannical  usurpation,  and  which 
would  establish  him  more  firmly,  as  giving  the  countenance 
of  the  Roman  people  to  his  ill- acquired  authority  j  while  thq 

444 

HisTOBT  or  mmE. 

[Y*R.  557. 
momH  <|^kyy  spkk  mmy  in  ot^r  slMte%  to  plot 
a^inst  the  liber^  ^  dieir  countrymeia.’’  The  wishca^  of  the 
gcBeiry  himself  mther  to  for  he  snvr^  that,  as 
the  enemy  wm  ahu^  up  in  the  town,  tKodmg  relnamed  but  a 
diege,  and  that  mast  be  very  tedious.  For  it  was  not  Gy* 
^um,  that  they  must  besiege,  thou^  eren  dtat  place  had 
been  gained  by  capitulation,  net  by  assault ;  hut  Lac^«mon, 
a  city  mcmt  powerful  in  men  and  arms.  The  only  hope  which 
they  could  have  formed,  was,  that,  on  the  first  approach  of 
their  army,  dtssenstons  and  insurrections  nugbt  have  been 
raised  within,  but,  diough  the  standards  had  been  seen  to  ad* 
vance  almost  to  the  gates,  not  one  person  had  stirred.  To 
this  he  added,  that  ViUius  the  andbassador,  retutning  from 
Antiochm,  brought  intelligence,  that  nothing  but  war  was  to 
be  expected  from  that  quartet ;  and  thjrt  the  King  had  come 
over  into  Europe  with  a  much  mme  {K>werfal  %armament  by 
sea  and  land  than  bcf(are:  .  Now,  if  the  army  shoidd  be  ea* 
gaged  in  the  siege  of  Iraced^^on,  with  What  other  forces 
could  the  war  be  maintained  against  a  king  of  bis  great  pow* 
cr  and  strength  These  arguments  he  urged  of^nly ;  but 
he  was  influenced  by  another  motive,  which  he  did  iK>t  avow, 
bis  anxiety,  lest  one  of  the  new  consuls  should  be  appointed 
to  the  province  of  Greece  |  and  then  the  honour  of  termina* 
ting  the  war,  in  which  be  had  proceeded  so  far,  must  be 
yielded  to  a  successor. 
XXXIV*  Finding  that  he  could  not,  by  opposition  make 
Miy  alteration  in  the  sentiments  of  the  allies,  by  pretending 
to  go  over  to  their  opinion,  he  led  them  all  into  a  concurrence 
m  his  scheme.  “  Be  it  so,**  said  he,  **  and  may  success  at¬ 
tend  us :  let  us  lay  siege  to  LacedBenmu,  mnee  Aat  is  your 
choice.  However,  as  a  business  so  slow  in  its  pr^ress,  as 
you  know  the  besieging  of  cities  to  be,  very  often  wears  out 
the  patience  of  the  besiegers,  sooner  than  that  cf  the  be¬ 
sieged,  you  ought,  before  you  proceed  a  step  farther,  to  con- 

B.C.  195.]  BOOJC  XXXIVv 
sider^  diat  we  mu^  pass  the  wimter  uader  the  wdHs  ^  Laoe* 
dsemofi.  If  this  tedious  eoteiprize  btought  only  toU^lind 
danger,  I  wou^  recommend  to  you,  to  prepare  your  minds 
and  bodies  to  suf^rt  these.  But  in  the  present  case,  vmt 
estpenses  also  wM  be  lequisite  for  the  construction  of  woii^s, 
for  machine  and  engines,  sufficient  ,f<w  the  siege  of  so  great 
a  city,  and  for  procuring  stc»es  of  provisions  for  the  wmier 
to  serve  you  and  us:  th^efore,  to  prevent  your  being  sud¬ 
denly  ^<Bsconcerted,  or  ^amefuUy  deserting  an  enterprize 
which  you  had  engaged  in,  £  think  it  will  be  necessary  for 
you  to  write  ho^fte  to  your  respective  states,  and  learn  wlmt 
degree  of  spirit  and  of  strength  each  pos^^ses.  Of  auxiliary 
troops  I  have  sufficient  number,  and  to  spare  ;  but  the  more 
numerous  we  are,  the  more  numerous  will  be  our  wan^. 
The  country  of  the  enemy  has  nothing  left  but  the  nak<^ 
soil.  Besides,  the  winter  is  at  hand,  which  will  render  it  dif¬ 
ficult  to  convey  ii^at  we  may  stand  in  need  of  from  distant 
places.’^  This  speech  first  turned  their  thoughts  to  the  domes¬ 
tic  evils  prevailing  in  their  several  states  ;  the  indolence  of 
those  who  remained  at  home ;  the  envy  and  misrepresenta¬ 
tions  to  which  those  who  served  abroad  were  liable  ;  the  dif¬ 
ficulty  of  procuring  unanimity  among  men  in  a  state  of  free¬ 
dom  ;  the  em^iness  of  the  public  treasury,  and  people’s 
Imckwardness  to  contribute  out  of  their  private  property. 
These  considerations  wrought  such  a  sudden  change  in  their 
inclinations,  that  they  gave  full  power  to  the  general,  to  do 
wh^ver  he  judged  conducive  to  the  general  interest  of  the 
Roman  people  and  their  allies. 
XXXV.  Then  Quintius,  consulting  only  his  iieutenant- 
gener^s  and  military  tribunes,  drew  up  the  following  condi¬ 
tions  on  which  peace  should  be  made  with  Nabis :  That 
there  should  be  a  suspimsion  of  arms  for  six  months,  between 
Nabis  on  one  part,  and  the  Romans,  King  Eumencs,  and  the 
Rhodians  cm  the  other.  That  Titus  Quintius  and  Nabis 

^  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.SSy, 
should  immediately  send  ambassadots  Rome,  in  order 
that  the  peace  might  be  ratified  hf  mithorHy  of  the  senate. 
That,  whatever  day  a  written  copy  of  these  conditions  should 
be  delivered  to  Nabis^  on  that  day  shoidd  ^  armistice  com« 
mence  ;  and,  witiiin  ten  days  after,  his  garriscms  shmild  be 
withdmwn  from  Argcw,  and  all  other  towns  in  the  territory 
of  the  Argives  ;  all  which  towns  should  be  entirely  evacua¬ 
ted,  restored  to  freedom,  and  in  that  state  delivered  to  the 
Romans.  That  im  slave,  whether  belonging  to  the  King,  the 
public,  or  a  private  pcrsmi,  be  removed  out  of  any  of  tiiem  ; 
and  if  any  l»d  been  removed  before,  that  ^y  be  faithfully 
restored  to  their  owners.  That  he  should  give  op  the  ships, 
which  he  had  takm  from  the  maritime  states  ;  and  shouy 
not  have  any  cdier  than  two  barks  ;  and  these  to  be  naviga¬ 
ted  with  no  more  than  sixteen  oars.  That  he  should  restore 
to  all  the  states,  in  alliance  with  the  Roman  peojde,  the  pri¬ 
soners  and  deserters  in  his  hands ;  and  to  the  Messenians, 
all  the  effects  that  could  be  discovered,  and  which  the  owners 
could  prove  to  be  their  property.  That  he  should,  likewise^ 
restore  to  the  exiled  Lacedsemonians  their  children,  and  their 
wives,  who  chose  to  follow  their  husbands ;  provided  that 
no  woman  should  be  obliged,  against  her  will,  to  go  with  her 
husband  into  exile.  That  such  of  the  mercenary  soldiers  of 
Nabis  as  had  deserted  him,  and  gone  either  to  their  own 
countries,  or  to  the  Romans,  should  have  all  their  effects 
faithfully  returned  to  them.  That  he  should  hold  possession 
of  no  city  in  the  island  of  Crete  ;  and  that  such  as  were^hen 
in  his  possession,  should  be  given  up  to  the  Romans.  That 
he  should  not  form  any  alliance,  or  wage  war,  with  any  of 
the  Cretan  states,  or  with  any  other.  That  he  should  with¬ 
draw  all  his  garrisons  from  those  cities  which  he  should  give 
up,  and  which  had  put  themselves,  and  their  country,  under 
the  dominion  and  protection  of  the  Roman  people ;  and 
should  take  care  that,  in  future,  neither  he,  not  any  of  his 

BOOK  XXXIV. 

BX-  195.] 

44r 

subjects,  should  diem  any  distutiimice.  That  he  iduiaM 
not  build  any  toim  m  fort  in  his  own,  or  any  other  territory. 
That,  to  secure  die>  perforitiance  of  these  ccmditiona,  he 
should  give  five  hostages,  such  as  the  Boman  general  shoukt 
choose,  and  among  them  })js  own  son ;  imd  should  pay,  at 
present,  one  hundred  talents  of  silver ;  and  fifty  talents,  an¬ 
nually,  for  eight  years.” 
XXXVI.  These  articles  were  put  into  Writing,  and  sent 
into  Lacediemon,  the  camp  having  been  removed,  and 
brought  nearer  to  the  town.  The  tyrant  saw  xmthing  in 
them  that  gave  him  much  ^tisfacricm,  excepting  diat,  beyond 
his  hopes,  no  mention  had  been  made  of  reinstating  the  ex¬ 
iles.  But  what  mortified  him  most  of  all,  was,  die  depriving 
him  of  his  shipping,  mid  of  the  maritime  towns;  fer  the 
hml  been  a  source  of  great  profit  to  himi  his  piratical  ves¬ 
sels  having  continually  infested  the  whole  coast  from  the 
promontory  of  Malea.  Besides,  he  found  in  the  young  men 
of  those  towns,  recruits  for  his  army,  who  made  by  far  the 
best  of  his  soldiers.  Though  he  discussed  those  conditions 
in  private  with  his  confidential  friends,  yet,  as  the  ministers 
in  the  courts  of  kings,  faithless  in  other  respects,  are  particu¬ 
larly  so  with  respect  to  the  concesding  of  secrets,  they  soon 
became  the  stfoject  of  common  conversation.  The  public, 
in  general,  expressed  not  so  great  a  disapprobation  of  the 
whole  of  the  terms,  as  did  individuals,  of  the  articles  par¬ 
ticularly  affecting  themselves.  Those  who  had  the  wives  of 
the  exiles  in  marriage,  or  had  possessed  themselves  of  my 
of  their  property,  were  provoked,  as  if  they  were  to  lose 
what  was  their  own,  and  not  to  make  restitution  of  what  be¬ 
longed  to  others.  The  slaves,  who  had  been  set  at  liberty 
by  the  tyrant,  perceived  plainly,  not  only  that  their  enfran¬ 
chisement  would  be  annulled,  but  that  their  servitude  wmild  be 
much  more  severe  than  it  had  been  before,  when  they  should 
be  again  put  under  the  power  of  their  incensed  masters. 

4m 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[YJ^.  JSfr. 

The  mercesary  soldiers  wUh  uneasiness,  thal^ 
quence  of  a  peace,  their  pay  Would  cease  i  md  liiey  hintm: 
aLfO,  that  they  could  aot  return  among  their  own  cocui^^^ 
men,  who  detested  not  tyrants  more  dian  they  their 
abettors. 
XXXVII.  They  at  first  spoke  of  tibese  matters,  in 
circles,  with  murmurs  of  discontent;  and  afterwssrd^ 
denly  ran  to  arms.  Frmn  which  tumultuous  proceedir^^  the 
tyrant  perceived  that  the  pas^imis  of  the  muldtude  were  of 
themselves  inflamed  as  highly  as  could  wish;  he,  there* 
fore,  immediately  ordered  a  general  as^^mUy  to  he  Mtmmtm* 
ed.  Here  he  explained  to  ibosi  the  torms  which  die  Romaw 
strove  to  impose,  to  which  he  falsely  added  .odi^Sf  mtm 
severe  and  humiliating.  Whde,  on  die  mention  of  each 
particular,  sometimes  the  whole  assendily,  sometimes  differ* 
ent  parties  raised  a  shout  of  disapprobiuicni,  he  asked  ihem^ 
What  answer  diey  wished  him  to  pve ;  or  what  they 
would  have  him  do?”  On  which  att,  as  k  were  with  one 
voice,  cried  out,  To  give  no  answer,  to  contimte  the  war;” 
and  they  began,  is  comniw  with  a  mukitude,  every  one 
to  encourage  the  test,  to^  keep  op  dieir  spirits,  and  cherish 
good  hopes,  observing,  that  ‘‘fortune  favours  the  brave,” 
Animated  by  these  expressions,  the  tyrant  assured  them, that 
Antiochus,and  the  uEtolians,  would  come  to  their  a^istancc ; 
and  that  he  had,  in  the  mean  time,  a  force  abundantly  suflS* 
cient  for  die  maintenance  of  a  siege.  Every  thought  of 
peace  vanished  from  their  minds,  and,  unable  to  contain 
themselves  longer  in  quiet,  they  ran  out  in  parties  against 
the  advanced  guards  of  the  enemy.  The  sally  of  these  few 
skirmishers,  and  the  weapons  which  they  threw,  immediately 
demonstrated  to  the  Romans,  beyond  a  doubt,  that  the  war 
was  to  continue.  During  the  four  following  days,  several 
slight  encounters  took  place,  without  any  certain  advantage; 
hut,  on  the  fifth  day  after,  in  a  kind  of  regular  en^geiMnt, 

BOOK  XXXIV. 

44^ 

ife were  beaten  back  into  the  town,  in  such 
a  l^fek/that  several  Roman  soldiers,  pressing  close  on  their 
rear,  entered  the  city  through  open  spaces,  not  secured  with 
a  widl,  of  which,  at  that  time,  there  were  several. 
XXXVIir.  Then  Quintius,  having,  by  this  repulse,  effec- 
thidly  checked  the  sallies  of  the  enemy,  and  being  fully  con¬ 
vinced  that  he  had  now  no  alternative,  but  must  besiege  the 
city,  sent  persons  to  bring  up  all  the  marine  forces  from  Gy- 
thium  ;  and,  in  the  mean  time,  rode  himself,  with  some  mili¬ 
tary  tribunes,  rouiid  the  walls,  to  take  a  view  of  the  situation 
of  the  place.  In  former  times,  Sparta  had  no  wall ;  of  late, 
the  tyrants  had  built  walls,  in  the  places  where  the  ground 
was  open  and  level ;  but  the  higher  places,  and  those  more 
difficult  of  access,  they  secured  by  placing  guards  of  soldiers 
instead  of  fortifications.  When  he  had  sufficiently  examined 
every  circumstance,  he  resolved  on  making  a  general  assault ; 
and,  for  that  purpose,  surrounded  the  city  with  all  his  forces, 
the  number  of  which,  Romans  and  allies,  horse  and  foot,  na¬ 
val  and  land  forces,  all  together,  amounted  to  fifty  thousand 
men.  Some  brought  scaling-ladders,  some  firebrands,  some 
other  matters,  wherewith  they  might  either  assail  the  enemy, 
or  strike  terror.  The  orders  were,  that  on  raising  the  shout, 
all  should  advance  at  once,  in  order  that  the  Lacedaemonians, 
being  alarmed  at  the  same  time  in  every  quarter,  might  be 
at  a  loss  where,  first,  to  make  head,  or  whither  to  bring  aid. 
The  main  force  of  his  army  he  formed  in  three  divisions,  and 
ordered  one  to  attack,  on  the  side  of  the  Phoebeum,  another 
on  that  of  the  Dictynneum,  and  the  third  near  a  place  called 
Heptagoniae,  all  which  are  open  places  without  walls*  Though 
surrounded  on  all  sides  by  such-  a  violent  alarm,  the  tyrant, 
at  first,  attentive  to  eveiy  sudden  shout,  and  hasty  message, 
either  ran  up  himself,  or  sent  others,  wherever  the  greatest 
danger  pressed ;  but  afterwards,  he  was  so  stunned  by  the 
horror  and  confusion  that  prevailed  all  around,  as  to  becoine 
VOL.  IV. — M  M  m 

450 

HISTORY  or  ROME. 

CY.R.  557. 

incapable  either  of  giving  proper  directions,  or  of  henring 
what  was  said,  and  to  lose,  not. only  his  judgment,  but  almost 
his  reason. 
XXXIX.  For  some  time  the  Lacedaemonians  maintained 
thetr  ground,  against  the  Romans,  in  the  narrow  passes ;  and 
three  armkiSt  on  each  side,  fought,  time,  in  different 
|daces.  Afterwards,  when  the  heat  ooficest  increased, 
the  copihatants  were,  by  no  means,  liqual  footing ;  for 
tl^  Lacedaemonians  fought  with  missile  arms,  against  which, 
the  Roman  soldiers,  by  means  of  their  large  shields,  easily 
defended  themselves,  and  many  of  their  blows  either  missed, 
or  were  very  weak  ;  for,  the  narrowness  of  the  place  causing 
them  to  be  closely  crowded  together,  they  neither  had  room 
to -discharge  their  weapons,  with  a  previous  run,  which  gives 
great  force  to  them,  nor  clear  and  steady  footing  while  they 
made  their  throw.  Of  those  therefore,  discharged  against 
the  front  of  the  Romans,  none  pierced  their  bodies,  few  even 
their  shields :  but  several  were  wounded,  by  ^hose  who  stood 
on  higher  places,  on  each  side  of  them  ;  and  presently,  when 
they  advanced  a  little,  they  were  hurt  unawares,  both  with 
javelins,  and  tiles  riso  thrown  from  the  tops  of  the  houses. 
On  this  they  raised  their  shields  over  their  heads,  and  join¬ 
ing  them  so  close  together  as  to  leave  no  room  for  injury 
from  such  random  casts,,  or  even  for  the  insertion  of  a  jave- 
Kn,  by  a  hand  within  reach,  they  pressed  forward  under 
cover  of  this  tortoise  fence.  For  some  time  the  narrow 
streets,  being  thronged  with  the  soldiers  of  both  parties, 
considerably  retarded  the  progress  of  the  Romans  ^  but  when 
once,  by  gmdually  pushing  back  the  enemy,  they  gained  the 
wider  pa^B,  the  impetuosity  of  their  attack  could  no  longer 
be  withstood.  While  tiie  Lacedaemonians,  having  turned 
their  backs,  fled  precipitately  ^  the  higher  places,  Nabis, 
being  utterly  confounded,  as  if  the  town  were  already  taken, 
began  to  look  about  for  a  way  to  make  his  escape.  Fytha- 

BOOK  xxxiv. 

B.C.  195.] 

451 

goras,  through  the  whole  affair,  displayed  the  spirit  and  coii- 
dudt  of  a  general,  ^nd  was  now  the  sole  tneans  of  saving  the 
city  from  being  taken.  For  he  ordered  the  buildings  near¬ 
est  to  the  wall  to  be  set  on  fire  ;  and  these  being  instantly  in 
a  blaze,  those  who,  on  another  occasion,  would  havel^rOught 
help  to  extinguish  fire,  now  helping  to  iiH^ase  it,  the 
roofs  tumbled  Romans;  and  not  only  firagmenti nf 
the  tiles,  blit  also^^^ISff-bumed  timber  reached  the  soldl^: 
the  flames  spread  wide,' and  the  smoke  caused  a  degree  cS 
tefror  even  greater  than  the  danger.  In  consequence,  the  Ro¬ 
mans' who  were  without  the  city,  and  were  just  then  advancing 
to  the  assault,  retired^  from  the  wall ;  and  those  who  were 
within,  fearing  lest  the  fire,  rising  behind  them,  should  put 
it  out  Of  their  power  to  rejoin  the  rest  of  the  army,  began  to 
retreat.  Whereupon  Quint! us,  seeing  how  matters  stood, 
ordered  a  general  retreat  to  be  sounded.— Thus,  after  they 
had  almost  mastered  the  city,  they  were  obliged  to  quit  it, 
and  return  to  their  camp. 
XL.  Quintius,  conceiving  greater  hopes  from  the  fears  of 
the  enemy,  than  from  the  immediate  effect  of  his  operations, 
kept  them  in  a  continual  alarm  during  the  three  succeeding 
days ;  sometimes  harassing  them  with  assaults,  sometimes 
inclosing  several  places  with  works,  so  as  to  leave  no  passage 
open'  for  flight.  These  menaces  had  such  an  effect  on  the 
tyrant  that  he  again  sent  Pythagoras  to  solicit  peace.  Quin-  ' 
tius,  at  first,  rejected  him  with  disdain,  ordering  him  to  quijt 
the  camp ;  but  afterwards,  on  his  suppliant  entreaties,  and 
throwing  himself  at  his  feet,  he  admitted  him  to  an  audience 
in  form.  The  purport  of  his  discourse,  at  first,  was,  an  offei* 
of  implicit  submission  to  the  will  of  the  Romans ;  but  this 
availed  nothing,  being  considered  as  nugatory  and  indecisive. 
The  business  was,  at  length,  brought  to  this  issue,  that  a  truce 
should  be  made  on  the  conditions  deli  veiled  in  writing  a  few 
days  before,  and  the  money  and  hostages  were  accordingly 

452 

HISTORY  OF  HOME. 

[Y.R.  55r. 

received..  While  the  tyrant  ^as  kept  shut  up  by  the  siege, 
the  Argives,  receiving  frequeni  accounts,  one  after  another, 
that  Lacedaemon  w,as  on  the  point  of  being  taken,  and  having 
themselves  resumed  courage  on  the  departure  of  Pythagoras, 
with  the  strongest  part  of  his  garrison,  looked  now  with  con¬ 
tempt  on  the  small  number  remaining  in  the  citadel ;  and, 
being  headed  by  a  person  named  Archippus,  drove,  the  gar¬ 
rison  out;  They  gave  Timocrates,  of  Pellcne,  leave  to  re¬ 
tire,  with  solemn  assurances  of  sparing  his  life,  in  considera¬ 
tion  of  the  mildness  which  he  had  shown  in  his  government. 
In  the  midst  of  their  rejoicing  for  this  event,  Quintius  arriv¬ 
ed,  after  having  granted  peace  to  the  tyrant,  dismissed  Eu- 
naenes  and  the  Rhodians  from  Lacedaemon,  and  sent  back  his 
brother,  Lucius  Quintius,  to  the  fleet. 
^  XLI.  The  Nemsean  games,  the  most  celebrated  of  all  the 
festivals,  and  their  most  splendid  public  spectacle,  had 
been  omitted,  at  the  regular  time,  on  account  of  the  disasters 
of  the  war the  state,  now,  in  the  fullness  of  their  joy,  or¬ 
dered  them  to  be  celebrated  on  the  arrival  of  the  Roman  ge- 
nend  and  his  army  ;  and  ap{>ointed  the  general  himself,  pre¬ 
sident  of  the  games.  Many  circumstances  concurred  to  ren¬ 
der  their  happiness  complete.}  their  eountryn^n,  whom  Py¬ 
thagoras,  lately,  and,  before  that,  Nabis,  had  carried 
were  brought  home  firom  Lacedssmon  ;  th<^  who,  on 
covery  of  the  conspiracy  by  Pythagoras,  and  when 
sacre  was  already  begun,  had  fled  from  retmmA ; 
they  saw  then  liberty  restored,  after  a  Imig  interval,  and  be¬ 
held,  in  their  city,  the  Romans,  the  authors  oi  restoration, 
whose  only  view,  m  making  war  on  the  tyrmt^  yras,  the  sup¬ 
port  of  their  interest.  The  freedom  of  the  Argives  also, 
solemnly  announced,  by  the  voice  of  a.  herald,  on  the  very 
day  of  the  Nemsen  games.  Whateilpl  pleasure  the  Ach^ans 
felt  on  Argos  being  reinstated  m  the  general  council  of 
Achaia,  it  was,  in  a  great  mes^nn;^,  idlayed  by  Lacedaemon 

BOOK  XXXIV. 

4^S- 

195.] 
being  left  in  slavery,  and  the  tyrant  dose  at  their  side.  As 
to  the  iEtoUans,  they  loudly  railed  at  that  measure  in  every 
meeting.  They  remarked,  that  ‘‘  the  war  with  IHbalip  wsm 
not  ended  until  he  evacuated  all  the  cities  of  Greece.  But 
Lacedaemon  was  left  to  ^e  tyl^nt,  while  the  lawful  king,  who 
had  been,  at  the  time,  in  the  Roman  camp,  and  others,  the 
noblest  of  the  citizens,  must  live  in  exile :  so  thatthe  Rommi 
nation  was  become  a  paitizan  of  Nabts^s  tyranny.”  Quin* 
tius  led  back  his  army  to  Elatia,  whence  he  had  set  out  to 
the  Spartan  war.  Some  writers  say,  that  the  tyrant’s  me¬ 
thod  of  carrying  on  hostilities  was  not  by  sallies  from  the 
city,  but  that  he  encamped  in  the  face  of  the  Romans ;  and 
that,  after  he  had  declined  fighting  a  long  time,  waiting  for 
succours  from  the  iEtolians,  he  was  forced  to  come  to  an  en¬ 
gagement,  by  an  attack  which  the  Romans  made  on  his  fiara- 
gers,  when,  being  defeated  in  that  battle,  and  beaten  out  of 
his  camp,  he  sued  for  peace,  after  fifteen  thousand  of  his  mm 
had  been  killed,  and  more  than  four  thousand  made  p^ 
soner$. 
XLII.  Nearly  at  the  same  .time,  arrived  at  Rome  a  letter 
from  Titus  Quintius,  with  an  account  of  his  proceedings  at 
Laced^mon  $  and  another,  out  of  Spain,  from  Marcus  Por- 
miis,  the  con^l ;  whereupon  the  senate  decreed  a  suppUca* 
Jj^lP^for  djree  days,  in  the  name  of  each.  The  other  con- 
Valerius,  as  Ms'  province  had  remained  quiet 
since  the  defeat  of  the  Boians  at  the  wood  of  Litana,  came 
home  to  Rome  to  hold  the  elections.  Publius  Cornelius  Sci- 
pio  Africanus,  a  second  time,  and  Xtberius  Sempronius  Lon- 
gus,  were  deemd  consuls.  The  fathers  of  these  two  had 
been  comials  in  the  first  year  of  the  second  Punic  war.  The 
dectidn  of  pr^tors  was  then  held,  and  the  choice  fell  on 
Publius  Cornelius  Sd|p^,  two  Cneius  Conieliuses,  Merenda, 
and  Blasio,  Cneius  B^UMus  iEnobm’bus,  Sextus  Digitius, 
and  Titus  Juvencius  *I%ahia,  As  soon  as  the  elections  were 

M4 

rnsmmt  of  rome. 

[y.H.  SMM. 

die  ecms^  rettirnei  ^  fab  provhice.  The  kifaebi^* 
t&tm  of  FemidQum,  this  yeer^  hid  daim  to  a  privikge  un* 
^ard  of  %k(mt  t  that  Li^bea,  giving  iti  their  names  for  a 
JlfoiliaQ  shmild  be  deemed  citizens  of  Roine.  Some 
who  had  given  hi  their  names  for  Futeoli,  Saler- 
mimi,  and  Bukentum^  assumed,  on  that  ground,  the  cluiraeter 
erf  Rom^  cidzens ;  but  the  senate  determined  that  diey 
were  not, 
XL  III.  In  the  beginning  of  the  year^  wherein  Publius 
Scipio  Afoicanus,  a  second  time4  a^  Tiberius 
Y  R  558 
B  C  iM*  Longus  were  consuls^  two  ambs^sa^ 
dors  from  the  tyrant  Nabis  came  to  Rome.  Tlie 
senate  gave  them  audience  in  the  temple  of  Apollo,  outside 
die  city.  They  entreated,  that  a  peace  might  be  concluded 
on  the  terms  settled  with  Quintius,  which  was  ||ratued.  When 
die  questbn  was  put  concerning  the  provinces^  the  majority 
of  the  senate  were  of  opinion,  that,  as  the  wars  in  Spain  and 
Macedonia  were  at  an  end,  Italy  shouM  be  the  province  of 
both  the  cmisub :  but  Scipio  contended  that  on^consul  was 
sufficient  for  Italy,  and  that  Macedonia  oughts  be  decreed 
to  the  other  ;  that  “  there  was  every  reason  to  apprehend  a 
dangerous  war  with  Antiochus,  for  he  had  already,  of  his 
own  accord,  come  into  Europe ;  and  how  did  they  suppose 
he  would  act  in  future,  when  he  should  be  encouraged  to  a 
war,  on  oi^  hand,  by  the  iEtolians,  avowed  enemies  of  their 
state,  and  stimulated,  on  the  erther,  by  Hannibal,  a  general 
famous  for  his  victories  over  the  Romans  While  the  c<m«- 
aubr  provides  were  tn#dispute,  the  praetors  cast  lots  for 
theirs.  The  city  jurisdiction  fell  to  Cneii;®  Demitius  ;  the 
foreign,  to  Titus  Juvencius  |  Farther  Spain,  to  Publius  Cor- 
z^lius ;  Hither  ^ain,  to  Sei^h^  Digptius  ;  Sicily,  to  Cneius 
Cornelius  Blasio ;  Sardinia,  to  Cneius  Cornelius  Merenda. 
It  was  resohred,  that  no  new  army  should  be  sent  into  Ma¬ 
cedonia,  but  that  the  one  which  was  there  shoidd  be  brought 

BOOK  XXXIV, 

BX,  194.] 

home  to  Italy  txy  Qutniius^  and  disbanded ;  that 
which  was  in  Spain,  under  Marcus  Porcius  Gato, 
likewise  be  disbanded  ;  that  Italy  should  be  tte  province  of 
both  the^  consuls,  for  the  defence  of  which  they  should 
two  city  legions  ;  so  that,  after  the  disbanding  of  the  armi^ 
mentioned  in  the  resolution  of  the  senate,  the  whole  milita^ 
establish mMit  should  consist  of  eight  .Homan  leg^ns. 
.  XLIV»  A  sacred  spring  had  bcen^celcbrated,  in  the  pre- 
ceding  year,  during  the  consulate  of  Marcus  Porcius  and 
Lucius  Va^fius  ;  but  Publius  Licinius,  one  of  the  pontiffs, 
having  made  a  report,  first,  to  the  college  of  pontiffs,  and  af¬ 
terwards,  by  their  direction,  to  the  senate,  that  it  had  not 
been  duly  performed,  a  vote  was,  passed,  that  it  should  be 
celebrated  anew,  under  the  direction  of  the  pontiffs  i  and  that 
the  great  garu^  vowed  together  with  it,  should  be  exhibited 
at  the  usual  expense  :  that  the  sacred  ^ipnng  should  be  deem** 
ed  to  comprehend  all  the  cattle  bom  betw^n  the  calends  of 
March,  and  the  day  preceding  the  calends  of  May,  in  the 
year  of  the  insulate  of  Publius  Cornelius  Scipio  and  Tibe¬ 
rius  Semptmiius  Longus.  ,  Then  followed  the  election  cf 
censors.  Sextus  iElius  Partus,  and  Caius  Cornelius  Ccthe- 
gus,  being  created  censors,  named  as  prince  of  tbe^nate,  the 
consul  PuUius  Scipio,  whom  the  former  censors  likewise  had 
appointed.  Th^  passed  by  only  three  senators  in  the  whole, 
none  of  whom  had  enjoyed  the  Imnour  of  a  curule 
They  ol^aincd,  on  another  account,  the  highest  degree  of 
credit  wkh  that  body  ;  fpr,  at  the  celebration  of  the  Roman 
g^es,  they  ordered  the  cumle  aediles  to  set  apart  places  fmr 
the  senators,  distinct  from  those  of  the  people,  wheFe£y$, 
hitherto,  all  the  spectator  used  to  sit  pronciiscuousdy.  Of  the 
knights,  also,  very  few  ware  deprived  of  their  horses  j,ncw 
was  severity  shown  towards  any  rank  of  men.  The  gallery 
of  the  temple  of  Liberty,  and  the  Villa  PaUica,  were  re¬ 
paired  and  enlarged  by  the  same  censors.  The  sacred  sprmg, 

456 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  558. 
the  votive  games,  were  celebrated,  pursuant  to  the  vow 
of  Servius  Sulpicius  Galba;  when  consul.  While  every  one’s 
thoughts  were  engaged  by  the  shows  then  exhibited,  Quin¬ 
tus  Pleminius,  who,  for  the  many  crimes,  against  gods  and 
men,  committed  by  him  at  Locri,  had  been  thrown  into  pri¬ 
sms,  procured  men  who  were  to  set  fire,  by  night,  to  several 
parts  of  the  city  at  once ;  in  order  that,  during  ^e  general 
consternation,  which  such  a  disturbance  would  occasion,  the 
priscm  might  be  broken  open.  But  some  of  the  accomplices 
discovered  the  design,  and  the  affaii*  was  laid  before  the  se¬ 
riate.  Pleminius  was  thrown  into  the  dungeon,  and  there  put 
to  death. 
XLV.  In  this  year,  colonies  of  Roman  citizens  were  set¬ 
tled  at  Puteoli,  Vultumum,  and  Litumum  ;  timse  hundred 
men  in  each  place.  The  lands  allotted  to  them  hadi^i^D^Sfiiylie- 
longed  to  the  Campani^is,  Colonies  of  Roman  citizens  were 
likewise  established  at  Salemum  and  Buxeutum.  The  corn** 
missioners  for  conducting  these  settlements  were,  Tiberius 
Sempronius  Longus,  then  Consul,  Marcus  Servilius,  and 
Quintus  Mxnucius  Thermus.  Other  commissioners,  also, 
Decius  Junius  Brutus,  Marcus  Baebius  T^mphilus,  and  Mar¬ 
cus  Helvius,  led  a  colony  of  Roman  citizens  to  Sipontum, 
into  a  district  which  had  belonged  to  the  Arpinians.  To 
Tempsa,  likewise,  and  to  Croto,  colonies  of  Roman  citizens 
were  led  out.  The  lands  of  Tempsa  had  been  taken  from 
the  Bruttians,  who  had  formerly  expelled  the  Greeks  from 
them.  Croto  was  possessed  by  Greeks.  In  ordering  the^ 
establishments,  there  were  named,  for  Croto, — Cneitts 
viu^  Lucius  iEmiiius  Paullus,  and  Caius  Pletorius;  frr 
Tempsa, — Lucius  Cornelius  Merula,  and  Caius  Salcmius. 
Several  prodigies  were  observed  at  Rome  that  year,  and 
others  reported,  from  other  places.  In  the  Forum,  Comi- 
tium,  and  Capitol,  drops  of  blood  were  seen,*  and  several 
showers  of  earth  fell,  and  the  head  of  Vulcan  was  surremnded 

BOOK  XXXIV. 

4,57 

a 

BX.194.] 

with  a  falaxe  of  fire.^  It  was  reported,  that  a  stream  of  milk 
ran  in  the  river  at  Interamna  ;  that,  in  some  reputable  fami* 
lies  at  Aritniimm,  children  were  bom  without  eyes  and  nose ; 
and  one,  in  the  territory  of  Picenum,  that  had  neither  hands 
nor  feet.  These  prodigies  were  expiated)  according  to  an 
order  of  the  pontiffs ;  and  the  nine  days  festival  was 
brated,  in  consequence  of  a  report  from  Adria,  that  a 
of  stones  had  fallen  in  that  neighbourhood. 
XL VI.  In  Oaul,  Lucius  Valerius  Flaccus,  proconsul,  in  a 
pitched  batde  near  Mediolanum,  completely  overtfnrew  the 
Insubrian  Gauls,  and  the  Boians ;  Who,  under  the  command 
of  Doruiacus,  had  crossed  the  Po,  to  rouse  the  Insubrians  to 
arms.  Ten  thousand  of  the  enemy  were  slain.  About  this 
time  his  colleague,  Marcus  Porcius  Cato,  triumphed  over 
Spain.'  He  carried  in  the  procession  twenty-five  thou^md 
pounds  weight  of  unwrought  silver,  one  hundred  and  three 
thousand  silver  denariuses,*  five  hundred  and  forty  of  Osom 
silver,!  and  one  thousand  four  hundred  pounds  weight  g£ 
gold.  Out  of  the  booty,  he  distributed  to  each  of  his  sol¬ 
diers  two  hundred  and  seventy  double  that  sum  to 
each  centurion,  and  triple  to  each  horseman.  Tiberius  Sem* 
prottius,  consul,  proceeding  to  his  province,  led  his 
first,  into  the  territory  of  the  Boians*  At  this  time  Boiorix, 
their  chieftain,  with  his^two  brothers,  after  having  drawn  oat 
the  whole  nation  into  the  field  to  renew  the  war,  piu^hed  his 
camp  on  level  ground,  with  an  evident  intention  to  fi^t  the 
en^tmy,  in  case  they  should  pass  die  frontiers.  When 
o^ul  understood  what  a  numerous  force,  arid  what  a  degree 
o£  resolution  the  enemy  had,  he  sent  an  express  to  his  col¬ 
league,  requesting  him,  “  if  he  thought  prcqicr,  to  hasten  to 
join  him adding,  that  “  he  would  act  on  die  defensive,  and 
defer  engaging  in  batde,  undl  his  airival.”  The  same  rca- 

*  3,9711. 17s.  6d. 
VOL.  IV. — N  N  n 

t  171.8s.  9d. 

^  17s.  5id. 

458 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.558. 

son  which  made  the  consul  wish  to  decline^an  action,  induced 
the  Gauls,  whose  spirits  were  raised  |^y  the  backwardness  of 
their  antagonists,  to  bring  .it  on  as  soon  as  possible,  that  they 
might  hnish  the  affair  before  the  two  consuls  should  unite 
their  forces.  However,  during  two  days,  they  did  nothing 
more  than  stand  in  readiness  for  battle,  if  any  should  come 
out  against  them.  On  the  third,  they  advanced  furiously  to 
the  rampart,  and  assaulted  the  camp  on  every  side  at  once. 
The  consul,  immediately^  ordered  his  men  to  take  arms,  and 
kept  them  quiet,  under  arms,  for  some  time  ;  both  to  add  to 
the  foolish  confidence  of  the  enemy,  and  to  arrange  his  troops 
at  the  gates,  through  which  each  party  was  to  sally  out.  The 
two  legions  were  ordered  to  march  by  the  two  principal 
gates  ;  but,  in  the  very  pass  of  the.  gates,  the  Gauls  opposed 
them  in  such  close  bodies  as  to  stop  up  the  way.  The  fight 
was  maintained  a  long  time  in  these  narrow  passes  ;  nor  were 
nheir  hands  or  swords  much  employed  in  the  business,  but 
pushing  with  their  shields  and  bodies,  they  pressed  against 
each  other,  the  Romans  struggling  to  force  their  way  out,  the 
Gauls  to  break  into  the  camp,  or,  at  least,  to  hinder  the  Ro¬ 
mans  from  issuing  forth.  However,  neither  party  could  make 
the  least  impression  on  the  other,  until  Quintus  Victorias,  a 
first  centurion,  and  Caius  Atinius,  a  military  tribune,  the  for¬ 
mer  of  the  second,  the  latter  of  the  fourth  legion,  had  re¬ 
course  to  an  expedient  often  tried  in  desperate  cases  ;  snatch¬ 
ing  the  standards  from  the  officers  who  carried  them,  and 
throwing  them  among  the  enemy.  In  the  struggle  to  recover 
the  standards,  the  men  of  the  second  legion,  first,  made  their 
way  out  of  the  gate. 
XLVII.  These  were  now  fighting  on  the  outside  qf  the 
rampart,  the  fourth  legion  still  entangled  in  the  gate,  when 
a  new  alarm  arose  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  camp.  The 
Gauls  had  broke  in  by  the  Quaestorian  Gate,  and  had  slain 
the  quaestor,  Lucius  Postumius,  surnamed  Tympanus,  with 

BOOK  XXXIV. 

459 

B.C.  194.3 
Marcus  Atinius  and  Publius  Sempronius,  praefects  of  the  aK 
lies,  who  made  an  obstinate  resistance  ;  and  also,  near  two 
hundred  soldiers.  .The  enemy  were  masters  of  that  part  of 
the  camp,  until  a  cohort  of  those  whic^h  are  called  Extra¬ 
ordinaries,  sent  by  the  consul  to  defend  the  Quaestorian 
Gate,  killed  some  who  had  got  within  the  rampart,  drovei 
out  the  rest,  and  opposed  others  who  were  attempting  to 
break  in.  About  the  same  time,  the  fourth  legion,  and  two 
cohorts  of  Extraordinaries,  burst  out  of  the  gate  ;  and  thus 
there  were  three  battles,  in  different  places,  round  the  camp  ; 
while  the  various  kinds  of  shouts  raised  by  them,  called  oflF 
the  attention  of^the  combatants  from  the  fight  in  which  they 
themselves  were  immediately  engaged,  to  the  dangers  Vhich 
threatened  their  friends*.  The  battle  was  maintained  until 
mid-day  with  equal  strength,  and  with  nearly  equal  hopes.  At 
length,  the  fatigue  anef  heat  so  far  got  the  better  of  the  soft 
relaxed  bodies  of  the  Gauls,  who  are  incapable  of  enduring 
thirst,  as  to  make  most  of  them  give  up  the  fight ;  and  the 
few  who  stood  their  ground  were  attacked  by  the  Romans, 
routed,  and  driven  to  their  camp.  The  consul  then  gave  the 
signal  for  retreat,  which  the  greater  part  obeyed;  but  some, 
eager  to  continue  the  fight,  and  hoping  to  get  possession  of 
the  camp,  pressed  forward  to  the  rampart,  on  which  the 
Gauls,  despising  their  small  number,  rushed  out  in  a  body. 
The  Romans  were  then  routed  in  turn,  and  compelled,  by 
their  oWn  fear  and  dismay,  to  retreat  to  their  camp,  which 
they  had  refused  to  do  at  the  command  of  their  gener^« 
Thus  both  parries  experienced,  in  turn,  the  vicissitudes  of 
flight  and  victory.  The  Gauls,  however,  had  eleven  thou¬ 
sand  killed,  the  Romans  but  five  thousand.  The  Gauls  re¬ 
treated  into  the  heart  of  their  country,  and  the  consul  led  his 
legions  to  Placentia.  Some  writers  say,  that  Scipio,  after 
joining  his  forces  to  those  of  his  colleague,  overran  and  plun¬ 
dered  the  country  of  the  Boians  aud  Ligurians,  as  far  as  the 

460 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  558. 

woods  and  marshes  suffered  him  to  proceed  ;  others  that, 
without  having  effected  anything  material,  he.  returned  to 
Rome  to  hold  the  elections. 
XLVIII.  Titus  Quintius  passed  the  entire  winter  season 
of  this  year  at  Elatia,  where  he  had  established  the  winter- 
quarters  of  his  army,  in  adjusting  political  arrmigements,  and 
reversing  the  measures  .which  had  been  introduced  in  the 
several  states  under  the  arbitrary  domination  of  Philip  and 
his  deputies,  while  they  crushed  the  rights  and  liberties  of 
o^ers,  in  order  to  augment  the  power  of  those  who  formed 
dfactimi  in  their  favour.  Early  in  the, spring  he  lo  Co¬ 
rinth,  where  he  had  summoned  a  general  .  Am¬ 
bassadorshaving  attended  from  every  one  of  ihe  bo 
as  to  form  a  numeroi^  assembly,  he  addressed  them  in  a  Icmg 
speech,  in  whic^  beginning  foom  the  first  commencement  dF 
friendship  between  the  Romans  and  the  naUoB^1|fc^  Greeks, 
he  enumerated  the  proceedings  of  the  commah<l^dll%Aok^ 
been  in  Macedonia  before  him,  and  likewise  his  own.  HBs 
whole  narration  was  heard  with  the  warmest  approbation,  un¬ 
til  he  came  to  make  mention  of  Nabis ;  and  then  thc^^tut- 
pressed  their  opinion,  that  it  was  utterly  inconsistent  vd^Ae 
character  of  the  deliverer  of  Greece,  to  have  left  seated,  fo  ^e 
centre  of  one  of  its  most  respectable  states,  a  tyrant,  who  was 
not  only  insupportable  to  his  own  country,  but  a  terror  to  all 
the  states  in  his  neighbourhood.  Whereupon  Quintius,  who 
well  knew  their  sentiments  on  the  occasion,  freely  acknow¬ 
ledged,  that  “  if  the  business  could  have  been  accomplished 
without  the  entire  destruction  of  Laced^mon,  no  mention  of 
peace  with  the  tyrant  ought  ever  to  have  been  listened  to ; 
but  that,  as  the  case  stood,  when  it  was  not  possible  to  ctush 
him  without  involving  the  city  in  utter  ruin,  it  was  judged 
more  eligible  to  leave  Nabis  in  a  state  of  dcWlity,  stripped  of 
almost  every  kind  of  power  to  do  injury,  than  to  suffer  the 
city,  which  must  have  perished  in  the  very  process  of  its  de- 

BOOK  XXXIV. 

B.C.  194.]. 

4m 

livery  being  effectuated,  to  sink  under  remedies  too  vtd^nt 
for  it  to  support.” 
XLIX.  To  die  recital  of  matters  past,  he  subjoined,  timt 
“  his  intention  was  to  depart  shortly  for  Italy,  and  to  carry 
with  him  all  his  troops ;  that  they  should  hear,  within  ten 
days,  of  the  garrisons  having  evacuated ;Demetri as ;  imd  diat 
Chalcis,  the  citadel  of  Corinth,  should  instantly  be  delivered 
up  to  the  Aebseans ;  that  all  the  world  might  know  wkidt 
deserved  better  the  character  of  deceivers,  the  Romans  or 
the  Italians,  who  had  spread  insinuations,  that  when  die 
caim  ^  Idietty  was  intrusted  to  the  Romans  it  was  put 
into  hands,  and  that  they  had  only  changed  mas¬ 
ters,  being  s^jugated  now  to  the  Romans,  as  formerly  to 
the  Macedemians.  But  they  were  never  scrupled 
what  they  either  said  or  4^.  The  r&st  of  the  nations, 
he  advji^j  to  form  their  estimate  of  friends  from  dee<k, 
not  words ;  and  to  satisfy  themselves  whom  they 
ought  tx>  trust,  and  agaii^t  whom  they  ought  to  be  on  dicir 
guard  ;  to  use  liberty  with  moderation  :  for,  when  regulated 
by  |n^dence,  it  was  productive  of  happiness  both  to  indt- 
and  to  states ;  but,  when  pushed  to  excess,  it  became 
not  only  obnoxious  to  others,  but  precipitated  the  possessors 
of  it  themselves  into  dangerous  rashness  and  extravagance. 
He  recommended,  that  those  at  the  head  of  affairs,  and  all 
the  several  ranks  of  men  in  each  particular  state,  should  cid- 
tivate  harmony  between  themselves  ;  and  that  all  should  dir^t 
dicir  views  to  the  general  interest  of  the  whole.  For,  while 
they  acted  in  c<mcert,  no  king  or  tyrant  would  ever  be  able  to 
overpower  them  :  but  discord  and  dissension  gave  every  ad¬ 
vantage  to  the  arts  of  an  adversary ;  as  the  party  worsted  in 
a  domestic  dispute,  generally  chose  to  unite  whh  foreigners, 
rather  than  submit  to  a  countryman  of  their  own.  He  then 
exhorted  them,  as  the  arms  of  others  had  procured  their 
liberty,  and  the  good  faith  of  foreigners  had  returned  it  safe 

462  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  lY.R.  558. 
imo  their  hands,  to  apply  now  their  own  diligent  care  to  the 
watching  and  guarding  of  it ;  that  the  Roman  people  might 
perceive,  that  those  on  whom  they  had  bestowed  liberty  were 
deserving  of  it,  and  that  their  kindness  was  not  ill  placed.” 
L.  On  hearing  these  admonitions,  such  as  parental  tender¬ 
ness  might  dictate,  every  one  present  shed  tears  of  joy  ;  and 
so^reat  were  their  transports,  that  they  affected  his  feelings 
to  such  a  degree  as  to  interrupt  his  discourse.  For  some 
time  a  confused  noise  prevailed,  all  together  expressing  their 
approbation,  and  charging  each  other  to  treasure  up  those  ex¬ 
pressions  in  their  minds  and  hearts,  as  if  they  had  been  utter¬ 
ed  by  an  oracle.  Then  silence  ensuing,  he  requested  of  them 
to  make  diligent  search  for  such  Roman  citizens  as  were  in 
servitude  among  them,  and  to  send  them  into  Thessaly  to 
him,  within  two  months ;  observing,  that  ‘‘  it  would  not  re¬ 
dound  to  their  honour,  if,  in  a  land  restored  to  liberty,  its 
deliverers  should  remain  in  servitude.”  This  was  answered 
with  a  shout  of  applause  ;  and  they  acknowledged,  as  an  obli¬ 
gation  added  to  the  rest,  his  reminding  them  of  the  discharge 
of  a  duty  so  indispensably  incumbent  on  their  gratitude. 
There  was  a  vast  number  of  these  who  had  been  made  pri¬ 
soners  in  the  Punic  war,  and  sold  by  Hannibal  when  their 
countrymen  refused  to  ransom  them.  That  they  were  very 
numerous,  is  proved  by  what  Polybius  says,  that  this  business 
cost  the  Achaeans  one  hundred  talents*,  though  they  had  fix¬ 
ed  the  price  to  be  paid  for  each  captive,  to  the  owner,  so  low 
as  five  hundred  denari usesf.  For,  at  that  rate,  there  were 
one  thousand  two  hundred  in  Achaia.  Calculate  now,  in  pro¬ 
portion  to  this,  how  many  were  probably  in  ail  Greece. 
LI.  Before  the  convention  broke  up,  they  saw  the  garrison 
march  down  from  the  citadel  of  Corinth,  proceed  forward  to 
the  gate,  and  depart.  The  general  followed  them,  accompa¬ 
nied  by  the  whole  assembly,  who,  with  loud  acclamations. 

194751, 

t  16L  2s.  lid. 

BOOK  XXXIV. 

463 

B.C.  194.] 
blessed  him  as  their  preserver  aad  deliverer.  At  length  taking 
leave  of  these,  and  dismissing  them  he  returned  to  Elatia  by 
the  same  road  through  which  he  came.  He  thence  sem  Ap* 
pius  Claudius,  lleutenantogeneral,  with  all  the  troops,  ordefv 
ing  him  to  march  through  Tl^ssaly  and  Epirus,  and  to  wait 
for  him  at  Oricum,  where  he  intended  to  embark  die  army 
for  Italy.  He  also  wrote  to  his  brother,  Lucius  Quintius, 
lieutenant-general,  and  commander  of  the  fleet,  to  collect  thi*> 
ther  transport  ships  from  all  the  coasts  of  jGreece-  He  himr 
self  proceeded  to  Chalcis ;  and,  after  sending  away  the  gar-* 
risons,  not  on}y  from  .that  city,  but  likewise  from  Oreum  and 
Eretria,  he  held  there  a  congress  of  the  Eubcean  states,  whom 
he  reminded  of  the  condittoq  in  which  he  had, found  their  af* 
fairs,  and  of  that  in  which  he  was  leaving  them  j  and  then  dis¬ 
missed  the  assembly.  He  then  proceeded  to  Demetrias,  and 
removed  the  garrison.  Accompanied  by  all  the  citizens,  as  at 
Corinth  and  Chalcis,  he  pursued  his  route  into  Thessaly, 
the  states  were  not  only  to*  be  set  at  liberty,  but  also  to  be  in¬ 
duced,  from  a  state  of  utter  anarchy  and  confusion,  into  some 
tolerable  form  :  for  they  had  been  thrown  into  disorder,  not 
only  through  the  faults  of  the  times,  and  the  arbitrary  acts  of 
the  king  and  his  adherents,  but  also  through  the  restless  dis¬ 
position  of  the  nation,  who,  from  the  earliest  times,  even  to 
our  days,  have  never  conducted  any  election,  or  assemUy,  or 
council,  without  dissensions  and  tumult.  He  chose  both  sena¬ 
tors  and  judges,  with  regard,  principally,  to  their  property, 
and  vested  the  chief  share  of  power  in  that  part  of  the  st^ 
which  was  more  particularly  interested  in  its  safety  and  tran¬ 
quillity. 
LII.  When  he  had  completed  these  regulations  in  Thessa¬ 
ly,  he  went  on,  through  Epirus,  to  Oricum,  whence  he  in¬ 
tended  to  take  his  passage  ;  all  the  troops  being  transported 
thence  to  Brundusium.  From  this  place  to  the  city,  diey 

4m 

HISTORY  OF  BOME. 

[Y*R.  558. 
jMsed  wtifde  of  Italy,  m  a  anatmer,  like  a  triumph ; 
die  cap^u^  ^ects,  which  they  brou^  with  theoi,  forming 
a  train  as  large  as  that  of  die  troops  Uiemselves.  When 
they  arrived' at  Rome,  the  aenate  ^sembled  ou^de  the  eity, 
to  receive  from  Qomtius  a  recital  of  his  services ;  and,  with 
sarisfactiOn,  voted  him  a  triumph,  which  he  had  so  just* 
ly  merited.  His  triumph  lasted  three  days.  On  the  foal 
di^  were  carried  in  procession,  armour,  weapods,  tousen  and 
maride  statues,  of  which  he  had  taken  greater  numbers  from 
jj^hp,  than  from  the  smtes  of  Greece.  On  die  second,  gold 
and  silver  wrought,  unwrought,  and  coined.  Of  unwrouf^t 
silver,  there  were  eighteen  thousand  pounds  weight ;  and,  of 
wrou|^,  two  hundred  and  seventy  thmisand  ;  consisting 
many  vessels  of  various  sorts,  most  of  tteem  engraved,  and 
se^rai  exquisite  Vrorkmanship ;  also^  greid  many  others 
made  of  brass,  and,  Imides  these,  ten  shields  of  silver.  The 
a^ned  silver  amounted  to  eighty-four  thousand  of  the  A^e 
coin,  caHed  Tetradrachmus,  containing  each,  of  silver, 
die  weight  of  four  denariuscs*.  Of  gold  there  were  three 
thousand  seven  hundred  and  fourteen  pounds,  and  one  shield 
of  massy  gold  ;  and  of  the  coin,  called  Philippics,  four¬ 
teen  diousand  five  hundred  and  fourteenf .  On  the  third  day 
were  carried  golden  crowns,  presented  by  the  several  states, 
in  number  one  hundred  and  fourteen  ;  then  the  victims.  Be¬ 
fore  his  ckmot  went  many  illustrious  captives,  with  die  host¬ 
ages,  among  whom  were  Demetrius,  son  of  King  Philip,  and 
Armenes,  a  Lacedaemonian,  son  of  die  tyrant  Nabis.  Then 
Qulntitts  himself  rode  into  the  city,  followed  by  a  numerous 
body  of  soldiers,  as  the  whole  army  had  been  brought  home 
fnmi  die  province.  Among  these  he  distributed  two  hun¬ 
dred  and  fifty  to  each  footman,  double  to  a  centurion, 
ti^e  to  a  horseman.  Those  who  had  been  redeemed  from 
10^4^  ^  t  93a.  10s. 

i  16s.  Ifd. 

BOOK  XX%W. 

c^ivity,  ^dcd  to  grandeHr  of  fm>cemoii^  waUiing 
after  l^m  ar^rti  their  b^t^  shavefi. 
X.IJI.  Im  the  iatter  j^rt  of  this  year,  Qui^ua  uEUns  Tjtt* 
hero,  idebeian  tribune,  in  puraaaitee.  of  a  deo-ee  of  aena^, 
to  the  people,  and  the  peo{d«,<mleTcd,  that  **  two 
l:^ne  oolontea  ahonld  he  settled,  one  in  Bmttiutn,  the  other 
in  the  territory  of  Thitrium/^  For  making  Aesc  settlemeiita, 
commissiofterjs  were  appointed,. whp  were  to  hold  the  office 
for  three  years :  for  Brnt^um,  QmnUjs  Naevius,  Marc^ 
Minacius,  Bulkis,  and  Marcus  F^rii^  Crassipes  ^  and  for  the 
disuict  of  Thurium,  Cm^us  Mip^lius,  ^^uintus  and 
Lucius  Apustias*  The  ^senoblies  election  to  these  two 
^pointments  were  held  in  the  Capitol  by  Cnei us  Oomitius, 
Wy  prator.  Seyeral  tem^es  were  dedicated  this  year :  one 
of  Jwo  Sospita,  in  the  herb*ma|rket,  ;^owed  and  contracted 
for  four  years  before,  in  the  time  of  the  Gallic  war,  by  Ct^ius 
Cotnelius,  consul ;  and  the  same  person,  now  censor,  per^ 
farmed  the  dedication.  Another  of  Faunus,  the  building  of 
which  had  beeh  agreed  for  two  years  before,  and  a  fund 
formed  for  it, out  of  fines  estreated  bjthe  aediles,  Caius  Seri- 
bonius  and  Cneius  Oomttius  ;  tiie  latter  of  whom,  now  city 
pr^tor,  dedicated  it.  Qufotus  Marcius  Kalla,  constituted 
commisaioTier  for  foe  pu^ose,  dedicated  the  .temple  of  For- 
tuna  Primigenia,  on  the  Quirinal  HiiL  Publius  Seujproniua 
Sq>h«s  had  vowed  this  tempk  ten  years  before,  in  the  Punic 
war ;  and,  being  afterwards  censor,  had  employed  persons  to 
build,  it.  Caiua  Servilius,  duumx'ir,  also  dedicated  a  temple 
of  Jupiter,  b  the  island.  This  bad  been  vowed  in  the  Gallic 
war,  sue  years  before,  by  Lucius  Furius  Purpureo,  who  after¬ 
wards,  when  consul,  contracted  for  the  building.  Such  were 
the  transactions  of  foat  ^ear^ 
LIV^  Publius  Scipb.came  home  from  his  province  of  Gaul 
to  choose  new  consuls  ;  su>d  the  pepple,  in  a^^mbly,  elected 
Lucius  Cornelius  Merula,  and  Qubtu^  M^cius  Thermua. 
\"0L.  IV. — O  o  o 

466 

HISTORY  OF  ROME- 

Next  daly,  were  elk>^ai  prsstors,  Lucim  Xomeliiie  Sd|de| 
Marcus  Fulvius  NcAilior,  Caius  So^ouius,  Marcia  Vi4e- 
rtos  Messala,  Ludiis  P<»*cia8  Lkkms,  and  Cams  Fli^imtts* 
The  curule  aediles  of  this  ^ear,  Cmm  Atifios  Serramts  ^md 
Lucius  Scribonius,  first  eidiibited  the  Megsd^ian  games,  m 
which  were  intFodoced  performances  cm  the  sti^.  At  the 
Roman  games,  celebrated  by  these  atdiles,  the  sensum^  for 
the  first  time,  sat  separate  from  die  |»ople,  which,  as  every 
innovation  usually  does,  gave  occasion  to  various  obi^rva- 
tions.  Some  considered  this  as  ^  an  honour,  shown  at  length 
to  that  most  respectidile  body,  and  which  ought  to  have  been 
done  long  before  while  others  contended,  that  “  every  ad¬ 
dition,  made  to  the  grandeur  of  the  s^ate,  was  a  diminuticm 
of  the  dignity  of  die  people  ;  and  diat  all  such  distinctions, 
as  tended  to  set  the  orders  of  the  state  at  a  distance  from  each 
other,  were  equally  subversive  of  liberty  and  concord.  Dur¬ 
ing  five  hundred  and  fifty-eight  years,”  diey  asserted,  ‘‘  all 
the  spectators  had  sat  promiscuously :  what  reason  then,  had 
now  occurred,  on  a  sudden  that  should  mahe  the  semiors  dis¬ 
dain  to  have  the  commons  intermixed  with  them,  Or  make 
the  rich  scorn  to  sit  in  company  with  the  poor  ?  It  was  an^n- 
precedented  gratificudon  of  jwide,  and  overbearing  vanity, 
never  even  desired^  or  certainly  not  assumed,  by  the  sensUe 
of  any  other  nation.”  It  is  said,  that  even  Afneanus  him¬ 
self,  at  last,  became  sorry  for  having  proposed  that  matter  in 
his  consulship  :  so  difficult  is  it  to  bring  people  to  approve  of 
any  alteration  of  ancient  customs  ;  they  are  always  naturally 
disposed  to  adhere  to  old  practices,  unl^s  experience  evi^ 
dently  proves  their  inexpediency^ 
L  V.  In  the  beginning  of  the  year,  which  was  the  consulsrte 
of  Lucii^  Cornelius  and  Quintus  Minucius,  such  frequent 
reports  of  earthquakes  were  brought,  that  j^ople  grew  wear}', 
not 'only  of  the  matter  itself,  but  of  the  r^igious  rites  eu- 
joined  in  con^quence  ;  for  neither  could  the  senate  be  con¬ 
vened,  nor  the  business  of  the  putdic  be  transacted,  the  con- 

bcm)k;  XXXIV. 

ms.} 
aids  were  so  em^yed  m  $aari£eesaiid  mphi$liamu 
At  hst^  die  decemvirs  were  orilered  to  consult  the  books^  mid^ 
hi  f^rsimuce  of  dieir  answer,  a  supfdtcadon  ws»  perfbilmed, 
dutis^  three  days.  People  o&ied  prs^ers  at  all  t^  shi^iu^, 
widi  garlands  on  tk&r  heads.  An  order  was  piddUli^d,\^i^t 
^  the  persons  belong^g  to  one  £sax^  shcmld  pay  their  we^» 
ship  together  ;  and  the  consuls,  directicm  of  the  senate^ 
published  an  edict,  d^t,  mi  any  day,  wheremi  religious  ritc^ 
shouUhe  mdered,  in  cmisequence  of  the  report  of  an  earth- 
qindce,  no  person  should  report  another  earthquake  on  that 
dsi^.  Then  ahe  consuls  first,  afterwards  die  prs^tors,  cast  lots 
fi>r  their  provinces.  Cornelius  obtained  Gaul|  Mitiucius, 
Liguria ;  Caius  Scribonius,  the  city  jurisdiction ;  Marcus 
Valerius,  the  foreign ;  Lucius  Ccnnelius,  Sicily ;  Lucius 
Porcius,  Sardink ;  Caius  Flaminius,  Hither  Spain ;  luid 
Marcus  Fulvius,  Fardier  Spain. 
LVI.  While  the  consuls  supposed,  that,  for  that  year,  diey 
should  have  no  employment  in  the  military  line,  a  letter  was 
brought  from  Marcus  Cincius,  who  was  commander  ^  Pisae, 
amiouncing,  that  twenty  thousand  armed  Ligurians,  in  cmi¬ 
sequence  of  a  conspiracy  of  that  whole  nation,  formed  in  the 
meetings  of  their  several  districts,  had,  fir^  wasted  die  lamls 
of  Luna,  and  then  passing  through  the  territory  of  Fisas,  had 
ovemur  the  whole  sea  coast.’’  In  coi^quence  of  this  intel¬ 
ligence,  the  ccmsul,  Minucius,  whose  province  Liguria  w^, 
by  direction  of  the  senate,  mounted  the  rostrum,  and  pidi- 
lUhed  orders,  that,^  “  the  two  kgipns,  enlisted  the  year  be¬ 
fore,  should,  on  die  tenth  day  from  that,  attend  him  at  Anrcr 
tium  i  and  mentioned  his  intention  of  levying  two  legions,  for 
the  city,  in  dieir  stead.  He  likewise  gave  notice 
to  Ae  magistrates  and  uidjassadorsof  such  of  the 
allies*,  and  ©f  the  Latine  confederates,  as  were 
*  It  was  not  customary  to  levy  recruits  from  afi  Uie  states  of  the  allies  at 
once,  but  from  a  certain  number  of  them  at  a  time ;  sirtibsA  titey  all  fur. 

^  HISTMt  Of  HOkE.  [Y.R;  559. 
to  furnish  soldiers,  to  attend  hini  in  flic  CapHo!*  OF 
fliMe  ’^he  wrote  out  a  list,  amounting  t6  f^cen  thdusand  foot, 
ve  hundred  ho^se;  pioportiohitig  the  coatingetit  of  each 
atifte  (to  the  number  of  its  young  men,  add  ordered  those  pre- 
91^'  to  go  directly  from  the  spot  fo  the  gate  erf  the  city  ;  and, 
iliyorder  to  expedite  the  business,  to  proceed  to  their  homes 
fdSHraisc  the  men.  To  Pulvlus  and  Flaminius  were  assigned 
fN|ual  numbers  of  men,  to  each  three  thousand  Roman  foot, 
add  a  reinforcement  of  one  hundred  horse,  with  five  thousand 
feot  of  the  Latine  allies,  and  two  hundred  horse ;  and  or* 
dfers  were  given  to  those  praetore,  to  dbhand  tile  edd  troops 
^hmedia^y  on  their  arrival  in  their  provinces.  Although 
^eat  numbers  of  the  soldiers  belonging  to  the  city  legions  had 
#ade  appUcation  to  the  plebeian  tribunes,  to  take  cognizance 
of  the  cases  of  such  men  as  claimed  exemption  from  the  ser¬ 
vice,  on  account  either  of  having  served  out  their  time,  or  of 
bad  health ;  yet  a  letter  from  Tiberias  Sempronius  bmiished 
all  thoughts  of  such  proceeding ;  for  he  sent  an  account,  that 
**  fifteen  thotisand  of  the  Ligurians  had  come  into  the  lands 
6f  Placentia,  and  wasted  them  with  fire  and  swtnfl,  to  the 
very  walls  of  that  chy  and  the  hank  of  the  Po ;  and  that  the 
Boism  nation  also  appeared  disposed  to  renew  hostilities.^^ 
In  consequence  of  this  information,  the  senate  passed  a  vote, 
that  there  was  a  Gallic  tumult  subsisting,”  and  that  it 
would  be  improper  for  flie  plebeian  tribunes  to  take  cogni¬ 
zance  of  the  claims  of  the  soldiers,  so  as  to  prevent  their  at¬ 
tending,  pursuant  to  the  proclamation ;  atid  they  added  an 
order,  that  the  Latine  confederates,  who  had  served  in  the 
army  of  Publius  Cornelius  and  'Tiberius  Sempronius,  and  had 
been  discharged  by  those  consuls,  should  reassemble,  on  what¬ 
ever  day  and  in  whatever  place  of  Etfuria  the  constiil  Lucius 
nished  tuppHes  in  their  turn,  exoept  when  a  pres^g  e2%encr  demanded 
an  eztracmiinaiy  force. 

B.C.  mq  B€KiK  XXlffV.  46# 
Cortielios  shiC^fS  tppmttt ;  smd  that  tfiecdfnsul  Lticiti^Cmtic- 
luw,  on  his  wtly  to  his  province,  should  enlist,  arm,  and  ezrry 
with  him  all  such  persOTS  as  he  shotild  thiiA  ht,  in  the  ^veral 
towns  and  eount^s  through  which  he  was  to  pass,  and  should 
have  authority  to  discharge  such  of  them,  mid  at  speh  tiibes, 
as  he  might  jnd^  proper. 
LVII.  After  the  consols  had  finished  the  levies,  and  were 
gone  to  their  provinces,  TiturQointius  demanded,  that  **  the 
senate  should  receive  an  account  of  the  regulations  which  be 
in  concert  with  the  ten  ambassadors,  had  settled  |  and,  tf 
they  thought  proper,  ratify  them  by  their  authority.’’  He 
told  them,  that  “it  would  facilitate  this  business,  if  they 
were  first  to  give  aiKiience  to  the  amba^adors,  who  had  come 
from  all  parts  of  Greece^  and  a  great  pm  of  Asia,  and  to 
those  from  the  two  These  embassies  were  intro¬ 
duced  to  the  senate,  by  the  city  praetor  Caius  Scribonius,  ami 
all  received  kind  answers.  As  the  discussion  of  the  aSmt 
with  Antiochus  required  toamuch  time,  it  was  referred  to 
the  ten  ambassadors,  some  of  whom  had  conferred-with  the 
King  in  Asia,  or  at  Lysimachia.  Directions  were  given  to 
Titus  Quintius,  that,  in  conjunctitm  with  these,  be  should 
hear  what  the  King’s  ambassadors  bad  to  say,  and  should 
give  them  such  answer  as  comported^ with  the  dignity  msd  in¬ 
terest  of  the  Roman  people.  At  thtr  head  of  the  embassy 
were  Mcnippus  and  Hegesianax  j  die  former  caf  whom  said, 
that  “  he  cotdd  not  conceive  what  intricacy  there  was  in  the 
business  of  their  embassy,  as  they  came  simply  to  ask  friend¬ 
ship,  and  conclude  an  alliance.  Now,  there  were^ree  kinds 
of  treaties,  by  which  kings  and  states  fomied  friendships  with 
each  other :  one,  when  terms  were  diemed  to  a  people  van¬ 
quished  in  war;  for  after  every  thing  has  been  surrendered 
to  him  who  has  proved  superior  in  war,  he  has  the  sole 
power  of  judging  and  deter mimtig  what  share  shall  remain 
to  the  vanquished,  aiid  what  they  shall  forfeit.  The  second, 

4/0 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  lYJR.  559. 

wben  parties^  equaUf  matched  m  war^  omdude  a  tremy  of 
j^ace  and  friendship  pn  terms  of  equality ;  for  then  demands 
are  proposed  and  r^tilution  made,  reciprcHraUy,  in  a  ecmven-* 
tion ;  and  if,  in  consequence  of  the  war^  confushm  has  arisen 
isith  respect  to  any  parts  of  their  properdes,  the  matter  is 
adjusted  on  the  footing  either  of  anci^t  right  or  of  mu¬ 
tual  convenience  of  the  pardes.  The  third  kiml  was,  when 
parties  who  hiul  never  been  foes,  met  to  form  a  inendly 
union  by  a  social  treaty :  these  neither  dictate  nor  receive 
terms,  for  that  is  the  case  between  a  victor  and  a  party  van¬ 
quished.  As  Andochus  came  under  this  last  descripdon,  he 
wondered,  he  said,  at  the  Romans  tddng  upon  them  to  dic¬ 
tate  terms  to  him ;  and  to  prescribe,  which  of  the  cities  of 
Asia  they  chose  should  be  free  and  independent,  which  tri¬ 
butary,  and  which  of  them  the  King’s  troops  and  the  King 
himself  should  be  prohibited  to  enter.  This  might  be  a  pro¬ 
per  method  of  concluding  a  peace  with  Philip,  who  was  their 
enemy,  but  not  of  making  a  treaty  of  alliance  with  Andochus, 
their  friend.” 
LVIIL  To  this  Quindus  answered:  Since  you  choose 
tQ  deal  methodically,  ami  enumerate  the  several  modes  pf 
CCHitracdng  amity,  J  also  will  lay  down  two  conditions,  with¬ 
out  which,  you  may  tell  your  King,  that  he  must  not  expect 
to  contract  atiy  friendship  with  the  Romans.  One,  that,  if 
he  does  not  choose  that  we  should  concern  ourselves  in  the 
affairs  of  the  cides  of  Asia,  he  must  refrain  from  interfering, 
in  any  particular,  with  the  affairs  of  Europe,  The  other, 
that  if  he  does  not  confine  himself  within  the  limits  of  Asia, 
but  passes  over  into  Europe,  the  Romans  will  think  them¬ 
selves  at  fuU  liberty  to  maintain  the  friendships  which  they 
have  already  formed  with  the  states  of  Asia,  and  ^so  to  con¬ 
tract  new  ones.”  On  this  Hegesianax  exclaimed,  that  such 
propositions  were  highly  improper  to  be  listened  to,  as  their 
tendency  was  to  exclude  Andochus  from  the  cities  of  Thrace 

BOOK  XXXIV. 

4T1 

BJC.  193.] 
'a®d  the  Chcrsbtiesey— places  which  his  gi^t»grasdfother, 
Seleucus,  had  acquired  ^ith  great  honour,  after  vsuiquisfabg 
I^machus  i&  war,  and  ktilhig  him  id  battle,  a&d  had  left 
to  his  successors ;  and  part  of  which,  after  they  had  been 
sdaed  by  the  Thracians,  Antiochus  had,  with  equal  honour, 
rcoovered  by  force  of  arms ;  as  well  as  others  which  had 
been  deserted, — as  Lystmachia,  for  instance,  he  had  repeo- 
pled,  by  calling  home  the  inhi^itants  ;«^and  several,  which 
had  been  destroyed  by  fire,  and  buried  in  ruins,  he  had  re¬ 
built  Sit  a  vast  expense.  What  kind  of  resemblance  was  there, 
then,  in  the  cases  of  Antiochus  bemg  ejected  from  posses¬ 
sions  so  acquired,  so  recovered  ;  and  of  the  Romans  refrain¬ 
ing  from  intermeddling  with  Asia,  to  which  they  never  had 
any  claim  ?  Antiochus  wished  to  ob^in  the  friendship  of  die 
Romans ;  but  he  wished  it  on  terms  that  wbuld  redound  to 
his  honour,  not  to  his  shame.’’  In  reply  to  this,  Quintius 
said, — ‘‘  Since  honour  is  the  point  on  which  our  disquisitions 
turn,  and  which,  indeed,  with  a  people  who  held  the  first 
rank  among  the  nations  of  the  world,  and  with  so  ^eat  a 
King,  ought  to  be  the  sole,  or  atieast  the  primary  object  of 
regard ;  tell  me,  I  pray  you,  which  do  you  think  more  ho¬ 
nourable,  to  wish  to  give  liberty  to  all  the  Grecian  cities  in 
every  part  of  the  world  ;  or  to  make  them  slaves  and 
sals  f  Since  Antiochus  thinks  it  conducive  to  his  glory,  to 
reduce  to  slavery  those  cities,  which  his  great-grandfather 
held  by  the  rigltt  of  arms,  but  which  his  grandfather  or  fa¬ 
ther  never  occupied  as  their  property ;  while  the  Roman  peo¬ 
ple,  having  undertaken  the  patronage  of  the  liberty  of  the 
Greeks,  deem  it  incumbent  on  their  faith  and  constancy  not 
to  abandon  it.  As  they  have  delivered  Greece  from  Philip, 
so  they  intend  to  deliver,  from  Antiochus,  all  the  states  of 
Asia  which  are  of  the  Grecian  race.  For  colonies  were  not 
sent  into  .£otia  and  Ionia  to  be  enslaved  to  kings ;  but  with 

^2  HISTORY  Of  ROME.  iY.R.  552. 
to  increase  tbe  population,  mtd  to  jn^iipigato  that  an¬ 
cient  race  in  every  part  of  the  globe.”  . 
LIX.  Hegesianaa  hesitating:^  as  he  ce^ld  not  depy,  that 
the  cause,  which  professetl  die  bestowing  of  liberty,  carried 
a  more  honourable  semblance  than  one  that  pointed  to  slave¬ 
ry,  Publius  Sulpicius,  who  was  the  eldest  of  the  ten  ambas¬ 
sadors,  said,--r*^‘  Let  us  cut  the. matter  short.  Choose  one  of 
the  two  conditions  clearly  propounded  just  now  by  Quintius ; 
or  cease  to  speak  of  friendship.”  But  Menippus  replied: 
We  neither  will,  nor  can,  accede  to  any  proposition^  which 
tends  to  lessen  t^e  dominions  of  Antipchus.”  Next  day, 
Quintius  brought  into  the  senate-house  all  the  ambassadors 
of  Greece  and  Asia,  in  order  that  they  might  learn  the  dU- 
ppritions  entertained  by  the  Rqman  peopk,  and  by  Antio¬ 
ch  us,  towards  the  Grecian  states.  He  then  ac<|uafnted  them 
with  his  own  demands,  and  those  of  the  King ;  and  desired 
them  to  **  assure  their  respective  states,  that  the  same  disin¬ 
terested  zeal  and  courage,  which  the  Roman  people  had  dis¬ 
played  in  defence  of  their  liberty  against  the  encroachments 
of  Philip,  Jihey  would,  likewise,  exert  against  those  of  Anti- 
ochus,  if  he  should  refuse  to  retiieouj^of  Europe.”  On  this, 
Menippus  earnestly  besought  Quinti^  and  the  senate,  ^^not 
to  be  h^sty  in  forming  their  determination,  which,  in  its  ef¬ 
fects,  might  disturb  the  peace  of  the  whole  world ;  to  take 
time  to  themselves,  and  allow  the  King  time  for  considera¬ 
tion  ;  that,  when  informed  of  the  conditions  proposed,  be 
would  consider  them,  and  either  obtain  some  relaxation  in 
the  terras,  or  accede  to  them.”  Accoixlingly,  the  business 
was  deferred  entire  ;  and  a  resolution  passed,  that  the  same 
ambassadors  should  be  sent  to  the  King,  who  had  attended 
him  at  Lysimachia, — Publius  Suipicius,  Publius  Viilius,  and 
Publius  i£l(ius. 
LX.  Scarcely  had  these  begun  their  journey,  when  am¬ 
bassadors  from  Carthage  brought  information,  that  Antio- 

BOOK  XXXIV. 

B.C.  193.] 

chas  WHS  evident  preparing  for  war,  md  that  limflilKil  was 
employed  ia  hissmrice ;  which  gave  reasem  to  iear,  thirt  Ac 
Cardi^;itiiftas  mig^t  take  arms  at  the  same  time.  HatmUsdif 
on  leaving  his  own  country,  had  gone  to  Antiochus,  as  was 
mentioned  before,  and  was  held  by  Ae  King  in  high  estima« 
tion,  not  so  much  for  his  other  qualification,  as  because,  to  a 
person  who  had  long  been  revolving  schemes  for  a  with 
Rome,  there  could  not  be  any  fitter  counsellor  to  confer  wiA 
can  such  a  subject.  His  opinion  was  always  one  and  the  same : 
that  Italy  should  be  made  Ae  seat  of  Ae  war;  because 
“  Italy  would  supply  a  foreign  enemy  both  with  men  and 
provisions ;  but,  if  it  were  left  in  quiet,  and  Ae  Roman  peo¬ 
ple  were  allowed  to  employ  Ae  strength  and  forces  of  Italy, 
in  making  war  in  any  other  country,  no  king  or  nation  would 
be  able  to  cope  with  them.’*  He  demanded,  for  himself,  one 
hundred  decked  ships,  ten  thousand  foot,  and  one  thousand 
horse.  ‘‘  With  this  force,”  he  said,  ‘‘  he  would  first  repair 
to  Africa ;  and  he  had  confident  hopes,  that  he  should  be 
able  to  prevail  on  the  Carthsiginians  to  revive  hostilities. 
If  Aey  should  hesitate,  he  would  raise  a  war  against  Ae 
Romans  in  some  part  erf  Italy.  That  Ae  King  ought  to  cross 
over  into  Europe  with  all  the  rest  of  his  fe^ce,  keep  his 
army  in  some  part  of  Greece  ;  not  to  pass  over  immediately 
into  Italy,  but  to  be  in  readiness  to  do  so ;  which  would  be 
sufficient  to  give  Ae  war  a  formidable  appearance,  and  im¬ 
press  a  terrifying  notion  of  its  magnitude.” 
LXI.  When  he  had  brought  the  King  to  agree  in  his 
opinion,  he  judged  it  necessary  to  predispose  Ac  minds  of 
his  countrymen  in  favour  of  the  design ;  but  he  durst  not 
send  a  letter,  lest  it  might,  by  some  accident,  be  intercepted, 
smd  his  plans  by  that  means  be  discovered.  He  had  found 
at  Ephesus  a  Tyrian  called  Aristo,  and,  in  several  less  im¬ 
portant  commi^ions,  had  discovered  him  to  pos^ss  a  go€»l 
degree  of  ingenuity.  This  mm  he  now  loaded  with  presents 
VOL.  IV. — P  P  p 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

4tT4 

[Y.R.4(59. 

ami  promises  of  reward,  which  were  confirmed  by  King 
himself^  and*  sent  him  to  Carthage  with  xnessages  to  his 
friends.  He  told  him  the  names  of  the  persons  to  whom 
they  were  to  be  delivered,  and  furnished  him  with  secret 
tokens,  by  which  they  would  know,  with  certainty,  that  the 
messages  came  from  him.  On  this  Aristo^s  appearing  at 
Carthage,  the  reason  of  his  coming  was  not  discovered  by 
Hannibid’s  friends  sooner  than  by  his  enemies.  At  first, 
they  spoke  of  the  matter  publicly,  in  their  circles  and  at  their 
tables ;  and  at  last  some  persons  declared  in  the  senate,  that 
^  the  banishment  of  Hannibal  miswered  no  purpose,  if,  while 
resident  in  another  country,  he  was  still  able  to  propagate  de¬ 
signs  for  changing  the  administration,  and  disturb  the  quiet 
of  the  state  by  his  intrigues.  That  a  Tyrian  stranger,  named 
Aristo,  had  come  with  a  commission  from  Hannibal  and 
King  Antiochus ;  that  certain  men  daily  held  secret  confer¬ 
ences  with  him,  and  caballed  in  private,  the  consequences  of 
which  would  soon  break  out,  to  the  ruin  of  the  public.”  This 
produced  a  general  outcry,  “  that  Aristo  ought  to  be  summon¬ 
ed,  and  examined  respecting  the  reason  of  his  coming  ;  and 
if  he  did  not  disclose  it,  to  be  sent  to  Rome,  with  ambassa¬ 
dors  accompanying  him ;  that  they  had  already  suffered 
enough  of  punishment  in  atonement  of  the  headstrong  rash¬ 
ness  of  cme  individual ;  that  the  faults  of  private  citizens 
should  be  at  their  own  risk,  and  the  state  should  be  preserved 
free,  not  only  from  guilt,  but  even  from  the  suspicion  of  it.” 
Aristo,  being  summoned,  contended  for  his  innocence ;  and 
urged,  as  his  strongest  defence,  that  he  had  brought  no  letter 
to  any  person  whatever :  but  he  gave  no  satisfactory  reason 
fEU*  his  coming,  and  was  chiefly  embarrassed  to  obviate  the 
charge  of  conversing  solely  with  men  of  the  Barcine  facUon. 
A  warm  debate  ensued ;  some  earnestly  pressing,  that  he 
should  be  immediately  seized  as  a  spy,  and  kept  in  custody  ; 
while  others  insbted,  that  there  were  not  siifiicient  gr(uin& 

BOOK  XXXIV. 

4W 

B.C.  193.] 
for  such  violent  measures ;  that  ^  putting  strangers  Into  con^ 
finementy  without  reason,  was  a  step  that  afforded  a1>ad  ipi*e» 
cedent ;  for  doubtless  the  same  treatment  would  be  retaliated 
on  the  Carthaginians  at  Tyre,  and  other  marts,  where  they 
frequently  traded.”  They  came  to  no  determination  tlmt 
day.  Aristo  practised  on  the  Carthaginians  an  artifice  suited 
to  their  own  genius ;  for,  having  early  in  the  evening  hung 
up  a  written  tablet,  in  the  most  frequented  place  of  the  city, 
over  the  tribunal  where  the  magistrates  daily  sat,  he  went  on 
board  his  ship  at  the  third  watch,  and  fled.  N ext  day,  when  the 
suffetes  had  taken  their  seats  to  administer  justice,  the  tablet 
was  observed,  taken  down,  and  read.  Its  contents  were,  that 
“  Aristo  came  not  with  a  private  commission  to  any  person, 
but  with  a  public  one  to  'the  elders by  this  name  they 
called  the  senate.  The  imputation  being  thus  thrown  on  the 
state,  less  pains  were  taken  in  searching  into  the  suspicions 
harboured  of  a  few  individuals:  however,  it  was  determined, 
that  simbassadors  should  be  sent  to  Rome,  to  represent  the 
affair  to  the  consuls  and  the  senate,  and,  at  the  same  time, 
to  complain  of  injuries  received  from  Masinissa. 
LXII.  When  Masinissa  observed,  that  the  Carthaginians 
were  looked  on  with  jealousy  by  others,  and  were  full  of  dis¬ 
sensions  among  themselves ;  the  nobles  being  suspected  by 
the  senate,  on  account  of  their  conferences  with  Aristo,  and 
the  senate  by  the  people,  in  consequence  of  the  information 
given  by  the  same  Aristo,  he  thought  that,  at  such  a  con¬ 
juncture,  he  might  successfully  encroach  on  their  rights ; 
and  accordingly  he  laid  waste  their  country,  along  the  sea- 
coast,  and  compelled  several  cities,  which  were  tributary  to 
the  Carthaginians,  to  pay  their  taxes  to  him.  This  tract  they 
call  Emporia ;  it  forms  the  shore  of  the  lesser  Syrtis,  and 
has  a  fertile  soil ;  one  of  its  cities  is  Leptis,  which  paid  it 
tribute  to  the  Carthaginians  of  a  talent  a  day.  At  this  time, 
Masinissa  not  only  ravaged  that  whole  tract,  but,  with  res* 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[yji.  ss9^ 

m 
fn&ct  to  a  cpBsid^afele  .part  of  k,  disputed  the  fight  ^  pos8^« 
«Ao0  wkh  thp  CiOthagiaians  i  and  when  he  learned  that  they 
were  $eni|ii^  to  Rome^bodi  to  justify  their  conduct,  wd,  at 
the  same  dose,  to  make  complaints  of  him,  he  likewise  sem 
apflmssadors  to  Home,  to  aggpravate  the  suspicioi^  entertain* 
ed  of  thenit  and  to  manage  the  dispute  about  the  right  to  the 
taxes*  The  Carthaginimis  were  beanl  first,  ami  their  ac¬ 
count  of  the  Tyrian  danger  gave  senate  no  sa^ll  unea- 
ainess,  as  they  dreaded  being  involved  in  war  with  Antiochus 
and  the  Carthaginians  at  the  same  time.  What  contributed 
chiefiy  to  strengthen  a  suspicion  of  evil  designs,  was,  diat 
though  they  had  resolved  to  seize  Aristo,  and  send  him  to 
Home,  diey  had  not  placed  a  guard  either  cm  himself,  or  his 
ship.  'Then  began  the  controversy  with  the  King’s  ambas¬ 
sadors,  on  the  claims  of  the  territory  ifi  dispute.  The  Car¬ 
thaginians  supported  their  cause,  by  insistiiig,  that  it  must 
belong  to  them,  as  being  within  the  limite  which  Scipio,  after 
conquering  the  country,  had  fixed  as  the  boundaries  of  the 
Carthaginian  territory ;  and  also,  by  the  acknowledgment  of 
the  King,  who  when  he  was  going  in  pursuit  of  A{dvir,  a 
fugitive  from  his  kingdom,  then  hovering  about  Cyrene,  with 
a  party  of  Numidlans,  had  solicited  as  a  favour,  a  passage 
through  that  very  district,  as  being  confessedly  a  part  of  the 
Carthaginian  dominions.”  The  Numidians  insisted,  ^  that 
they  were  guilty  of  misrepresentation,  with  respect  to  the 
limits  fixed  by  Scipio ;  and  if  a  person  chc^e  to  recur  to  die 
real  origin  of  their  property,  what  title  had  the  Carthaginians 
to  call  any  land  in  Africa  their  own:  foreigi^rs  and  strangers, 
to  whom  had  been  granted  as  a  gift,  for  the  purpose  of  build¬ 
ing  a  city,  as  much  ground  as  they  could  encompass  with 
the  cuttings  of  a  bull’s  hide  ?  Whatever  acquisitions  they  had 
made  beyond  By rsa,  their  original  settlement,  they  held  by 
fraud  and  violence :  for,  in  relation  to  the  land  in  question, 
so  far  were  they  from  being  able  to  prove  uninterrupted  pos* 

BOOK  XXXIV. 

B.C.  193.] 

m 

smion,  from  tbe  time  when  it  wsm  first  fteqiuredy  that  they 
cannot  even  prove  that  they  ever  possessed  it  fm  any  con* 
aiderable  time.  As  occasions  offered,  sometimes  diey,  some* 
times  the  kings  of  Numidia,  had  held  the  dominion  of  it ; 
and  the  possession  of  it  always  fell  to  the  party  which  had 
the  stronger  army.  They  requested  the  senate  to  suffer  tbe 
matter  to  remain  on  the  same  footing,  on  which  it  stood,  be* 
fc«rc  the  Carthaginians  became  enemies  to  the  Romans,  or 
the  King  of  Numidia  their  friend  and  ally ;  and  to  interfere, 
so  as  to  hinder  whichever  party  was  able,  from  keeping  pos* 
session.’^  The  senate  resolved  to  tell  the  ambassadors  of 
both  parties,  that  they  would  send  persons  into  Africa  to 
determine,  on  the  spot,  the  controversy  between  the  peopls 
of  Carthage  and  the  King.  They  accordingly  sent  Publius 
Scipio  Africanus,  Caius  Cornelius  Cethegus,  and  Marcus 
Minucius  Rufus  j  who,  after  viewing  the  ground,  and  hear* 
ing  what  could  be  said  on  both  sides,  left  every  thing  as  they 
found  it,  without  giving  any  opinion.  Whether  they  acted 
in  this  manner  fijmn  their  own  judgment,  or  in  pursuance  of 
directions  received  at  home,  is,  by  no  means  certain  j  but, 
thus  much  is  most  certain,  that,  as  affairs  were  circumstanced, 
it  was  highly  expedient  to  leave  the  dispute  undecided :  for, 
had  the  case  been  otherwise,  Scipio  alone,  either  from  his  own 
knowledge  of  the  business,  or  the  influence  which  he  posses¬ 
sed,  and  to  which  he  had  a  just  claim,  on  both  parties,  could, 
with  a  nod,  have  ended  the  controversy. 

END  OF  THE  FOURTH  VOLUME, 

THE 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 
BY 
TITUS  LlVIUa 

TRANSLATED  PROM  THE  ORIGINAL, 
WITB  NOTKS  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS  ^ 
BY  GEORGE  BAKER,  A.  M. 

History  is  Philosophy  teachiog  by  examples . 
BOLIKGBRORE 

FIRST  AMERKJAN,  FROM  THE  LAST  LONDON  EDITION 
IN  SIX  VOI.I^MES.— VOL.  V. 

NEW  YORK: 
PUBLISHED  BY'  PETER  A.  MFSIER,  COLLINS  &  CO.  J.  &  T.  SWORDS,  A.  T. 
GOODRICH,  HENRY  I.  MEGARY,  R.  &  W.  A.  BARTOW,  S,  GOULD,  W.  R. 
GILLEY,  JAMES  EASTBURN,  GEORGE  LONG,  PRIOR  &  DUNNING,  SAMUEl, 
CAMPBELL  &  SON,  E.  BLISS  &  E.  WHITE,  A.  DURELL  &  CO,  AND  JAMES 
V.  SEAMAN 
Maxwellf  Printer. 
1823. 

CONTENTS 

OF 
THE  FIFTH  VOLUME. 

Page. 
BOOK  XKXV. . 1 
BOOK  XXXVI.  .  .  -  -  -  66 
BOOK  XXXVII. . 123 
BOOK  XXXVHI. . 203 
BOOK  XXXIX. . 288 
BOOK  XL. . 363 

132S7 

THE 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

BOOK  XXXV. 
PuRlitis  Scipio  Afric&DUS  sent  ambassador  to  Antiochus;  has  a  conversa' 
tion  with  Hannibal  at  Ephesus.  Preparations  of  the  Romans  for  war 
with  Antiochus.  Nabis,  the  tyrant  of  Lacedaemon,  instigated  by  the 
.^tolians,  makes  war  on  the  Achaeans;  is  put  to  death  by  a  party  of  the 
.^tolians.  The  iEtoIians,  violating  the  treaty  of  friendship  with  the 
Romans,  invite  Antiochus,  who  comes,  with  a  small  force,  into  Greece, 
and,  in  conjunction  with  them,  takes  several  towns,  and  the  whole 
island  of  Euboea.  The  Achseans  declare  war  against  Antiochus  and 
the  Altolians. 
I.  In  the  beginning  of  the  same  year,  Sextus  y 
Digitius,  prsetor  in  the  hither  Spain,  fought  with 
those  states,  which,  after  the  departure  of  Marcus  Cato,  had 
recommenced  hostilities,  a  great  number  of  battles,  but  none 
deserving  of  particular  mention;  and  all  so  unfavourable  to 
him,  that  he  scarcely  delivered  to  hts  successor  half  the  num¬ 
ber  of  men  that  he  had  received.  In  consequence  of  this, 
every  state  in  Spain  would  certainly  have  resumed  new  cou* 
rage,  and  have  taken  up  arms,  had  not  the  other  praetor,  Pub¬ 
lius  Cornelius  Scipio,  son  of  Cneius,  been  successful  in  se¬ 
veral  engagements  on  the  other  side  of  the  Iberus;  and,  by 
these  means,  diffused  such  a  general  terror,  that  no  less 
than  fifty  towns  came  over  to  his  side*  These  exploits  Scipio 
performed  in  his  praetorship.  Afterwards,  when  proprietor. 
VOL.  V. — B 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  559. 

2 
as  the  Lusitanians,  after  ravaging  the  farther  province,  were 
returning  home,  with  an  immense  booty,  he  attacked  them 
on  their  march,  and  continued  the  engagement  from  the 
third  hour  of  the  day  to  the  eighth,  before  any  advantage 
was  gained  on  either  side.  He  was  inferior  to  the  enemy  in 
number  of  men,  but  he  had  the  advantage  of  them  in  other 
respects:  with  his  troops  formed  in  a  compact  body,  he  at¬ 
tacked  a  long  train,  encumbered  with  multitudes  of  cattle; 
and  with  his  soldiers  fresh,  engaged  men  fatigued  by  a  long 
inarch;  for  the  enemy  had  set  out  at  the  third  watch,  and, 
besides  travelling  the  remainder  of  the  night,  had  continued 
their  route  to  the  third  hour  of  the  day,  nor  had  they  been 
allowed  any  rest,  as  the  battle  immediately  succeeded  the 
march.  Wherefore,  though  at  the  beginning  they  retained 
some  vigour  of  body  and  mind,  and,  at  first,  threw  the  Ro¬ 
mans  into  disorder,  yet,  after  some  time,  the  fight  be¬ 
came  equal.  In  this  critical  situation  the  propreetor  made 
a  vow  to  celebrate  games  in  honour  of  Jupiter,  in  case  he 
should  defeat  and  cut  off  the  enemy.  The*  Romans  then 
made  a  more  vigorous  push,  which  the  Lusitanians  could  not 
withstand,  but,  in  a  little  time  turned  their  backs.  The  vic¬ 
tors  pursued  them  briskly,  killed  no  less  than  twelve  thou¬ 
sand  of  them,  and  took  five  hundred  and  forty  prisoners, 
most  of  whom  were  horsemen.  There  were  taken,  besides, 
an  hundred  and  thirty-four  military  standards.  Of  the  Ro¬ 
man  army,  but  seventy -three  men  were  lost.  The  battle  was 
fought  at  a  small  distance  from  the  city  of  Ilipa,  Thither 
Publius  Cornelius  led  back  his  victorious  army,  amply  en¬ 
riched  with  spoil;  all  which  was  exposed  to  view  under  the 
walls  of  the  town,  and  permission  given  to  the  owners  to 
claim  their  effects.  The  remainder  was  put  into  the  hands  of 
the  quiestor  to  be  sold,  and  the  money  prqduced  by  the 
sale  was  distributed  among  the  soldiers. 
1 1.  At  the  time  when  these  occurrences  happened  in  Spain, 
Caius  Flaminius,  the  prsetor,  had  not  yet  set  out  from  Rome: 

BOOK  XXXV. 

3 

B.  C.  193.] 
therefore,  he  and  his  friends  took  pains,  to  represent,  in  the 
strongest  colours,  both  the  successes  ond  the  misfortunes 
experienced  there;  and  he  laboured  to  persuade  the  senate, 
that,  as  a  very  formidable  war  had  blazed  out  in  his  pro¬ 
vince,  and  he  was  likely  to  receive  from  Sextus  Digitius  a 
very  small  remnant  of  an  army,  and  that,  too,  terrified  and 
disheartened,  they  ought  to  decree  one  of  the  city  legions 
to  him,  in  order  that,  when  he  should  have  united  to  it  the 
soldiers  levied  by  himself,  pursuant  to  decree,  he  might  select 
from  the  whole  number  three  thousand  five  hundred  foot,  and 
three  hundred  horse.  He  said,  that  “  with  such  a  legion  as 
that  (for  very  little  confidence  could  be  placed  on  the  troops  of 
Sextus  Digitius),  he  should  be  able  to  manage  the  war.’^ 
But  the  elder  part  of  the  senate  insisted,  that  ‘‘  decrees  of 
the  senate  ought  not  to  be  passed  on  every  groundless 
rumour,  fabricated  hy  private  persons  for  the  purpose  of 
humouring  magistrates;  and  that  no  intelligence  should  be 
deemed  authentic,  except  it  were  either  witten  by  the 
preetors,  from  their  provinces,  or  brought  by  their  depu¬ 
ties.  If  there  was  a  tumultuous  commotion  in  Spain,  they 
advised  a  vote,  that  tumultuary  soldiers  should  be  levied 
by  the  prpetor  in  some  other  country  than  Italy.’’  The  se¬ 
nate’s  intention  was,  that  such  description  of  men  should 
be  raised  in  Spain.  Valerius  Antias  says,  that  Caius  Fla- 
mini  us  sailed  to  Sicily  for  the  purpose  of  levying  troops, 
and  that,  on  his  voyage  thence  to  Spain,  being  driven  by  a 
storm  to  Africa,  he  enlisted  there  many  stragglers  who  had 
belonged  to  the  army  of  Publius  Africanus;  and  that,  to  the 
levies  made  in  those  two  provinces,  he  added  a  third  in 
Spain. 
III.  In  Italy  the  war,  commenced  by  the  Ligurians,  grew 
daily  more  formidable.  They  now  invested  Pisee,  with  an 
army  of  forty  thousand  men;  for  multitudes  flocked  to  them 
continually,  led  by  the  favourable  reports  of  their  proceed¬ 
ings,  and  the  expectation  of  booty.  The  consul,  Minucius, 

4 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  559. 
came  to  Arctium,  on  the  day  which  he  had  fixed  for  the  as¬ 
sembling  of  the  troops.  Thence  he  led  them,  in  order  of 
battle,  towards  .  Pisae;  and  though  the  enemy  had  removed 
their  camp  to  the  other  side  of  the  river  at  the  distance  of 
no  more  than  three  miles  from  the  place,  the  consul  marched 
into  the  city,  which  evidently  owed  its  preservation  to  his 
coming.  Next  day,  he  also  encamped  on  the  opposite  shore, 
about  a  mile  from  the  enemy;  and  by  sending  out  parties 
from  that  post,  to  attack  those  of  the  enemy,  protected  the 
lands  of  the  allies  from  their  depredations.  He  did  not  think 
it  prudent  to  hazard  a  general  engagement,  because  his 
troops  were  raw,  composed  of  many  different  kinds  of 
men,  and  not  yet  sufficiently  acquainted  with  each  other,  to 
act  together  with  confidence.  The  Ligurians  depended  so 
much  on  their  numbers,  that  they  not  only  came  out  and  of¬ 
fered  battle,  willing  to  risk  every  thing  on  the  issue  of  it; 
while  from  their  superfluity  of  men,  they  sent  out  many 
parties  along  the  frontiers,  to  plunder;  and  whenever  a  large 
quantity  of  cattle,  and  other  prey  was  collected,  there  was 
an  escort,  always  in  readiness,  to  convey  it  into  their  forts 
and  towns. 
IV.  While  the  operations  remained  at  a  stand,  at  Pisae^ 
the  other  consul,  Lucius  Cornelius  Merula,  led  his  army 
through  the  extreme  borders  of  the  Ligurians,  into  the  ter¬ 
ritory  of  the  Boians,  where  the  mode  of  proceeding  was 
quite  the  reverse  of  that  which  took  place  in  the  war  of  Li¬ 
guria.  The  consul  offered  battle,  the  enemy  refused  to 
fight;  and  the  Romans,  when  they  could  not  urge  them  to 
it,  went  out  in  parties  to  plunder,  while  the  Boians  chose  to 
let  their  country  be  utterly  wasted  with  fire  and  sword,  with¬ 
out  opposition,  rather  than  venture  an  engagement  in  de¬ 
fence  of  it.  When  the  ravage  was  completed,  the  consul 
quitted  the  enemy’s  lands,  and  marched  towards  Mutina,  in 
a  careless  manner,  as  through  a  tract  where  no  hostility  was 
to  be  apprehended.  The  Boians,  when  they  learned  that  the 

BOOK  XXXV. 

B.  C.  193.] 

3 

Roman  had  withdrawn  beyond  their  frontiers,  followed  him 
as  secretly  as  possible,  watching  an  opportunity  for  an  am¬ 
buscade;  and  having  gone  by  his  camp  in  the  night,  took 
possession  of  a  defile  through  which  the  Homans  were  to 
pass.  But  they  were  not  able  to  effect  this  without  being  dis¬ 
covered;  and  the  consul,  who  usually  began  his  march  late 
in  the  night,  now  waited  until  day,  lest,  in  the  disorderly 
fight  likely  to  ensue,  darkness  might  increase  the  confusion; 
and,  though  he  did  not  stir  before  it  was  light,  yet  he  sent 
forward  a  troop  of  horse  “to  explore  the  country.  On  receiv¬ 
ing  intelligence  from  them  of  the  number  and  situation  of 
the  enemy,  he  ordered  the  baggage  to  be  heaped  together  in 
the  centre,  and  the  veterans  to  throw  up  a  rampart  round  it; 
and  then,  with  the  rest  of  the  army  in  order  of  battle,  he 
advanced  towards  the  enemy.  The  Gauls  did  the  same, 
when  they  found  that  their  stratagem  was  detected,  and  that 
they  were  to  engage  in  a  fair  and  regular  battle,  where  suc¬ 
cess  must  depend  on  valour  alone. 
.  V.  The  battle  began  about  the  second  hour.  The  left 
brigade  of  the  allies,  and  the  extraordinaries,  formed  the  first 
line,  and  were  commanded  by  two  lieutenants-general,  of 
consular  dignity,  Marcus  Marcellus,  and  Tiberius  Sempro- 
nius,  who  had  been  consul  the  year  before.  The  present 
consul  was  sometimes  employed  in  the  front  of  the  line, 
sometimes  in  keeping  back  the  legions  in  reserve,  that  they 
might  not,  through  eagerness  for  fighting,  come  up  to  the 
attack,  until  they  received  the  signal.  He  ordered  the  two 
Miiiuciuses,  Quintus  and  Publius,  military  tribunes,  toiead 
off  the  cavalry  of  the  legions  into  open  ground,  at  some  dis¬ 
tance  from  the  line;  and  “  when  he  should  give  them  the 
signal,  to  charge  the  enemy  through  the  clear  space.^’  While 
he  was  thus  employed,  a  message  came  from  Tiberius  Sem- 
pronius  Longus,  that  the  extraordinaries  could  not  support 
the  onset  of  the  Gauls;  that  great  numbers  had  already  fal¬ 
len;  and  that  partly  through  weariness,  partly  through  fear. 

6 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  559. 

the  ardour  of  the  survivors  was  much  abated.  He  recom¬ 
mended  it,  therefore,  to  the  consul,  if  he  thought  proper,  to 
send  up  one  or  other  of  the  two  legions,  before  the  army 
suffered  disgrace.  The  second  legion  was  accordingly  sent, 
and  the  extraordinaries  were  ordered  to  retire.  By  the  le¬ 
gion  coming  up,  with*  its  men  fresh,  and  the  ranks  complete 
in  their  numbers,  the  fight  was  renewed  with  vigour.  The 
left  wing  was  withdrawn  out  of  the  action,  and  the  right 
took  its  place,  in  the  van.  The  intense  heat  of  the  sun  dis¬ 
composed  the  Gauls,  whose  bodies*  were  very  ill  qualified  to 
endure  it:  nevertheless,  keeping  their  ranks  close,  and  lean¬ 
ing  sometimes  on  each  other,  sometimes  on  their  bucklers, 
they  withstood  the  attack  of  the  Romans;  which,  when  the 
consul  observed,  in  order  to  break  their  ranks,  he  ordered 
Caius  Livius  Salinator,  commander  of  the  allied  cavalry,  to 
charge  them  at  fulT  speed,  and  the  legionary  cavalry  to  re¬ 
main  in  reserve.  This  shock  of  the  cavalry  first  confused 
and  disordered,  and  at  length  entirely  broke  the  line  of  the 
Gauls;,  yet  it  did  not  make  them  fly.  That  was- prevented  by 
their  officers,  w^ho,  when  they  quitted  their  posts,  struck 
them  on  the  back  with  their  spears,  and  compelled  them  to 
return  to  their  ranks:  but  the  allied  cavalry,  riding  in  among 
them,  did  not  suffer  them  to  recover  their  order.  The  consul 
exTiorted  his  soldiers  to  continue  their  efforts  a  little  lon¬ 
ger  for  victory  was  within  their  reach;  to  press  the  enemy, 
while  they  saw  them  disordered  and  dismayed;  for,  if  they 
were  suffered  to  recover  their  ranks,  they  would  enter  on  a 
fresh  battle,  the  success  of  which  must  be  uncertain.”  He 
ordered  the  standard-bearers  to  advance  with  the  standards, 
and  then,  all  exerting  themselves  at  once,  they  at  length 
forced  the  enemy  to  give  way.  As  soon  as  they  turned  their 
backs,  and  fled  precipitately  on  every  side,  the  legionary  ca¬ 
valry  was  sent  in  pursuit  of  them.  On  that  day,  fourteen 
thousand  of  the  Boians  were  slain;  one  thousand  and  ninety- 
two  taken;  as  were  seven  hundred  and  twenty-one  horsemen. 

B.  C.  193.] 

BOOK  XXXV. 

7 

and  three  of  their  commanders,  with  two  hundred  and  twelve 
military  .standards,. and  sixty -three  chariots.  Nor  did  the 
Romans  gain  the  victory  without  loss  of  blood:  of  themselves, 
or  their  allies,  were  lost  above  five  thousand  men,  twenty- 
three  centurions,  four  prsefects  of  the  allies,  and  two  militaiy 
tribunes  of  the  second  legion,  Marcus  Genucius  and  Marcus 
Marcius. 
VL  Letters  from  both  the  consuls  arrived  at  Rome,  near¬ 
ly  at  the  same  time.  That  of  Lucius  Cornelius  gave  an  ac¬ 
count  of  the  battle  fought  with  the  Boians,  at  Mutina;  that 
of  Quintus  Minucius,  from  Pisse,  mentioned,  that  the  hold¬ 
ing  of  the  elections  had  fallen  to  his  lot,  but  that  affairs  in 
Liguria  were  in  such  a  critical  posture,  that  he  could  not 
leave  that  country  without  bringing  ruin  on  the  allies,  and 
material  injury  on  the  commonwealth.  He  therefore  advis¬ 
ed,  that  if  the  senate  thought  proper,  they  should  direct  his 
colleague,  (as  in  his  province  the  fate  of  the  war  was  deter¬ 
mined,]  to  repair  to  Rome  to  hold  the  elections.  He  said,  if 
Cornelius  should  object  to  this,  because  that  employment 
had  not  fallen  to  his  lot,  he  would  certainly  do  whatever  the 
senate  should  order;  but  he  begged  them  to  consider  care¬ 
fully,  whether  it  would  not  be  less  injurious  to  the  public, 
that  an  interregnum  should  take  place,  than  that  the  province 
should  be  left  by  him  in  such  a  state.”  The  senate  gave  di¬ 
rections  to  Caius  Scribonius  to  send  two  deputies,  of  sena- 
torian  rank,  to  the  consul,  Lucius  Cornelius,  to  communicate 
to  him  the  letter,  sent  by  his  colleague  to  the  senate,  and  to 
acquaint  him,  that  if  he  did  not  come  to  Rome  to  elect  new 
magistrates,  the  senate  were  resolved,  rather  than  Quiutius 
Minucius  should  be  called  away  from  a  war,  in  which  no 
progress  had  been  made,  to  suffer  an  interregnum  to  take 
place.  The  deputies  sent,  brought  back  his  answer,  that  he 
would  come  to  Rome,  to  elect  new  magistrates.  The  lettet 
of  Lucius  Cornelius,  which  contained  an  account  of  the  bat¬ 
tle  with  the  Boians,  occasioned  a  debate  in  the  senate;  for 

8 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

fY.  R.  559. 

Marcus  Claudius,  lieutenant-general,  in  private  letters  to 
many  of  the  members,  had  written,  that  they  might  thank 
the  fortune  of  the  Roman  people,  and  the  bravery  of  the 
soldiers,  for  the  success  of  their  arms.  That  the  conduct  of 
the  consul  had  been  the  cause  of  a  great  many  men  being 
lost,  and*of  the  enemy’s  army,  which  might  have  been  en¬ 
tirely  cut  off,  making  its  escape.  That  what  made  the  loss 
of  men  the  greater,  was,  the  reinforcements,  necessary  to 
support  them  when  distressed,  coming  up  too  late  from  the 
reserve;  and  that,  what  enabled  the  enemy  to  slip  out  of  their 
hands,  was,  the  signal  being  given  too  tardily  to  the  legion¬ 
ary  cavalry,  and  their  not  being  allowed  to  pursue  the  fugi¬ 
tives.”  It  was  agreed,  that  no  resolution  should  be  hastily 
passed  on  the  subject;  and  the  business  was  accordingly  ad¬ 
journed  until  there  should  be  a  fuller  meeting. 
VII,  Another  concern  demanded  their  attention.  The 
public  was  heavily  distressed  by  usurious  practices;  and  al¬ 
though  avarice  had  been  restricted  by  many  laws,  respecting 
usury,  yet  these  had  been  evaded  by  a  fraudulent  artifice,  of 
transferring  the  securities  to  subjects  of  some  of  the  allied 
states,  who  were  not  bound  by  those  laws,  by  which  means 
usurers,  freed  from  all  restraint,  overwhelmed  their  debtors 
under  accumulated  loads.  On  considering  of  the  best  method 
for  putting  a.  stop  to  this  evil,  the  senate  decreed,  that  a  cer¬ 
tain  day  should  be  fixed  on  for  it;  the  next  approaching  fes¬ 
tival  of  the  infernal  deities;  and  that  any  of  the  allies  who 
should,  from  that  day,  lend  money  to  the  Roman  citizens, 
should  register  the  transaction;  and  that  all  proceedings  re¬ 
specting  such  money,  lent  after  that  day,  should  be  regulated 
by  the  laws  of  whichever  of  the  two  states  the  debtor  shoCild 
choose.  In  some  time  after,  when  the  great  amount  of  debt, 
contracted  through  this,  kind  of  fraud,  was  discovered,  by 
means  of  the  registries,  Marcus  Sempronius,  plebeian  tri¬ 
bune,  by  direction  of  the  senate,  proposed  to  the  people,  and 
the  people  ordered,  that  all  proceedings  relative  to  money 

BOOK  XXXV. 

9 

B.  C.  193.] 
lent,  between  Roman  citizens  and  subjects  of  any  of  the  al¬ 
lied  states,  or  Latine  confederacy,  should  be  regulated  by 
the  same  laws  as  those  wherein  both  parties  were  Roman 
citizens.  Such  were  the  transactions  in  Italy,  civil  and  mili¬ 
tary.  In  Spain,  the  war  was  far  from  being  so  formidable, 
as  the  exaggerations  of  report  had  represented  it.  In  hither 
Spain,  Caius  Flaminius  took  the  town  of  Ilucia,  in  the  coun¬ 
try  of  the  Oretanians,  and  then  marched  his  army  into  win¬ 
ter-quarters,  Several  engagements  took  place  during  the 
winter,  but  none  deserving  of  particular  mention,  the  adver¬ 
saries  being  rather  bands  of  robbers,  than  regular  soldiers; 
and  yet  the  success  was  various,  and  some  men  were  lost. 
More  important  services  were  performed  by  Marcus  Ful- 
vius.  He  fought  a  pitched  battle,  near  the  town  of  Toletum, 
against  the  Vaccseans,  Vectonians,  and  Celtiberians;  routed 
and  dispersed  their  combined  forces,  and  look  prisoner  their 
king,  Hilermus. 
VIII.  While  this  passed  in  Spain,  the  day  of  election 
drawing  near,  Lucius  Cornelius,  consul,  left  Marcus  Clau¬ 
dius,  lieutenant-general,  in  command  of  the  armv,  and  came 
to  Rome.  After  representing  in  the  senate  the  services  which 
he  had  performed,  and  the  present  state  of  the  province,  he 
expostulated  with  the  Conscript  Fathers  on  their  not  having 
ordered  a  thanksgiving  to  the  immortal  gods,  when  so  great 
a  war  was  so  happily  terminated  by  one  successful  battle; 
and  then  demanded,  that  the  same  might  be  decreed,  and 
also  a  triumph  to  himself.  But,  before  the  question  was  put, 
Quintus  Metellus,  who  had  been  consul  and  dictator,  said, 
that  letters  had  been  brought,  at  the  same  time  from  the 
consul,  Lucius  Cornelius,  to  the  senate,  and  from  Marcus 
Marcellus,  to  a  great  part  of  the  senators;  which  letters  con¬ 
tradicted  each  other,  and  for  that  reason  the  consideration  of 
the  business  had  been  adjourned,  in  order  that  it  might  be 
debated  when  the  writers  of  those  letters  should  be  present. 
He  had  expected,  therefore,  that  the  consul,  who  knew  that 
VOL.  V. — C 

10 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

[Y.  R.  559. 

the  lieutenant-general  had  written  something  to  his  disad¬ 
vantage,  would,  when  he  was  coming  home,  have  brought 
him  to  Rome;  especially,  as  the  command  of  the  army  would, 
with  more  propriety,  have  been  committed  to  Tiberius  Sem- 
pronius,  who  was  already  invested  with  authority,  than  to  the 
lieutenant-generah  As  the  case  stood  at  present,  it  appeared 
as  if  the  latter  was  kept  out  of  the  way,  designedly,  lest  he 
might  assert,  in  person,  the  same  things  which  he  had  writ¬ 
ten  in  his  letters;  and,  face  to  face,  either  substantiate  his 
charges,  or  if  his  allegations  were  ill  founded,  he  convicted 
of  misrepresentation,  so  that  the  truth  would  be  clearly  dis- 
covered.  For  this  reason  he  was  of  opinion,  that  the  senate 
should  not,  at  present,  assent  to  either  of  the  decrees  de¬ 
manded  by  the  consul.”  The  latter,  nevertheless,  persisted 
in  putting  the  question,  on  a  thanksgiving  being  ordered, 
and  himself  allowed  to  ride  into  the  city  in  triumph;  but 
two  plebeian  tribunes,  Marcus  and  Caius  Titinius,  declared, 
that  they  would  enter  their  protest,  if  the  senate  passed  any 
decree  on  the  subject. 
IX.  In  the  preceding  year,  Sextus  Psetus,  and  Caius 
Cornelius  Cethegus,  were  created  censors.  Cornelius  now 
closed  the  lustrum.  The  number  of  citizens  rated,  was  an 
hundred  and  forty-three  thousand  seven  hundred  and  four. 
Extraordinar}'  quantities  of  rain  fell  in  this  year,  and  the  Ti¬ 
ber  overflowed  the  lower  parts  of  the  city;  by  which  inundation 
some  buildings  near  the  Flumentan  gate  were  laid  in  ruins. 
The  Ccelimontan  gate  was  struck  by  lightning,  as  was  the 
W’all  on  each  side  of  it,  in  several  places.  At  Aricia,  Lanu- 
vium,  and  on  the  Aventine,  showers  of  stones  fell.  From 
Capua,  a  report  was  brought  that  a  very  large  s'warm  of  wasps 
flew  into  the  Forum,  and  pitched  on  the  temple  of  Mars; 
that  they  had  been  carefully  collected  and  burnt.  On  account 
of  these  prodigies,  the  duumvirs  were  ordered  to  consult 
the  books;  the  nine  days’  festival  was  celebrated,  a  supplica¬ 
tion  proclaimed,  and  the  city  purified.  At  the  same  time. 

B.  ai93.3 

BOOK  XXXV. 

n 

Marcus  Fortius  Cato  dedicated  a  chapel  to  Maiden  Victory, 
near  the  temple  of  Victory,  two  years  after  he  had  vowed  it. 
During  this  year,  a  Latine  colony  was  established  in  the 
Thurian  territory,  by  commissioners  appointed  for  the  pur¬ 
pose,  Cneius  Manlius  Vulso,  Lucius  Apustius  Fullo,  and 
Quintus  Ailius  Tubero,  who  had  proposed  the  order  for  its 
settlement.  I'here  went  out  thither,  three  thousand  foot  and 
three  hundred  horsemen;  a  very  small  number  in  proportion 
to  the  quantity  of  land  lying  waste.  Thirty  acres  might  have 
been  given  to  each  footman,  and  sixty  to  a  horseman;  but, 
by  the  advice  of  Apustius,  a  third  part  was  reserved,  that 
they  mi^ht  afterwards,  when  they  should  judge  proper,  send 
out  thither  a  nt  w  colony.  The  footmen  received  twenty  acres 
each,  the  horsemen  forty. 
X.  The  year  was  now  near  a  close,  and  with  regard  to  the 
election  of  consuls,  the  heat  of  competition  was  kindled  to  a 
degree  beyond  what  was  ever  known  before.  The  candidates, 
boUi  patrician  and  plebeian,  were  many  and  powerful;  Publius 
Cornelius  Scipio,  son  to  Cneius,  and  who  had  lately  come 
home  from  Spain,  where  he  had  gained  great  honour  by  his 
exploits;  Lucius  Quintius  Flamininus,  who  had  commanded 
the  fleet  in  Greece,  and  Cneius  Manlius  Vulso;  these  were 
the  patricians.  Then  there  \vere,  of  plebeian  rank,  Caius 
Lailius,  Cneius  Demitius,  Caius  Li\ius  Salinator,  and  Ma- 
xiius  Acilius.  The  eves  of  all  men  were  turned  on  Quintius 
and  Cornelius;  for,  being  both  patricians,  they  sued  for  one 
place;  and  they  \vere  both  of  them  recommended  by  high 
and  recent  renown  in  w'ar.  Above  every  thing  else,  the  bro¬ 
thers  of  the  candidates,  the  two  most  illustrious  generals  of 
the  age,  increased  the  violence  of  the  struggle.  Scipio's  fame 
was  the  more  splendid,  and  in  proportion  to  its  greater  splen¬ 
dour,  the  moic  obnoxious  to  envy.  Quintius's  was  the  more 
recent,  as  he  had  triumphed  in  the  course  of  that  very  same 
year.  Besides,  the  former  had  now,  for  almost  ten  years, 
been  continually  in  people’s  sight;  which  circumstance,  bv 

12 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R,  559. 
the  mere  satiety  which  it  creates,  diminishes  the  reverence 
felt  for  great  characters.  He  had  been  a  second  time  con¬ 
sul,  after  the  final  defeat  of  Hannibal,  and  also  censor.  All 
Quintius’s  claims  to  the  favour  of  the  public  were  fresh  and 
new;  since  his  triumph^  he  had  neither  asked  nor  received 
^ny  thing  from  the  people;  “  he  solicited,”  he  said,  in  fa¬ 
vour  of  his  own  brother,  not  of  a  half  brother;  in  favour  of 
his  lieutenant-general,  and  partner  in  the  administration  of 
the  war;  his  brother  having  conducted  the  operations  by  sea, 
while  he  did  the  same  on  land.”  Such  were  the  arguments 
by  which  he  carried  his  point.  His  brother  was  preferred  to 
the  brother  of  Africanus,  though  supported  by  the  whole 
Cornelian  family,  and  while  one  of  the  same  family  presided 
at  the  election,  and  notwithstanding  the  very  honourable  tes¬ 
timony  given  by  the  senate,  in  his  favour,  when  they  judged 
him  to  be  the  best  man  in  the  state;  and  as  such,  appointed 
him  to  receive  the  Idsean  Mother  into  the  city,  when  she 
w^as  brought  from  Pessinus.  Lucius  Quintius  and  Cneius 
Domitius  Ahenobarbus  were  elected  consuls;  so  that,  not 
even  with  respect  to  the  plebeian  consul,  could  Africanus 
prevail;  for  he  employed  his  interest  in  favour  of  Caius  Lse- 
lius.  Next  day  were  elected  praetors,  Lucius  Scribonius 
Libo,  Marcus  Fuivius  Centumalus,  Aulus  Atilius  Serranus, 
Marcus  Beebius  Tamphilus,  Lucius  Valerius  Tappus,  and 
Quintus  Salonius  Sarra.  The  fediles  of  this  year,  Marcus 
A^milius  Lepidus  and  Lucius  ^^milius  Paulas,  distinguished 
themselves  highly:  they  prosecuted  to  conviction  many  of 
the  farmers  of  the  public  pastures,  and  with  the  money  ac¬ 
cruing  from  the  fines,  placed  gilded  shields  in  the  upper 
part  of  the  temple  of  Jupiter.  They  built  one  colonnade  on 
the  outside  of  the  gate  Tergemina,  to  which  they  added  a 
wharf  on  the  Tiber;  and  another,  reaching  from  the  Front!- 
nal  gate  to  the  altar  of  Mars,  to  serve  as  a  passage  into  the 
field  of  Mars. 

BOOK  XXXV. 

13 

B.  C.  193.] 
XL  For  a  long  time,  nothing  worth  recording  had  occurred 
in  Liguria;  but,  towards  the  end  of  this  year,  the  Roman  af¬ 
fairs  there  were  twice  brought  into  great  peril;  for  the  con¬ 
sul’s  camp  being  assaulted,  was,  with  difficulty,  saved  from 
falling  into  the  enemy's  hands;  and  a  short  time  after,  as  the 
Roman  army  was  marching  through  a  defile,  the  Ligurians 
seized  on  the  opening  through  which  they  were  to  pass.  The 
consul,  when  he  found  that  passage  stopped  up,  faced  about, 
resolved  to  return  by  the  way  he  came:  but  the  entrance  be¬ 
hind,  also,  was  occupied  by  a  party  of  the  enemy,  and  the 
disaster  of  Caudium  not  only  occurred  to  the  memory  of  the 
Romans,  but  was,  in  a  manner,  represented  to  their  eyes. 
The  consul  had,  among  his  auxiliary  troops,  about  eight 
hundred  Numidian  horsemen,  whose  commanding  officer  un¬ 
dertook  to  force  a  passage  with  his  troops,  on  whichever 
side  the  consul  should  choose.  He  only  desired  to  be  told 
on  which  part  the  greater  number  of  villages  lay;  for,  on 
them  he  meant  to  make  an  attack;  and  the  first  thing  he  in¬ 
tended  doing,  was  to  set  fire  to  the  houses,  in  order  that  the 
alarm  which  this  should  occasion,  might  induce  the  Ligu¬ 
rians  to  quit  their  posts  in  the  defile,  and  hasten  to  different 
quarters  to  the  relief  of  their  friends.  The  consul  highly 
commended  his  zeal,  and  gave  him  assurance  of  ample  re¬ 
wards.  The  Numidians  mounted  their  horses,  and  began  to 
ride  up  to  the  advanced  posts  of  the  enemy,  but  without 
making  any  attack.  Nothing  could  appear,  on  the  first  view, 
more  contemptible.  Both  men  and  horses  were  of  a  small 
size,  and  thin  make,  the  riders  unaccoutred,  and  unarmed, 
excepting  that  they  carried  javelins  in  their  hands;  and  the 
horses  without  bridles,  and  awkward  in  their  gait,  running 
with  their  necks  stiff',  and  their  heads  stretched  out.  The 
contempt,  conceived  from  their  appearance,  they  took  pains 
to  increase;  sometimes  falling  fz'om  their  horses,  and  making 
themselves  objects  of  derision  and  ridicule.  The  consequence 
was,  that  the  enemy,  who  at  first  had  been  alert,  and  read) 

14 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

[Y.  R.  559. 

on  their  posts,  in  case  of  an  attack,  now,  for  the  most  part, 
laid  aside  their  arms,  and  sitting  down,  amused  themselves 
with  looking  at  them.  The  Numidians  often  rode  up,  then 
gallopped  back,  but  still  contrived  to  get  nearer  to  the  pass, 
as  if  they  were  unable  to  manage  their  horses,  and  were  car¬ 
ried  away  against  their  will.  At  last,  setting  spurs  to  them, 
they  broke  out  through  the  midst  of  the  enemy’s  posts,  and, 
getting  into  the  open  country,  set  fire  to  all  the  houses  near 
the  road.  The  nearest  village  was  soon  in  flames,  while  they 
ravaged  all  around  with  fire  and  sword.  At  first,  the  sight 
of  the  smoke,  then  the  shouts  of  the  affrighted  inhabitants, 
at  last  the  old  people  and  children,  who  fled  for  shelter, 
created  great  disorder  in  the  camp.  In  consequence  of  which 
the  whole  of  their  army,  without  plan,  and  without  command, 
ran  off,  each  to  take  care  of  his  own;  the  camp  was  in  a  mo¬ 
ment  deserted;  and  the  consul,  delivered  from  the  blockade, 
made  good  his  march  to  the  place  whither  he  intended  to  go. 
XII.  But  neither  the  Boians  nor  the  Spaniards,  though  pro¬ 
fessed  enemies  at  that  time,  were  such  bitter  and  inveterate 
foes  to  the  Romans  as  the  nation  of  the  JEtolians.  These, 
after  the  departure  of  the  Roman  armies  from  Greece,  had, 
for  some  time,  entertained  liopcs,  that  Antiochus  would 
come  and  take  possession  of  Europe,  without  opposition;  and 
that  neither  Philip  nor  Nabis  would  continue  quiet.  But, 
seeing  no  active  measures,  begun,  in  any  quarter,  they  re¬ 
solved,  lest  their  designs  might  be  damped  by  delay,  to  set 
on  foot  some  plan  of  disturbance;  and,  with  this  view,  they 
summoned  a  general  assembly  at  Naupactum.  Here  Thoas, 
their  praetor,  after  complaining  of  the  injurious  behaviour  of 
the  Romans,  and  the  present  state  of  iEtolia,  and  assorting, 
that,  “of  all  the  nations  and  states  of  Greece,  they  were  treat¬ 
ed  with  the  greatest  indifference,*  after  the  victory  which 
they  themselves  had  been  the  means  of  obtaining, ’’  moved, 
that  ambassadors  should  be  sent  to  each  of  the  kings;  hot 
only  to  sound  their  dispositions,  but,  by  such  incentives  as 

BOOK  XXXV. 

B.  C.  193.] 

suited  the  temper  of  each,  to  urge  them  to  a  war  with  Rome. 
Damocritus  was  sent  to  Nabis,  Nicander  to  Philip,  and  Di- 
csearchus,  the  prgetor’s  brother,  to  Antiochus.  To  the  La¬ 
cedemonian  tyrant,  Damocritus  represented  that,  “  by  the 
maritime  cities  being  taken  from  him,  his  government  was 
left  quite  destitute  of  strength;  for  from  them  he  used  to 
draw  supplies  of  soldiers,  as  well  as  of  ships  and  seamen.  He 
was  now  pent  up,  almost  within  the  walls  of  his  capital, 
while  he  saw  the  Achacans  domineering  over  the  whole  Pelo¬ 
ponnesus.  Never  would  he  have  another  opportunity  of  re¬ 
covering  his  rights,  if  he  neglected  to  improve  the  one  that 
now  offered.  There  was  no  Roman  army  in  Greece,  nor 
would  the  Romans  deem  Gythium,  or  the  other  towns  on  the 
coast  of  Laconia,  sufficient  cause  for  transporting  their  le¬ 
gions  a  second  time  into  that  country.”  These  arguments 
were  used  for  the  purpose  of  provoking  the  passions  of  Na- 
bis;  in  order  that,  when  Antiochus  should  come  into  Greece, 
the  other,  conscious  of  having  infringed  the  treaty  of  amity 
with  Rome,  by  injuries  offered  to  its  allies,  might  unite  him¬ 
self  with  him.  Nicander  endeavoured  to  rouse  Philip,  by 
arguments  somewhat  similar;  and  he  had  more  copious  mat- 
ter  for  discourse,  as  the  king  had  been  degraded  from  a  more 
elevated  state  than  the  tyrant,  and  had  sustained  greater  loss¬ 
es.  Besides  these  topics,  he  introduced  the  ancient  renown 
of  the  Macedonian  kings,  and  the  victorious  arms  of  that  na¬ 
tion,  displayed  through  every  quarter  of  the  globe,  “  The 
plan  which  he  proposed,”  he  said,  “  was  free  from  any  dan¬ 
ger,  either  in  the  commencement,  or  in  the  issue.  For  he 
did  not  advise  that  Philip  should  stir,  until  Antiochus 
should  have  come  into  Greece,  with  an  army;  and,  consider¬ 
ing  that,  without  the  aid  of  Antiochus,  he  had  maintained  a 
war  so  long  against  the  combined  forces  of  the  Romans  and 
^Titolians,  with  what  possible  force  could  the  Romans  with¬ 
stand  him,  when  joined  by  Antiochus,  and  supported  by  the 
aid  of  the  yEtolians,  who,  on  the  former  occasion,  were  more 

15 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  559. 
dangerous  enemies  than  the  Romans?  ’  He  added  the  circum¬ 
stance  of  Hannibal  being  general;  a  man  born  a  foe  to  the 
Romans,  who  had  slain  greater  numbers,  both  of  their  com¬ 
manders  and  soldiers,  than  were  left  surviving.”  Such  were 
the  incitements  held  out  to  Philip  by  Nicander.  Diceearchus 
addressed  other  arguments  to  Antiochus.  In  the  first  place, 
he  told  him.  that  “  although  the  Romans  reaped  the  spoils 
of  Philip,  the  honour  of  the  victory  over  him  was  due  to 
the  iEtolians;  that,  to  the  iEtolians  alone,  the  Romans  were 
obliged,  for  having  gained  admittance  into  Greece,  and  that 
the  same  people  supplied  them  with  the  strength  which  ena¬ 
bled  them  to  conquer.”  He  next  set  forth  the  numerous 
forces,  both  horse  and  foot,  which  they  were  willing  to  fur¬ 
nish  to  Antiochus,  for  the  purpose  of  the  war;  what  quarters 
they  would  assign  to  his  land-forces,  what  harbours  for  his 
ships.  He  then  asserted  whatever  falsehoods  he  pleased,  re¬ 
specting  Philip  and  Nabis;  that  both  were  ready  to  recom¬ 
mence  hostilities,  and  would  greedily  lay  hold  on  the  first 
opportunity  of  recovering  what  they  had  lost  in  war.” 
Thus  did  the  iEtolians  labour,  in  every  part  of  the  world,  to 
stir  up  war  against  the  Romans.  Of  the  kings,  however,  one 
refused  to  engage  in  the  business,  and  the  other  engaged  in 
it  too  late. 
XI I L  Nabis  immediately  despatched  emissaries,  through 
all  the  towns  on  the  coast,  to  sow*  dissensions  among  the  in¬ 
habitants:  some  of  the  men  in  power  he  brought  over  to  his 
party,  by  presents;  others,  who  more  firmly  adhered  to  the 
alliance  wdth  Rome  he  put  to  death.  The  charge  of  protect-^ 
ing  all  the  Laced^emonians,  on  the  coast,  had  been  commit¬ 
ted  by  Titus  Quintius  to  the  Ach^eans;  they,  therefore  instant¬ 
ly  sent  ambassadors  to  the  tyrant,  to  remind  him  of  his  trea¬ 
ty  with  the  Romans,  and  to  warn  him  against  violating  a 
peace  which  he  had  so  earnestly  sued  for.  They  also  sent 
succours  to  Gythium,  which  he  had  already  besieged,  and 
ambassadors  to  Rome,  to  make  known  these  transactions. 

BOOK  XXXV. 

17 

B.  C.  193.] 

King  Antiochus  liaving,  this  winter,  solemnized  the  nuptials 
of  his  daughter,  with  Ptolemy,  king  of  Egypt,  at  Raphia,  in 
Phcenicia,  returned  thence  to  Antioch,  and  came,  towards 
the  end  of  the  season,  through  Cilicia;  after  passing  mount 
Taurus,  to  the  city  of  Ephesus.  Early  in  the  spring,  he  sent 
his  son  Antiochus  thence  into  Syria,  to  guard  the  remote 
frontiers  of  his  dominions,  lest,  during  his  absence,  any  com¬ 
motion  might  arise  behind  him;  and  then,  he  marched  him¬ 
self,  with  all  his  land-forces,  to  attack  the  Pisidians,  inhabit¬ 
ing  the  country  near  Sida.  At  this  time,  Publius  Sulpicius 
and  Publius  Villius,  the  Roman  ambassadors,  who  were  sent 
to  Antiochus,  as  above  mentioned,  having  received  orders 
to  wait  on  Eumenes,  first  came  to  Elsea,  and  thence  went  up 
to  Pergamus,  where  that  monarch  kept  his  court.  Eumenes 
was  very  desirous  of  wan  being  undertaken  against  Antiochus, 
for  he  thought,  that  if  peace  continued,  a  king,  so  much  su¬ 
perior  in  power,  would  be  a  troublesome  neighbour;  but  that, 
in  case  of  hostilities,  he  would  prove  no  more  a  match  for 
the  Romans,  than  Philip  had  been;  and  that  either  he  would 
be  entirely  removed  out  of  the  way,  or,  should  peace  be 
granted  to  him,  after  a  defeat,  he  (Eumenes)  might  reasona¬ 
bly  expect,  that  a  great  deal  of  what  should  be  taken  from 
Antiochus,  would  fall  to  his  own  share;  so  that,  in  future,  he 
might  be  very  well  able  to  defend  himself  against  him,  with¬ 
out  any  aid  from  his  ally;  and  even  if  any  misfortune  were 
to  happen,  it  would  be  better  for  him,  in  conjunction  with 
the  Romans,  to  undergo  any  turn  of  fortune,  than,  standing 
alone,  either  suffer  himself  to  be  ruled  by  Antiochus,  or,  on 
refusal,  be  compelled  to  submission  by  force  of  arms.  There¬ 
fore,  with  all  his  influence,  and  every  argument  which  he 
could  devise,  he  urged  the  Romans  to  a  war. 
XIV.  Sulpicius,  falling  sick,  staid  at  Pergamus.  Villius, 
on  hearing  that  the  king  was  carrying  on  war  in  Pisidia, 
went  on  to  Ephesus,  and  during  a  few  days,  that  he  halted 
in  that  city,  took  pains  to  procure  frequent  interviews  with 
VOL.  V.— D 

18 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  55G. 

Hannibal,  who  happened  to  be  there  at  the  time.  His  design 
was,  merely,  to  discover  his  intentions,  if  possible,  and  to 
remove  his  apprehensions  of  danger  threatening  him  from 
the  Romans.  No  other  business,  of  any  kind,  was  men¬ 
tioned  at  these  meetings;  yet  they,  accidentally,  produced 
an  important  consequence,  as  effectually,  as  if  it  had  been 
intentionally  sought;  the  lowering  Hannibal  in  the  esteem 
of  the  king,  and  rendering  him  more  obnoxious  to  suspicion, 
in  every  matter,  Claudius,  following  the  history,  written 
in  Greek  by  Acilius,  says,  that  Publius  Africanus  was  em¬ 
ployed  in  this  embassy,  and  that  it  was  he  who  conversed 
with  Hannibal  at  Ephesus.  He  even  relates  one  of  their 
conversations,  in  which  Scipio  asked  Hannibal  “  what  man 
it  was,  whom  he  thought  the  greatest  captain?’’  who  answered, 
Alexander,  king  of  Macedonia;  be9ause,  with  a  small  band, 
he  defeated  armies  whose  numbers  were  beyond  reckoning; 
and  because  he  carried  his  victorious  arms  through  the 
remotest  boundaries  of  the  world,  the  merely  visiting  of 
which  would  be  a  task  which  no  other  man  could  hope  to 
accomplish,”  Scipio  then  asked,  ‘‘  to  whom  he  gave  the 
second  place?”  and  he  replied,  to  Pyrrhus;  for  he  first 
taught  the  method  of  encamping;  and  besides,  no  one  ever 
showed  more  exquisite  judgment,  in  choosing  his  ground, 
and  disposing  his  posts;  while  he  also  possessed  the  art  of 
conciliating  esteem  to  such  a  degree,  that  the  nations  of  Italy 
wished  him,  though  a  foreign  prince,  to  hold  the  sovereignty 
among  them,  rather  than  the  Romans,  who  had  so  long 
possessed  the  dominion  of  that  part  of  the  world.”  On  his 
proceeding  to  ask,  the  name  of  him  whom  he  esteemed 
the  third:  ’  Hannibal  replied,  “  myself,  beyond  doubt.” 
On  this  Scipio,  smiling,  said  What  would  you  have  said 
if  you  had  conquered  me?”  ‘‘  Then,”  replied  the  other,  “  I 
would  have  placed  Hannibal,  not  only  before  Alexander  and 
Pyrrhus,  but  before  every  other  commander  that  ever  lived.’' 
This  answer,  conveying,  with  a  turn  of  Punic  artifice,  an 

B.  C.  193.] 

BOOK  XXXV. 

19 
indirect  compliment,  and  an  unexpected  kind  of  flattery,  was 
highly  grateful  to  Scipio,  as  it  set  him  apart  from  the  crowd 
of** commanders,  beyond  competition,  as  if  his  abilities  were 
not  to  be  estimated. 
XV.  From  Ephesus,  Villius  proceeded  to  Apamea, 
whither  Antiochus,  on  hearing  of  the  coming  of  the  Homan 
delegates,  came  to  meet  him.  In  this  congress,  at  Apamea, 
the  debates  were  similar  to  those  which  passed  at  Rome, 
between  Quintius  and  the  king’s  ambassadors;  and  the  con¬ 
ferences  were  broken  oflF,  by  news  arriving  of  the  death  of 
Antiochus  the  king’s  son,  who,  as  just  now  mentioned,  had 
been  sent  into  Syria.  This  youth  was  greatly  lamented  and 
regretted  at  court;  for  he  had  ^ven  such  specimens  of  his 
character,  as  afforded  evident  proof,  that,  had  a  longer  life 
been  allotted  him,  he  would  have  displayed  the  talents  of  a 
great  and  just  prince.  The  more  he  was  beloved  and 
esteemed  by  all,  the  stronger  were  the  suspicions  excited 
by  his  death;  that  his  father,  thinking  that  his  heir  shared 
too  largely  of  the  public  favour,  while  he  himself  was  de¬ 
clining  in  old  age,  had  him  taken  off  by  poison,  by  some 
eunuchs,  a  kind  of  people,  who  recommend  themselves  to 
kings,  by  the  perpetration  of  such  foul  deeds.  People 
mentioned  also,  as  another  motive  for  that  clandestine  act 
of  villainy,  that,  as  he  had  given  Lysimachia  to  his  son 
Seleucus,  he  had  no  establishment  of  the  like  kind,  which 
he  could  give  to  Antiochus,  for  the  purpose  of  banishing 
him  also  to  a  distance,  under  pretext  of  doing  him  honour. 
Nevertheless,  an  appearance  of  deep  mourning  was  main¬ 
tained  in  the  court  for  several  days;  and  the  Roman  ambas¬ 
sador,  lest  his  presence  at  that  time  might  be  troublesome, 
retired  to  Pergamus.  The  king,  dropping  the  prosecution 
of  the  war  which  he  had  begun,  went  back  to  Ephesus;  and 
there  keeping  himself  shut  up  in  the  palace,  under  colour  of 
grief,  held  secret  consultations  with  a  person  called  Minio, 
who  was  his  principal  favourite.  Minio  was  utterly  ignorant 

20 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y*  R.  559. 

of  the  state  of  <all  foreign  nations;  and,  accordingly,  estima¬ 
ting  the  strength  of  the  king  from  his  successes  in  Syria  or 
Asia,  he  was  confident  that  Antiochus  had  superiority  fi^m 
the  merits  of  bis  cause,  and  that  the  demands  of  the  Romans 
were  highly  unreasonable;  imagining  also,  that  he  would 
prove  the  more  powerful  in  war.  As  the  king  wished  to 
avoid  farther  debate  with  the  envoys,  either  because  he  had 
found  no  advantage  to  result  from  the  former  conference,  or 
because  he  was  too  much  discomposed  by  recent  grief,  Mi¬ 
ni©  undertook  to  say  whatever  was  requisite  for  his  interest, 
and  persuaded  him  to  invite  for  the  purpose  the  ambassadors 
from  Pergamus. 
XVI.  By  this  time  Sulpicius  had  recovered  his  health; 
both  himself  and  Villi  us,  therefore,  came  to  Ephesus.  Minio 
apologized  for  the  king  not  being  present,  and  the  business 
was  entered  upon.  Then  Minio  in  a  studied  speech,  said, 
I  find,  Romans,  that  you  profess  very  specious  intentions, 
(the  liberating  of  the  Grecian  states,)  but  your  actions  do 
not  accord  with  your  words.  You  lay  down  one  rule  for 
Antiochus,  and  follow  another  yourselves.  For,  how  are 
the  inhabitants  of  Smyrna  and  Lampsacus  better  entitled  to 
the  character  of  Greeks,  than  the  Neapolitans,  Rhegians,  and 
Tarentines,  from  whom  you  exact  tribute,  and  ships,  in  pur¬ 
suance  of  a  treaty?  Why  do  you  send  yearly  to  Syracuse, 
and  other  Grecian  cities  of  Sicily,  a  praetor,  vested  with  sove¬ 
reign  power,  and  attended  by  his  rods  and  axes?  You  can, 
certainly,  allege  no  other  reason  than  this,  that,  having  con¬ 
quered  them  in  war,  you  imposed  these  terms  on  them#  Ad¬ 
mit,  then,  on  the  part  of  Antiochus,  the  same  reason  with 
respect  to  Smyrna  and  Lampsacus,  and  the  cities  belonging  to 
Ionia  and  iEolia.  Conquered  by  his  ancestors,  they  were  sub¬ 
jected  to  tribute  and  taxes,  and  he  only  reclaims  an  ancient 
right.  Answer  him  on  these  heads,  if  you  mean  a  fair  discus¬ 
sion  and  do  not  merely  seek  a  pretence  for  war.’’  Sulpicius  an¬ 
swered,  Antiochus  has  shown  some  modesty  in  choosing. 

BOOK  XXXV.  . 

21 

B.C.  193.] 
that,  since  no  other  arguments  could  be  produced  in  his  fa¬ 
vour,  any  other  person  should  utter  these  rather  than  himself. 
For,  what  similarity  is  there  in  the  cases  of  those  states 
whicK  you  have  brought  into  comparison?  From  the  Rhe- 
gians,  Neapolitans,  and  Tarentines,  we  require  what  they 
owe  us  by  treaty,  in  virtue  of  a  right  invariably  exercised,  in 
one  uniform  course,  since  they  first  came  under  our  power; 
a  right  always  'asserted,  and  never  intermitted.  Now  can 
you  assert,  that  as  these  states  have,  neither  of  themselves, 
or  through  any  other,  ever  refused  conforming  to  the  treaty, 
so  the  Asiatic  states,  since  they  once  came  under  the  power 
of  Antiochus’s  ancestors,  have  been  held  in  uninterrupted 
possession  by  your  reigning  kings;  and  that  some  of  them 
have  not  been  subject  to  the  dominion  of  Philip,  some  to 
that  of  Ptolemy;  and  that  others  have  not  for  many  years 
maintained  themselves  in  a  state  of  independence;  their  title 
to  which  was  ndl.  called  in  question?  For,  if  the  circum¬ 
stance  of  their  having  been  once  subject  to  a  foreigner,  when 
crushed  under  the  severity  of  the  times,  conveys  a  right  to 
enforce  that  subjection  again,  after  a  lapse  of  so  many  ge¬ 
nerations,  what  can  be  said  of  our  having  delivered  Greece 
from  Philip,  but  that  we  have  laboured  in  vain;  and  that  his 
successors  may  reclaim  Corinth,  Chalcis,  Demetrias,  and 
the  whole  nation  of  Thessaly?  But  why  do  I  plead  the  cause 
of  those  states,  which  it  would  be  fitter  that  both  we  and 
the  king  should  hear  pleaded  by  themselves?” 
XVI I .  He  then  desired,  that  the  deputies  of  those  states 
should  be  called,  for  they  had  been  prepared  beforehand,  atjd 
kept  in  readiness,  by  Eumenes,  who  reckoned,  that  every 
share  of  strength  that  should  be  taken  away  from  Antiochus, 
would  become  an  accession  to  his  own  kingdom.  Many  of 
them  were  introduced;  and,  while  each  enforced  his  own 
complaints,  and  sometimes  demands,  some  reasonable,  many 
unreasonable,  they  changed  the  debate  into  a  mere  alterca¬ 
tion.  The  ambassadors,  therefore,  without  conceding  or 

no 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

[  Y.  R.  559. 

carrying  any  one  point,  returned  to  Rome,  and  left  every 
thing  in  the  same  unsettled  state,  in  which  they  found  it.  On 
their  departure  the  king  held  a  council,  on  the  subject  of  a 
war  with  Rome,  in  which  all  the  members  vied  with  each 
other  in  the  violence  of  their  harangues;  for  every*  one 
thought,  that  the  greater  acrimony  he  showed  toward  the 
Romans,  the  greater  share  of  favour  he  might  expect  to  ob¬ 
tain.  One  inveighed  against  the  insolence  of  their  demands, 
in  which  they  presume  to  impose  terms  on  Antiochus,  the 
greatest  king  in  Asia,  as  they  would  on  the  vanquished  Na- 
bis.  Although  to  Nabis  they  left  absolute  power  over  his 
own  country,  and  its  capital,  Lacedeemon,  yet  the}"  insist  on 
the*  impropriety  of  Smyrna  and  Lampsacus  yielding  obedi¬ 
ence  to  Antiochus.’’— Others  said,  that  “  to  so  great  a  mo¬ 
narch,  those  cities  were  but  a  trivial  ground  of  war,  scarcely 
worth  mention;  but  unjust  pretensions  to  authority  were  al¬ 
ways  urged,  at  first,  in  matters  of  little  cSnsequence,  unless 
indeed,  it  could  be  supposed,  that  the  Persians,  when  they 
demanded  earth  and  water  from  the  Lacedtemonians,  stood 
in  need  of  a  morsel  of  the  one  or  a  draught  of  the  other. 
The  proceedings  of  the  Romans,  respecting  the  two  cities, 
were  meant  as  a  trial  of  the  same  sort.  The  rest  of  the  states, 
when  they  saw  that  two  had  shaken  off  the  yoke,  would  go 
over  to  the  party  of  that  nation  which  professed  the  patro¬ 
nage  of  liberty.  If  freedom  was  not  actually  preferable  to  ser¬ 
vitude,  yet  the  hope  of  bettering  their  circumstances  by  a 
change,  was  more  flattering  to  every  one  than  any  present 
situation.” 
XVIII.  There  was,  in  the  council,  an  Acarnanian  named 
Alexander,  who  had  formerly  been  a  friend  of  Philip,  but 
had  lately  left  him  to  follow  the  more  opulent  court  of  An- 
tiochus.  This  man,  being  well  skilled  in  the  affairs  of  Greece, 
and  not  unacquainted  tvith  the  Romans,  was  admitted  by  the 
king  into  such  a  degree  of  intimacy,  that  he  shared  even  in 
his  secret  counsels.  As  if  the  question  to  be  considered 

B.  C.  193.] 

BOOK  XXXV. 

23 

were  not^  whether  there  should  be  war  or  not,  but  where, 
and  in  what  manner,  it  should  be  carried  on,  he  affirmed, 
that  “  he  saw  an  assured  prospect  of  victory,  provided  the 
king  would  pass  into  Europe,  and  choose  some  part  of 
Greece  for  the  seat  of  war.  In  the  first  place,  the  iEtolians, 
who  lived  in  the  centre  of  Greece,  would  be  found  in  arms, 
ready  to  take  the  lead  in  the  most  perilous  operations.  Then, 
in  the  two  extremities  of  Greece,  Nabis,  on  the  side  of  Pe¬ 
loponnesus,  would  put  every  thing  in  motion,  to  recover  the 
city  of  Argos,  and  the  maritime  cities,  from  which  he  had 
been  expelled  by  the  Romans,  and  pent  up  within  the  walls 
of  Lacedsemon:  while  on  the  side  of  Macedonia,  Philip  would 
be  ready  for  the  field  the  moment  he  heard  the  alarm  sound¬ 
ed.  He  knew,’’  he  said,  ‘‘  his  spirit,  he  knew  his  temper;  he 
knew  that,  fas  is  the  case  with  wild  beasts,  confined  by  bars 
or  chains,)  for  a  long  time  past,  the  most  violent  rage  had 
been  boiling  in  his  breast.  He  remembered  also,  how  often, 
during  the  war,  that  prince  had  prayed  to  all  the  gods  to  grant 
him  Antiochus  as  an  assistant;  and,  if  that  prayer  were  now 
heard  with  favour,  he  would  not  hesitate  an  instant  to  re¬ 
sume  his  arms.  It  was  only  requisite  that  there  should  be 
no  delay,  no  procrastination;  for  success  depended  chiefly 
on  securing  beforehand,  commodious  posts  and  proper  al¬ 
lies:  besides,  Hannibal  ought  to  be  sent  immediately  into 
Africa,  in  order  to  distract  the  attention  of  the  Romans,^’ 
XIX.  Hannibal  was  not  called  to  this  consultation,  because 
the  king  had  harboured  suspicions  of  him  on  account  of  his 
conferences  with  Villius,  and  had  not  since  shown  him  any 
mark  of  regard.  This  affront,  at  first,  he  bore  in  silence; 
but  afterwards  thought  it  better  to  take  some  proper  oppor¬ 
tunity  to  inquire  the  reason  of  the  king’s  suddenly  with¬ 
drawing  his  favour,  and  to  clear  hilnself  of  blame.  Without 
any  preface,  he  asked  the  cause  of  the  king’s  displeasure; 
and  on  being  told  it,  said,  “  Antiochus,  when  I  was  yet  an 
infant,  my  father  Hamilcar,  at  a  time  when  he  was  offering 

24 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  560* 

sacrifice,  brought  me  up  to  the  altars,  and  made  me  take  an 
oath,  that  I  never  would  be  a  friend  to  the  Roman  people. 
Under  the  obligation  of  this  oath,  I  carried  arms  against 
them  for  thirty-six  years;  this  oath,  on  peace  being  made, 
drove  me  out  of  my  country,  and  brought  me  an  exile  to 
your  court:  and  this  oath  shall  guide  me,  should  you  disap¬ 
point  my  hopes,  until  I  traverse  every  quarter  of  the  globe, 
where  I  can  understand  that  there  is  either  strength  or  arms, 
to  find  out  enemies  to  the  Romans.  If,  therefore,  your  cour¬ 
tiers  have  conceived  the  idea  of  ingratiating  themselves  with 
you,  by  insinuating  suspicions  of  me,  let  them  seek  some 
other  means  of  advancing  their  own  reputation,  rather  than 
the  depressing  of  mine.  I  hate,  and  am  hated  by,  the  Ro¬ 
mans.  That  I  speak  the  truth  in  this,  my  father  Hamilcar, 
and  the  gods  are  witnesses.  Whenever,  therefore,  you  shall 
employ  your  thoughts  on  a  plan  of  waging  war  with  Rome, 
consider  Hannibal  as  one  of  your  firmest  friends.  If  cir¬ 
cumstances  force  you  to  adopt  peaceful  measures,  on  such  a 
subject  employ  some  other  counsellor.’’  This  discourse  af¬ 
fected  the  king  much,  and  even  reconciled  him  to  Hannibal. 
The  resolution  of  the  council,  at  their  breaking  up,  was,  that 
the  war  should  be  undertaken. 
Y-  R.  560.  XX.  At  Rome,  people  talked,  indeed,  of  a  breach 
B.  C.  19:^^  with  Antiochus  as  an  event  very  likely  to  happen, 
but,  except  talking  of  it,  they  had  hitherto  made  no  prepara¬ 
tion.  Italy  was  decreed  the  province  of  both  the  consuls, 
who  received  directions  to  settle  between  themselves,  or 
draw  lots  which  of  them  should  preside  at  the  elections  of 
the  year;  and  it  was  ordered,  that  he  whd  should  be  disen¬ 
gaged  from  that  business,  should  hold  himself  in  readiness, 
in  case  there  should  be  occasion,  to  lead  the  legions  any 
where  out  of  that  country.  The  consul,  so  commissioned, 
had  leave  given  him  to  levy  two  new  legions,  and  twenty 
thousand  foot,  and  nine  hundred  horse,  among  the  allies  and 
Latine  confederates.  To  the  other  consul  were  decreed  the 

BOOK  XXXV. 

25 

B.  C.  192.] 
two  legions  which  had  been  commanded  by  Lticius  Conie- 
lius,  consul  of  the  preceding  year;  and  from  the  same  army, 
a  body  of  allies  and  Latines,  amounting  to  fifteen  thousand 
foot,  and  five  hundred  horse.  Quintus  Minucius  was  con¬ 
tinued  in  command,  and  had  assigned  to  him  the  forces  which 
he  then  had  in  Liguria;  as  a  supplement  to  which,  four  thou¬ 
sand  Roman  foot,  and  five  hundred  horse,  were  ordered  to 
be  enlisted,  and  five  thousand  foot,  and  two  hundred  and  fifty 
horse  to  be  demanded  from  the  allies.  I'he  province  of  go¬ 
ing  out  of  Italy,  wherever  the  senate  should  order,  fell  to 
Cneius  Domitius;  Gaul,  and  the  holding  the  elections,  to 
Lucius  Quint ius.  The  pfaetors  then  cast  lots  for  their  pro¬ 
vinces:  to  Marcus  Fulvius  Centumalus  fell  the  city  jurisdic¬ 
tion;  to  Lucius  Scribonius  Libo,  the  foreign;  Lucius  Valeri¬ 
us  J'appus  obtained  Sicily;  Quintus  Saionius  Sarra,  Sardinia; 
Marcus  Bsebius  Tamphilus,  hither  Spain;  and  Marcus  Ati- 
lius  Serranus,  farther  Spain.  But  the  provinces  of  the  two 
last  were  changed,  first,  by  a  decree  of  senate,  which  was 
afterwards  confirmed  by  an  order  of  the  people.  The  fleet, 
and  oNIacedonia,  were  assigned  to  Atilius;  Bruttium  to  Bae- 
bius.  Flaminius  and  Fulvius  were  continued  in  command  in 
both  the  hither  and  farther  Spain.  To  Baebius  Tamphilus, 
for  the  business  of  Bruttium,  were  decreed  the  two  legions 
which  had  served  in  the  city  the  year  before;  and  he  was 
ordered  to  demand  from  the  allies,  for  the  same  service,  fif¬ 
teen  thousand  foot  and  five  hundred  horse.  Atilius  was  or¬ 
dered  to  build  thirty  ships  of  five  banks  of  oars:  to  bring  out, 
from  the  docks,  any  old  ones  that  were  fit  for  service,  and 
to  raise  seamen.  An  order  was  also  given  to  the  consid,  to 
supply  him  with  two  thousand  of  the  allied  and  Latine  foot¬ 
men,  and  a  thousand  Roman.  The  destination  of  these  two 
praetors,  and  their  two  armaments,  one  on  land,  and  the  other 
on  sea,  was  declared  to  be  intended  against  Nabis,  who  was 
now  carrying  on  open  hostilities  against  the  allies  of  the  Ro¬ 
man  people.  But  it  was  thought  proper  to  wait  the  return  ot 
VOL.  V. — E 

26 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  560. 

the  ambassadors  sent  to  Antiochus,  and  the  senate  ordered 
the  consul  Cneius  Domitms  not  to  leave  the  city  until  they 
arrived. 
XXL  The  praetors,  Fulvius  and  Scribonius,  whose  pro¬ 
vince  was  the  administration  of  justice,  at  Rome,  were 
charged  to  provide  an  hundred  quinqueremes,  besides  the  fleet 
which  Atilius  was  to  command.  Before  the  consul  and  prse- 
tors  set  out  for  their  provinces  a  supplication  was  performed 
on  account  of  some  prodigies.  A  report  was  brought  from 
Picenum,  that  a  goat  had  produced  six  kids  at  a  birth.  It 
was  said  that  a  boy  was  born  at  Arretium  who  had  but  one 
hand;  that,  at  Amiternum,  a  slx)wer  of  earth  fell;  a  gate 
and  wall  at  Formiee  were  struck  by  lightning;  and,  what  was 
more  alarming  than  all,  an  ox,  belonging  to  the  consul  Cnei¬ 
us  Doniitius,  spoke  these  words, — “  Rome,  take  care  of  thy¬ 
self.”  To  expiate  the  other  prodigies,  a  supplication  was 
performed;  the  ox  w’as  ordered  by  the  aruspices  to  be  care¬ 
fully  preserved  and  fed.  The  Tiber,  pouring  into  the  city 
with  more  destructive  violence  than  last  year,  swept  ^way 
two  bridges,  and  many  buildings,  particularly  about  the 
Fluraentan  gate.  A  huge  rock,  loosened  from  its  seat,  either 
by  the  rains,  or  by  an  earthquake,  so  slight  that  no  other 
effect  of  it  was  perceived,  tumbled  down  from  the  capitol  in¬ 
to  the  Jugarian  street,  and  buried  many  people  under  it.  In 
the  country,  many  parts  of  which  were  overflowed,  much 
cattle  was  carried  away,  and  many  houses  thrown  down. 
Previous  to  the  arrival  of  the  consul,  Lucius  Quintius,  in 
his  province,  Quintus  Minucius  fought  a  pitched  battle  with 
the  £.igurians,  in  the  territory  of  Pisa*,  slew  nine  thousand 
of  the  enemy,  and,  putting  the  rest  to  flight,  drove  them 
within  their  works,  which  were  assaulted  and  defended  with 
obstinate  valour  until  night  came  on.  During  the  night,  the 
Ligurians  stole,  away  unobserved;  and,  at  the  first  dawn,  the 
Romans  took  possession  of  their  deserted  camp,  where  the 
quantity  of  booty  was  the  less,  because  it  was  a  frequent 

BOOK  XXXV. 

27 

B.  C.  192.] 
practice  with  the  enemy  to  send  home  the  spoil  taken  in  the 
country.  Minucius^  after  this,  allowed  them  no  respite. 
From  the  territory  of  Pisse,  he  marched  into  that  of  the  Li¬ 
gurians,  and,  with  fire  and  sword,  utterly  destroyed  their 
forts  and  towns,  where  the  Roman  soldiers  were  abundantly 
enriched  with  the  spoils  which  the  enemy  had  collected  in 
Etruria  and  sent  home. 
XXII.  About  this  time,  the  ambassadors,  who  had  been 
sent  to  the  kings,  returned  to  Rome.  As  they  brought  no 
information  of  such  a  nature  as  called  for  any  immediate 
declaration  of  war,  (except  against  the  Lacedaemonian  ty¬ 
rant,  whom  the  Ach^an  ambassadors  also  represented  as 
ravaging  the  searcoast  of  Laconia,  in  breach  of  treaty,)  Atili- 
us,  the  praetor,  was  sent  with  the  fleet  to  Greece,  for  the 
protection  of  the  allies.  It  was  resolved,  that,  as  there  w^as 
nothing  to  be  apprehended  from  Anliochus  at  present,  both 
the  consuls  should  go  to  their  provinces;  and,  accordingly^, 
Domitius  marched  into  the  country  of  the  Boians,  by  the* 
shorter  road,  through  Arminum,  and  Quintius  through  Li¬ 
guria.  The  two  armies  of  the  consuls,  proceeding  by  these 
different  routes,  spread  devastation  wide  over  the  enemy’s 
country.  In  consequence  of  which,  first,  a  few  of  their 
horsemen,  with  their  commanders,  then  their  whole  senate, 
and,  at  last,  ail  who  possessed  either  property  or  dignity,  to 
the  number  of  one  thousand  five  hundred,  came  over,  and 
joined  the  consuls.  In  both  Spains,  likewise,  success  attend¬ 
ed  the  Roman  arms  during  this  year.  For,  in  one,  Caius 
Flaminius,  after  a  seige,  took  Litabrum,  a  strong  and  opu¬ 
lent  city,  and  made  prisoner  Corrib ilo,  a  powerful  chieftain; 
and,  in  the  other,  Marcus  Fulvius,  proconsul,  fought  two 
battles,  with  two  armies  of  the  enemy;  and  was  victorious  in 
both.  He  captured  Vescelia  and  Holo,  towns  belonging  to 
the  Spaniards,  with  many  of  their  forts,  and  others  volunta¬ 
rily  submitted  to  him.  Then,  advancing  into  the  territory 
of  Ore  turn,  and  having,  there  also,  taken  two  cities,  Nolifaa 

28 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  560. 

and  Cusibis,  he  proceeded  to  the  river  Tagus.  Here  stood 
Toletum,  a  smail  city,  but  strong  from  its  situation.  While 
he  was  besieging  this  place,  a  numerous  army  of  Vectonians 
came  to  relieve  their  friends  in  the  town,  but  he  overthrew 
them  in  a  general  engagement,  and,  after  their  defeat,  took 
Toletum  by  means  of  his  works. 
XXIII.  At  this  juncture,  the  wars,  in  which  they  were 
actually  engaged,  caused  not  so  great  anxiety  in  the  minds 
of  the  senate,  as  the  expectation  of  one  with  Antiochus* 
For  although,  through  their  ambassadors,  they  had,  from 
time  to  time,  made  careful  inquiries  into  every  particular, 
yet  rumours,  rashly  propagated,  without  authentic  founda¬ 
tion,  intermixed  many  falsehoods  with  the  truth.  Among 
the  rest,  a  report  was  spread,  that  Antiochus  intended,  as 
soon  as  he  should  come  into  JEtolia,  to  send  a  fleet  inunedi'- 
ately  to  Sicily.  The  senate,  therefore,  though  they  had 
already  despatched  the  praetor,  Atilius,  with  a  squadron  to 
the  Ionian  sea,  yet,  considering  that  not  only  a  military  force, 
but  also  the  influence  of  characters  entitled  to  respect,  would 
be  necessary  towards  securing  the  attachment  of  the  allies, 
they  sent  into  Greece,  in  quality  of  ambassadors,  Titus  Quin- 
tius,  Caius  Octavius,  Cneius  Servilius,  and  Publius  Villiusj 
at  the  same  time  ordering,  in  their  decree,  that  Marcus  Bae- 
bius  should  lead  forward  his  legions  from  Bruttium  to  Ta- 
rentum  and  Brundusium,  so  that,  if  occasion  required,  he 
might  transport  them  thence  into  Macedonia.  They  also 
ordered,  that  Marcus  Fulvius,  praetor  ^.should  send  a  fleet  of 
thirty  ships  to  protect  the  coast  of  Sicily;  and  that,  whoever 
had  the  direction  of  that  fleet,  should  be  invested  with  the 
authority  of  a  commander  in  chief.  To  this  commission  was 
appointed  Lucius  Oppius  Salinator,  who  had  been  plebeian 
aedile  the  year  before.  They  likewise  determined,  that  the 
same  prsetor  should  write  to  his  colleague,  Lucius  Valerius, 
that  there  was  reason  to  apprehend  that  the  ships  of  king 
Antiochus  would  pass  over  from  jEtolia  to  Sicily;  for  which 

BOOK  XXXV. 

29 

B.  C.  192.] 
reason  the  senate  judged  it  proper,  that  in  addition  to  the 
army,  which  he  then  had,  he  should  enlist  tumultuary  sol¬ 
diers,  to  the  number  of  twelve  thousand  foot,  and  four  hun¬ 
dred  horse,  which  might  enable  him  to  defend  that  coast  of 
his  province  which  lay  next  to  Greece.”  These  troops  the 
prsetor  collected,  not  only  out  of  Sicily,  but  from  the  circum¬ 
jacent  islands;  placing  strong  garrisons  in  all  the  towns  on 
the  coast  opposite  to  Greece.  The  rumours  already  cur¬ 
rent,  were,  in  some  degree,  confirmed  by  the  arrival  of  Atta¬ 
ins,  the  brother  of  Eumenes;  for  he  brought  intelligence, 
that  king  Antiochus  had  crossed  the  Hellespont  with  his 
army,  and  that  the  jEtoIians  were  putting  themselves  into 
such  a  posture,  that,  when  he  arrived,  he  expected  to  find 
them  in  arms.  Thanks  were  given  to  Eumenes,  in  his  ab¬ 
sence,  and  to  Attalus,  who  was  present;  and  an  order  was 
passed,  that  the  latter  should  be  furnished  with  a  house,  and 
every  accommodation;  that  he  should  be  presented  with  two 
horses,  two  suits  of  horseman’s  armour,  vases  of  silver  to  an 
hundred  pounds  weight,  and  of  gold  to  twenty  pounds. 
XXIV.  As  accounts  were  continually  arriving,  that  the 
war  was  on  the  point  of  breaking  out,  it  was  judged  expe¬ 
dient  that  consuls  should  be  elected  as  soon  as  possible. 
Wherefore  the  senate  passed  a  decree,  that  the  pr^tor, 
Marcus  Fulvius,  should  instantly  despatch  a  letter  to  the 
consul,  informing  him,  that  it  was  the  will  of  the  senate  that 
he  should  leave  the  command  of  the  province  and  army  to 
his  lieutenants-general,  and  return  to  Rome;  and  that,  when 
on  the  road,  he  should  send  on  before  him  an  edict  appoint¬ 
ing  the  day  for  the  election  of  consuls.  The  consul  com¬ 
plied  with  the  letter;  and,  having  sent  forward  the  edict, 
arrived  at  Rome.  There  was,  this  year  also,  a  warm  com¬ 
petition,  three  patricians  suing  for  one  place;  Publius  Cor¬ 
nelius  Scipio,  son  to  Cneius,  who  had  suffered  a  disappoint¬ 
ment  the  year  before;  Lucius-  Cornelius  Scipio,  and  Cneius 
Manlius  Vulso,  The  consulship  was  conferred  on  Publius 

30 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  560. 
Scipio,  that  it  might  appear  that  the  honour  had  only  been 
delayed,  and  not  refused,  to  a  person  of  such  character. 
The  plebeian  colleague,  joined  with  him,  was  Manius  Acili- 
us  Glabrio.  Next  day  were  created  praetors,  Lucius  iEmi- 
lius  Paulus,  Marcus  iEmilius  Lepidus,  Marcus  Junius  Bru¬ 
tus,  Aulus  Cornelius  Mammula,  Caius  Livius,  and  Lucius 
Oppius;  the  two  last,  both  of  them,  surnamed  Salinator. 
This  was  the  same  Oppius  who  had  conducted  the  fleet  of 
thirty  ships  to  Sicily,  While  the  new  magistrates  were  set¬ 
tling  the  distribution  of  their  provinces,  orders  were  despatch¬ 
ed  to  Marcus  Batbius,  to  pass  over,  with  all  his  forces,  from 
Brundusium  to  Epirus,  and  to  keep  the  army  stationed  near 
Apollonia;  and  Marcus  Fuivius,  city  praetor,  was  commis¬ 
sioned  to  build  fifty  new  quinqueremes. 
XXV.  Such  were  the  precautions  taken  by  the  Roman 
people  to  guard  against  every  attempt  of  Antiochus.  At 
this  time,  Nabis  did  not  disavow  his  hostile  intentions,  but, 
with  his  utmost  force,  carried  on  the  siege  of  Gythiumj  and, 
being  incensed  against  the  Achseans,  for  having  sent  succours 
to  the  besieged,  he  ravaged  their  lands.  The  Acha^ans  would 
not  presume  to  engage  in  war,  until  their  ambassadors  should 
come  back  from  Rome,  and  acquaint  them  with  the  senti¬ 
ments  of  the  senate;  but  as  soon  as  these  returned,  they  sum¬ 
moned  a  council  at  S  icy  on,  and  also  sent  deputies  to  Titus 
Quintius  to  ask  his  advice.  In  the  council,  all  the  mem¬ 
bers  were  inclined  to  vote  for  an  immediate  declaration  of 
war;  but  a  letter  from  Titus  Quintius,  in  which  he  recom¬ 
mended  waiting  for  the  Roman  prator,  and  fleet,  caused 
some  hesitation.  While  many  of  the  members  persisted  in 
their  first  opinion,  and  others  arguing  that  they  ought  to  fol¬ 
low  the  counsel  of  the  person  to  whom  they  of  themselves 
had  applied  for  advice,  the  generality  waited  to  hear  the  sen¬ 
timents  of  Philopaemen.  He  was  praetor  of  Achaea  at  the 
time,  and  surpassed  all  his  contemporaries  both  in  wisdom 
and  influence.  He  first  observed,  that  “  it  was  a  wise  rule, 

BOOK  XXXV. 

B.  C.  192.] 

Z1 

established  among  the  Achaeans,  that  their  prsetor,  when  he 
proposed  a  question  concerning  war,  should  not  himself  have 
a  vote:”  and  then  he  desired  them  to  fix  their  determina¬ 
tion  among  themselves  as  soon  as  possible;”  assuring  them, 
that  ‘‘  their  praetor  would  faithfully  and  carefully  carry  their 
decrees  into  execution;  and  would  use  his  best  endeavours, 
that,  as  far  as  depended  on  human  prudence,  they  should 
not  repent  of  them,  whether  they  were  for  peace  or  war.” 
These  words  conveyed  a  more  efficacious  incitement  to  war, 
than  if,  by  openly  arguing  in  favour  of  it,  he  had  betrayed 
an  ambition  to  distinguish  himself  in  command.  War  was 
therefore  unanimously  resolved  on:  the  time  and  mode  of 
conducting  it,  were  left  entirely  to  the  praetor.  Philop se¬ 
men’s  own  judgment,  indeed,  besides  its  being  the  opinion 
of  Quintius,  pointed  it  out  as  best  to  wait  for  the  Roman 
fleet,  which  might  succour  •  Gythium  by  sea;  but  he  feared 
that  the  business  would  not  endure  delay,  and  that  not  only 
Gythium,  but  the  party  which  had  been  sent  to  its  aid,  would 
fall  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  and  therefore  he  drew  out 
what  ships  the  Achseans  had. 
XXVL  The  tyrant  also,  with  the  view  of  cutting  off  any 
supplies  that  might  be  brought  to  the  besieged  by  sea,  had 
fitted  out  a  small  squadron,  consisting  of  only  three  ships  of 
war,  with  some  barks  and  cutters,  as  his  former  fleet  had 
been  given  up  to  the  Romans,  according  to  the  treaty.  In 
order  to  try  the  activity  of  these  vessels,  as  they  were  then 
new,  and  to  have  every  thing  in  fit  condition  for  a  battle,  he 
put  ou|  IP  sea  every  day,  and  exercised  both  the  rowers  and 
marines  in  mock  fights;  for  he  thought  that  all  his  hopes  of 
succeeding  in  the  siege  depended  on  his  preventing  any  suc¬ 
cours  being  brought  to  them  by  ships.  The  prsetor'of  the 
Achfeans,  in  respect  of  skill  for  conducting  operations  on 
land,  was  equal  to  any  of  the  most  celebrated  compianders 
both  in  capacity  and  experience,  yet  with  naval  affairs  he  was 
quite  unacquainted.  Being  an  inhabitant  of  Arcadia,  an  in- 

32 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  560. 

land  country,  he  was  even  ignorant  in  foreign  aflFairs,  except¬ 
ing  that  he  had  once  served  in  Crete  as  commander  of  a 
body  of  auxiliaries.  There  was  an  old  ship  of  four  banks  of 
oars,  which  had  been  taken  eighty  years  before,  as  it  was 
conveying  Nicfea,  the  wife  of  Craterus,  from  Naupactum  to 
Corinth.  Led  by  the  reputation  of  this  ship,  for  it  had  been 
reckoned  a  remarkably  fine  vessel  when  in  the  king’s  fleet, 
he  ordered  it,  though  now  quite  rotten>  and  falling  asunder 
through  age,  to  be  brought  out  from  iEgium.  The  fleet 
sailed  with  this  ship  at  its  head,  Tiso  of  Patrae,  the  com¬ 
mander,  being  on  board  it,  when  the  ships  of  the  Lacedae¬ 
monians  from  Gythium  came  within  view.  At  the  first 
shock,  against  a  new  and  firm  vessel,  that  old  one,  which 
before  admitted  the  water  through  every  joint,  was  shattered 
to  pieces,  and  the  whole  crew  were  made  prisoners.  On  the 
loss  of  the  commander’s  ship,  the  rest  of  the  fleet  fled  as  fast 
as  their  oars  could  carry  them.  Philop^men  himself  made 
his  escape  in  a  light  advice-boat,  nor  did  he  stop  his  flight 
until  he  arrived  at  Patrse.  This  untoward  event  did  not  in 
the  least  damp  the  spirit  of  a  man  so  well  versed  in  military 
affairs,  and  who  had  experienced  so  many  vicissitudes  of 
fortune.  On  the  contrary,  as  he  had  failed  of  success  in  the 
naval  line,  in  which  he  had  no  experience,  he  even  conceived, 
thence,  the  greater  hopes  of  succeeding  in  another,  wherein 
he  had  acquired  knowledge;  and  he  affirmed,  that  he  would 
quickly  put  an  end  to  the  tyrant’s  rejoicing. 
XXVII.  Nabis,  elated  by  this  adventure,  and  confident 
that  he  had  not  now  any  danger  to  apprehend  frora>^e  sea, 
resolved  to  shut  up  the  passages  on  the  land  also,  by  parties 
stationed  in  proper  posts.  With  this  view,  he  drew  off  a 
third  part  of  his  forces  from  the  siege  of  Gythium,  and  en¬ 
camped  them  at  Beefle,  a  place  which  commands  both  Leucse 
and  Acidee,  on  the  road  by  which  he  supposed  the  enemy’s 
army  would  advance.  While  he  lay  on  this  statipn,  where 
very  few  of  his  men  had  tents,  (the  generality  of  them  hav- 

BOOK  XXXV- 

B-  C.  192.] 

ing  formed  huts  of  reeds  interwoven,  and  which  ttey  cover¬ 
ed  with  leaves  of  trees,  to  serve  as  a  defence  from  the  wea¬ 
ther,)  Philopxmen,  before  he  came  within  sight,  resolved  to 
surprise  him  by  an  attack  of  such  a  kind  as  he  did  not  ex¬ 
pect.  He  drew  together  a  number  of  amall  ships  in  a  rcm<^e 
creek,  on  the  coast  of  the  territory  of  Argos,  and  embarked 
on  board  them  a  body  of  soldiers,  mostly  targeteers,  furnish¬ 
ed  with  slings,  javelins,  and  other  light  kinds  of  weapons. 
He  then  coasted  along  the  shore,  until  he  came  to  a  pro¬ 
montory  near  Nabis’s  post.  Here  he  landed;  and  made  his 
way,  by  night,  through  paths  with  which  he  was  well  ac¬ 
quainted,  to  Baese.  He  found  the  sentinels  fast  asleep,  for 
they  had  not  conceived  the  least  apprehension  of  an  enemy 
being  near,  and  he  immediately  set  fire  to  the  huts  in  every 
part  of  the  camp.  Great  numbers  perished  in  the  flames,  be¬ 
fore  they  could  discover  the  enemy’s  arrival,  and  those  who 
did  discover  it  could  give  no  assistance;  so  that  neai^  the 
whole  was  destroyed  by  fire  and  sword.  From  both  these 
means  of  destruction,  however,  a  very  small  number  made 
their  escape,  and  fled  to  the  principal  camp  before  Gythium. 
Philopsemen  having,  by  this  blow,  given  a  severe  check  to 
the  presumption  of  the  enemy,  led  on  his  forces  to  ravage 
the  district  of  Tripolis,  a  part  of  the  Lacedaemonian  territo¬ 
ry,  lying  next  to  the  frontiers  of  Megalopolis;  and,  carrying 
off  thence  a  vast  number  of  men  and  cattle,  withdrew,  be¬ 
fore  the  tyrant  could  send  a  fore#  from  Gythium  to  protect 
the  country.  He  then  collected  his  whole  force  at  Tegea,  to 
which  place  he  summoned  a  council  of  the  Achaeans  and 
their  allies;  at  which  were  present,  alao^  deputies  from  the 
Epirots  and  Acarnanians.  Here  it  was  resolved,  that,  as  the 
minds  of  his  men  were  now  sufficiently  recovered  from  the 
shame  of  the  disgrace  suffered  at  sea,  ^nd  those  of  the  ene¬ 
my  dispirited,  he  should  march  directly  to  Lacedi«mon;  for 
that  was  judged  to  be  the  only  effectual  means  to  draw  off 
the  enemy  from  the  siege  of  Gythium.  On  entering  their 
VOL.  V. —  F 

34 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  560. 

country,  he  encamped  the  first  day  at  Caryee,  and  on  that 
very  day,  Gythium  was  taken*  Ignorant  of  that  event,  Phi« 
lopsemen  advanced  to  the  Barbosthenes,  a  mountain  ten  miles 
from  Lacedaemon.  On  the  other  side,  Nabis,  after  taking 
possession  of  Gythium,  set  out  at  the  head  of  a  body  of  light 
troops;  marched  hastily  by  Lacedsemon;  and  seized  on  a 
place  called  the  Camp  of  Pyrrhus,  which  post  he  believed 
the  Achaeans  intended  to  occupy.  From  thence,  he  proceed¬ 
ed  to  meet  the  enemy.  The  latter,  being  obliged,  by  the  nar¬ 
rowness  of  the  road,  to  extend  their  train  to  a  great  length, 
occupied  a  space  of  almost  five  miles.  The  cavalry,  and  the 
greatest  part  of  the  auxiliaries,  covered  the  rear,  Philopaemen 
expecting  that  the  tyrant  would  attack  him,  on  that  quarter, 
with  his  mercenary  troops,  in  whom  he  placed  his  principal 
confidence.  Two  unforeseen  circumstances  at  once  filled  him 
with  uneasiness;  one,  the  post  at  which  he  aimed  being  pre¬ 
occupied;  the  other,  the  enemy  having  met  him  in  front, 
where,  as  the  road  lay  through  very  uneven  ground,  he  did 
not  see  how  the  battalions  could  advance  without  the  support 
of  the  ligh^  troops. 
XXVI I L  Philopsemen  was  possessed  of  an  admirable 
degree  of  skill  and  experience  in  conducting  a  march,  and 
choosing  his  station;  having  made  these  points  his- principal 
study,  not  only  in  times  of  war,  but  likewise  during  peace. 
Whenever,  in  travelling,  he  came  to  a  defile  where  the  pas¬ 
sage  was  difficult,  it  wa^his  practice,  first,  to  examine  the 
nature  of  the  ground  on  everv  side.  When  journeying  alone, 
he  meditated  within  himself;  if  he  had  company,  he  asked 
them,  if  an  enemy  should  appear  in  that  place,  what  would 
be  the  proper  method  of  proceeding;  what,  if  they  should  at¬ 
tack  him  in  front;  what,  if  on  this  flank  or  on  that;  what,  if 
on  the  rear?  For  he  might  happen  to  meet  them  while  his 
men  were  formed  with  a  regular  front;  or  when  they  were 
in  the  loose  order  of  march,  fit  only  for  the  road.”  He  would 
proceed  to  examine,  either  in  his  own  mind,  or  by  asking 

BOOK  XXXV. 

35 

B.  C.  192.] 
qtiestions,  what  ground  he  ought  to  choose;  what  number 
of  soldiers;  or  what  kind  of  arms  (^which  was  a  very  material 
point)  he  ought  to  employ;  where  he  should  deposit  the 
baggage,  where  the  soldiers’  necessaries,  where  the  unarmed 
multitude;  what  number  and  what  kind  of  troops  he  should 
appoint  to  guard  them,  and  whether  it  would  be  better  to 
prosecut^his  march  as  intended,  or  to  return  back  by  the 
way  he  came;  what  spot,  also,  he  should  choose  for  his  camp; 
what  space  he  should  inclose  within  the  lines;  where  he 
could  be  conveniently  supplied  with  water;  where  a  suffi¬ 
ciency  of  forage  and  wood  could  be  had;  which  would  be  his 
safest  road  on  decamping  next  day,  and  in  what  form  the 
army  should  march.”  In  such  studies  and  inquiries  he  had, 
from  his  early  years,  so  frequently  exercised  his  thoughts, 
that  on  any  emergency  of  the  kind  occurring,  no  expedient 
that  could  be  devised  was  new  to  him.  On  this  occasion, he 
first  ordered  the  army  to  halt;  then  sent  forward,  to  the  van, 
the  auxiliary  Cretans,  and  the  horsemen  called  Tarentines, 
each  leading  two  spare  horses;  and,  ordering  the  rest  of  the 
cavalry  to  follow,  he  seized  on  a  rock  which  stood  over  a 
rivulet,  from  which  he  might  be  supplied  with  water.  Here 
he  collected  together  all  the  baggage,  with  all  the  suttlers 
and  followers  of  the  army,  placing  a  guard^of  soldiers  round 
them;  and  then  he  fortified  his  camp,  as  the  nature  of  the 
place  required.  The  pitching  of  tents  in  such  rugged  and 
uneven  ground  was  a  difficult  task.  The  enemy  were  distant 
not  more  than  five  hundred  paces.  Both  drew  water  from 
the  same  rivulet,  under  escorts  of  light  troops;  but,  before 
any  skirmish  took  place,  as  usual,  between  men  encamped  so 
near  to  each  other,  night  came  on.  It  was  evident,  however, 
that  they  must,  unavoidably,  fight  next  day  at  the  rivulet,  m 
support  of  the  watering  parties.  Wherefore,  during  the  night, 
Philopsemen  concealed,  in  a  valley  remote  from  the  view  of 
the  enemy,  as  great  a  number  of  targeteers  as  could  con 
veniently  lie  in  the  place. 

36 

HISTORY  OF  ROME,  [Y.  R.  560, 
XXIX*  At  break  of  day,  the  Cretan  light  infantry,  and 
the  Tarentine  horse,  began  an  engagement  on  the  bank  of 
the  rivulet*  Latemnastus,  a  Cretan,  commanded  his  country¬ 
men;  Lycortas,  of  Megalopolis,  the  cavalry*  The  enemy’s 
watering  party,  also,  was  guarded  by  Cretan  auxiliaries,  and 
Tarentine  horsemen.  The  fight  was,  fora  considerable  time, 
doubtful,  as  the  troops  on  both  sides  were  of  the  same  kind, 
and  armed  alike;  but,  as  the  contest  advanced,  t%e  tyrant’s 
auxiliaries  gained  an  advantage,  both  by  their  superiority  of 
numbers,  and  because  Philopsemen  had  given  directions  to 
his  officers,  that,  after  maintaining  the  contest  for  a  short 
time,  they  should  betake  themselves  to  flight,  and  draw  the 
enemy  on  to  tne  place  of  the  ambuscade*  The  latter,  pursuing 
the  runaways  in  disorderly  haste,  through  the  valley,  were 
most  of  them  wounded  and  slain,  before  they  discovered 
their  concealed  foe.  The  targeteers  had  posted  themselves 
in  such  order,  as  far  as  the  breadth  of  the  valley  allowed,  that 
they  easily  gave  a  passage  to  their  flying  friends,  through 
openings  in  their  ranks;  then  starting  up  themselves,  hale, 
fresh,  and  in  regular  order,  they  briskly  attacked  the  enemy, 
whose  ranks  were  broken,  who  were  scattered  in  confusion, 
and  were,  besides,  exhausted  with  fatigue  and  wounds.  This 
decided  the  victory:  the  tyrant’s  troops  instantly  turned  their 
backs,  and  flying  with  much  more  precipitation  than  they  had 
pursued,  were  driven  into  their  camp.  Great  numbers  were 
killed  and  taken  in  the  pursuit;  and  the  consternation  would 
have  spread  through  the  camp  also,  had  not  Philopaemen 
ordered  a  retreat  to  be  sounded:  for  he  dreaded  the  ground, 
(which  was  rough,  and  dangerous  to  advance  on  without 
caution,)  more  than  he  did  the  enemy*  Judging,  both  from 
the  issue  of  the  battle,  and  from  the  disposition  of  the  ene¬ 
my’s  leader,  that  he  was  not  a  little  dismayed,  he  sent  to  him 
one  of  the  auxiliary  soldiers  in  the  character  of  a  deserter, 
to  assure  him  positively,  that  the  Achaeans  had  resolved  to 
advance,  next  day,  to  the  river  Eurotas,  which  runs  almost 

BOOK  XXXV. 

37 

B.  C.  t92.] 

dose  to  the  walls.  In  order  to  cut  off  the  tyrant’s  retreat  to 
the  city,  and  to  prevent  any  provisions  being  brought  thence 
to  the  camp;  and  that  they  intended,  at  the  same  time,  to  try 
whether  any  could  be  prevailed  on  to  desert  his  cause.  Al¬ 
though  the  deserter  did  not  gain  implicit  credit,'  yet  he  af¬ 
forded  Nabis’s  captain,  who  was  full  of  apprehensions,  a 
plausible  pretext  for  leaving  his  camp.  ,On  the  day  follow¬ 
ing,  he  ordered  Pythagoras,  with  the  auxiliaries  and  cavalry, 
to  mount  guard  before  the  rampart;  and  then,  marching  out 
himself  with  the  main  body  of  the  army,  as  if  intending  to 
offer  battle,  he  ordered  them  to  return  with  all  haste  to  the 
city. 
XXX.  When  Philopsemen  saw  their  army  marching  pre¬ 
cipitately  through  a  narrow  and  steep  road,  he  sent  all  his 
cavalry,  together  with  the  Cretan  auxiliaries,  against  the 
guard  of  the  enemy,  stationed  in  the  front  of  their  camp. 
These,  seeing  their  adversaries  approach,  and  perceiving 
that  their  friends  had  abandoned  them,  at  first  attempted  to 
retreat  within  their  works;  but  then,  observing  the  whole 
force  of  the  Achseans  advancing  in  order  of  battle,  they  were 
seized  with  fear,  lest  together  with  the  camp  itself,  they 
might  be  taken;  they  resolved  therefore  to  follow  the  body 
of  their  army,  which,  by  this  time,  had  proceeded  to  a  con¬ 
siderable  distance.  Immediately  the  targeteers  of  the  Achee- 
ans  assailed  the  camp,  and  the  rest  set  out  in  pursuit  of  the 
enemy.  The  road  was  such,  that  a  body  of  men,  even  when 
undisturbed  by  any  fear  of  a  foe,  could  not  without  difficulty, 
•  make  its  way  through  it.  But  when  an  attack  was*  made  on 
their  rear,  and  the  shouts  of  terror,  raised  by  the  affrighted 
troops  behind,  reached  to  the  van,  they  threw  down  their 
arms,  and  fled  diflerent  ways  into  the  adjacent  woods.  In 
an  instant  of  time,  the  way  was  stopped  up  with  heaps  of 
weapons,  particularly  spear&,  which  falling  mostly  with  their 
points  toward  the  pursuers,  formed  a  kind  of  palisade  across 
the  road.  Philopsemen  ordered  the  auxiliaries  to  push  for« 

58 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  560. 

ward  in  pursuit  of  the  enemy,  who  would  find  it  a  difficult 
matter,  the  horsemen  particularly,  to  continue  their  flight; 
while  he  himself  led  away  the  heavy  troops  through  more 
open  ground  to  the  river  Eurotas.  There  he  pitched  his 
camp  a  littie  before  sunset,  and  waited  for  the  light  troops, 
which  he  had  sent  in  chase  of  the  enemy.  These  arrived  at 
the  first  watch,  and  brought  intelligence,  that  Nabis,  with  a 
few  attendants,  had  made  his  way  into  the  city,  and  that  the 
rest  of  his  army,  unarmed  and  dispersed,  were  straggling 
through  all  parts  of  the  woods;  whereupon,  he  ordered  them 
to  refresh  themselves,  while  he  himself  chose  out  a  party  of 
men, who  having  come  earlier  into  camp,  were,  by  this  time, 
both  recruited  by  food  and  rest;  and,  ordering  them  to  carry 
nothing  with  them  but  their  swords,  he  marched  them  out  di¬ 
rectly,  and  posted  them  in  the  roads  which  led  from  two  of 
the  gates,  one  towards  Pherse,  the  other  towards  the  Bar- 
bosthenes:  for  he  supposed,  that  through  these  the  flying  ene¬ 
my  would  endeavour  to  make  their  retreat.  Nor  was  he 
disappointed  therein;  for  the  Lacedaemonians,  as  long  as  any 
light  remained,  retreated  through  the  centre  of  the  woods  in 
the  most  retired  paths.  As  soon  as  it  grew  dusk,  and  they 
saw  lights  in  the  enemy’s  camp,  they  kept  themselves  con¬ 
cealed  from  view;  but,  having  passed  it  by,  they  then  thought 
that  all  was  safe,  and  came  down  into  the  open  roads,  where 
they  were  intercepted  by  the  parties  lying  in  wait;  and  such 
numbers  of  them  were  killed  and  taken,  that,  of  the  whole 
army,  scarcely  a  fourth  part  effected  their  escape.  As  Nabis 
was  now  pent  up  within  the  city,  Philopsemen  employed  the 
greatest,  part  of  thirty  succeeding  days  in  ravaging  the  lands 
of  the  Lacedaemonians;  and  then,  after  greatly  reducing,  and 
almost  annihilating,  the  strength  of  the  tyrant,  he  returned 
home,  w’hile  the  Acheeans  extolled  him  as  equal  in  the  merit 
of  his  services,  to  the  Roman  general,  or,  so  far  as  regarded 
the  war  with  Lacedaemon,  even  superior. 
XXXL  While  the  Achseans  and  the  tyrant  were  carrying 

B.  C,  192.] 

BOOK  XXXV. 

39 

on  the  war  in  this  manner,  the  Roman  ambassadors  made  a 
circuit  through  the  cities  of  the  allies;  for  they  feared,  lest 
the  4'Etolians  might  seduce  some  of  them  to  join  the  party  of 
Antiochus.  They  took  but  little  pains,  in  their  applications 
to  the  Achaeans;  because,  knowing  their  animosity  against 
Nabis,they  thought  that  they  might  be  safely  relied  on  with 
regard  to  other  matters.  They  went  first  to  Athens,  thence 
to  Chalcis,  thence  to  Thessaly;  and,  after  addressing  proper 
exhortations  to  the  Thessalians,  in  a  full  assembly,  they  di¬ 
rected  their  route  to  Demetrias,  to  which  place  a  council  of 
the  Magnetians  was  summoned.  Their  negotiation  here 
required  more  address;  for  a  great  many  of  the  leading  men 
were  disaffected  to  the  Romans,  and  entirely  devoted  to  the 
interests  of  Antiochus  and  the  iEtolians;  because,  atthe  time 
when  accounts  were  received  that  Philip’s  son,  who  was  an 
hostage,  would  be  restored  to  him,  and  the  tribute  imposed 
on  him  remitted,  among  other  groundless  reports  it  had  been 
given  out,  that  the  Romans  intend^  to  put  him  again  in  posses¬ 
sion  of  Demetrias.  Rather  than  that  should  take  place,  Eury- 
lochus,  a  deputy  of  the  Magnetians,  and  others  of  that  faction, 
wished  for  a  total  change  of  measures  to  be  effected  by  the 
coming  of  Antiochus  and  the  iEtolians.  In  opposition  to  those 
it  was  necessary  to  reason  in  such  a  manner,  that,  in  dispel¬ 
ling  their  mistaken  fear,  the  ambassadors  -should  not,  by  cut¬ 
ting  off  his  hopes  at  once,  give  any  disgust  to  Philip,  whose 
friendship  was  of  greater  moment,  on  any  occasion,  than  that 
of  the  Magnetians.  They  only  observed  to  the  assembly, 
that,  as  Greece  in  general  was  under  an  obligation  to  the 
Romans  for  their  kindness  in  restoring  its  liberty,  so  was 
their  state  in  particular.  For  there  had  not  only  been  a  gar¬ 
rison  of  Macedonians  in  their  capital,  but  a  palace  had  been 
built  in  it,  that  they  might  have  a  master  continually  before 
their  eyes.  But  all  that  had  been  done  would  be  of  no  effect  * 
if  the  iEtolians  should  bring  thither  Antiochus,  and  settle 
him  in  the  abode  of  Philip,  so  that  a  new  and  unknown  king 

40 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  560* 

should  be  set  over  them,  in  the  place  of  an  old  one,  with 
whom  they  were  long  acquainted.”  Their  chief  magistrate 
is  styled  Magnetarch.  This  office  was  then  held  by  Eurylo- 
chus,  who,  assuming  confidence  from  his  high  station,  openly 
declared,  that  he,  and  the  Magnetians,  saw  no  reason  to  dis¬ 
semble  their  having  heard  the  comn:ion  report  about  the  res¬ 
toration  of  Demetrias  to  Philip;  to  prevent  which,  the  Mag¬ 
netians  were  bound  to  use  every  effort,  however  hazardous; 
and,  in  the  eagerness  of  discourse,  he  was  carried  to  such  an 
inconsiderate  length,  as  to  throw  out,  ihat  “*  at  that  very  time, 
Demetrias  was  only  free  in  appeal  ance;  and  that,  in  reality, 
all  things  were  directed  by  the  will  of  the  Romans.”  These 
words  excited  a  general  murmur  in  the  assembly,  some  of 
•whom  showed  their  approbation,  others  expressed  indignation 
at  his  presumption,  in  uttering  such  an  expression.  .4s  to 
Quintius,  he  was  so  inflamed  with  anger,  that,  raising  his 
hands  towards  heaven,  he  invoked  the  gods  to  witness  the 
ungrateful  and  perfidious  disposition  of  the  Magnetians.  This 
struck  terror  into  the.  whole  assembly;  and  one  of  the  depu¬ 
ties,  named  Zeno,  who  had  acquired  a  great  degree  of  influ¬ 
ence,  by  his  judicious  course  of  conduct  in  life,  and  by  hav¬ 
ing  been  always  an  avowed  supporter  of  the  interest  of 
the  Romans,  with  tears  besought  Quintius,  and  the  other  am¬ 
bassadors,  ‘‘  not  to  impute  to  the  state  the  madness  of  an  indi¬ 
vidual.  Every  man,”' he  said,  was  answ^erable  for  his  own 
absurdities.  As  to  the  Magnetians,  they  were  indebted  to 
Titus  Quintius  and  the  Roman  people,  not  only  for  liberty 
but  for  every  thing  that  mankind  hold  valuable,  or  sacred.  By 
their  kindness,  they  were  in  the  enjoyment  of  every  blessing 
for  which  they  could  ever  petition  the  immortal  gods;  and 
if  struck  with  phrenzy,  they  would  sooner  vent  their  fury  on 
their  own  persons,  than  violate  the  friendship  with  Rome.” 
XXXII.  His  entreaties  were  seconded  by  the  prayers  of 
the  whole  assembly:  on  which  Eurylochus  retired  hastily 
from  the  council,  and,  passing  through  private  streets,  fled 

B.  C.  192.] 

BOOK  XXXV. 

41 

away  into  iEtolia.  As  to  the  iEtolians,  they  now  gave  plain 
indications  of  their  intention  to  revolt,  which  became  more 
evident  every  day;  and  it  happened,  that,  at  this  very  time, 
Thoas,  one  of  their  leading  men,  whom  they  had  sent  to 
Antiochus,  returned,  and  brought  back  with  him  an  ambas¬ 
sador  from  the  king,  named  Menippus.  These  two,  before 
the  council  met  to  give  them  audience,  filled  every  one’s  ears 
with  pompous  accounts  of  the  naval  and  land  forces  that 
were  coming;  ‘‘  a  vast  army,”  they  said,  “  of  horse  and  foot 
was  on  its  march,  accompanied  by  elephants  from  India;  and 
besides,  they  were  bringing  such  a  quantity  of  gold  and  silver, 
as  was  sufficient  to  purchase  the  Romans  themselves:”  which 
latter  circumstance,  they  knew,  would  influence  the  multi¬ 
tude,  more  than  any  thing  else.  It  was  easy  to  foresee,  what 
effects  ihese  reports  would  produce  in  the  council;  for  the 
Roman  ambassadors  received  information  of  the  arrival  of 
those  men,  and  of  all  their  proceedings.  A  rupture,  indeed, 
was  almost  unavoidable,  yet  Quintius  thought  it  advisable, 
that  some  ambassadors  of  the  allies  should  be  present  in  that 
council,  who  might  remind  the  iEtolians  of  their  alliance 
with  Rome,  and  who  might  have  the  courage  to  speak  with 
freedom  in  opposition  to  the  king’s  ambassador.  The  Athe¬ 
nians  seemed  to  be  the  best  qualified  for  this  purpose,  by 
reasorKof  the  high  reputation  of  their  state,  and  also  from 
an  amity  long  subsisting  between  them  and  the  vEtolians. 
Quintius,  therefoie,  requested  of  them  to  send  ambassadors 
to  the  Pan^tolic  council.  At  the  first  meeting,  Thoas  made 
a  report  of  the  business  of  his  embassy.  After  him.  Me- 
nippus  was  introduced,  who  said,  that  it  would  have  been 
happy  for  all  the  Greeks,  residing  both  in  Greece  and  Asia, 
if  Antiochus  could  have  taken  a  part  in  their  affairs,  while 
the  power  of  Philip  was  yet  unbroken;  for  then  every  one 
would  have  had  what  of  right  belonged  to  him,  and  the  whole 
would  not  have  come  under  the  dominion  and  absolute  dis¬ 
posal  of  the  Romans,  But  even  as  matters  stand  at  present,” 
voi .  V. — G 

42 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  560. 

said  he,  “  provided  you  have  constancy  enough  to  carry  into 
effect  the  measures  which  you  have  adopted,  Antiochus  will 
be  able,  with  the  assistance  of  the  gods,  and  the  alliance  oi 
the  iEtolians,  to  reinstate  the  affairs  of  Greece  in  their  formei 
rank  of  dignity,  notwithstanding  the  low  condition  to  which 
they  have  been  reduced.  But  this  dignity  consists  in  a  state 
of  freedom  supported  by  its  own  strength,  and  not  dependent 
on  the  will  of  another.”  The  Athenians,  who  were  permit- 
ted  to  deliver  their  sentiments  next  after  the  king’s  ambas¬ 
sadors,  avoiding  all  mention  of  Antiochus,  reminded  the 
.^tolians  of  their  alliance  with  Rome,  and  the  benefits  con¬ 
ferred  by  Titus  Quintius  on  the  whole  body  of  Greece;  and 
recommended  to  them,  “  not  inconsiderately,  to  break  off 
that  connection  by  too  hasty  counsels;  observing,  that  pas¬ 
sionate  and  adventurous  schemes,  however  flattering, at  first 
view,  prove  difficult  in  the  execution,  and  disastrous  in  the 
issue:  that,  as  the  Roman  ambassadors,  and,  among  them, 
Titus  Quintius,  were  within  a  small  distance,  it  would  be 
better,  before  any  violent  step  was  taken,  to  discuss,  in  ami¬ 
cable  conference,  any  matters  in  dispute,  than  to  rouse  Eu¬ 
rope  and  Asia  to  a  dreadful  war,” 
XXXIII.  The  multitude,  ever  fond  of  novelty,  warmly 
espoused  the  cause  of  Antiochus,  and  gave  their  opinion, 
that  the  Romans  should  not  even  be  admitted  into  the  coun¬ 
cil;  but  by  the  influence  chiefly  of  the  elder  membei;;^,  a  vote 
was  passed,  that  the  council  should  give  audience  to  the  Ro¬ 
mans.  On  being  acquainted,  by  the  Athenians,  with  this 
determination,  Quintius  resolved  on  going  into  iEtolia;  for 
he  thought  that,  either  he  should  be  able  to  effect  some 
change  in  their  designs;  or  that  it  would  be  manifest  to  all 
mankind,  that  the  blame  of  the  war  would  lie  on  the  Mto- 
iians,  and  that  the  Romans  would  be  warranted  to  take  arms 
by  justice,  and,  in  a  manner,  by  necessity.”  On  arriving 
there,  Quintius,  in  his  discourse  to  the  council,  began  with 
the  first  formation  of  the  alliance  between  the  Romans  and 

BOOK  XXXV. 

4a 

B.  C.192.] 
the  iEtoUans,  and  enumerated  the  many  transgressions  oi 
the  terms  of  the  treaty,  of  which  the  latter  had  been  guilty. 
He  then  enlarged  a  little  on  the  rights  of  the  states  concern* 
ed  in  the  dispute,  and  added,  that,  “  notwithstanding,  if  they 
thought  that  they  had  any  reasonable  demand  to  make,  it 
would  surely  be  infinitely  better  to  send  ambassadors  to  Rome, 
whether  they  chose  to  argue  the  case,  or  to  make  a  request 
to  the  senate,  than  that  the  Roman  people  should  enter  the 
lists  with  Antiochus,  while  the  ^Etolians  acted  as  marshals 
of  the  field,  an  event  which  would  cause  a  great  convulsion 
in  the  affairs  of  the  world,  and  the  utter  ruin  of  Greece,’* 
He  concluded  with  asserting,  that  ‘‘  no  people  would  feel  the 
fatal  consequences  of  such  a  w^ar  sooner  than  the  first  pro¬ 
moters  of  it,”  This  prediction  of  the  Roman  was  disre¬ 
garded.  Thoas,  and  others  of  the  same  faction,  were  then 
heard,  with  general  approbation;  and  they  prevailed  so  far. 
that,  without  adjourning  the  meeting,  or  waiting  for  the  ab¬ 
sence  of  the  Romans,  the  assembly  passed  a  decree,  that  An¬ 
tiochus  should  be  invited  to  vindicate  the  liberty  of  Greece, 
and  decide  the  dispute  between  the  jEtolians  and  the  Ro¬ 
mans.  To  the  insolence  of  this  decree,  their  praetor,  Damo* 
cratus,  added  a  personal  affront;  for,  on  Quintius  asking  him 
for  a  copy  of  the  decree,  without  any  respect  to  the  dignity 
of  the  person  to  whom  he  spoke,  he  told  him,  that  ‘‘  he  had, 
at  present,  more  pressing  business  to  despatch;  but  he  would 
shortly  give  him  the  decree,  and  an  answer,  in  Italy,  from 
his  camp  on  the  banks  of  the  Tiber.”  Such  was  the  degree 
of  madness  which  possessed,  at  that  time,  both  the  nation  of 
the  vEtolians,  and  their  magistrates, 
XXXIV.  Quintius,  and  the  ambassadors,  returned  to  Co¬ 
rinth,  The  JEtolians,  that  they  might  not  appear  to  depend 
merely  on  Antiochus,  and  to  sit  inactive,  waiting  for  his  ar¬ 
rival,  though  they  did  not,  after  the  departure  of  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  hold  a  general  diet  of  the  nation,  yet  endeavoured,  bv 
their  Apocleti,  (a  more  confidential  council,  composed  of 

44 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  56a 

persons  selected  from  the  rest)  to  devise  schemes  for  setting 
Greece  in  commotion.  They  were  sensible,  that  in  the  se¬ 
veral  states  the  principal  people,  particularly  those  of  the  best 
characters,  were  disposed  to  maintain  the  Roman  alliance, 
and  well  pleased  with  the  present  state  of  affairs;  but  that  the 
populace,  and  especially  such  as  were  in  needy  circumstan¬ 
ces,  wished  for  a  general  revolution.  The  -^tolians,  at  one 
day’s  sitting,  formed  a  scheme,  the  very  conception  of  which 
argued,  not  only  boldness,  but  impudence, — being  no  less 
than  the  making  themselves  masters  of  Demetrias,  Chalcis, 
and  Lacedaemon.  One  of  their  principal  men  was  sent  to  each 
of  these  places;  Thoas  to  Chalcis,  Alexamenus  to  Lacedae¬ 
mon,  Diodes  to  Demetrias.  This  last  was  assisted  by  the 
exile  Eurylochus,  whose  flight,  and  the  cause  of  it,  have 
been  mentioned  above,  and  who  had  no  other  prospect  of 
being  restored  to  his  country.  Eurylochus,  by  letter,  instruct¬ 
ed  his  friends  and  relations,  and  those  of  his  own  faction, 
to  order  his  wife  and  children  to  assume  a  mourning  dress; 
and,  holding  the  badges  of  supplicants,  to  go  into  a  full  as¬ 
sembly,  and  to  beseech  each  individual,  and  the  whole  body, 
not  to  suffer  a  man,  who  was  innocent  and  uncondemned,  to 
grow  old  in  exile.  The  simple  and  unsuspecting  were  moved 
by  compassion;  the  ill-disposed  and  seditious,  by  the  hope  of 
seeing  all  things  thrown  into  confusion,  in  consequence  of 
the  tumults  which  the  Aitolians  would  excite;  and  every  one 
voted  for  his  being  recalled.  These  preparatory  measures 
being  effected,  Diodes,  at  that  time  general  of  the  horse, 
with  all  the  cavalry,  set  out,  under  pretext  of  escorting  to  his 
home  the  exile,  who  was  his  guest.  Having,  during  that  day 
and  the  following  night,  marched  an  extraordinary  length  of 
way,  and  arrived  within  six  miles  of  the  city  at  the  first  dawn, 
he  chose  out  three  troops,  at  the  head  of  which  he  went  on, 
before  the  rest  of  the  cavalry,  whom  he  ordered  to  follow. 
When  he  came  near  the  gate,  he  made  all  his  men  dismount, 
and  lead  their  horses  by  the  reins,  without  keeping  their 

BOOK  XXXV. 

45 

B.  C.  19S.] 
ranks,  but  like  travellers  on  a  journey,  in  order  that  they 
might  appear  to  be  the  retinue  of  the  general,  rather  than  a 
military  force.  Here  he  left  one  troop  at  the  gate,  lest  the 
cavalry,  who  were  coming  up,  might  be  shut  out:  and  then 
holding  Eurylochus  by  the  hand,  conducted  him  to  his  house 
through  the  middle  of  the  city  and  the  Forum,  and  through 
crowds  who  met  and  congratulated  him.  In  a  little  time  the 
city  was  filled  with  horsemen,  and  convenient  posts  were 
seized;  and  then  parties  were  sent  to  the  houses  of  persons 
of  the  opposite  faction,  to  put  them  to  death.  In  this  man¬ 
ner  Demetrias  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  jEtolians. 
XXXV.  The  plan  to  be  executed  at  Lacedaemon  was,  not 
to  attempt  the  city  by  force,  but  to  entrap  the  tyrant  by  stra¬ 
tagem.  For  though  he  had  been  stripped  of  the  maritime 
towns  by  the  Romans,  and  afterwards  shut  up  within  the 
walls  of  his  city  by  the  Achseans,  they  supposed  that  who¬ 
ever  took  the  first  opportunity  of  killing  him,  would  engross 
the  whole  thanks  of  the  Lacedsemonians.  The  pretence  which 
they  had  for  sending  to  him,  was,  that  he  had  long  solicited 
assistance  from  them,  since,  by  their  advice,  he  had  renewed 
the  war.  A  thousand  foot  were  put  under  the  command  of 
Alexamenus,  with  thirty  horsemen,  chosen  from  among  the 
youth.  These  received  a  charge  from  Damocritus,  the  prie- 
tor,  in  the  select  council  of  the  nation,  mentioned  above. 
not  to  suppose  that  they  were  sent  to  act  against  the 
Achaeans;  or  even  on  other  business,  which  any  might  think 
he  had  discovered  from  his  own  conjectures.  Whatever  sud¬ 
den  enterprise  circumstances  might  direct  Alexamenus  to 
undertake,  that  (however  unexpected,  rash,  or  daring)  they 
were  to  hold  themselves  in  readiness  to  execute  with  impli¬ 
cit  obedience;  and  should  understand  that  to  be  the  matter, 
for  the  sole  purpose  of  effecting  which  they  had  been  sent 
abroad.”  With  these  men,  thus  pre-instructed,  Alexamenus 
came  to  the  tyrant,  and  at  his  first  arrival  filled  him  with 
very  flattering  hopes;  telling  him,  that  Antiochus  had  al- 

4b 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[y,  R.  560, 

ready  come  over  into  Europe;  that  he  would  shortly  be  in 
Greece,  and  would  cover  the  lands  and  seas  with  men  and 
arms:  that  the  Romans  would  find  that  they  had  not  Philip 
to  deal  with:  that  the  numbers  of  the  horsemen,  footmen, 
and  ships,  could  not  be  reckoned;  and  that  the  train  of  ele¬ 
phants,  by  their  mere  appearance,  would  effectually  daunt  the 
enemy;  that  the  iEtolians  w'ere  resolved  to  come  to  Laceds- 
mon  with  their  entire  force,  whenever  occasion  required;  but 
that  they  wished  to  show  the  king^  on  his  arrival,  a  nume¬ 
rous  body  of  troops;  that  Nabis  himself,  likewise,  ought  to 
take  care  not  to  suffer  his  soldiers  to  be  enervated  by  inac¬ 
tion,  and  by  spending  their  time  in  houses;  but  to  lead  them 
out,  and  make  them  perform  their  evolutions  under  arms, 
which,  while  it  exercised  their  bodies,  would  also  rouse  their 
courage:  that  the  labour  would  become  lighter  by  practice, 
and  might  even  be  rendered  not  unpleasing  by  the  affability 
and  kindness  of  their  commander.”  Thenceforward,  the 
troops  used  frequently  to  be  drawn  out  under  the  walls  of  the 
city,  in  a  plain  near  the  fiver  Eurotas,  The  tyrant’s  life¬ 
guards  were  generally  posted  in  the  centre.  He  himself,  at¬ 
tended  by  three  horsemen  at  the  most,  of  whom  Alexamenus 
was  commonly  one,  rode  about  in  front,  and  went  to  view 
both  vrings  to  their  extremities.  On  the  right  wing  were  the 
^Fitolians;  both  those  who  had  been  before  in  his  army  as 
auxiliaries,  and  the  thousand  who  came  with  Alexamenus. 
Alexamenus  made  it  his  custom  to  ride  about  with  Nabis 
through  a  few  of  the  ranks,  making  such  remarks  as  he 
thought  proper;  then  to  join  his  own  troops  in  the  right  wing, 
and  presently  after,  as  if  having  given  the  necessary  orders, 
to  return  to  the  tyrant.  But,  on  the  day  which  he  had  fixed 
for  the  perpetration  of  the  deed  of  death,  after  accompany¬ 
ing  the  tyrant  for  a  little  time,  he  withdrew  to  his  own  sol¬ 
diers,  and  addressed  the  horsemen,  sent  from  home  with  him, 
in  these  words:  Young  men,  you  are  now  to  perform,  and 
that  with  boldness  and  resolution,  the  business  which  you 

BOOK  XXXV. 

47 

B.  C.  1920 
were  ordered  to  execute  at  my  command.  Have  your  cou¬ 
rage  and  your  hands  ready,  that  none  may  fail  to  second  me 
in  whatever  he  sees  me  attempt.  If  any  one  shall  hesitate, 
and  let  any  scheme  of  his  own  interfere  with  mine,  that  man 
most  certainly  shall  never  return  to  his  home.’’  Horror  seiz¬ 
ed  them  all,  and  they  well  remembered  the  charge  which 
they  had  received  at  setting  out.  Nabis  was  now  coming 
from  the  left  wing.  Alexamenus  ordered  his  horsem^  to 
rest  their  lances,  and  keep  their  eyes  fixed  on  him;  and  in 
the  meaniime  he  himself  re-collected  his  spirits  from  the 
hurry  into  which  they  had  been  thrown  by  the  thoughts  of 
such  a  desperate  attempt.  As  soon  as  the  tyrant  came  near, 
he  charged  him;  and  driving  his  spear  through  his  horse, 
brought  the  rider  to  the  ground.  All  the  horsemen  aimed 
their  lances  at  him  as  he  lay,  and  after  many  ineffectual 
strokes  against  his  coat  of  mail,  their  points  at  length  pene¬ 
trated  his  body,  so  that,  before  relief  could  be  sent  from  the 
centre,  he  expired. 
XXXVI.  Alexamenus,  with,  all  the  iEtolians,  hastened 
away  to  seize  on  the  palace.  Nabis’s  life-guards  were  at 
first  struck  with  horror  and  dismay,  the  act  being  perpetrated 
before  their  eyes;  then,  when  they  observed  the  ^Etolian 
troops  leaving  the  place,  they  gathered  round  the  tyrant’s 
body,  where  it  was  left,  forming,  instead  of  avengers  of  his 
death,  a  mere  groupe  of  spectators.  Nor  would  any  one 
have  stirred,  if  Alexamenus  had  immediately  called  the  peo¬ 
ple  to  an  assembly,  there  made  a  speech  suitable  to  the  occa¬ 
sion,  and  afterwards  kept  a  good  number  of  AUtolians  in 
arms,  without  offering  to  commit  any  act  of  violence.  In¬ 
stead  of  which,  by  a  fatality  which  ought  to  attend  all  de¬ 
signs  founded  in  treachery,  every  step  was  taken  that  could 
tend  to  hasten  the  destruction  of  the  actors  in  this  villainous 
enterprise.  The  commander,  shut  up  in  the  palace,  wasted 
a  day  and  a  night  in  searching  out  the  tyrant’s  treasures;  and 
the  iEtolians,  as  if  they  had  stormed  the  city,  of  which  they 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  560. 

4B 
wished  to  be  thought  the  deliverers,  betook  themselves  to 
plunder.  The  insolence  of  their  behaviour,  and,  at  the  same 
time,  contempt  of  their  numbers,  gave  the  Laced semonians 
courage  to  assemble  in  a  body,  when  some  said,  that  they 
ought  to  drive  out  the  .^Etolians,  and  resume  their  liberty 
which  had  been  ravished  from  them  at  the  very  time  when  it 
seemed  to  be  restored;  others,  that,  for  the  sake  of  appearance, 
they  ought  to  associate  with  them  some  one  of  the  royal  fami¬ 
ly,  to  give  authority  to  their  proceedings.  There  was  a  very 
young  boy,  of  that  family,  named  Laconicus,  who  had  been 
educated  with  the  tyrant’s  children;  him  they  mounted  on  a 
horse,  and  taking  arms,  slew'  all  the  jLtolians  whom  the\ 
met  straggling  through  the  city.  They  then  assaulted  the 
palace,  v/here  they  killed  Alexamenus,  w'ho,  with  a  small  par¬ 
ty  attempted  resistance.  Others  of  the  ^tolians,  who  had 
collected  together  round  the  Chalciaicon,  that  is,  the  brazen 
temple  of  Minerva,  were  cut  to  pieces.  A  few,  throwing 
away  their  arms,  fled,  some  to  Tegea,  others  to  Megalopolis 
where  they  were  seized  by  the  magistrates,  and  sold  as  slaves. 
Philopsemen,  as  soon  as  he  heard  of  the  murder  of  the  tyrant, 
went  to  Lacedsemon,, where,  finding  all  in  confusion  and  con¬ 
sternation,  he  called  together  the  principal  inhabitants,  to 
whom  he  addressed  a  discourse,  (such  as  ought  to  have  been 
made  by  Alexamenus,)  which  had  so  great  an  effect,  that 
the  Lacedsemonians  joined  the  confederacy  of  the  Achseans. 
To  this  they  were  the  more  easily  persuaded,  because,  at 
that  very  juncture,  Aulas  Atilius  happened  to  arrive  at  Gy- 
thium  with  twenty-four  quinqueremes. 
XXXV IT  Meanwhile,  Thoas,  in  his  attempt  on  Chalcis, 
was  not  near  so  fortunate  as  Eurylochus  had  been  in  getting 
possession  of  Demetrias;  although  (by  the  intervention  ol 
Euihymidas,  a  man  of  considerable  consequence,  who,  after 
the  arrival  of  Titus  Quintius  and  the  ambassadors,  had  been 
banished  by  those  who  adhered  to  the  Roman  alliance;  and 
also  of  Herodorus,  who  was  a  merchant  of  Cios,  and  who,  by 

B.C.  19^:]  BOOK  XXXV.  49 
means  of  his  wealth,  possessed  a  powerful  influence  at  Chal* 
cis,)  he  had  engaged  a  party,  composed  of  Euthymidas’s  fac¬ 
tion,  to  betray  the  city  into  his  hands.  Euthymidas  went 
from  Athens,  where  he  had  fixed  his  residence,  first  to  Thebes, 
and  thence  to  Salganea;  Herodorus  to  Thronium.  At  a 
small  distance,  on  the  Malian  bay,  Thoas  had  two  thousand 
foot  and  two  hundred  horse,  with  thirty  light  transport  ships. 
With  these  vessels,  carrying  six  hundred  footmen,  Herodo* 
rus  was  ordered  to  sail  to  the  island  of  Atalanta,  that,  as  soon 
as  he  should  perceive  the  land-forces  approaching  Aulis  and 
the  Euripus,  he  might  pass  over  to  Chalcis;  to  which  place 
Thoas  himself  led  the  rest  of  his  forces,  marching  mostly  by 
night,  and  with  all  possible  expedition. 
XXXVHL  Mictio  and  Xenoclides,  who  were  now^ since  the 
banishment  of  Euthymidas,  at  the  head  of  affairs  in  that  city, 
either  of  themselves  suspected  the  matter,  or  received  some 
information  of  it,  and  were  at  first  so  greatly  terrified,  that 
they  saw  no  prospect  of  safety  but  in  flight;  but  afterwards, 
when  their  fright  subsided,  and  they  considered  that,  by  such 
a  step,  they  would  betray  and  desert  not  only  their  country, 
but  the  Roman  alliance,  they  struck  out  the  following  plan. 
It  happened  that,  at  that  very  time,  there  was  a  solemn  an¬ 
niversary  festival,  celebrated  at  Eretria,  in  honour  of  Diana 
Amar}nthis,  which  was  always  attended  by  great  numbers, 
not  only  of  the  natives  but  also  of  the  Carystians:  thither  they 
sent  envoys  to  beseech  the  Eretrians  and  Carystians,  “  as  hav¬ 
ing  been  born  in  the  same  isle,  to  compassionate  their  situa¬ 
tion;  and,  at  the  same  time,  to  show  their  regard  to  the  friend¬ 
ship  of  Rome:  not  to  suffer  Chalcis  to  become  the  property  of 
the  iEtolians,  who,  if  they  once  got  that  city  into  their  power 
would  soon  possess  themselves  of  all  Eubcea:  and  to  remind 
them,  that  they  had  found  the  Macedonians  grievous  masters, 
but  that  the  iEtolians  would  be  much  more  intolerable.” 
Those  states  were  influenced  chiefly  by  motives  respecting 
ihe  Romans,  as  they  had  lately  experienced  both  the  bravery 
vor.  ^ 

50 

HISTORY  OF  ROML. 

[Y.  R.  560. 

in  war,  and  the  justice  and  liberality  in  success,  which  cha¬ 
racterised  that  people.  Both  states,  therefore,  armed,  and 
sent  the  main  strength  of  their  young  men.  To  these  the 
people  of  Chalcis  entrusted  the  defence  of  the  walls,  and 
they  themselves,  with  their  whole  force  crossed  the  Euripes, 
and  encamped  at  Salganea.  From  that  place  they  despatch¬ 
ed  first  a  herald,  and  afterwards,  ambassadors,  to  ask  the 
iEtolians,  for  what  word  or  act  of  theirs,  friends  and  allies 
came  thus  to  attack  them.  Thoas,  commander  of  the  iEtolians, 
answered,  that  ‘‘  he  came  not  to  attack  them,  but  to  deliver 
them  from  the  Romans:  that  they  were  icttered  at  present 
with  a  brighter  chain  indeed,  but  a  much  heavier  one,  than 
W'hen  they  had  a  Macedonian  garrison  in  their  citadel/’  The 
men  of  Chalcis  replied,  that  “  they  were  neither  under  bon^ 
dage,  nor  in  need  of  protection/'  The  ambassadors  then 
withdrew  from  the  meeting,  and  returned  to  their  countiy  - 
men.  Thoas  and  the  Aitolians,  (who  had  no  other  hopes 
than  In  a  sudden  surprise,  and  were  by  no  means  in  a  capaci¬ 
ty  to  undertake  a  regular  war,  and  the  siege  of  a  city  so  well 
secured  against  aru*  attack  from  the  land  or  the  sca,j  returned 
home.  Eulhymidas,  on  hearing  that  his  countrymen  were 
encamped  at  Salganea,  and  that  the  iEtolians  had  retired, 
went  back  from  Thebes  to  Athens,  Herodorus,  after  wait¬ 
ing  several  days  at  Atalantu,  autntively  watching  for  the 
concerted  signal  in  vain,  sent  an  advice- boat  to  learn  the 
cause  of  the  delay;  and,  understanding  that  the  enterprise 
was  abandoned  by  his  associates,  returned  to  Throniam. 
XXXI X.  Quintius,  being  informed  of  these  proceedings, 
came  w^ith  the  fleet  from  Corinth,  and  met  Euments,  in  the 
Euripus  of  Chalcis,  It  was  agreed  between  them,  that  king 
Eumenes  should  leave  there  five  hundred  of  his  soldiers,  as 
a  garrison  to  the  city,  and  should  go  himself  to  Athens. 
Quititius  proceeded  to  Demetrias,  as  he  had  purposed  from 
the  first,  hoping  that  the  relief  of  Chalcis  would  prove  a 
strong  inducement  to  the  Magnetians  to  renew  the  alliance 
with  Rome.  And,  in  order  that  such  of  them  as  favoured 

B.  C.  19C.] 

BOOK  XXXV. 

51 

his  views*might  have  some  support  at  hand^  he  wrote  to  Eu- 
riomus,  preetor  of  the  Thessalians,  to  arm  the  youth  of  his  na¬ 
tion;  sending  Villius  forward  to  Demetrias,  to  sound  the  incli¬ 
nations  of  the  people;  for  he  was  determined  not  to  take  any 
step  in  the  business,  unless  a  considerable  number  of  them 
were  disposed  to  revive  the  former  treaty  of  amity,  Vil¬ 
lius,  in  a  ship  of  five  banks  of  oars,  came  to  the  mouth  of  the 
harbour,  and  the  whole  multitude  ol  the  Magneiians  hastened 
out  thither.  Villius  then  asked,  whether  they  chose  that  he 
should  consider  himself  as  having  come  to  fi  lends,  or  to  ene¬ 
mies?  F.ur\lochus,  the  Magnetarch,  answered,  that  “  he  had 
come  to  friends;  but  desired  him  not  to  enter  the  harbour, 
but  to  sufi'er  the  Magnetians  to  live  in  freedom  and  harmony; 
and  not  to  attempt,  under  the  show  of  friendly  converse,  to 
seduce  the  minds  of  the  populace.’’  Then  followed  an  alter¬ 
cation,  not  a  conference,  the  Roman  upbraiding  the  Magne¬ 
tians  with  ingratitude,  and  forewarning  them  of  the  calami¬ 
ties  impending  over  them;  the  mullitude,  on  the  other  side, 
clamorously  reproaching  him,  and  reviling,  sometimes  the 
senate,  sometimes  Qulntius.  Villius,  therefore,  unable  to  ef¬ 
fect  any  part  of  his  business,  vvent  back  to  Quintius,  who  des¬ 
patched  orders  to  the  Thessalian  praetor,  to  lead  his  troops 
home,  while  himself  returned  by  sea  to  Corinth. 
XL.  I  have  let  the  aiTairs  ol  (Treece,  blended  with  those 
of  Home,  carry  me  a>vay,  as  it  w^ere,  out  of  the  course;  not 
that  they  were  in  themselves  deserving  of  a  recital,  but  be¬ 
cause  they  gave  rise  to  a  war  with  Antiochus.  After  the 
consular  election,  for  thence  I  digressed,  the  consuls,  Lucius 
Quintius  and  Cneius  Domitius  repaired  to  their  provinces. 
Quintius  to  Liguria,  Domitius  against  the  Boians.  These 
latter  kept  themselves  quiet;  nay,  the  senators  w’ith  their 
children,  and  the  commanding  officers  of  the  cavalry,  with 
their  troops,  amounting  in  all  to  one  thousand  five  hundred, 
surrendered  to  the  consul.  The  other  consul  laid  waste  the 
country  ol  the  Ligurians  to  a  wide  extent,  and  took  some 

52 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  560. 

forts;  in  which  expeditions  he  not  only  acquired  booty  of 
all  sorts,  together  with  many  prisoners,  but  he  also  recover¬ 
ed  several  of  his  countr)men,  and  of  the  allies,  who  had 
been  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy.  In  this  year  a  colony  was 
settled  at  Vibo,  in  pursuance  of  a  decree  of  the  senate  and 
an  order  of  the  people;  three  thousand  seven  hundred  foot¬ 
men,  and  three  hundred  horsemen,  went  out  thither,  con¬ 
ducted  by  the  commissioners  Quintus  Naevius,  Marcus  Mi- 
nucius,  and  Marcus  Furius  Crassipes.  Fifteen  acres  of 
ground  were  assigned  to  each  footman,  double  that  quantity 
to  a  horseman.  This  land  had  been  last  in  possession  of  the 
Brnttians,  who  had  taken  it  from  the  Greeks.  About  this 
time  two  dreadful  alarms  happened  at  Rome,  one  of  which 
continued  long,  but  produced  less  mischief  than  the  other. 
An  earthquake  lasted  through  thirty-eight  days;  during 
all  which  time  there  was  a  total  cessation  of  business,  so 
strong  were  people’s  anxiety  and  fears.  On  account  of  this 
event,  a  supplication  was  performed  of  three  days  continu¬ 
ance.  The  other  was  not  a  mere  fright,  but  attended  with 
the  loss  of  many  lives.  In  consequence  of  a  fire  breaking 
out  in  the  cattle  market,  the  conflagration,  among  the  houses 
near  to  the  Tiber,  continued  through  all  that  day  and  the 
following  night,  and  all  the  shops  with  wares  of  very  great 
value,  were  reduced  to  ashes. 
XLI.  I'he  year  was  now  almost  at  an  end,  while  the  ru¬ 
mours  of  impending  hostility,  and  consequently,  the  anxiety 
of  the  senate,  daily  increased.  They  therefore  set  about  ad¬ 
justing  the  provinces  of  the  magistrates  elect,  in  order  that 
they  might  all  be  the  more  attentive  in  their  several  depart¬ 
ments.  They  decreed,  that  those  of  the  consuls  should  be  Italy, 
and  whatever  other  place  the  senate  should  vote,  for  every 
one  knew  that  a  war  against  Antioch  us  v;as  now  a  settled 
point.  That  he,  to  whose  lot  the  latter  province  fell,  should 
have  under  his  command,— -of  Roman  citizens,  four  thousand 
foot  and  three  hundred  horse;  and  of  the  Latine  confederates. 

B,  C.  192.] 

BOOK  XXXV. 

six  thousand  foot  and  four  hundred  horse.  The  consul,  Lu* 
cius  Quintius,  was  ordered  to  levy  these  troops,  that  the  new 
consul  might  have  nothing  to  prevent  his  proceeding  imme¬ 
diately  to  any  place  which  the  senate  should  appoint.  Con¬ 
cerning  the  provinces  of  the  praetors,  also,  it  was  decreed, 
that  the  first  lot  should  comprehend  the  two  jurisdictions, 
both  that  between  natives,  and  that  between  them  and  fo¬ 
reigners;  the  .second  should  be  Bruttium;  the  third,  the  fleet; 
to  sail  wherever  the  senate  should  direct;  the  fourth  Sicily, 
the  fifth  Sardinia;  the  sixth  farther  Spain.  An  order  \vas  also 
given  to  the  consul  Lucius  Quiniius,  to  levy  two  new  legions 
of  Roman  citizens,-  and  of  the  allies  and  Latines  twenty 
thousand  foot  and  eight  hundred  horse.  This  arm}'’  they  as¬ 
signed  to  the  praetor  to  whom  should  fall  the  province  of 
Bruttium.  Two  temples  were  dedicated  this  year  to  Jupiter 
in  the  capitol;  one  of  which  had  been  vowed  by  Lucius  Fu- 
rius  Purpureo,  when  praetor,  during  the  Gallic  war;  the  other 
by  the  same,  when  consul.  Quintus  Marcius  Ralia,  duumvir, 
dedicated  both.  Many  severe  sentences  were  passed  this 
year  on  usurers,  who  were  prosecuted  by  the  curule  aediles, 
Marcus  Tuccius  and  Publius  Junius  Brutus.  Out  of  the 
fines  imposed  on  those  who  were  convicted,  gilded  chariots, 
with  four  horses,  were  placed  in  the  recess  of  Jupiter's  tem¬ 
ple  in  the  capitol,  over  the  canopy  of  the  shrine,  and  also 
twelve  gilded  bucklers.  The  same  aediles  built  a  portico  on 
the  outside  of  the  Triple  Gate,  in  the  Carpenters-Square. 
XLll.  While  the  Romans  were  busily  employed  in  pre¬ 
paring  for  a  new  war,  Antiochus,  on  his  part,  was  not  idle. 
He  was  detained  some  time  by  three  cities,  Smyrna,  Alex¬ 
andria  in  Troas,  and  Lampsacus,  which  hitherto  he  had  not 
been  able  either  to  reduce  by  force,  or  to  persuade  into  a  trea¬ 
ty  of  amity;  and  he  was  unwilling,  on  going  into  Europe,  to 
leave  these  as  enemies.  The  difficulty  of  forming  a  fixed  de¬ 
termination  respecting  Hannibal  occasioned  him  further  de¬ 
lay.  First,  the  open  ships,  which  the  king  was  to  have  sent 

54 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  560. 

with  him  to  Africa,  were  not  readily  fitted  out;  and,  after¬ 
wards  doubts  were  raised,  whether  he  ought  to  be  sent  at 
all.  This  was  owing  chiefly  to  Thoas,  the  Altolian;  who,  aT 
ter  setting  ail  Greece  in  commotion,  came  with  the  account 
of  Demetrias  being  in  the  hands  of  his  countrymen;  and  as 
he  had,  by  false  representations  concerning  the  king,  and 
multiplying  in  his  assertions,  the  numbers  of  his  forces,  ex¬ 
alted  the  expectations  of  many  in  Greece;  so  now,  by  the 
same  artifices,  he  puffed  up  the  hopes  of  the  king;  telling 
him,  that  “  every  one,  with  earnest  wishes,  longed  for  his 
coming;  and,  that,  wherever  they  got  a  view  of  the  royal 
fleet,  they  would  all  run  down  to  the  shore  to  welcome  him.’' 
He  even  had  the  audacity  to  attempt  altering  the  king’s  judg¬ 
ment  respecting  Hannibal,  when  it  was  nearly  settled.  For 
he  alleged,  that,  the  fleet  ought  not  to  he  weakened  b)- 
sending  away  any  part  of  it,  but  that,  if  ships  must  be  sent, 
no  person  tvas  less  fit  for  the  command  than  Hannibal;  for  he 
was  an  exile,  and  a  Carthaginian;  to  whom  hi:i  own  circum* 
Stances,  or  his  disposition,  might  daily  suggest  a  thousand 
new  schemes.  Then,  as  to  his  military  fame,  which,  like  a 
large  dowry,  recommended  him  to  notice,  it  was  too  splen¬ 
did  for  an  officer  acting  under  Antiochus.  The  king  ought 
to  be  the  grand  object  of  view;  the  king  ought  to  appear  the 
sole  leader,  the  sole  commander.  If  Hannibal  should  lose  u 
fleet  or  an  army,  the  amount  of  the  damage  would  be  the 
same  as  if  the  loss  were  incurred  by  any  other  general;  but 
should  success  be  obtained,  all  the  honour  would  be  ascribed 
to  Hannibal.  Besides,  if  the  war  should  prove  so  fortunate 
as  to  terminate  finally  in  the  defeat  of  the  Romans,  could  it 
be  expected  that  Hannibal  would  live  under  a  king;  subject, 
in  short,  to  an  individual;  he  who  could  not  brook  subjection 
to  the  government  of  his  own  country?  His  conduct,  from 
early  youth,  had  been  of  a  very  different  cast:  for  he  was  a 
man  who  grasped  at  nothing  less  than  the  dominion  of  the 
world.  It  was  therefore  not  likely  that,  in  his  maturer  age 

BOOK  XXXV. 

B.  C.  192.] 

he  would  be  able  to  endure  a  master.  The  king  wanted  not 
Hannibal  as  a  general:  as  an  attendant  and  a  counsellor  in  the 
business  of  the  war,  he  might  properly  employ  him.  A  mo¬ 
derate  use  of  such  abilities  would  be  neither  unprofitable 
nor  dangerous:  but,  if  advantages  of  the  highest  nature  were 
sought  through  him,  the  probable  consequences  would  be 
the  destruction  both  of  the  agent  and  the  employer.’" 
XLIII,  There  are  no  dispositions  more  prone  to  envy  than 
those  of  persons  whose  mental  qualifications  are  inferior  to 
their  birth  and  rank  in  Ule;  such  always  harbour  an  antipa¬ 
thy  to  merit,  as  a  treasure  in  which  they  cannot  share.  The 
design  of  the  expedition,  to  be  commanded  by  Hannibal,  tiu 
only  one  thought  of  that  could  be  of  use,  in  the  beginning  oi 
the  war,  was  Immediately  laid  aside.  The  king,  highly  flat> 
tcred  by  the  defeclion  of  Demetrius  Irom  the  Romans  to  the 
i^Etoiians,  resolved  to  pass  into  Greece  without  farther  delav. 
Before  the  fleet  weighed  anchor,  he  went  up  from  the  shore 
to  Ilium,  to  offer  sacrifice  to  Minerva.  Immediately  on  his 
return,  he  set  sail  with  forty  decked  ships  and  sixty  open 
ones,  followed  by  two  hundred  transports,  laden  with  provi¬ 
sions  and  warlike  stores.  He  first  touched  at  the  island  oi 
Imbrus;  thence  he  passed  over  to  Sciathus;  whence,  after 
collecting  the  ships  which  had  been  separated  during  the 
voyage,  he  proceeded  to  Pteleum,  the  nearest  part  of  the 
continent.  Here,  Eurylochus  the  IMagnetarch,  and  other  prin¬ 
cipal  JNIagnetians  from  Demetrias,  met  him.  BGng  greath 
gratified  by  their  numerous  appearance,  he  carried  his  fleet 
the  next  day  into  the  harbour  of  the  ir  city.  At  a  small  dis¬ 
tance  from  the  town  he  landed  his  forces,  which  consisted  of 
ten  thousand  foot,  five  hundred  hors.,  and  six  elephants;  a 
force  scarcely  sufficient  to  take  possession  of  Greece  if  there 
were  to  be  no  foreign  opposition,  much  less  to  withstand  the 
armies  of  Rome.  7  he  -Etolians,  as  soon  as  the\’  were  in¬ 
formed  of  Antiochus  s  arrival  at  Demetrias,  convened  a  ge¬ 
neral  council,  and  passed  a  decree,  inviting  him  into  theit 

56 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y,  R.  560. 

country.  The  king  had  already  left  Demetrias,  (for  he  knew 
that  such  a  decree  was  to  be  passed,)  and  had  advanced  as 
far  as  Phalera  on  the  Malian  bay.  Here  the  decree  was  pre¬ 
sented  to  him,  and  then  he  proceeded  to  Lamia,  where  he 
was  received  by  the  populace  with  marks  of  the  warmest  at¬ 
tachment,  with  clapping  of  hands  and  shouting,  and  other 
signs  by  which  the  vulgar  express  extravagant  joy. 
XL IV.  When  he  came  to  the  place  w'here  the  council  sat, 
he  was  Introduced  by  PhieneaS,  the  praetor,  and  other  per¬ 
sons  of  eminence,  who,  with  difficulty,  made  way  for  him 
through  the  crowd.  Then,  silence  being  ordered,  the  king 
addressed  himself  to  the  assembly.  He  began  with  account¬ 
ing  for  his  having  come  with  a  force,  so  much  smaller  than 
every  one  had  hoped  and  expected,  That,'’  he  said,  ought 
to  be  deemed  the  strongest  proof  cif  the  warmth  of  his  good 
will  towards  them;  because,  though  he  was  not  sufficiently 
prepared  in  any  particular,  and  though  the  season  was  yet 
too  early  for  sailing,  he  had,  without  hesitation,  complied 
w  ith  the  call  of  their  ambassadors,  and  had  believed,  that, 
when  the  jEtolians  should  see  him  among  them,  they  would 
be  satisfied,  that  in  him,  even  if  he  were  unattended,  they 
might  be  sure  of  eveiy  kind  of  support.  But  he  would  also 
abundantly  fulfil  the  hopes  of  those,  whose  expectations 
seemed  at  present  to  be  disappointed.  For,  as  soon  as  the 
season  of  the  year  rendered  navigation  safe,  he  would  cover 
all  Greece  with  arms,  men,  and  horses,  and  all  its  coasts  with 
fleets.  He  would  spare  neither  expense,  nor  labour,  nor  dan¬ 
ger,  until  he  should  remove  the  Homan  yoke  from  their 
necks,  and  render  Greece  really  free,  and  the  .^Ltoiians  the 
first  among  its  states.  That,  together  with  the  armies,  stores 
of  all  kinds  were  to  come  from  Asia.  For  the  present,  the 
TEtolians  ought  to  take  care  that  his  men  might  be  properly 
supplied  with  corn,  and  other  accommodations,  at  reasonalile 

rates. 

BOOK  XXXV. 

57 

B.  C.  192.] 
XL  V.  Such  was  tlic  purport  of  the  king’s  discourse,  which 
was  received  with  imiversal  approbation,  and  he  then  with* 
drew.  After  his  departure,  a  warm  debate  ensued  between 
two  of  the  iEtolian  chiefs,  Phseneas  and  Thoas.  Phaeneas  de* 
dared  his  opinion,  that  it  would  he  better  to  employ  Antio^ 
chus,  as  a  mediator  of  peace,  and  an  umpire  respecting  the 
matters  in  dispute  with  the  Roman  people,  than  as  leader  in 
a  war.  ThtU  ‘‘  his  presence,  and  his  dignified  station,  would 
impress  the  Romans  with  awe,  more  powerfully  than  his 
arms.  That  in  many  cases,  men,  for  the  sake  of  avoiding 
war,  remit  pretensions,  which  force  and  arms  would  never 
compel  them  to  forego.”  Thoas,  on  the  other  hand,  insisted, 
that  Phaeneas’s  motive  was  not  a  love  of  peace,  but  a  wish 
to  embarrass  them  in  their  preparations  for  war,  with  the  view 
that,  through  the  tediousness  of  the  proceedings,  the  king’s 
vigour  might  be  relaxed,  and  the  Romans  gain  time  to  put 
themselves  in  readiness.  That  they  had  abundant  proof  from 
experience,  after  so  many  embassies  sent  to  Rome,  and  so 
many  conferences  with  Quintius  in  person,  that  nothing 
reasonable  could  ever  be  obtained  from  the  Romans  in  the 
way  of  negotiation;  and  that  they  ^ould  not,  until  every  hope 
of  that  sort  was  6ut  of  sight,  have  Implored  the  aid  of  Antio* 
chus.  That,  as  he  had  appeared  among  them  sooner  than 
any  had  expected,  they  ought  not  to  sink  into  indolence,  but 
rather  to  petition  the  king,  that,  since  he  had  come  in  person, 
which  was  the  great  point  of  all,  to  support  the  rights  of 
Greece,  he  would  also  send  for  his  fleets  and  armies.  For 
the  king,  at  the  head  of  an  army,  might  obtain  something; 
but,  without  that,  could  have  very  little  influence  with  the 
Romans,  either  in  the  cause  of  the  ^tolians,  or  even  in  his 
own.”  This  opinion  was  adopted,  and  the  council  voted,  that 
the  title  of  general  should  be  conferred  on  the  king.  They 
also  nominated  thirty  of  ihe!r  number,  as  a  council,  with 
whom  he  might  deliberate  on  business,  when  he  should  think 
VOL.  V. — I 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

6H 

CY.  R.  C60, 

proper.  The  council  was  then  broken  up,  and  all  went  home 
to  their  respective  states. 
XLVI.  Next  day,  the  king  held  a  consultation  with  their 
select  council,  respecting  the  most  eligible  place  for  begin¬ 
ning  his  operations.  They  judged  it  best  to  make  the  first 
trial  on  Chalcis,  which  had  lately  been  attempted,  in  vain, 
by  the  iEtolians;  and  they  thought  that  the  business  required 
rather  expedition  than  any  great  exertion  or  preparation. 
Accordingly  the  king,  with  a  thousand  foot,  who  had  foh 
lowed  him  from  Demetrias,  took  his  route  through  Phocis; 
and  the  iEtolian  chiefs,  going  by  another  road,  met,  at  Che- 
ronaea,  a  small  number  of  their  young  men,  whom  they  had 
called  to  arms,  and  thence,  in  ten  decked  ships,  proceeded 
after  him.  Antiochus  pitched  his  camp  at  Salganea,  while 
himself,  with  the  iEtolian  chiefs,  crossed  the  Euripus  in  the 
ships.  When  he  had  advanced  a  little  way  from  the  harbour, 
the  magistrates,  and  other  chief  men  of  Chalcis,  came  out 
before  their  gate.  A  small  number,  from  each  side,  met  to 
confer  together.  The  ^Etolians  warmly  recommended  to  the 
others,  ‘‘  without  violating  the  friendship  subsisting  between 
them  and  the  Romans,  to  receive  the  king  also,  as  a  friend 
and  ally.  For  his  cominl^^  into  Europe  was  not  for  the  pur¬ 
pose  of  making  war,  but  of  vindicating  the  liberty  of  Greece; 
and  of  vindicating  it  in  reality,  not  in  words  and  pretence 
merely,  as  the  Romans  had  done.  Nothing  could  be  more 
advantageous  to  the  states  of  Greece,  than  to  possess  the 
friendship  of  both  those  powers;  as  they  would  then  be  al¬ 
ways  secure  against  ill-treatment  from  either,  under  the 
guaranty  and  protection  of  the  other.  If  they  refused  to  re¬ 
ceive  the  king,  they  ought  to  consider  the  immediate  diffi¬ 
culties  which  they  must  encounter;  the  aid  of  the  Romans 
being  far  distant,  and  Antiocb^us,  whom  with  their  own 
strength  they  could  not  possibly  resist  in  character  of  an  ene¬ 
my  at  their  gates.”  To  this  Mictio,  one  of  the  Chalcian  de¬ 
puties,  answered,  that  “  he  wondered  who  those  people  were, 

BOOK  XXXV. 

59 

B.  C.  192.] 

for  the  vindicating  of  whose  liberty  Antiochus  had  left  his 
own  kingdom,  and  come  over  into  Europe.  For  his  part,  he 
knew  not  any  state  in  Greece  which  either  was  awed  by  a 
garrison,  or  paid  tribute  to  the  Romans,  or  was  bound  by  a 
disadvantageous  treaty,  and  obliged  to  submit  to  terms  which 
it  did  not  like.  The  people  of  Chalcis,  therefore,  stood  not 
in  need,  either  of  any  assertor  of  their  liberty,  which  they 
already  enjoyed,  or  of  any  armed  protector;  since,  through 
the  kindness  of  the  Roman  people,  they  were  in  possession 
of  both  liberty  and  peace.  They  did  not  slight  the  friendship 
of  the  king,  nor  that  of  the  JEtolians  themselves.  The  first 
instance  of  friendship,  therefore,  that  they  could  give,  would 
be  to  quit  the  island  and  go  home;  for,  as  to  themselves, 
they  were  fully  determined,  not  only  not  to  admit  them 
within  their  walls,  but  not  even  to  agree  to  any  alliance,  but 
with  the  approbation  of  the  Romans.” 
XLVII.  When  an  account  of  this  conference  was  brought 
to  the  king,  at  the  ships,  where  he  had  staid,  he  resolved 
for  the  present  to  return  to  Demetrias;  for  he  had  not  with 
him  a  sufficient  number  of  men  to  attempt  any  thing  by  force. 
At  Demetrias,  he  held  another  consulation  with  the  ./Etoli- 
ans,  to  determine  what  w^as  next  to  be  done,  as  their  first 
effort  had  proved  fruitless.  It  was  agreed  that  they  should 
make  trial  of  the  Boeotians,  Achaeans,  and  Amynander,  king 
of  Aihamania.  The  Boeotian  nation  they  believed  to  be  dis¬ 
affected  to  the  Romans,  ever  since  the  death  of  Brachyllas, 
and  the  consequences  which  attend  it.  Philopaemcn,  chief 
of  the  Achaeans,  they  supposed  to  hate,  and  be  hated  by, 
Quintius,  in  consequence  of  a  rivalship  for  fame  in  the  war 
of  Laconia.  Amynander  had  married  Apamia,  daughter  of 
a  Megalopolitan,  called  Alexander,  who,  pretending  to  be 
descended  from  Alexander  the  Great,  had  given  the  names 
of  Philip  and  Alexander  to  his  two  sons,  and  that  of  Apa¬ 
mia  to  his  daughter;  and  when  she  was  raised  to  distinc¬ 
tion,  bv  her  marriage  to  the  king,  Philip,  the  elder  of  her 

60 

HISTORY  OF  ROME- 

[Y.  R.  560. 

brothers,  followed  her  into  Athamania.  I’his  man,  who  was 
naturally  vain,  the  iEtolians  and  Antiochus  persuaded  to 
hope,  that,  as  he  was  really  of  the  royal  family,  he  should 
be  put  in  possession  of  the  kingdom  of  Macedonia,  on  con¬ 
dition  of  his  prevailing  on  Amynander  and  the  Athamani- 
ans  to  join  Antiochus;  and  these  empty  promises  produced 
the  intended  effect,  not  only  on  Philip,  but  likewise  on  Amy¬ 
nander. 
XLVIII.  In  Achaia,  the  ambassadors  of  Antiochus,  and 
the  iEtolians,  were  admitted  to  an  audience  of  the  council 
at  .^gium,  in  the  presence  of  Titus  Quintius.  The  ambas¬ 
sador  of  Antiochus  was  heard  prior  to  the  iEtolians,  He, 
with  all  that  pomp  and  parade,  which  is  common  among 
those  who  are  maintained  in  the  courts  of  kings,  covered,  as 
far  as  the  empty  sound  of  words  could  go,  both  lands  and 
seas  with  forces.  He  said,  that  an  innumerable  body  of 
cavalry  was  coming  over  the  Hellespont  into  Europe;  some 
of  them  cased  in  coats  of  mail,  whom  they  call  Cataphracti^ 
others  discharging  arrows  on  horseback;  and,  what  rendered 
it  impossible  to  guard  against  them,  shooting  with  the  surest 
aim  even  when  their  backs  were  turned,  and  their  horses  in 
full  gallop.  To  this  army  of  cavalry,  sufficient  to  crush  the 
forces  of  all  Europe,  collected  into  one  body,’’  he  added  ano¬ 
ther  of  infantry  of  many  times  its  number;  and  to  terrify 
them,  repeated  the  names  of  nations  scarcely  ever  heard  of 
before;  talking  of  Dahans,  Medes,  Eiym&eans,  and  Cadu^ 
sians.  As  to  the  naval  forces,  no  harbours  in  Greece  were 
capable  of  containing  them;  the  right  squadron  was  compos- 
ed  of  Sidonians  and  Tyrians;  the  left  of  Aradians  and  Side- 
tians,  from  Pamphyila, — nations  which  none  others  had  evet 
equalled,  either  in  courage,  or  skill  in  sea  affairs.  Then,  as 
to  money,  and  other  requisites  for  the  support  of  war,  it  was 
needless  for  him  to  speak.  They  themselves  knew,  that  the 
kingdoms  of  Asia  had  always  abounded  in  gold.  The  Ro¬ 
mans,  therefore,  had  not  now  to  deal  with  Philip,  or  with 

BOOK  XXXV. 

61 

B.  C.  192,3 
Hannibal;  the  one  a  principal  member  of  a  commonwealth^ 
the  other  confined  merely  to  the  limits  of  the  kingdom  of 
Macedonia:  but  with  the  great  monarch  of  all  Asia^  and 
part  of  Europe.  Nevertheless,  though  he  had  come  to  the 
remotest  bounds  of  the  East  to  give  freedom  to  Greece,  he 
did  not  demand  any  thing  from  the  Achseans,  that  could 
injure  the  fidelity  of  their  engagements  with  the  Romans, 
their  former  friends  and  allies.  For  he  did  not  require  them 
to  take  arms  on  his  side  against  them;  but  only,  that  they 
should  not  join  themselves  to  either  party.  That,  as  became 
common  friends,  they  should  wish  for  peace  to  both  parties, 
and  not  intermeddle  in  the  war.”  Archidamus,  ambassador 
of  the  ^tolians,  made  nearly  the  same  request;  that,  as  was 
their  easiest  and  safest  way,  they  should  stand  neuter;  and, 
as  mere  spectators  of  the  war,  wait  for  the  issue,  which 
would  affect  only  the  interests  of  others,  while  their  own  af¬ 
fairs  were  exposed  to  no  manner  of  hazard.  He  afterwards 
allowed  himself  to  be  transported  into  such  intemperance  of 
language,  as  to  utter  invectives,  sometimes  against  the  Ro¬ 
mans  in  general,  sometimes  against  Quintius  himself  in  par¬ 
ticular;  charging  them  with  ingratitude,  and  upbraiding 
them,  as  being  indebted  to  the  valour  of  the  iEtolians,  not 
only  for  the  victory  over  Philip,  but  even  for  their  preserva¬ 
tion;  for,  ‘‘  by  their  exertions,  both  Quintius  himself  and 
his  army  had  been  saved.  What  duty  of  a  commander  had 
he  ever  discharged?  He  used  to  see  him,  indeed,  in  the 
field,  taking  auspices;  sacrificing  and  offering  vows,  like  an 
insignificant  soothsaying  priest;  while  he  himself  was,  in  his 
defence,  exposing  his  person  to  the  weapons  of  the  enemy.” 
XLIX.  To  this  Quintius  replied,  that  Archidamus  had 
calculated  his  discourse  for  the  numerous  auditors,  rather  than 
for  the  persons  to  whom  it  was  particularly  addressed.  For  the 
Achaeans  very  well  knew,  that  the  bold  spirit  of  the  .^toli- 
ans  consisted  entirely  in  words,  not  in  deeds;  and  was  more 
displayed  in  their  councils  and  assemblies  than  in  the  field 

62 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  560. 
He  had  therefore  been  indifferent  concerning  the  sentiments 
of  the  Achaeans,  to  whom  he  and  his  countrymen  were  con¬ 
scious  that  they  were  thoroughly  known;  and  studied  to  re¬ 
commend  himself  to  the  king’s  ambassadors,  and,  through 
them,  to  their  absent  master.  But,  if  any  person  had  been 
hitherto  ignorant  of  the  cause  which  had  effected  a  junction 
between  Antiochus  and  the  ^tolians,  it  was  easy  to  disco¬ 
ver  it  from  the  language  of  their  ambassadors.  By  the  false 
representations  made  by  both  parties,  and  boasts  of  strength 
which  neither  possessed,  they  mutually  puffed  up  each  others 
and  were  themselves  puffed  up  with  vain  expectations:  one 
party  talking  of  Philip  being  vanquished  by  them,  the  Ro¬ 
mans  being  protected  by  their  valour,  and  the  rest  of  what 
you  have  just  heard;  and  that  you,  and  the  other  states  and 
nations,  would  follow  their  lead.  The  king,  on  the  other 
side,  boasting  of  clouds  of  horsemen  and  footmen,  and  co¬ 
vering  the  seas  with  his  fleets.  Their  representations,”  he 
added,  ‘‘  are  exceedingly  like  a  supper  that  I  remember  at 
the  house  of  my  host  at  Chalcis,  who  is  both  a  man  of  worth, 
and  an  excellent  conductor  of  a  feast.  He  gave  a  cheerful 
entertainment  to  a  party  of  us  at  midsummer;  and  on  our 
wondering  how  he  could,  at  that  time  of  the  year,  procure 
such  plenty  and  variety  of  game,  he,  not  being  so  vain-glori- 
ous  as  these  men,  told  us,  with  a  pleasant  smile,  that  the  va¬ 
riety  was  owing  to  the  dressing,  and  that  what  appeared  to 
be  the  flesh  of  many  different  wild  animals,  was  entirely  of 
tame  swine.  This  may  be  aptly  applied  to  the  forces  of  the 
king,  so  ostentatiously  displayed  a  while  ago;  that  those  men, 
in  various  kinds  of  .armour,  and  nations,  whose  names  were 
never  mentioned  before,  Dahans  and  Medes,  and  Cadusians, 
and  Elymseans,  are  nothing  more  than  Syrians,  a  race  pos¬ 
sessed  of  such  grovelling  souls,  as  to  be  much  fitter  for  slaves 
than  for  soldiers.  I  wish,  Achseans,  that  I  could  exhibit  to 
your  view  the  rapid  excursions  of  this  mighty  monarch  from 
Demetrias;  first,  to  Lamia,  to  the  council  of  the  iEtolians; 

B.  C.  192,] 

BOOK  XXX\  , 

63 

then  to  Chalcis.  I  wouKl  show  you,  in  the  royal  camp^ 
about  the  number  of  two  small  legions,  and  these  incom¬ 
plete.  You  should  see  the  king,  now,  in  a  manner  begging 
corn  from  the  ^tolians,  to  be  measured  out  to  his  soldiers; 
then,  striving  to  borrow  money  at  interest  to  pay  them; 
again,  standing  at  the  gates  of  Chalcis;  and  presently,  on 
being  refused  admittance,  returning  thence  into  Ji.tolia, 
without  having  effected  any  thing,  except  indeed  the  taking 
a  peep  at  Aulis  and  the  Euripus.  Both  have  been  duped: 
Antiochus  by  the  Aitolians,  and  the  ^Etolians  by  the  king’s 
\  ain  and  empty  boastings.  For  which  reason,  you  ought  to 
be  the  more  on  your  guard  against  their  deceptions,  and  ra¬ 
ther  to  confide  in  the  tried  and  approved  fidelity  of  the  Ro¬ 
mans.  For,  with  respect  to  a  neutrality,  which  they  recom¬ 
mend  as  your  wisest  plan,  nothing,  in  fact,  can  be  more  con¬ 
trary  to  your  interest:  for  the  inevitable  consequence  must 
be,  that,  without  gaining  thanks  or  esteem  from  either,  you 
will  become  a  prey  to  the  conqueror/’ 
L.  His  arguments,  in  opposition  to  both,  were  deemed 
conclusive;  and  there  was  no  difficulty  in  bringing  an  audi¬ 
ence,  prepossessed  in  his  favour,  to  give  their  approbation  to 
his  discourse.  In  fact,  there  was  no  debate  or  doubt  start¬ 
ed,  but  all  concurred  in  voting,  that  the  nation  of  the  Achae- 
ans  would  treat,  as  their  friends  or  foes,  those  who  were 
judged  to  be  such  by  the  Roman  people,  and  in  ordering 
war  to  be  declared  against  both  Antiochus  and  the  iEtolians. 
They  also,  by  the  direction  of  Quintias,  sent  immediate- 
succours  of  five  hundred  men  to  Chalcis,  and  five  hundred 
to  the  Piraeus;  for  affairs  at  Athens  were  in  a  state,  not  far 
from  a  civil  war,  in  consequence  of  the  endeavours,  used  by 
some,  to  seduce  the  venal  populace,  by  hopes  of  largesses, 
to  take  part  with  Antiochus,  But  at  length  Quintius  was 
called  thither  by  those  who  were  of  the  Roman  party;  and 
Apollodorus,  the  principal  adviser  of  a  revolt,  being  public¬ 
ly  charged  therewith  by  one  Leon,  was  condemned  and  driv- 

64 

HISTORY  OF  ROME*  [Y.  R.  560. 

en  into  exile*  Thus,  from  the  Achaeans  also,  the  king’s 
embassy  returned  with  a  discouraging  answer.  The  Boeo¬ 
tians  made  no  explicit  declaration;  they  only  said,  that  ‘‘when 
Antiochus  should  come  into  Bosotia,  they  would  then  delibe¬ 
rate  on  the  measures  proper  to  be  pursued.”  When  Antio¬ 
chus  heard,  that  both  the  Achseans  and  king  Eumenes  had 
sent  reinforcements  to  Chalcis,  he  resolved  to  act  with  the 
utmost  expedition,  that  his  troops  might  get  the  start  of 
them,  and,  if  possible,  intercept  the  others  as  they  camc; 
and  he  sent  thither  JMenippus,  with  about  three  thousand 
soldiers,  and  Pol\  xenidas  with  the  whole  fleet.  In  a  few 
days  after,  be  marched  himself,  at  the  head  of  six  thousand 
of  his  own  soldiers,  and  a  smaller  number  of  iEtoiians,  as 
many  as  could  be  collected  in  haste,  out  of  those  who  were 
at  Lamia.  The  five  hundred  Achacaris,  and  a  small  party 
sent  by  king  Eumenes,  being  guided  by  Xenoclides,  of  Chal¬ 
cis,  (the  roads  being  \  et  open,)  crossed  the  Euripus,  and 
arrived  at  Chalcis  in  safety.  The  Roman  soldiers,  who 
were  likewise  about  five  hundred,  camc,  after  Mcnlppus  had 
fixed  his  camp  under  Salganea,  at  Hermseus,  the  place  of 
passage  from  Bosutia  to  the  island  of  Eubcea.  The}  had 
with  them  Mictio,  who  had  been  sent  express  from  Chalcis 
to  Quintius,  to  solicit  the  reinforcement;  and  when  he  per¬ 
ceived  that  the  passes  were  blocked  up  by  the  enemy,  he 
quitted  the  road  to  Aulis,  and  turned  avay  to  Delium,  with 
intent  to  pass  over  thence  to  Eubcea. 
LI.  Delium  is  a  temple  of  Apollo,  standing  over  the  sea, 
five  miles  distant  from  Tanagra;  and  the  passage  thence,  to 
the  nearest  part  of  Eiuboca,  is  less  than  four  miles.  As  they 
were  in  this  sacred  building  and  grove,  sanctified  with  all 
that  religious  awe  and  those  privileges  which  belong  to  tem¬ 
ples,  called  by  the  Greeks  asylums,  (w^ar  not  being  yet  either 
proclaimed,  or  so  far  commenced  as  that  they  had  heard,  of 
swords  being  drawn,  or  blood  shed  any  where,)  the  soldiers, 
in  perfect  tranquillity,  amused  themselves,  some  with  view- 

B.  C.  I92.j 

BOOK  XXXV, 

65 

ing  the  temple  and  groves;  others  with  walking  ahou^  un¬ 
armed,  on  the  strand;  and  a  great  part  had  gone  different 
ways  in  quest  of  wood  and  forage;  when  on  a  sudden,  IVIe- 
nippus  attacked  them  in  that  scattered  condition,  slew’  many, 
and  took  fifty  of  them  prisoners.  Very  few  made  their  es¬ 
cape,  among  whom  w^as  Mictio,  who  W'as  received  on  board 
a  small  trading  vessel.  Though  this  event  caused  much  grief 
to  Quintius  and  the  Romans,  on  account  of  the  loss  of  their 
men,  vet  it  tended  greatly  to  the  justification  of  their  cause 
in  making  war  on  Antiochus.  Antiochus,  when  arrived  with 
his  arm\'  so  near  as  Aulis,  sent  again  to  Chalcis  a  deputa¬ 
tion^  composed  parti v  of  his  own  people,  and  partly  of  A^to- 
lians,  to  treat  on  the  same  grounds  as  before,  but  wuth  hea¬ 
vier  denunciations  of  vengeance;  and,  notwithstanding  all  the 
efforts  of  Mictio  and  Xenoclides  to  the  contrarv,  he  carried 
his  point,  and  the  gates  were  opened  to  him.  Those  who 
adhered  to  the  Roman  interest,  on  the  approach  of  the  king, 
withdrew  from  the  city.  The  soldiers  of  the  Aclueans,  and 
Eumenes,  held  Salganea;  and  the  few  Romans  who  had  es¬ 
caped,  raised,  for  the  security  of  the  place,  a  little  fort  on 
the  Euripus.  Menippus  laid  siege  to  Salganea,  and  the  king 
himself  to  the  fort.  I'he  Achstans  and  Eumenes’  soldiers 
first  surrendered,  on  the  terms  of  being  allowed  to  retire  in 
safety.  The  Romans  detended  their  fortress  with  more  ob¬ 
stinacy.  But  even  these,  when  they  found  themselves  com¬ 
pletely  invested  both  by  land  and  sea,  and  saw  the  machines 
and  engines  prepared  for  an  assault,  could  hold  out  no  lon¬ 
ger.  The  king,  having  thus  got  possession  of  the  capital  of 
Eubcea,  the  other  cities  of  the  island  did  not  even  attempt 
resistance;  and  he  seemed  to  himself  to  have  signalized  the 
commencement  of  the  war  by  an  important  acquisition,  in 
having  brought  under  his  power  so  great  an  island,  and  so 
many  cities  so  conveniently  situated. 
VOL.  v. — K 
f 

THE 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

BOOK  XXXVL 
Manilla  Acihas  Giabno,  codsu),  aided  by  Kins:  Pbibp,  defeats  Aniiochu- 
at  Thermop}la;,  and  drives  him  out  of  Greece:  reduces  the  *'Etolians  to 
sue  for  peace.  PudIius  C  ornchub  Scipio  Nasica  reduces  the  Koian  Gauis 
to  submifcsioin  Sea-fi^hl  between  the  Konian  fleet  and  that  of  Antiochus. 
iu  winch  the  Koinans  are  victorious. 
„  ...  I.  Publius  Cornelius  Scipio,  son  of  Cneius, 
B.  C.  191.  and  Manias  Acilius  Glabrio,  consuls  on  their  as¬ 
suming  the  administration,  were  ordered  by  the  senate,  be- 
fore  they  settled  an)'  thing  respecting  their  provinces,  to  per¬ 
form  sacrifices,  with  victims  of  the  greater  kinds,  at  all  the 
shrines  where  the  lectisternium  was  usually  celebrated  for 
the  greater  part  of  the  year;  and  to  offer  prayers,  that  the 
business  which  the  state  had  in  contemplation,  concerning  a 
new  war,  might  terminate  prosperously  and  happily  for  the 
senate  and  people  of  Rome.  At  every  one  of  those  sacri¬ 
fices,  appearances  were  favourable,  and  the  propitious  omens 
were  fountl  in  the  first  victims.  Accordingly,  the  haruspices 
gave  this  answer: — That,  by  this  war,  the  boundaries  of  the 
Homan ‘empire  would  be  enlarged;  and  that  victory  and  tri¬ 
umph  Were  portended.  When  this  answer  was  reported,  the 
senate,  having  their  minds  now  freed  from  every  religious 
scruple,  ordered  this  question  to  be  proposed  to  the  people; 
Was  it  their  will,  and  did  they  order,  that  tvar  should  be 

BOOK  XXXVI. 

undertaken  against  king  Antiochus,  and  all  who  should  join 
his  party?”  And  that,  if  that  order  passed,  then  the  consuls 
were,  if  they  thought  proper,  to  lay  the  business  entire  be¬ 
fore  the  senate.  Publius  Cornelias  got  the  order  passed;  and 
then  the  senate  decreed,  that  the  consuls  should  cast  lots  for 
the  provinces  of  Italy  and  Greece;  that  he,  to  whose  lot 
Greece  fell,  should,  in  addition  to  the  number  of  soldiers 
enlisted  and  raised  from  the  allies  b)'  Quintius  for  that  pro¬ 
vince,  pursuant  to  a  decree  of  the  senate,  take  under  his 
command  that  army,  which,  in  the  preceding  year,  Marcus 
Bsebius,  praetor,  had,  by  order  of  the  senate,  carried  over  to 
Macedonia.  Permission  was  also  granted  him,  to  receive 
succours  from  the  allies,  out  of  Italy,  if  circumstances  should 
so  require,  provided  their  number  did  not  exceed  fiv^e  thou¬ 
sand.  It  was  resolved,  that  Lucius  Quintius,  consul  of  the 
former  year,  should  be  commissioned  as  lieutenant-general 
in  that  war.  The  other  consul,  to  whom  Italy  fell,  was  or¬ 
dered  to  carry  on  the  war  with  the  Boians,  with  whichever 
he  should  choose  of  the  two  armies  commanded  by  the  con¬ 
suls  of  the  last  year;  and  to  send  the  other  to  Home;  and 
these  were  ordered  to  be  the  city  legions,  and  ready  to  march 
to  whatever  place  the  senate  should  direct. 
II.  Things  being  thus  adjusted  in  the  senate,  excepting 
the  assignment  of  his  particular  province  to  each  of  the 
magistrates,  the  consuls  were  ordered  to  cast  lots.  Greece 
fell  to  Acilius,  Italy  to  Cornelius.  The  lot  of  each  being  now 
determined,  the  senate  passed  a  decree,  that  inasmuch  as 
the  Homan  people  had  ordered  war  to  be  declared  against 
king  Antiochus,  and  those  who  were  under  his  government, 
the  consuls  should  command  a  supplication  to  be  performed, 
on  account  of  that  business;  and  that  Manius  Acilius,  consul, 
should  vow  the  great  games  to  Jupiter,  and  offerings  at  all 
the  shrines.”  This  vow  was  made  by  the  consul  in  these 
words,  which  w’ere  dictated  by  Publius  Licinius,  chief  pon¬ 
tiff;  “If  the  war,  which  the  people  has  ordered  to  be  under- 

68 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.561- 

taken  against  king  Antiochiis,  shall  be  concluded  agreeably  to 
the  wishes  of  the  senate  and  people  of  Rome,  then,  O  Jupiter, 
the  Roman  people  will,  through  ten  successive  days,  exhibit 
the  great  games  in  honour  of  thee,  and  offerings  shall  be 
presented  at  all  the  shrines,  of  such  value  as  the  senate  shall 
direct.  Whatever  magistrate  shall  celebrate  those  games,  and 
at  whatever  time  and  place,  let  the  celebration  be  deemed 
proper,  and  the  offerings  rightly  and  duly  made.’^  The  twe 
consuls  then  proclaimed  a  supplication  for  two  days.  When 
the  consuls  had  determined  their  provinces  bv  lots,  the  prse* 
tors,  likewise,  immediately  cast  lots  for  theirs.  The  two  civil 
jurisdictions  fell  to  Marcus  Junius  Brutus;  Bruttium,  to  Au- 
lus  Cornelius  Mammula;  Sicily,  to  Marcus  iEmilius  Lepi- 
dus;  Sardinia,  to  Lucius  Onpius  Salinator:  the  fleet,  to  Caius 
Livius  Salinator;  and  farther  Spain,  to  Lucius  .lEmilius 
Paullus,  The  troops  for  these  were  settled  thus: — to  Aulus 
Cornelius  were  assigned  the  new  soldiers,  raised  last  year 
by  Lucius  Quintius,  consul,  pursuant  to  the  senate’s  decree; 
and  he  was  ordered  to  defend  the  whole  coast  near  Taren- 
turn  and  Brundusium.  Lucius  ^milius  Paullus  was  directed 
to  take  with  him  into  farther  Spain,  (to  fill  up  the  numbers 
of  the  army,  which  he  was  to  receive  from  Marcus  Fulvius, 
pro-prsetor,)  three  thousand  new  raised  foot,  and  three  hun¬ 
dred  horse,  of  whom  two-thirds  should  be  Latine  allies,  and 
the  other  third  Roman  citizens.  An  equal  reinforcement 
W’as  sent  to  hither  Spain,  to  Caius  Flaminius,  who  was  con¬ 
tinued  in  command.  Marcus  i£milius  Lepidus  was  ordered 
to  receive  both  the  province  and  army  from  Lucius  Valerius, 
whom  he  was  to  succeed,  and,  if  he  thought  proper,  to  re¬ 
tain  Lucius  Valerius,  as  propraetor,  in  the  province,  which 
he  was  to  divide  with  him  in  such  a  manner,  that  one  divi¬ 
sion  should  reach  from  Agrigentum  to  Pachynum,  and  the 
other  from  Pachynum  to  Tyndarium,  the  sea  coasts  whereof 
Lucius  Valerius  was  to  protect  with  a  fleet  of  twenty  ships 
of  war.  The  same  praetor  received  a  charge  to  lev}’  two 

B.  C.  J91.] 

BOOK  XXXVL 

69 

tenths  of  corn,  and  to  take  care  that  it  should  be  carried  to 
the  coast,  and  thence  conveyed  into  Greece*  Lucius  Oppius 
was  likewise  commanded  to  levy  a  second  tenth  in  Sardinia; 
but  with  directions  that  it  should  be  transported,  not  into 
Greece,  but  to  Rome.  Caius  Livius,  the  praetor,  whose  lot 
was  the  command  of  the  fleet,  was  ordered  to  sail  directly 
to  Greece  with  thirty  ships,  which  were  ready,  and  to  re¬ 
ceive  the  other  fleet  from  Atilius.  The  praetor  Marcus  Ju¬ 
nius  was  commissioned  to  refit  and  arm  the  old  ships  which 
were  in  the  dock-yards;  and,  for  the  manning  of  these,  to 
enlist  the  sons  of  freemen  as  seamen* 
III.  Commissaries  were  sent  into  Africa,  three  to  Car¬ 
thage,  and  a  like  number  to  Numidia,  to  procure  corn  to  be 
carried  into  Greece;  for  which  the  Roman  people  were  to 
pay  the  value.  And  so  particularly  attentive  was  the  state 
to  the  making  of  every  preparation  and  provision  necessary 
for  the  carrying  on  of  this  war,  that  the  consul,  Publius  Corne¬ 
lius,  published  an  edict,  that  no  senator,  nor  any  who  had 
the  privilege  of  giving  an  opinion  in  the  senate,  nor  any  of 
the  inferior  magistrates,  should  go  so  far  from  the  city  of 
Rome  as  that  they  could  not  return  the  same  day;  and  that 
not  more  than  five  of  the  senators  should  be  absent  at  the 
same  time.”  The  exertions  of  the  praetor,  Caius  Livius,  in 
fitting  out  the  fleet,  were  for  some  time  retarded  by  a  dis¬ 
pute  which  arose  with  the  maritime  colonies.  For,  when 
he  insisted  on  their  manning  the  ships,  they  appealed  to  the 
tribunes  of  the  people,  by  whom  the  cause  was  referred  to 
the  senate.  The  senate,  without  one  dissenting  voice,  re¬ 
solved,  that  those  colonies  were  not  entitled  to  exemption 
from  the  sea-service.  The  colonies  which  disputed  this 
point  with  the  preetor  were,  Ostia,  Frcgena\  Castrumnovum, 
Pyrgi,  Antium,  Tarracina,  Minturnfc,  and  Sinuessa.  The 
consul,  Manius  Aciiius,  then,  bv  direction  of  the  senate, 
consulted  the  college  of  heralds,  “  whether  a  declaration  ol 
war  should  be  made  to  Antiochus  in  person,  or  whether  d 

70 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  K.  56L 

would  be  sufficient  to  declare  it  at  some  of  his  garrison 
towns;  whether  they  directed  a  separate  declaration  against 
the  iEtolians^  and  whether  their  alliance  and  friendship 
ought  not  to  be  renounced  before  war  was  declared.  The 
heralds  answered,  that  they  had  given  their  judgment 
before,  when  they  were  consulted  respecting  Philip,  that  it 
w'as  of  no  consequence  whether  the  declaration  were  .made 
to  himself  in  person,  or  at  one  of  his  garrisons.  That,  in 
their  opinion,  friendship  had  been  already  renounced;  be- 
cause,  after  their  ambassadors  had  so  often  demanded  restitu¬ 
tion,  the  ^Etolians  had  not  thought  proper  to  make  either 
restitution  or  apology.  That  these,  by  their  own  act,  had 
made  a  declaration  of  war  against  themselves,  when  they 
seized,  by  force,  Demetrias,  a  city  in  alliance  with  Rome; 
when  thev  laid  siege  to  Chakisby  land  and  sea;  and  brought 
king  Antiochus  into  Europe,  to  make  war  on  the  Romans.’' 
Everv  preparatory  measure  being  now  completed,  the  con¬ 
sul  IVIanius  Acilius  issued  an  edict,  that  ‘‘  the  soldiers 
enlisted  or  raised  from  among  the  allies  by  Titus  Quintius, 
and  who  were  under  orders  to  go  with  him  to  his  province; 
as,  likewise,  the  military  tribunes  of  the  first  and  third 
legions,  should  assemble  at  Brundusium,  on  the  ides  of 
Ma\  He  himself,  on  the  fifth  belbic  the  nones  of  May,^ 
set  out  from  the  city  in  his  m Hilary  robe  of  command.  I’hc 
pr^tors,  likewise,  departed  for  their  respective  provinces. 
IV.  A  little  before  this  time,  ambassadors  came  to  Rome 
from  the  two  kings,  Philip  of  3Iacedoiiia,  and  Ptolemy  of 
Egypt,  offering  aid  of  men,  money,  and  corn,  towards  the 
support  of  the  war.  From  Ptolemy  was  brought  a  thousand 
pounds  weight  of  gold,  and  twenty  thousand  pounds  weight 
of  silver.  None  of  this  was  accepted.  Thanks  were  re¬ 
turned  to  the  kingh.  Both  of  them  offered  to  come,  with 
iheir  whole  force,  into  ^Etolia.  Ptolemy  was  excused  from 

'  ijti. 

r  yj  Mav 

B.  C.  191.] 

BOOK  XXXVL 

7t 

that  trouble;  and  Philip’s  ambassadors  were  answered,  that 
the  senate  and  people  of  Rome  would  consider  it  as  a  kind¬ 
ness  if  he  lent  his  assistance  to  the  consul  Manius  Acilius. 
Ambassadors  came,  likewise,  from  the  Carthaginians,  and 
from  king  Masinissa.  The  Carthaginians  made  an  offer  of 
sending  a  thousand  pecks*  of  wheat,  and  five  hundred  thou¬ 
sand  of  barley  to  the  army,  and  half  that  quantity  to  Rome, 
which  they  requested  the  Romans  to  accept  from  them  as  a 
present.  They  also  offered  to  fit  out  a  fleet  at  their  own 
expense,  and  to  give  in,  immediately,  the  whole  amount  of 
the  annual  tribute- money  which  they  were  bound  to  pay  for 
many  years  to  come.  The  ambassadors  of  IVIasinissa 
promised,  that  their  king  should  send  five  hundred  thousand 
pecks  of  wheat,  and  three  hundred  thousand  of  barley,  to 
the  army  in  Greece,  and  three  hundred  thousand  of  wheat, 
and  two  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  of  barley,  to  Rome;  also 
five  husdred  horse,  and  twenty  elephants,  to  the  consui 
Acilius.  The  answer  given  to  both,  with  regard  to  the 
corn,  w^as,  that  the  Roman  people  would  make  use  of  it, 
})rovided  they  would  receive  payment  for  the  same,  ^^"ith 
regard  to  the  fleet  offered  by  the  Carthaginians,  no  more 
was  accepted  than  such  ships  as  they  owed  by  treaty;  and. 
as  to  the  money,  they  were  told,  that  none  would  be  taken 
before  the  regular  days  of  payment. 
V.  While  affairs  at  Rome  proceeded  in  this  manner, 
Antiochus,  during  the  winter  season  at  Chalcis,  endeavoured 
to  bring  over  several  of  the  states  by  ambassadors  sent 
among  them;  while  many  of  their  own  accord  sent  deputies 
to  him;  as  the  Epirots,  by  the  general  voice  of  the  nation, 
and  the  Eleans  from  Peloponnesus.  I'he  Eleans  requested 
aid  against  the  Achseans;  for  they  supposed,  that,  since  the 
*  Here  IS.  doubtless,  some  word  dropped  in  the  ong-inal,  so  small  a 
quantity  could  never  have  been  deemed  an  object  for  one  powerful  state 
to  offer  to  another  Commentators  suppose  U  to  have  been  one  hundred 
thousand. 

72 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [ Y.  R.  56i 

war  had  been  declared  against  Antiochus  contrary  to  their 
judgment,  the  Achaeans  would  first  turn  their  arms  against 
them.  One’  thousand  foot  were  sent  to  them,  under  the 
command  of  Euphanes,  a  Cretan.  The  embassy  of  the 
Epirots  showed  no  mark  whatever  of  a  liberal  or  candid 
disposition.  They  wished  to  ingratiate  themselves  with  the 
king;  but.  at  the  same  time,  to  avoid  giving  cause  of  dis¬ 
pleasure  to  the  Romans.  They  requested  him,  not  hastily, 
to  make  them  a  party  in  the  dispute,  exposed,  as  they  were, 
opposite  to  Italy,  and  in  the  front  of  Greece,  where  they 
must  necessarily  undergo  the  first  assaults  of  the  Romans.  If 
he  himself,  with  his  land  and  sea-forces,  could  take  charge 
of  Epirus,  the  inhabitants  would  joyfully  receive  him  in  all 
their  ports  and  cities.  But  if  circumstances  allowed  him 
not  to  do  that,  then  they  earnestly  entreated  him  not  to  sub¬ 
ject  them,  naked  and  defenceless,  to  the  arms  of  the  Ro¬ 
mans.”  I'heir  intention  in  sending  him  this  mes^ge  evi¬ 
dently  was,  that  if  he  declined  going  into  Epirus,  which 
they  rather  supposed  would  be  the  case,  they  stood  clear  of 
all  blame  with  regard  to  the  Romans,  while  they  sufficiently 
recommended  themselves  to  the  king  by  their  willingness  to 
receive  him  on  his  coming;  and  that,  on  the  other  hand,  if 
he  should  come,  even  then  they  were  not  without  hopes  of 
being  pardoned  by  the  Romans,  for  having  yielded  to  the 
strength  of  a  prince  who  was  in  the  heart  of  their  country, 
without  waiting  for  succour  from  them,  who  were  so  far 
distant.  To  this  evasive  embassy,  as  he  did  not  readily 
think  of  a  proper  answ’er,  he  replied,  that  he  would  send 
ambassadors  to  confer  upon  such  matters  as  w^ere  of  com¬ 
mon  concernment  both  to  him  and  them. 
VI.  Antiochus  went  himself  into  Bceotia,  where  the  ostensi¬ 
ble  causes  held  out,  for  the  public  resentment  to  the  Romans 
were  those  already  mentioned:  the  death  of  Brachyllas,  and 
the  attack  made  by  Quintius  on  Coronea,  on  account  of  the 
massacre  of  the  Roman  soldiers;  while  the  real  ones  were. 

BOOK  XXXVL 

73 

B.  C.  191.] 
that  the  former  excellent  policy  of  that  nation,  with  respect 
both  to  public  and  private  concerns,  had,  for  several  ge- 
erations,  been  on  the  decline;  and  that  great  numbers  were  in 
such  circumstances,  that  they  could  not  long  subsist  without 
some  change  in  affairs.  Through  multitudes  of  the  princi¬ 
pal  Bceotians,  who  every  where  flocked  out  to  meet  him,  he 
arrived  at  Thebes.  There,  notwithstanding  that  he  had 
(both  at  Deiium,  by  the  attack  made  on  the  Roman  troops, 
and  also  at  Chalcis)  already  commenced  hostilities,  l>y  enter¬ 
prises  of  neither  a  trifling  nor  of  a  dubious  nature^  yet  in  a 
general  council  of  the  nation,  he  delivered  a  speech  of  the 
same  import  with  that  which  he  delivered  in  the  first  conference 
at  Chalcis,  and  that  used  by  his  ambassadors  in  the  council 
of  the  Achseans;  that  what  he  required  of  them  was,  to 
form  a  league  of  friendship  with  him,  not  to  declare  war 
against  the  Romans^”  But  not  a  man  among  them  was  ig' 
norant  of  his  meaning.  However,  a  decree,  disguised  under 
a  slight  covering  of  words,  was  passed  in  his  favour  against 
the  Romans.  After  securing  this  nation  also  on  his  side,  he 
returned  to  Chalcis;  and,  having  despatched  letters  sum¬ 
moning  the  chief  Ai  olians  to  meet  him  at  Demetrias,  that 
he  might  deliberate  with  them  on  the  general  plan  of  opera¬ 
tions,  he  wer^t  thither  by  sea.  Amynander,  likewise,  was 
called  from  Athamania  to  the  consultation;  and  Hannibal, 
who  for  a  long  time  before,  had  not  been  asked  to  attend, 
was  present  at  this  assembly,  I'he  subject  of  their  delibera¬ 
tion  was,  the  mode  of  conduct  proper  to  be  pursued  towards 
the  Thessalian  nation;  and  every  one  present  was  of  opinion, 
that  it  was  necessary  to  obtain  their  concurrence.  The  only 
points  on  which  opinions  differed  were,  that  some  thought 
the  attempt  ought  to  be  made  immediately;  while  others 
judged  it  better  to  defer  it  for  the  winter  season,  which  W'as 
then  about  half  spenf,  until  the  beginning  oi  spring.  Some 
advised  to  send  ambassadors:  others,  that  the  king  should 
VOL.  V. — L 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

74 

1 Y.  R.  561. 

go  at  the  head  of  all  his  forces," and,  if  they  hesitated,  terrify 
them  into  compliance. 
VII.  Although  the  present  debate  turned  chiefly  on  thejse 
points,  Hannibal,  being  called  on  by  name  to  give  his  opinion, 
led  the  king,  and  those  who  were  present,  into  the  consid¬ 
eration  of  the  general  conduct  of  the  war,  by  a  speech  to  this 
effect: — ‘‘  If  I  had  been  employed  in  your  councils  since  we 
came  first  into  Greece,  when  you  >vere  consulting  about  Eu¬ 
boea,  the  Achaeans,  and  Bceotia,  I  would  have  offered  the 
same  advice  which  I  shall  offer  you  this  day,  when  your 
thoughts  are  employed  about  the  Thessalians.  My  opinion 
is,  that,  above  all  things,  Philip  and  the  Macedonians  should, 
by  some  means  or  other,  be  engaged  to  act  as  confederates 
in  this  war.  For,  as  to  Eubcea,  as  well  as  the  Boeotians  and 
Thessalians,  is  it  not  perfectly  clear,  that,  having  no  strength 
of  their  own,  they  will  ever  court  the  power  that  is  present; 
and  will  make  use  of  the  same  fear,  which  governs  their 
councils,  as  an  argument  for  obtaining  pardon?  That,  as  soon 
as  they  shall  see*a  Roman  army  in  Greece  the)  will  change 
sides,  and  attach  themselves  to  that  government,  to  which 
they  have  been  armstmTiefl?  Nor  are  they  to  blame,  if, 
when  the  Romans  were  at  so  great  a  distance,  they  did  not 
choose  to  try  your  force,  and  that  of  your  army,  who  were 
on  the  spot.  How  much  more  advisable,  therefore,  and 
more  advantageous  would  it  be,  to  unite  Philip  to  us,  than 
these;  as,  if  he  once  embarks  in  the  cause,  he  will  have  no 
room  for  retreat,  and  as  he  will  bring  with  him  such  a  force, 
as  will  not  only  be  an  accession  to  a  power  at  war  with  Rome, 
but  was  able,  lately,  of  itself,  to  withstand  the  Romans?  With 
such  an  ally,  (I  wish  to  speak  without  offence,)  how  could  I 
harbour  a  doubt  about  the  issue?  When  I  should  see  the  very 
persons  who  enabled  the  Romans  to  overcome  Philip,  now 
readv  to  act  against  them?  The  ^Etolians,  who,  as  all  agree, 
conquered  Philip,  will  fight  in  conjunction  with  Philip  against 
the  Romans.  Amynander  and  the  Athamanian  nation,  wdio. 

B.C,  191.] 

BOOK  XXXVL 

7S 

next  to  the  ^tolians,  performed  the  greatest  services  in  that 
war^  will  stand  on  our  side.  The  Macedonian,  at  the  time 
when  you  remained  inactive,  sustained  the  whole  burden  of 
the  war.  Now,  you  and  he,  two  of  the  greatest  kings,  will, 
with  the  force  of  Asia  and  Europe,  wage  war  against  one 
state;  which,  to  say  nothing  of  my  own  contests  with  them, 
either  prosperous  or  adverse,  was  certainly,  in  the  memory 
of  our  fathers,  unequal  to  a  dispute  with  a  single  king  of 
Epirus;  what  then,  I  say,  must  it  be  in  competition  with  you 
two?  But  it  may  be  asked,  what  circumstances,  induce  me 
to  believe  that  Philip  may  be  brought  to  an  union  with  us? 
First,  common  utility;  which  is  the  strongest  cement  of  union; 
and  next,  my  reliance,  .^tolians,  on  your  veracity.  For 
Thoas,  your  ambassador,  among  the  other  arguments  which 
he  used  to  urge,  for  the  purpose  of  drawing  Antiochus  into 
Greece,  always  laid  particular  stress  on  this  assertion;  that 
Philip  expressed  extreme  indignation  at  being  reduced  to  the 
condition  of  a  slave  under  the  appearance  of  conditions  of 
peace;  comparing  the  king’s  anger  to  that  of  a  wild  beast 
chained,  or  shut  up,  and  wishing  to  break  the  bars  that 
confined  it.  Now,  if  his  temper  of  mind  is  such,  let  us 
loose  his  chains,  let  us  break  these  bars,  that  he  may  vent, 
upon  the  common  foe,  this  anger  so  long  pent  up.  But 
should  our  embassy  fail  of  producing  any  effect  on  him,  let 
us  then  take  care,  that  if  we  cannot  unite  him  to  ourselves, 
he  may  not  be  united  to  our  enemies.  Your  son,  Seleucus, 
is  at  Lysimachia;  and  if,  with  the  army  which  he  has  there, 
he  shall  pass  through  Thrace,  and  once  begin  to  make  de¬ 
predations  on  the  nearest  parts  of  Macedonia,  he  will  effectu¬ 
ally  divert  Philip  from  carrying  aid  to  the  Romans,  and  will 
oblige  him  to  endeavour,  in  the  first  place,  to  protect  his  own 
dominions.  Thus  much  respecting  Philip.  With  regard  to 
the  general  plan  of  the  war,  you  have,  from  the  beginning, 
been  acquainted  with  my  sentiments;  and  if  my  advice  had 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  56T 

76 
been  listened  to,  the  Romans  would  not  now  hear  that  Chal- 
cis  in  Euboea  was  taken,  and  a  fort  on  the  Euripus  reduced; 
but  that  Etruria,  and  the  w^hole  coast  of  Liguria  and  Cisal¬ 
pine  Gaul,  were  in  a  blaze  of  war;  and,  what  would  strike 
more  terror  into  them  than  all,  that  Hannibal  was  in  Italy. 
Even  as  matters  stand  at  present,  I  recommend  it  to  you,  to 
call  home  all  your  land  and  sea  forces;  let  store-ships  with 
provisions  follow  the  fleet;  for,  as  we  are  here  too  few  for  the 
exigences  of  the  war,  so  are  we  too  many  for  the  scanty 
supplies  of  necessaries.  When  you  shall  have  collected  to¬ 
gether  the  whole  of  your  force,  you  will  divide  the  fleet,  and 
keep  one  division  stationed  at  Corey ra,  that  the  Romans 
may  not  have  a  clear  and  safe  passage;  and  the  other  you 
will  send  to  the  coast  of  Italy,  opposite  Sardinia  and  Africa; 
while  you  yourself,  with  all  the  land  forces,  will  proceed  to 
the  territory  of  Byllium.  In  this  position  you  will  hold 
the  command  of  all  Greece;  you  will  give  the  Romans  rea¬ 
son  to  think,  that  you  intend  to  sail  over  to  Italy;  and  you 
will  be  in  readiness  so  to  do,  if  occasion  require.  This  is 
my  advice:  and  though  I  may  not  be  the  most  skilful  in  ever}* 
kind  of  warfare,  yet  surely  I  must  be  allow'ed  to  have  learned, 
in  a  long  scries  of  both  good  and  bad  fortune,  how  to  wage 
war  against  the  Homans.  For  the  execution  of  the  mea¬ 
sures  which  I  have  ad\ised,  I  ofler  you  my  most  faithful  and 
zealous  endeavours.  Whatever  plan  you  shall  prefer,  may 
the  gods  grant  it  their  approbation.” 
VIII.  Such,  nearly,  was  the  counsel  given  by  Hannibal, 
which  the  hearers  commended  indeed  at  the  time,  but  never 
carried  into  effect.  For  not  one  article  of  it  w’as  executed, 
except  the  sending  Polyxenidas  to  bring  over  the  fleet  and 
army  from  Asia.  Ambassadors  were  sent  to  Larissa,  to  the 
diet  of  the  Thessalians.  1  he  iEtolians  and  Aroynander 
appointed  a  day  for  the  assembling  of  their  troops  at  Pherae, 
and  the  king,  with  his  forces,  came  thither  immediately. 
While  he  waited  there  for  Amynander  and  the  iEtolians,  he 

BOOK  XXXVL 

B,  C.  191.J 

sent  Philip,  the  Megalopolitan,  with  two  thousand  men,  to 
collect  the  homes  of  the  Macedonians  round  Cynoscephalae, 
where  had  been  fought  the  battle  which  decided  the  war 
with  king  Philip;  being  advised  to  this,  either  in  order  to 
gain  favour  with  the  Macedonians,  and  draw  their  dis¬ 
pleasure  on  the  king  for  having  left  his  soldiers  unburied: 
or  having  of  himself,  through  the  spirit  of  vain- glory  inci¬ 
dent  to  kings,  conceived  such  a  design, — splendid,  indeed, 
in  appearance,  but  really  insignificant.  There  is  a  mount 
there  formed  of  the  bones  which  had  been  scattered  about, 
and  were  then  collected  into  one  heap.  Although  this  step 
procured  him  no  thanks  from  the  Macedonians,  yet  it  excit¬ 
ed  the  heaviest  displeasure  of  Philip;  in  consequence  of 
which,  he,  who  had  hitherto  intended  to  regulate  his  coun¬ 
sels  by  the  fortune  of  events,  now  sent  instantly  a  messen¬ 
ger  to  the  prc.prsetor,  Marcus  Bsebius,  to  inform  him  that 
‘‘  Antiochus  had  made  an  irruption  into  Thessaly;  and  to 
request  of  Batbius,  if  he  thought  proper,  to  move  out  of  his 
winter-quarters;  which  if  he  did,  he  himself  would  advance 
to  meet  him,  that  they  might  consider  together  what  was 
proper  to  be  done.” 
IX,  While  Antiochus  lay  encamped  near  Pherae,  where  the 
^Etolians  and  Amynnnder  had  joined  him,  ambassadors  came 
to  him  from  Larissa,  desiring  to  know  on  account  of  what 
acts  or  words  of  theirs,  he  had  made  war  on  the  Thessalians; 
at  the  same  time  requesting  him  to  withdraw  his  arniv;  and, 
if  he  had  conceived  any  reason  of  disagreement,  to  discuss 
it  amicably  by  commissioners.  In  the  mean  time,  they  sent 
five  hundred  soldiers,  under  the  command  of  Hippolochus, 
to  re-inforce  Pherce;  but  these,  being  debarred  of  access  by 
the  king’s  troops,  who  blocked  up  all  the  roads,  retired  to 
Scotussa*  The  king  answered  the  Larissan  ambassadors  in 
mild  terms,  that  “  he  came  into  their  country,  not  with  a 
design  of  making  war,  but  of  protecting  and  establishing 
the  liberty  of  the  Thessalians.^’  He  sent  a  person  to  make 

7B 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  561. 

a  similar  declaration  to  the  people  of  Pherae,  who,  without 
giving  him  any  answer,  sent  to  the  king,  in  quality  of  ambas¬ 
sador,  Pausanias,  the  first  magistrate  of  their  state.  He 
offered  remonstrances  of  a  similar  kind  with  those  which 
had  been  urged  in  behalf  of  the  people  of  Chalcis,  at  the 
first  conference,  on  the  straight  of  the  Euripus,  as  the  cases 
were  similar,  and  he  even  proceeded  to  a  greater  degree  ot 
boldness;  on  which  the  king  desired  that  they  would  con¬ 
sider  seriously,  before  they  adopted  a  resolution,  which, 
while  they  were  over-cautious  and  provident  of  futurity, 
would  give  them  immediate  cause  of  repentance;  and  then 
dismissed  him.  When  the  Pheraeans  were  acquainted  with 
the  result  of  this  embassy,  without  the  smallest  hesitation, 
they  determined  to  endure  whatever  the  fortune  of  war 
might  bring  on  them,  rather  than  violate  their  engagements 
with  the  Romans.  Tlrey  accordibgly  exerted  their  utmost 
efforts  to  provide  for  the  defence  of  the  place,  while  the 
king,  on  his  part,  resolved  to  assail  the  walls  6n  every  side 
at  once;  and  considering,  what  w^as  evidently  the  case,  that 
it  depended  on  the  fate  of  this  city,  the  first  which  he  had 
besieged,  whether  he  should  for  the  future  be  despised,  or 
dreaded,  by  the  whole  nation  of  the  Thessalians,  he  put  in 
practice,  every  where,  all  possible  means  of  striking  them 
with  terror.  The  first  fury  of  the  assault  they  supported  , 
with  great  firmness;  but  in  some  time,  great*numbers  of 
their  men  being  either  slain  or  wounded,  their  resolution 
began  to  fail.  However,  they  were  soon  so  far  reanimated 
by  the  rebukes  of  their  leaders,  as  to  resolve  on  persevering 
in  their  resistance;  and  having  abandoned  the  exterior  circle 
6f  the  wall,  for  the  defence  of  which  their  numbers  were  now 
insufficient,  they  withdrew  to  the  interior  part  of  the  city, 
round  which  had  been  raised  a  fortification  of  less  extent. 
At  last,  being  overcome  by  distresses  of  every  kind,  and 
fearing  that,  if  they  were  taken  by  storm,  they  might  meet 
no  merev  from  the  conqueror,  they  capitulated.  The  king 

BOOK  XXXVL 

79 

B.  C.  191.] 

then  lost  no  time;  but,  while  the  alarm  was  fresh,  sent  four 
thousand  men  against  Scotussa,  which  surrendered  without 
delay,  the  garrison  taking  warning  from  the  recent  example 
of  those  in  Pherse;  who,  notwithstanding  their  obstinate 
refusal  at  first,  were  at  length  compelled  by  sufferings  to 
submit.  Together  with  the  town,  Hippolochus  and  the 
Larissan  garrison  were  yielded  to  him,  all  of  whom  he  dis* 
missed  unhurt;  hoping  that  such  behaviour  would  operate 
powerfully  towards  conciliating  the  esteem  of  the  Larissans. 
X.  Having  4iCComplished  all  this  within  the  space  of  ten 
days  after  his  arrival  at  Pherse,  he  marched,  with  his  whole 
force,  to  Cranon,  which  submitted  on  his  first  approach. 
He  then  took  Cypjera  and  Metropolis,  and  the  forts  in  their 
neighbourhood;  and  now  every  town,  in  all  that  tract,  was 
in  his  power,  except  Atrax  and  Gyrton.  He  next  resolved 
to  lay  siege  to  Larissa,  for  he  hoped  that  (either  through 
dread  inspired  by  the  storming  of  the  other  towns,  or  in 
consideration  of  his  kindness  in  dismissing  the  troops  of 
their  garrison,  ot  being  led  by  the  example  of  so  many  cities 
surrendering  themselves,)  they  would  now  lay  aside  their 
obstinady.  Having  ordered  the  elephants  to  advance  in 
front  of  the  battalions,  for  the  purpose  of  striking  terror,  he 
approached  the  city  with  his  army  in  order  of  battle;  which 
had  such  an  effect  on  ^  great  number  of  the  Larissans,  that 
they  became  irresolute  and  perplexed,  between  their  fears  of 
the  enemy  at  their  gates,  and  their  respect  for  their  distant 
allies.  Meantime,  Amynander,  w'ith  the  Athainanian  troops, 
seized  on  Pellinfeus,  while  Menippus,  with  three  thousand 
iifitolian  foot  and  two  hundred  horse,  marched  into  Perrhee- 
bia,  where  he  took  Mollsea  and  Cyretia  by  assault,  and 
ravaged  the  lands  of  Tripolis.  After  executing  these  enter¬ 
prises  with  despatch,  they  marcht^d  back  to  Larissa,  where 
they  joined  the  king,  just  when  he  was  holding  a  council  on 
the  method  of  proceeding  with  regard  to  that  place.  On 
this  occasion  there  were  opposite  opinions:  for  some  thought 

m  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  561, 
that  force  should  be  applied;  that  there  was  no  time  to  be 
lost,  but  that  the  walls  should  be  immediately  attacked  with 
works  and  machines  on  all  sides  at  once;  especially  as  the 
city  stood  in  a  plain^  the  entrances  open,  and  the  approaches 
every  where  level.  While  others  represented  at  one  time 
the  strength  of  the  city,  greater  beyond  comparison  than  that 
of  Pherse;  at  another,  the  approach  of  the  winter  season, 
unfit  for  any  operation  of  war,  much  more  so  for  besieging 
and  assaulting  cities.  While  the  king's  judgment  hung  in 
suspense  between  hope  and  fear,  his  courage*  was  raised  by 
ambassadors  happening  to  arrive  just  at  the  time  from 
Pharsalus,  to  make  surrender  of  the  same.  In  the  mean¬ 
time  Marcus  Beebius  had  a  meeting  with  Philip  in  Das- 
saretia,  and,  in  conformity  to  their  joint  opinion,  sent  Appius 
Claudius  to  reinforce  LarisSa,  who,  making  long  marches 
through  Macedonia,  arrived  at  that  summit  of  the  moun¬ 
tains  which  overhang  Gonni.  The  town  of  Gonni  is  twenty 
miles  distant  from  Larissa,  standing  at  the  opening  of  the 
valley  called  Tempe,  Here,  by  erdarging  the  extent  of  his 
camp  beyond  whai  his  numbers  required,  and  kindling  more 
fires  than  were  necessary,  he  imposed  on  the  enemy  •the 
opinion  which  he  wished,*  that  the  whole  Roman  army  was 
there,  and  king  Philip  along  with  them.  Antiochus,  there¬ 
fore,  pretending  the  near  approach  winter  as  his  motive, 
staid  but  one  day  longer,  then  withdrew  from  Larissa,  and 
returned  to  Demetrias.  The  ^tolians  and  Athamanians 
retired  to  their  respective  countries.  Appius,  although  he 
saw  that,  by  the  siege  being  raised,  the  purpose  of  his  com¬ 
mission  was  fulfilled,  yf^t  resolved  to  go  down  to  Larissa,  to 
strengthen  the  resolution  of  the  allies  against  tuture  contin- 
gences.  Thus  the  Larissans  enjoyed  a  twofold  happiness, 
from  the  departure  of  the  enemy  out  of  their  country,  and 
from  seeing  a  Roman  garrison  in  their  city. 
XI.  Antiochus  went  from  Demetrias  to  Chalcis;  where  he 
became  captivated  with  a  young  woman,  daughter  of  Cleopto- 

B.  C.191.] 

BOOK  XXXVI. 

81 

iemus.  Her  father  was  unwilling  to  enter  into  a  connexion 
which  might  probably  involve  him  in  difficulties,  until  at 
length,  by  messages,  and  afterwards  by  personal  importuni¬ 
ties,  he  gained  his  consent;  and  then  he  celebrated  his  nup¬ 
tials  in  the  same  manner  as  if  it  were  a  time  of  profound 
peace.  Forgetting  the  two  important  undertakings  in  which 
he  was  engaged,— the  war  with  Rome,  and  the  liberating  of 
Greece, — he  banished  every  thought  of  business  from  his 
mind,  and  spent  the  remainder  of  winter  in  feasting  and  ca¬ 
rousals;  and  when  fatigued,  rather  than  cloyed,  with  these,  in 
sleep.  The  same  spirit  of  dissipation  seized  all  his  officers, 
who  commanded  in  the  several  winter- quarters,  particularly 
those  stationed  in  Bceotia,  and  even  the  mmmon  men  aban¬ 
doned  themqe1ve«;  to  the  same  indulgences;  nut  one  of  whom 
ever  put  on  his  armour,  or  kept  watch  or  guard,  or  did  any 
part  of  the  duty  or  business  of  a  soldier.  This  was  carried 
to  such  a  length,  that  when,  in  the  beginning  of  spring,  the 
king  came  through  Phocis  to  Cheronsea,  where  he  had  ap¬ 
pointed  the  general  assembly  of  all  the  troops,  he  perceived 
at  once  that  the  discipline  of  the  army  during  the  winter 
had  not  been  more  rigid  than  that  of  their  commander.  He 
ordered  Alexander,  an  Acarnanian,  and  Menippus,  a  Mace¬ 
donian,  to  lead  his  forces  thence  to  Stratum,  in  iEtolia;  and 
he  himself,  after  offering  sacrifice  to  Apollo  at  Delphi,  pro¬ 
ceeded  to  Naupactum.  After  holding  a  council  of  the 
chiefs  of  iEtolia;  he  went  by  the  road  which  leads  by  Chal- 
cis  and  I.ysimachia  to  Stratum,  to  meet  his  army  which  was 
coming  along  the  Malian  bay.  Mnesilochus,  a  man  of  dis¬ 
tinction  among  the  Acarnanians,  being  bribed  by  many  pre¬ 
sents,  not  only  laboured  himself  to  dispose  that  nation  in  fa¬ 
vour  of  the  king,  but  had  brought  to  a  concurrence  in  the 
design,  their  praetor,  Clytus,  who  w’as  at  the  time  invested 
with  the  highest  authority.  This  latter,  finding  that  the  peo¬ 
ple  of  Leucas,  the  capital  of  Acarnania,  could  not  be  easily 
prevailed  on  to  violate  their  former  engagements,  because 
\"0L.  V. — M 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  561 
thej"  were  afraid  of  the  Roman  fleets,  one  under  Atilius, 
and  another  at  Cephallenia,  practised  an  artifice  against 
them.  He  observed  in  the  council,  that  the  inland  parts  of 
Acarnania  should  be  guarded  from  danger,  and  that  all  who 
were  able  to  bear  arms  ought  to  march  out  to  Medio  and 
Thurium,  to  prevent  those  places  from  being  seized  by  An- 
tiochus,  or  the  jEtolians;  on  which  some  said,  that  there  was 
no  occasion  to  call  out  all  the  people  in  that  hasty  manner, 
for  a  body  of  five  hundred  men  would  be  sufficient  for  the 
purpose.  Having  got  this  number  of  soldiers  at  his  disposal, 
he  placed  three  hundred  in  garrison  at  Medio,  and  two  hun¬ 
dred  at  Thurium,  with  the  design  that  they  should  fall  int(.> 
the  hands  of  the  king,  and  serve  hereafter  as  hostages. 
XII.  At  this  time,  ambassadors  from  the  king  came  tc 
Medio,  whose  proposal  being  heard,  the  assembly  began  to 
consider  what  answer  to  give;  when  some  advised  to  adhere 
to  the  alliance  with  Rome,  and  others,  not  to  reject  the 
friendship  of  the  king;  but  Clitus  offered  an  opinion,  which 
seemed  to  take  a  middle  course  between  the  other  two,  and 
which  was  therefore  adopted.  It  was,  that  ambassadors  would 
be  sent  to  the  king,  to  request  of  him  to  allow  the  people 
of  Medio  to  deliberate  on  a  subject  of  such  great  importance 
in  a  general  assembly  of  the  Acarnanians.  Care  was  taken  that 
this  embassy  should  be  composed  of  Mnesilochus,  and  some 
others  of  his  faction,  who,  sending  a  private  message  to  the 
king  to  bring  up  his  army,  wasted  time  on  purpose,  so  that 
they  had  scarcely  set  out,  when  Antiochus  appeared  in  the 
territory,  and  presently  at  the  gates  of  the  city;  and,  while 
those  who  w'ere  not  concerned  in  the  plot,  were  all  in  hurry 
and  confusion,  and  hastily  called  the  young  men  to  arms,  he 
was  conducted  into  the  place  by  Clitus  and  Mnesilochus, 
One  party  of  the  citizens  now  joined  him  through  inclina¬ 
tion,  and  those  who  were  of  different  sentiments  were  com¬ 
pelled  by  fear  to  attend  him.  He  then  calmed  their  appre¬ 
hensions  by  a  discourse  full  of  mildness;  and  his  clemencv 

fi.  C.  I9i.j 

BOOK  XXXV^l. 

being  reported  abroad,  several  of  the  states  of  Acarnania. 
in  hopes  of  meeting  the  same  treatment,  went  over  to  his 
side.  From  Medio  he  went  to  Thorium,  whither  he  had 
sent  on  before  him  the  same  Mnesilochus,  and  his  colleagues 
in  the  embassy.  But  the  detection  of  the  treachery  practised 
at  Medic  rendered  the  Thurians  more  cautious,  not  more  ti¬ 
mid.  They  answered  him  explicitly,  that  they  would  form 
no  new  alliance  without  the  approbation  of  the  Komansj  they 
then  shut  their  gates,  and  posted  soldiers  on  the  walls.  Most 
seasonably  for  confirming  the  resolution  ol  the  Acarnanians, 
Cncius  Octavius,  being  sent  by  Quintus,  and  having  received 
a  part}’  of  men  and  a  few  ships  from  Aulus  Postumius. 
whom  Atiliiis  had  appointed  his  lieutenant  to  command  at 
Cephallenia,  arrived  at  Leucas,  and  filled  the  allies  with  tht 
strongest  hopesj  assuring  them,  that  t'ne  consul  Manius 
Acllius  had  alread}’  crossed  the  sea  wuli  his  legions,  and 
that  the  Homan  torces  were  encamped  in  Thessaly.  As  the 
season  of  the  year,  which  was  by  this  time  favourable  foi 
sailing,  strengthened  the  credibility  of  this  report,  the  king, 
after  placing  a  garrison  in  Medio,  and  some  other  towns  of 
Acarnania.  retired  from  Thurium,  and  taking  his  route 
through  the  cities  of  ^Ttolia  and  Phocis,  returned  to  Chalcis. 
Xiil.  Marcus  Ba^uus  and  king  Philip,  after  the  meeting 
which  they  had  in  the  wiuiei  in  Dassaietia,  when  they  sent 
Appius  Chiudiu*'  into  i'hessal}'  to  raise  tiie  siege  ol  Larissa, 
had  returned  to  winter  quarters,  the  season  not  being  sufficient- 
ly  advanced  for  entering  un  action,  but  now,  in  the  beginning 
of  spring,  they  united  their  forces,  and  marched  into  I’hes- 
saly.  Antiochus  was  then  in  Acarnania.  As  soon  as  the} 
entered  that  country,  Philip  laid  siege  to  Mallaea,  in  the  ter¬ 
ritory  of  Perrhaebia,  and  Babius,  to  Phaciuni.  This  town 
of  Phacium  he  took  almost  at  the  first  attempt,  and  then  re¬ 
duced  Phaestus  with  as  little  delav.  Alter  this,  he  retired 
to  Atrax;  and  having  seized  on  C}  retia?  and  Phricium,  and 
placed  garrisons  in  the  places  which  he  had  reduced,  he 

84 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.561 

again  joined  Philip,  who  was  carrying  on  the  siege  of  Mah 
lasa.  On  the  arrival  of  the  Roman  army,  the  garrison,  either 
awed  by  its  strength,  or  hoping  for  pardon,  surrendered 
themselves,  and  the  combined  forces  marched,  in  one  body, 
to  recover  the  towns  which  had  been  seized  by  the  Athama- 
nians.  These  were  ^Eginium,  Ericinum,  Gomphi,  Silana, 
Tricca,  Melibsea,  and  Phaloria.  Then  they  invested  Pelli- 
neeum,  where  Philip  of  Megalopolis  was  in  garrison,  with 
five  hundred  foot  and  forty  horse;  but  before  they  made  an 
assault,  they  sent  a  person  to  warn  Philip,  not  to  expose 
himself  to  the  last  extremities;  to  which  he  answered,  with 
much  confidence,  that  he  could  entrust  himself  either  to  the 
Romans  or  the  Thessalians,  but  never  would  put  himself  in 
the  power  of  the  Macedonian.  The  confederate  command¬ 
ers  now  saw  that  they  must  have  recourse  to  force,  and 
thought  that  Limn^ea  might  be  attacked  at  the  same  time;  it 
was  therefore  agreed,  that  the  king  should  go  against 
Limnaea,  while  Bsebius  staid  to  carry  on  the  siege  of  Pelli- 
naeum. 
XIV.  It  happened  that,  just  at  this  time,  the  consul,  Ma- 
nius  Acillus,  having  crossed  the  sea  with  twenty  thousand 
foot,  two  thousand  horse,  and  fifteen  elephants,  ordered 
some  military  tribunes,  chosen  for  the  purpose,  to  lead  the 
infantry  to  Larissa,  and  he  himself  with  the  cavalry  came  to 
Limnaea,  to  Philip.  Immediately  on  the  consuPs  arrival, 
the  town  capitulated,  and  the  king’s  garrison,  together  with 
the  Athamanians,  were  delivered  up.  From  Limnsa  the 
consul  went  to  Pellinaeum.  Here  the  Athamanians  surren- 
dered  first,  and  afterwards  Philip  of  Megalopolis.  King 
Philip,  happening  to  meet  the  latter  as  he  was  coming  out 
from  the  town,  ordered  his  attendants,  in  derision,  to  salute 
him  with  the  title  of  king;  and  he  himself,  coming  up  to 
him,  with  a  sneer,  highly  unbecoming  his  own  exalted  sta¬ 
tion,  accosted  him  by  the  name  of  brother.  He  was  brought 
before  the  consul,  who  ordered  him  to  be  kept  in  confine- 

B.  C.  191*] 

BOOK  XXXVI. 

85 

ment,  and  soon  after  sent  him  to  Rome  in  chains.  All  the 
rest  of  the  Athamanians,  together  with  the  soldiers  of  king 
Antiochus,  who  had  been  in  garrison  in  the  towns  which  sur^ 
rendered  about  that  time,  were  delivered  over  to  Philip. 
They  amounted  to  three  thousand  men.  The  consul  went 
thence  to  Larissa,  in  order  to  hold  a  consultation  on  the  ge¬ 
neral  plan  of  operations;  and,  on  his  way,  was  met  by  ambas¬ 
sadors  from  Pieria  and  Metropolis,  with  the  surrender  of 
those  cities.  Philip  treated  the  captured,  particularly  the 
Athamanians,  with  great  kindness,  in  expectation  of  gaining, 
through  them,  the  favour  of  their  countrymen;  and  having 
hence  conceived  hopes  of  getting  Athamania  into  his  posses¬ 
sion,  he  first  sent  forward  the  prisoners  to  their  respective 
states,  and  then  marched  his  army  thither.  The  represen¬ 
tations  given  by  these  of  the  king’s  clemency  and  generosity 
towards  them,  operated  strongly  on  the  minds  of  the  people; 
and  Amynander,  who,  by  his  presence,  had  retained  many 
in  obedience,  through  the  respect  paid  to  his  dignity,  began 
now  to  dread  that  he  might  be  delivered  up  to  Philip,  who 
had  been  long  his  professed  enemy,  or  to  the  Homans,  who 
were  justly  incensed  against  him  for  his  late  deiection.  He 
therefore,  with  his  wife  and  children,  quitted  the  kingdom, 
and  retired  to  Ambracia.  Thus  all  Athamania  came  under 
the  authority  and  dominion  of  Philip.  The  consul  delayed 
a  few  days  at  Larissa,  for  the  purpose  chiefly  of  refreshing 
the  horses,  which,  by  the  voyage  first,  and  marching  after¬ 
wards,  had  been  much  harassed  and  fatigued;  and  when  he 
had  renewed  the  vigour  of  his  army  by  a  moderate  share  of 
rest,  he  marched  to  Cranon.  On  his  way,  Pharsalus,  Sco- 
tussa,  and  Pherae  were  surrendered  to  him,  together  with  the 
garrisons  placed  in  them  by  Antiochus,  He  asked  these 
men,  whether  any  of  them  chose  to  remain  with  him;  and 
one  thousand  having  declared  themselves  willing,  he  gave 
them  to  Philip;  the  rest  he  sent  back,  unarmed,  to  Deme- 
trias.  After  this  he  took  Proerna,  and  the  torts  adjacent; 

80 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y,R,  561. 

and  then  marched  forwards  toward  the  Malian  bay.  When 
he  drew  near  to  the  pass  on  which  Thaumaci  is  situated,  aU 
the  young  men  of  that  place  took  arms,  and,  quitting  the 
town,  placed  themselves  in  ambush  in  the  woods  adjoining 
the  roads,  and  thence,  with  the  advantage  of  higher  ground, 
made  attacks  on  the  Roman  troops  as  they  marched.  I'he 
consul  first  sent  people  to  talk  with  them,  and  warn  them  to 
desist  from  such  a  mad  proceeding;  but,  finding  that  they 
persisted  in  their  undertaking,  he  sent  round  a  tribune,  with 
two  companies  of  soldiers,  to  cut  off  the  retreat  of  the  men 
in  arms,  and  took  possession  of  the  defenceless  city.  On 
this,  the  parties  in  ambush,  hearing  from  behind  the  shouts 
occasioned  by  that  event,  fled  homeward  from  all  parts  oi  the 
woods,  but  were  intercepted  and  cut  to  pieces.  From 
Thaumaci  the  consul  came,  on  the  second  day,  to  the  rivei 
Sperchius,  and.  sending  out  parties,  laid  waste  the  coun¬ 
try  of  the  Hypataeans. 
XV.  During  these  transactions,  Antiochus  was  at  Chalcis, 
and  now,  perceiving  that  be  had  gained  nothing  from  Greece 
to  recompense  his  trouble,  except  pleasing  winter-quarters 
and  a  disgraceful  marriage,  he  warmly  blamed  Thoas,  and 
the  fallacious  promises  ol  the  ^Ttolians,  whilt  he  admired 
Hannibal  as  a  man  endowed  not  only  with  wisdom,  but  with 
a  kind  of  prophetic  skill,  which  had  enabled  him  to  foretel 
all  that  had  come  to  pass.  However,  that  he  might  not 
contribute  to  the  failure  of  his  inconsiderate  enterprise  by  his 
own  inactivity,  he  sent  requisitions  to  the  AAolians,  to  arm 
all  their  young  men,  and  assemble  in  a  bod\.  He  went  him¬ 
self  immediately  into  their  country,  at  the  head  of  about  ten 
thousand  foot,  (the  number  having  been  filled  up  out  of  the 
troops  which  had  come  after  him  from  Asia,)  and  five  hun¬ 
dred  horse.  Their  assembly  on  this  occasion  was  far  less 
numerous  than  ever  before,  none  attending  but  the  chiefs 
with  a  few  of  their  vassals.  These  affirmed  that  they  had. 
with  the  utmost  diligence,  tried  every  method  to  bring  into 

B.  C.  191,j 

BOOK  XXXVL 

87 

the  field  as  great  a  number  as  possible  out  ol  their  respec¬ 
tive  states,  but  had  not  been  able,  either  by  argument,  per¬ 
suasion,  or  authority,  to  overcome  the  general  aversion  to 
the  service.  Being  disappointed  thus  on  all  sides,  both  by 
his  own  people,  who  delayed  in  Asia,  and  by  his  allies,  who 
did  not  fulfil  those  engagements  by  w’hich  they  had  prevailed 
on  him  to  comply  with  their  invitation,  the  king  retired  ije- 
yond  the  pass  of  Thermopylee.  A  range  of  mountains  here 
divides  Greece  in  the  same  manner  as  Italy  is  divided  by 
the  ridge  of  the  Appennines.  Outside  the  streight  of  Ther¬ 
mopylae,  towards  the  north,  lie  Epirus,  Perrhaebia,  Magne¬ 
sia,  Thessaly,  the  Achaean  Phthiothis,  and  the  Malian  bay; 
on  the  inside,  towards  the  south,  the  greater  part  of  iEtolia, 
Acarnania,  Phocis,  Locris,  Bceotia,  and  the  adjacent  island 
of  Eubcea,  the  territory  of  Attica,  which  stretches  out  like  a 
promontory  into  the  sea,  and  behind  that,  the  Peloponnesus. 
This  range  of  mountains,  which  extends  from  Leucas  and 
the  sea  on  the  west,  through  ^Ttolia,  to  the  opposite  sea  on 
the  east,  is  so  closely  covered  with  thickets  and  craggy  rocks, 
that,  not  to  speak  of  an  army,  even  persons  lightly  equipped 
for  travelling,  can  with  difficulty  find  paths  through  which 
they  can  pass.  The  hills  at  the  eastern  extremity  are  called 
Gfita,  and  the  highest  of  them  Callidromus,  in  a  valley,  at 
the  foot  of  which,  reaching  to  the  Malian  bay,  is  a  passagt 
not  broader  than  sixty  paces.  This  is  the  only  military 
road,  by  which  an  army  can  be  led,  even  supposing  no  op¬ 
position.  The  place  is,  therefore,  called  Pyla,  the  gate;  and 
by  some,  on  account  of  a  warm  spring,  rising  just  at  tbt 
entrance  of  it,  Thermopylae  It  is  rendered  famous  by  the 
glorious  stand  made  there  by  a  party  of  Lacedtemonians 
against  the  Persians,  and  by  their  still  more  glorious  death. 
XVI.  With  a  very  inferior  portion  of  spirit,  Antiochus 
now  pitched  his  camp  within  the  inclosures  of  this  pass,  the 
difficulties  of  which  he  increased  by  raising  fortifications, 
and  when  he  had  completely  strengthened  every  part  with  a 

88 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  56T 
double  rampart  and  trench,  and,  wherever  it  seemed  re¬ 
quisite,  with  a  wall  formed  of  the  stones  which  lay  scattered 
about  in  abundance,  being  very  confident  that  the  Roman 
army  would  never  attempt  to  force  a  passage  there,  he  sent 
away  one-half  of  the  four  thousand  iEtolians,  the  number 
that  had  joined  him,  to  garrison  Heraclea,  which  stood  op¬ 
posite  the  entrance  of  the  defile,  and  the  other  half  to  Hypa- 
taj  for  he  concluded,  that  the  consul  would  undoubtedly  at¬ 
tack  Heraclea,  and  he  received  accounts  from  many  hands, 
of  depredations  committed-  on  the  country  round  Hypata. 
The  consul,  after  ravaging  the  lands  of  Hypata  first,  and 
then  those  of  Heraclea,  in  both  which  places  the  iEtolian 
detachments  proved  useless,  encamped  opposite  to  the  king, 
in  the  very  entrance  of  the  pass,  near  the  warm  springs;  both 
parties  of  the  ^tolians  shutting  themselves  up  in  Heraclea. 
Antiochus,  who,  before  he  saw  the  enemy,  thought  every 
spot  perfectly  well  fortified,  and  secured  by  guards,  now  be" 
gan  lo  apprehend,  that  the  Romans  might  discover  some 
paths  among  the  hills  above,  through  which  they  could  make 
their  way;  for  he  had  heard  that  the  Lacedsemonians  former¬ 
ly  had  been  surrounded  in  that  manner  by  the  Persians,  and 
Philip  lately  by  the  Romans  themselves.  He  therefore  des¬ 
patched  a  messenger  to  the  iEtolians  at  Heraclea,  desiring 
them  to  afford  him  so  much  assistance,  at  least  in  the  war 
as  to  seize  and  secure  the  tops  of  the  hills,  so  as  to  put  it  out 
of  the  power  of  the  Romans  to  pass  them.  The  delivery  of  this 
message  raised  a  dissension  among  the  Al-tolians:  some  insist¬ 
ed  that  they  ought  to  obey  the  ki  ng’s  orders,  and  go  where 
he  desired;  others  that  they  ought  to  lie  still  at  Heraclea,  and 
wait  the  issue,  be  it  what  it  might;  for  if  the  king  should  be 
defeated  by  the  consul,  their  forces  would  be  fresh,  and  in 
readiness  to  carry  succour  to  their  own  states  in  the  neigh¬ 
bourhood;  and  if  he  were  victorious,  they  could  pursue  the 
Romans,  while  scattered  in  their  flight.  Each  party  not  only 
adhered  positively  to  its  own  plan,  but  even  carried  it  into 

BOOK  XXXVL 

89 

B.  C.  191.J 
execution;  two  thousand  lay  still  at  Heraclea;  and  two  thou¬ 
sand,  divided  into  three  parties,  took  possession  of  the  sum¬ 
mits  called  Callidromus,  Rhoduntia,  and  Tichiuns. 
XVII.  When  the  consul  saw  that  the  heights  were  posses¬ 
sed  by  the  iEtolians,  he  sent  against  those  posts  two  men 
of  consular  rank,  who  acted  as  lieutenants-general,  with  two 
thousand  chosen  troops; — Lucius  Valerius  Flaccus  against 
Rhoduntia  and  Tichiuns,  and  Marcus  Porcius  Cato  against 
Callidromus.  Then,  before  he  led  on  his  forces  against  the 
enemy,  he  called  them  to  an  assembly,  employing  a  short 
exhortation  to  this  effect:  Soldiers,  1  see  that  the  greater 
part  of  you,  who  are  present,  of  all  ranks,  are  men  who  serv¬ 
ed  in  this  same  province,  under  the  conduct  and  auspices  of 
Titus  Quintius.  I  therefore  wish  to  remind  you,  that,  in  the 
Macedonian  war,  the  pass  at  the  river  Aous  was  much  more 
difficult  than  this  before  us.  For  this  is  only  a  gate,  a  single 
passage,  formed  as  it  were  by  nature;  every  other  in  the 
whole  tract,  between  the  two  seas,  being  utterly  impracticable. 
In  the  former  case,  there  were  stroiiger  fortifications,  and 
more  advantageously  situated.  The  enemy's  army  was  both 
more  numerous,  and  c(;mposed  of  very  superior  men;  for 
they  were  Macedonians,  I'hracians  and  iiiyrians, — people 
remarkable  for  the  ferocity  of  their  com  age;  your  present 
opponents  are  Syrians,  and  Asiatic  Greeks,  the  most  unstea¬ 
dy  of  men,  and  born  slaves.  The  commander,  there,  was  a 
king  of  extraordinary  warlike  abilities,  improved  by  practice 
from  his  early  youth,  in  wars  against  his  neighbours,  the 
Thracians  and  Illyrians,  and  all  the  adjoining  nations.  The 
king,  with  whom  we  have  now  to  deal,  is  one,  who,  (to  say 
nothing  of  his  former  life,  after  coming  over  from  Asia  into 
Europe  to  make  war  on  the  Roman  people,)  has,  during  the 
whole  length  of  the  winter,  accomplished  no  more  memora¬ 
ble  exploit,  than  the  taking  a  wife,  to  gratify  his  amorous 
inclinations,  out  of  a  private  house,  and  a  family  obscure 
even  among  its  neighbours:  and  now,  this  newly-married  man. 
VOL.  V. — 

90 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  561. 

after  indulging  in  the  luxury  of  nuptial  feasts,  comes  out  to 
fight.  H  is  chitf  reliance  was  on  the  strength  of  the  iEtoU- 
ans, — a  nation  of  all  others,  the  most  faithless  and  ungrate¬ 
ful,  as  you  have  formerly  experienced,  and  as  Antiochus  now 
experiences.  For  they  neither  joined  him  with  the  great 
numbers  that  were  promised,  nor  could  they  be  kept  in  the 
field;  and  besides,  they  are  now  in  a  state  of  dissension 
among  themselves.  Although  they  demanded  to  be  intrust¬ 
ed  with  the  defence  of  Hvpata  and  Heraclea^yet  they  defend¬ 
ed  neither;  but  one  half  of  them  fled  to  the  tops  of  the  moun¬ 
tains,  while  the  others  shut  themselves  up  in  Heraclea.  The 
king  himself,  plainly  confessing,  that  so  far  from  daring  to 
meet  us  in  battle  on  the  level  plain,  he  durst  not  even  en¬ 
camp  in  open  ground,  has  abandoned  all  that  tract  in  front, 
which  he  b-  asred  of  having  taken  from  us  and  Philip,  and 
has  hid  himself  behind  the  rocks,  not  even  appearing  in  the 
opening  of  the  pass,  as  it  is  said  the  Lacfc<lgemonians  did 
formerly,  but  drawing  back  his  camp  within  the  streight. 
Does  not  this  demonstrate  just  the  same  degree  of  fear  as  if 
he  had  shut  himself  up  within  the  walls  of  a  city  to  stand  a 
siege?  But  neither  shall  the  streights  protect  Antiochus, 
nor  the  hills  which  the^  have  seized,  the  iEtolians,  Sufficient 
care  and  precaution  has  been  used  on  every  quarter,  that  you 
shall  have  nothing  to  contend  with  in  the  fight,  but  the  ene¬ 
my  himself.  On  your  parts,  you  have  to  consider,  that  you 
are  not  fighting  merely  for  the  liberty  of  Greece;  although, 
were  that  all,  it  would  be  an  achievenient  highly  meritorious 
to  deliver  that  country  now  from  Antiochus  and  the  iEtoli- 
ans,  which  }  ou  formerly  delivered  from  Philip;  and  that  the 
wealth  in  the  king’s  camp  will  not  be  the  whole  prize  of  vour 
labour;  but  that  the  great  collection  of  stores,  daily  expected 
from  Ephesus,  will  lilcewise  become  your  prey;  and  also, 
that  you  will  open  a  way  for  the  Roman  power  into  Asia, 
and  Svria,  and  all  the  most  opulent  realms  to  the  extremity 
of  the  East,  What  then  must  be  the  consequence,  but  that. 

B-  C.  191] 

BOOK  XXXVI. 

91 
from  Gades  to  the  Red  Sea,"^  we  shall  have  no  limit  but  the 
ocean,  which  encircles  the  whole  orb  of  the  earthy  and  that 
all  mankind  shall  regard  the  Roman  name  with  a  degree  of 
veneration  next  to  that  which  they  pay  to  the  divinities? 
For  the  attainment  of  prizes  of  such  magnitude,  be  ready  to 
exert  a  spirit  adequate  to  the  occasion,  that,  to  morrow,  with 
the  aid  of  the  gods,  w'e  may  decide  the  matter  in  the  field.’' 
XVIII.  After  this  discourse  he  dismissed  the  soldiers, 
who,  before  they  went  to  their  repast,  got  ready  their  armour 
and  weapons.  At  the  first  dawn,  the  signal  of  battle  being 
displayed,  the  consul  formed  his  troops  with  a  narrow  front, 
adapted  to  the  nature  and  the  straitness  of  the  ground.  When 
the  king  saw  the  enenay’s  standards  in  motion,  he  likewise 
drew  out  his  forces.  He  placed  in  the  van,  before  the  ram- 
part,  a  part  of  his  light-infantry;  and  behind  them,  as  a  sup¬ 
port,  close  to  the  fortifications,  the  main  strength  of  his  Ma¬ 
cedonians,  whom  they  call  Sarissophori,  spearmen.  On  the 
left  wing  of  these,  at  the  foot  of  the  mountain,  he  posted  a 
body  of  javelin-bearers,  archers,  and  slingers;  that  from  the 
highfer  ground  they  might  annoy  the  naked  flank  of  the  ene¬ 
my:  and  on  the  right  of  the  Macedonians,  to  the  extremity 
of  the  works,  where  the  deep  morasses  and  quicksands, 
stretching  thence  to  the  sea.  render  the  place  impassable,  the 
elephants  with  their  usual  g  :rd;  in  the  rear  of  them,  the  ca¬ 
valry;  and  then,  with  a  mot  ‘ate  interval  between,  the  rest 
of  his  forces  as  a  second  line.  The  Macedonians,  posted  be¬ 
fore  the  rampart,  for  some  ti  i  e  easily  withstood  the  efforts 
which  the  Romaas  made  eveiy  where  to  force  a  passage;  for 
they  received  great  assistance  from  those  who  poured  down 
from  the  higher  ground  a  shower  of  leaden  balls  from  their 
shngs,  and  of  arrows,  and  javelins,  all  together.  But  after- 
The  aacients  supposed  the  earth  to  Invc  a  tlat  circular  surface,  round 
the  extremity  ofwhicii  ilowed  a  i)()dy  of  water,  caiie  1  h\  them  the  Ocean. 
The  eastern  quarter  of  the  ocean  they  called  the  Red  Sea,  from  the  rudd^ 
colour  of  Uie  rising  bun. 

92 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  561 

wards,  the  enemy  pressing  on  with  greater  and  now  irresisti¬ 
ble  force,  they  were  obliged  to  give  ground,  and,  filing  off 
from  the  rear,  retire  within  the  fortification.  Here,  by  ex-* 
tending  their  spears  before  them,  they  formed  as  it  were  a 
second  rampart,  for  the  rampart  itself  was  of  such  a  mode¬ 
rate  height,  that  while  its  defenders  enjoyed  the  advantage 
of  the  higher  grouncb  they,  at  the  same  time,  by  the  length 
of  their  spears,  had  the  enemy  within  reach  underneath. 
Many  of  the  assailants,  inconsiderately  approaching  the  work, 
were  run  through  the  body;  and  they  must  either  have  aban¬ 
doned  the  attempt  and  retreated,  or  have  lost  very  great 
numbers,  had  not  Marcus  Porcius  come  from  the  summit  of 
Callidromus,  whence  he  had  dislodged  the  ^toiians,  after 
killing  the  greater  part  of  them.  These  he  had  surprised,  quite 
unprepared,  and  mostly  asleep,  and  now  he  appeared  on  the 
hill  which  overlooked  the  camp.  Flaccus  had  not  met  the 
same  good  fortune  at  Tichiuns  and  Rhoduntia;  having  failed 
in  his  attempts  to  approach  those  fastnesses. 
XIX.  The  Macedonians,  and  others,  in  the  king^s  camp, 
as  long  as^  on  account  of  the  distance,  they  could  distinguish 
nothing  more  than  a  body  of  men  in  motion,  thought  thet' 
were  the  ^Etolians,  who,  on  seeing  the  fight,  were  coming  to 
their  aid.  But  when,  on  a  nearer  view,  they  knew  the  stan¬ 
dards  and  arms,  and  thence  discovered  their  mistake,  they 
were  all  instantly  seized  with  such  a  panic,  that  they  threw' 
down  their  arms  and  fled.  The  pursuit  was  somewhat  re¬ 
tarded  by  the  fortifications,  and  bv' the  narrowness  of  the  val¬ 
ley,  through  which  the  troops  had  to  pass,  and,  above  all,  bv 
the  elephants  being  on  the  rear  of  the  flying  enemy,  so  that 
it  was  with  difficulty  that  the  infantry  could  make  their  way. 
This,  indeed,  the  cavalry  could  by  no  means  do,  their  horses 
being  so  frightened,  that  they  threw  one  another  into  greatei 
confusion  than  would  be  occasioned  by  a  battle.  The  plun¬ 
dering  of  the  camp,  also,  caused  a  considerable  delay.  But, 
notwithstanding  all  this,  the  Romans  pursued  the  enemy  that 

B.C.  191.] 

BOOK  XXXVL 

93 

day  as  far  as  Scarphia^  killing  and  taking  on  the  way  great 
numbers  both  of  men  and  horses,  and  also  killing  such  of  the 
elephants  as  they  could  not  secure;  and  then  they  returned 
to  their  post.  This  had  been  attacked,  during  the  time  of  the 
action,  by  the  ^Ttolians  quartered  at  Heraclea;  but  the  en- 
terprise,  which  certainly  showed  no  want  of  boldness,  was 
not  attended  with  any  success.  The  consul,  at  the  third  watch 
of  the  following  night,  sent  forward  his  cavalry  in  pursuit 
of  the  enemy;  and,  as  soon  as  day  appeared,  set  out  at  the 
head  of  the  legions.  The  king  had  got  far  before  him,  for 
he  fled  with  the  utmost  speed,  and  never  halted  until  he 
came  to  Elatia.  There  he  first  endeavoured  to  collect  the 
scattered  remains  of  his  army;  and  then  with  a  \  ery  small 
body  of  half-armed  men,  he  continued  his  retreat  to  Chalcis. 
The  Roman  cavalry  did  not  overtake  the  king  himself  at 
Elatia;  but  they  cut  off  a  great  part  of  his  soldiers,  \vho  either 
halted  through  weariness,  or  wandered  out  of  the  way  through 
mistake,  as  they  fled  without  guides  through  unknowm  roads, 
so  .that,  out  of  the  whole  army,  not  one  escaped,  except  five 
hundred,  who  kept  close  about  the  king;  and  even  of  the  ten 
thousand  men,  whom,  on  the  authority  of  Polybius,  we  have 
mentioned  as  brought  over  by  the  king  from  Asia,  a  verv 
trifling  number  got  off.  But  what  shall  w^e  say  to  the  account 
q^iven  bv  Valerius  Antias,  that  there  w  ere  in  the  king's  army 
sixtv  thousand  men,  of  w  hom  forty  thousand  fell,  and  above 
five  thousand  were  taken,  with  tw^o  hundred  and  thirty  mili' 
tarv  standards?  Of  the  Homans  were  slain  in  the  action  it¬ 
self  an  hundred  and  fifty;  and  of  the  part\  that  defended 
the  camp  against  the  assault  of  the  ^Etolians,  not  more  than 
fifty. 
XX.  As  the  consul  marched  through  Phocis  and  Bceotia. 
the  revolted  states,  conscious  of  their  demerits,  aiid  dread¬ 
ing  lest  they  should  be  exposed  as  enemies  to  the  ravages  of 
the  soldiers,  presented  themselves  at  the  gates  of  their  cities, 
with  the  badges  of  suppliants;  hut  the  army  proceeded,  dur- 

94 

HISTORY  OF  ROMK.  [Y,  R.  561. 
ing  the  whole  time,  just  as  if  they  were  in  the  country  of 
friends,  without  offering  violence  of  any  sort,  until  they 
reached  the  territory  of  Coronea.  Here  a  statue  of  king  An- 
tiochus,  standing  in  the  temple  of  Minerva  Itonia,  kindled 
such  violent  resentment,  that  permission  was  given  to  the 
soldiers  to  plunder  the  surrounding  lands.  But  the  reflection 
quickly  occurred,  that,  as  the  statue  had  been  erected  by  a 
general  vote  of  all  the  Hceotian  states,  it  was  unreasonable 
to  resent  it  on  the  single  district  of  Coronea.  The  soldiers 
were  therefore  immediately  recalled,  and  the  depredations 
stopped.  The  Boeotians  were  only  reprimanded  for  their 
ungrateful  behaviour  to  the  Homans  in  return  for  great  obli¬ 
gations,  -o  recently  conferred.  At  the  very  time  when  the 
battle  was  fought,  ten  ships  belonging  to  the  king,  with  their 
commander  Isidorus,  lav  at  ane'mn'  near  I  hronium,  in  the 
IMalian  bay.  To  them  Alexander  of  Acarnunia,  being  griev- 
ousl}^  wounded,  made  his  escape,  and  gave  an  account  of  the 
unfortunate  issue  of  the  battle;  on  wfhch  the  fleet,  alarmed 
at  the  immediate  danger,  sailed  away  in  haste  to  Censeus  in 
Kuhtea.  There  Alexander  died,  and  was  buried.  Three 
other  ships,  which  came  from  Asia  to  the  same  port,  on  hear¬ 
ing  the  disaster  which  had  befallen  the  army,  returned  to 
Ephesus.  Isidorus  sailed  over  from  Caeneus  to  Demetrias, 
supposing  that  the  king  might  perhaps  have  directed  his 
flight  thither.  About  this  time,  A  ulus  Atiiius,  commander 
of  the  Roman  fleet,  intercepted  a  large  convoy  of  provisions 
going  to  the  king,  just  as  they  had  passed  the  streight  at  the 
island  of  Andros;  some  of  the  ships  he  sunk,  and  took  many 
others.  Those  who  were  in  the  rear  tacked  about  and  steer¬ 
ed  back  to  Asia.  Atiiius,  with  the  captured  vessels  in  his 
train,  sailed  back  to  Pirieeus,  his  former  station,  and  distri¬ 
buted  a  vast  quantity  of  corn  among  the  Athenians,  and  the 
other  allies  in  that  quarter. 
XXI.  Antiochus,  quitting  Chalcis  before  the  consul  arri- 
-'ed  there,  first  sailed  to  Tenus,  and  thence  passed  over  te 

B.  C  191.J 

BOOK  XXXVL 

Ephesus.  When  the  consul  came  to  Chalcis,  the  gates  were 
open  to  receive  him;  for  Aristoteles,  who  commanded  for  the 
king,  on  hearing  of  his  approach,  had  withdrawn  from  the 
city.  The  rest  of  the  cities  of  Euboea  also  submitted  without 
opposition;  and  peace  being  restored  all  over  the  Island, 
within  the  space  of  a  few  days^  without  inflicting  punishment 
on  any;  the  army,  which  had  acquired  much  higher  praise 
for  moderation  after  victory,  than  even  for  the  attainment 
of  it^marched  back  to  Thermop\la'.  From  this  place,  the 
consul  despatched  Marcus  Cato  to  Rome,  that  the  senate 
and  people  might  learn  what  had  passed  from  unquestiona¬ 
ble  authority.  H#  set  sail  from  Creusa,  a  sea-port  belonging 
to  the  Thespians,  seated  at  the  bottom  of  the  Corinthian  gulf, 
and  steered  to  Petrae  in  Achaia.  From  Petrte,  he  coasted 
along  the  shores  of  Altolia  and  Acarnania,  as  far  as  Corey ra, 
and  thence  he  passed  over  to  Hydruntum  in  Italy.  Proceed¬ 
ing  hence,  with  rapid  expedition,  by  land,  he  arrived  on  the 
fifth  day  at  Rome.  Having  come  into  the  city  before  day, 
he  w’ent  on,  directly  from  the  gate,  to  Marcus  Junius,  the 
praetor,  who,  at  the  first  dawn,  assembled  the  senate.  Here, 
Lucius  Cornelius  Scipio,  who  had  been  despatched  by  the 
consul  several  days  before  Cato,  and  on  his  arrival  had  heard 
that  the  latter  had  outstripped  him,  and  was  then  in  the  se¬ 
nate,  came  in,  just  as  he  was  giving  a  recital  of  the  transac¬ 
tions.  The  two  lieutenants-general  were  then,  by  order  of 
the  senate,  conducted  to  the  assembly  of  the  people,  where 
they  gave  the  sajme  account,  as  in  the  senate,  of  the  services 
performed  in  ^tolia.  Hereupon  a  decree  was  passed,  that 
a  supplication,  of  three  days’  continuance,  should  be  perform¬ 
ed;  and  that  the  praetor  should  offer  sacrifice  to  such  of  the 
gods  as  his  judgment  should  direct,  with  forty  victims  of  the 
larger  kinds.  About  the  same  time,  Marcus  Fulvius  Nobi- 
lior,  who,  two  years  before,  had  gone  into  farther  Spain,  in 
the  office  of  praetor,  went  through  the  city  in  ovation.  He 
carried  in  the  procession  an  hundred  and  thirty  thousand 

96 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  561. 

silver  dcnarius€s,^  and,  besides  the  coin,  twelve  thousand 
pounds  weight  of  silver,  and  an  hundred  and  twenty-seven 
pounds  weight  of  gold. 
XXII.  T  he  consul  Acilius  sent  on,  from  Thertnopylee,  a  mes¬ 
sage  to  the  iEtolians  in  Heraclea,  warning  them,  “  then  at 
least,  after  the  experience  which  they  had  of  the  emptiness 
of  the  king's  professions,  to  return  to  a  proper  way  of  think¬ 
ing;  and,  by  surrendering  Heraclea,  to  endeavour  to  procure, 
irom  the  senate,  a  pardon  for  their  past  madness,  or  error, 
if  thev  rather  chose  so  to  call  it;”  and  he  observed  that  other 
Grecian  states  also  had,  during  the  present  war,  revolted 
from  the  Romans,  to  whom  they  W’-ere  ^nder  the  highest 
obligations,  but  that,  inasmuch  as,  after  the  flight  of  the  king, 
whose  presence  had  inspired  that  confidence  which  led  them 
astray  from  their  duty,  they  had  not  added  obstinacy  to 
iheir  other  crimes,  they  were  re-admitted  into  friendship. 
In  like  manner,  although  the  ^Etoiians  had  not  followed  the 
king’s  lead,  but  had  invited  him,  and  had  been  principals  in 
the  war,  not  auxiliaries;  nevertheless,  if  they  could  prevail 
on  themselves  to  show  a  proper  sense  of  their  misconduct, 
they  might  still  ensure  their  safety.”  Their  answer  showed 
nothing  like  a  pacific  disposition;  wherefore,  seeing  tka^  the 
business  must  be  determined  by  force  of  arms,  and  that,  not¬ 
withstanding  the^  defeat  of  the  king,  the  v/ar  of  Aitolia  was 
as  far  from  a  conclusion  as  ever,  Acilius  led  up  his  army 
from  Thermopylae  to  Heraclea,  and,  on  the  same  day,  rode 
on  horseback  entirely  round  the  walls,  in  order  to  chscover 
the  strength  of  the  city,  Heraclea  is  situated  at  the  foot  of 
mount  Oeta;  the  town  itself  is  in  the  plain,  but  has  a  citadel 
overlooking  it,  which  stands  on  an  eminence  of  considerable 
height,  terminated  on  all  sides  by  precipices.  Having  exa¬ 
mined  everv  part  which  he  wished  to  see,  the  consul  deter¬ 
mined  to  make  the  assault  in  four  places  at  once.  On  the 
side  next  the  river  Asophus,  where  is  also  the  Gymnasium, 
he  gave  the  direction  of  the  works  to  Lucius  Valerius.  He 

B.  C.  191.] 

BOOK  XXXVL 

97 

assigned  to  Tiberius  Sempronius  Longus,  the  attack  of  a 
part  of  the  suburbs,  which  was  as  thickly  inhabited  as  the 
city  itself.  He  appointed  Marcus  Bsebius  to  act  on  the  side 
opposite  the  Malian  bay,  where  the  access  was  far  from  easy; 
and  Appiub  Claudius,  on  the  side  next  to  another  rivulet, 
called  Melas,  the  black,  opposite  to  the  temple  of  Diana. 
These  exerted  themselves  with  such  vigorous  emulation, 
that  within  a  few*  days  the  towers,  rams,  and  other  machines 
used  in  the  besieging  of  towns,  were  all  completed.  The 
lands  round  Heraclea,  naturally  marshy,  and  abounding 
with  tall  trees,  furnished  timber  in  abundance  for  every  kind 
of  work;  and  then,  as  the  ^tolians  had  fled  into  the  city,  the 
deserted  suburbs  supplied  not  only  beams  and  boards,  but 
also  bricks  and  mortar,  and  stones  of  every  size  for  all  their 
various  occasions. 
XXIII.  The  Romans  carried  on  their  approaches  by  means 
of  works  more  than  of  personal  exertions;  the  iEtoiians  main¬ 
tained  their  defence  by  dint  of  arms.  For  when  the  walls 
were  shaken  by  the  ram,  they  did  not,  as  is  usual,  intercept 
and  turn  aside  the  strokes  by  the  help  of  nooses  formed  on 
ropes,  but  sallied  out  in  large  armed  bodies,  with  parties  carry¬ 
ing  fire,  in  order  to  burn  the  machines.  They  had  likewise 
arched  passages  through  the  parapet,  for  the  purpose  of  ma¬ 
king  sallies;  and  when  they  built  up  the  wall  anew^,  in  the 
room  of  any  part  that  was  demolished,  they  left  a  great  num¬ 
ber  of  these  sally  ports,  that  they  might  rush  out  in  many 
places  at  once.  In  several  days,  at  the  beginning,  while 
their  strength  was  unimpaired,  they  carried  on  this  practice 
in  numerous  parties,  and  with  much  spirit;  but  then,  both 
their  numbers  and  spirit  daily  decreased.  For  though  they 
had  a  multiplicity  of  difficulties  to  struggle  with,  what  above 
all  things  utterly  consumed  their  vigour,  was  the  want  of 
sleep,  as  the  Romans,  having  plenty  of  men,  relieved  each 
other  regularly  in  their  posts;  while  among  the  iEtolians, 
their  numbers  being  small,  the  same  persons  were  obliged  to 
VOL.  V. — O 

DB  HISTORY  OF  ROME  [Y.  R,  56i, 
toil  on  without  intermission.  During  a  space  of  twenty-four 
days,  they  were  kept  day  and  night  in  one  continued  course 
of  unremitting  exertion,  against  the  attacks  carried  on  by  the 
enemy  in  four  different  quarters  at  once;  so  that  they  never 
had  an  hour’s  respite  from  action.  When  the  consul,  from 
computing  the  time,  and  from  the  reports  of  deserters,  judg¬ 
ed  that  the  j^ltolians  were  thoroughly  fatigued,  he  adopted 
the  following  plan.  At  midnight  he  gave  the  signal  of  retreat, 
and  drawing  off  all  his  men  at  once  from  the  assault,  kept 
them  quiet  in  the  camp  until  the  third  hour  of  the  next  day- 
The  attacks  were  then  renewed,  and  continued  until  midnight, 
when  they  ceased,  until  the  third  hour  of  the  day  following. 
The  iEiolians  imagined  that  the  Romans  suspended  the  at¬ 
tack  from  the  same  cause  by  which  they  felt  themselves  dis¬ 
tressed, — excessive  fatigue.  As  soon,  therefore,  as  the  sig¬ 
nal  of  retreat  was  given  to  the  Romans,  as  if  themselves 
were  thereby  recalled  from  dutV)  every  one  gladly  retired 
from  his  post,  nor  did  they  again  appear  in  arms  on  the 
walls  before  the  third  hour  of  the  day. 
XXIV.  The  consul  having  put  a  stop  to  the  assault  at  mid¬ 
night,  renewed  it  on  three  of  the  sides,  at  the  fourth  watch, 
with  the  utmost  vigour;  ordering  Tiberius  Sempronius,  on 
the  fourth,  to  keep  his  party  alert,  and  ready  to  obey  his 
signal;  for  he  concluded  assuredly,  that,  in  the  tumult  by 
night,  the  enemy  would  all  run  to  those  quarters  where  they 
heard  the  shouts.  Of  the  iEtolians,  such  as  had  gone  to  rest, 
with  difficulty  roused  their  bodies  from  sleep,  exhausted,  as 
thev  were,  with  fatigue  and  watching;  and  such  as  were  still 
awake,  ran,  in  the  dark,  to  the  places  where  they  heard  the 
noise  of  fighting.  Meanwhile  the  Romans  endeavoured  to 
climb  over  the  ruins  of  the  walls,  through  the  breaches;  in 
others,  strove  to  scale  the  walls  with  ladders;  while  the  .ffi,to- 
lians  hastened  to  defend  the  parts  attacked.  In  one  quarter, 
where  the  buildings  stood  outside  the  city,  there  was  neither 
attack  nor  defence;  but  a  party  stood  ready,  waiting  for  the 

BOOK  XXXVI. 

B.  C.  19!.] 

99 

signal -to  make  an  attack,  but  there  was  none  within  to  op¬ 
pose  them.  The  day  now  began  to  dawn,  and  the  consul  gave 
the  signalj  on  which  the  party,  without  any  opposition,  made 
their  way  into  the  town;  some  through  breaches,  others  scal¬ 
ing  the  walls  where  they  were  entire.  As  soon  as  the  i£tolians 
heard  them  raise  the  shout,  which  denoted  the  place  being 
taken,  they  every  where  forsook  their  posts,  and  fled  into 
the  citadel.  The  victors  sacked  the  city;  the  consul  having 
given  permission,  not  for  the  sake  of  gratifying  resentment 
or  animosity,  but  that  the  soldiers,  after  having  been  re¬ 
strained  from  plunder  in  so  many  captured  cities,  might  at 
last,  in  some  one  place,  enjoy  the  fruits  of  victory.  About 
mid-day  he  recalled  the  troops;  and,  dividing  them  into  two 
parts,  ordered  one  to  be  led  round  by  the  foot  of  the  moun¬ 
tain  to  a  rock,  which  was  of  equal  height  with  the  citadel, 
and  seemed  as  if  it  had  been  broken  off  from  it,  leaving  a 
hollow  between;  but  the  summits  of  these  eminences  are  so 
nearly  contiguous,  that  weapons  may  be  thrown  into  the  ci¬ 
tadel  from  their  tops.  With  the  other  half  of  the  troops  the 
consul  intended  to  march  up  from  the  city  to  the  citadel,  as 
soon  as  he  should  i*eceive  a  signal  from  those  who  were  to 
mount  the  rock  on  the  farther  side.  The  ^^itolians  in  the  ci¬ 
tadel  could  not  support  the  shout  of  the  party  which  had 
seized  the  rock,  and  the  consequent  attack  of  the  Romans 
from  the  cit\ ;  for  their  courage  was  now  broken,  and  the 
place  was  by  no  means  in  a  condition  to  hold  out  a  siege  of 
any  continuance;  the  women,  children,  and  great  numbers  of 
other  helpless  people,  being  ciowded  together  in  a  fort,  which 
was  scarce  capable  of  containing,  much  less  of  affording  pro¬ 
tection  to,  such  a  multitude.  On  the  first  assault,  therefore, 
they  laid  down  their  arms,  and  submitted.  Among  the  rest 
vras  delivered  up  Damocritus,  chief  magistrate  of  the  jEto- 
bans,  who  at  the  beginning  of  the  tvar,  when  Titus  Quintius 
asked  for  a  copy  of  the  decree,  passed  by  the  iEtolians  for 
inviting  Antiochus,  told  him,  that  in  Itaiv,  'when  the  ^¥ao 

100 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  561. 

iians  were  encamped  there,  it  should  be  delivered  to  him.’^ 
This  presumptuous  insolence  of  his  enhanced  the  satisfac^ 
tion  which  the  victors  felt  at  his  being  put  into  their  hands. 
XXV.  At  the  same  time,  while  the  Romans  were  employed 
in  the  reduction  of  Heraclea,  Philip,  by  concert,  besieged 
Lamia.  He  had  had  an  interview  with  the  consul,  as  he  was 
returning  from  Bceotia,  at  Thermopylae,  whither  he  came  to 
congratulate  him  and  the  Roman  people  on  their  successes, 
and  to  apologize  for  his  not  having  taken  an  active  part  in 
the  war,  being  prevented  by  sickness;  and  then  they  went 
from  thence,  by  different  routes,  to  lay  siege  to  the  two  cities 
at  once.  The  distance  between  these  places  is  about  seven 
miles;  and  as  Lamia  stands  on  high  ground,  and  has  an  open 
prospect  on  that  side  particularly,  the  distance  seems  very 
short,  and  every  thing  that  passes  can  be  seen  from  thence. 
The  Romans  and  Macedonians,  with  all  the  emulation  of 
competitors  for  a  prize,  employed  the  utmost  exertions,  both 
night  and  day,  either  in  the  works  or  in  fighting;  but  the 
Macedonians  encountered  greater  difficulty,  on  this  account, 
that  the  Romans  made  their  approaches  by  mounds,  covered 
galleries,  and  other  works,  which  w^re  all  above  ground; 
whereas  the  Macedonians  worked  under  ground  by  mines, 
and,  in  that  stony  soil,  often  met  a  flinty  rock,  which  iron 
could  not  penetrate.  The  king,  seeing  that  iitde  progress 
could  be  made  in  that  way,  endeavoured,  by  reasoning  with 
the  principal  inhabitants,  to  prevail  on  them  to  surrender  the 
place;  for  he  was  fully  persuaded,  that  if  Heraclea  should 
be  taken  first,  the  Lamians  would  then  choose  to  surrender 
to  the  Romans  rather  than  to  him;  and  that  the  consul  would 
take  to  himself  the  merit  of  relieving  them  from  a  siege 
Nor  was  he  mistaken  in  that  opinion;  for  no  sooner  was 
Heraclea  reduced,  than  a  message  came  to  him  to  raise  the 
siege;  because  it  was  more  reasonable  that  the  Roman  sol¬ 
diers,  who  had  fought  the  iEtolians  in  the  field,  should  reap 
the  truits  of  the  victory.”  Thus  was  Lamia  relieved,  and 

B.  C,  191.J 

BOOK  XXX VL 

ioi 
the  misfortune  of  a  neighbouring  city  proved  the  means  of 
its  escaping  a  like  disaster. 
XXVI.  A  few  days  before  the  capture  of  Heraclea,  the 
^tolians,  having  assembled  a  council  at  Hypata,  sent  am- 
bassadors  to  Antiochus,  among  whom  was  I'hoas,  who  had 
visited  him  before  in  the  same  capacity.  Their  instructions 
were,  in  the  first  place,  to  request  the  king  again  to  assemble 
his  land  and  marine  forces,  and  come  into  Greece;  and,  in 
the  next  place,  if  it  should  be  inconvenient  to  him  to  leave 
home,  then  to  send  them  supplies  of  men  and  money.  They 
were  to  remind  him,  that  it  concerned  his  dignity  and  his 
honour,  not  to  abandon  his  allies;  and  it  likewise  concerned 
the  safety  of  his  kingdom  not  to  leave  the  Romans  at  full 
leisure,  after  ruining  the  nation  of  the  Aiitolians,  to  carry  their 
whole  force  into  Asia.”  Their  remonstrances  were  well 
founded,  and  therefore  made  the  deeper  impression  on  the 
king;  in  consequence  of  which,  he  immediately  supplied  the 
ambassadors  with  the  money  requisite  for  the  exigences  of 
the  war,  and  assured  thenti  that  he  would  send  them  succours 
both  of  troops  and  ships.  He  kept  with  him  Thoas,  who  was 
not  unwilling  to  stay,  as  he  hoped  that  his  presence  might 
accelerate  the  performance  ot  the  king's  promises. 
XXVII.  But  the  loss  of  Heraclea  entirely  broke  the  spirits 
of  the  iEtolians;  insomuch,  that  within  a  few  days  after  they 
had  sent  ambassadors  into  Asia  for  the  purpose  of  renewing 
the  war,  and  inviting  the  king,  they  threw  aside  all  thoughts 
of  fighting,  and  despatched  deputies  to  the  consul  to  sue  for 
peace.  When  these  began  to  speak,  the  consul,  interrupting 
them,  said,  that  he  had  other  business  to  attend  to  at  pre¬ 
sent;  and,  ordering  them  to  return  to  Hypata,  granted  them 
a  truce  for  ten  days,  sending  with  them  Lucius  Valerius 
Flaccus,  to  whom,  he  desired,  whatever  business  they  in¬ 
tended  to  have  proposed  to  himself  might  be  communicated, 
with  any  other  that  they  thought  proper.  On  their  arrival 
at  Hypata,  the  chiefs  of  the  iEtoUans  held  a  consultation,  at 

102 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  56E 

which  Flaccus  was  present,  on  the  method  to  be  used  in 
treating  with  the  consul.  They  showed  an  inclination  to  be* 
gin  with  setting  forth  the  ancient  treaties,  and  the  services 
which  they  had  performed  to  the  Roman  people;  on  which 
Flaccus  desired  them  to  speak  no  more  of  treaties,  which 
they  themseh^es  had  violated  and  annulled.”  He  told  them, 
that  they  might  expect  more  advantage  from  an  acknow* 
ledgment  ol  their  fault,  and  submissive  entreaty.  For  their 
hopes  of  safety  rested  not  on  the  merits  of  their  cause,  but 
on  the  clemency  of  the  Roman  people.  That,  if  they  acted 
in  a  suppliant  manner,  he  would  himself  be  a  solicitor  in 
their  favour,  both  with  the  consul  and  with  the  senate  at  Rome; 
for  thither  also  they  must  send  ambassadors.”  This  appeared 
to  all  the  only  way  to  safety:  to  submit  themselves  entirely 
to  the  faith  of  the  Romans.  For,  in  that  case,  the  latter 
would  be  ashamed  to  do  injury  to  suppliants;  while  them¬ 
selves  would,  nevertheless,  retain  the  power  of  consulting 
their  own  interest,  should  fortune  offer  any  thing  more  ad¬ 
vantageous.” 
XXVIII.  When  they  came  into  the  consul’s  presence, 
Phoeneas,  who  was  at  the  head  of  .the  embassy,  made  a  long 
speech,  in  which  he  endeavoured,  by  a  variety  of  pathetic 
representations,  to  mitigate  the  wrath  of  the  conqueror;  and 
he  concluded  with  saying,  that  the  -£tolians  surrendered 
themselves,  and  all  belonging  to  them,  to  the  faith  of  the 
Roman  people.”  The  consul,  on  hearing  this,  said,  JEio- 
iians,  consider  well  whether  )*ou  will  yield  on  these  terms:” 
and  then  Phceneas  produced  the  decree,  in  which  the  condi¬ 
tions  were  expressly  mentioned.  “  Since  then,”  said  the  con¬ 
sul,  “  you  submit  in  this  manner,  I  demand  that,  without 
delay,  you  deliver  up  to  me  Dica^archus  your  country  man, 
Menetas  the  Epirot,”  who  had  with  an  armed  force,  entered 
Naupactum,  and  compelled  the  inhabitants  to  abandon  the 
cause  of  Rome,  and  also  Amynander,  with  the  Athama- 
nian  chiefs,  by  whose  advice  you  revolted  from  us.”  Pha?- 

BOOK  XXXVL 

B.  C.  191.1 

lo: 

neas,  scarcely  waiting  until  the  Roman  had  done  speaking, 
answered, — “  We  surrendered  ourselves,  not  into  slavery, 
but  to  your  faith;  and  I  take  it  for  granted,  that,  from  not 
being  sufficiently  acquainted  with  us,  you  fall  into  the  mis¬ 
take  of  commanding  what  is  inconsistent  with  the  practice 
of  the  Greeks.’’  Nor,  in  truth,”  replied  the  consul,  do  I 
much  concern  myself,  at  present,  what  the  iEtolians  may 
think  conformable  to  the  practice  of  the  Greeks;  while  I, 
conformably  to  the  practice  of  the  Romans,  exercise  authori¬ 
ty  over  men,  who  just  now  surrendered  themselves  by  a  de¬ 
cree  of  their  own,  and  were,  before  that,  conquered  by  my 
arms.  Wherefore,  unless  my  commands  are  quickly  com¬ 
plied  with,  I  order  that  you  be  put  in  chains!”  At  the  same 
time  he  ordered  chains  to  be  brought  forth,  and  the  lictors 
to  surround  the  ambassadors.  This  effectually  subdued  the 
arrogance  of  Phifineas,  and  the  other  i£tolians;  and,  at  length, 
they  became  sensible  of  their  situation.  Phaeneas  then  said, 
that  as  to  himself  and  his  countrymen  there  present,  they 
knew  that  his  commands  must  be  obeyed:  but  it  was  necessary 
that  a  council  of  the  iEtolians  should  meet,  to  pass  decrees 
accordingly;  and  that,  for  that  purpose,  he  requested  a  sus¬ 
pension  of  arms  for  ten  days.”  At  the  intercession  of  Flac- 
cus  this  was  granted,  and  the  iEtolians  returned  to  Hypata. 
When  Phaeneas  related  here,  in  the  select  council,  called 
Apocleti,  the  orders  which  they  had  received,  and  the  treat¬ 
ment  which  they  had  narrowly  escaped;  although  the  me¬ 
lancholy  condition  to  which  they  were  reduced,  drew  forth 
the  deepest  lamentations  from  the  members  present,  never¬ 
theless  they  were  of  opinion,  that  the  conqueror  must  be 
obeyed,  and  that  the  iEtolians  should  be  summoned,  from 
all  their  towns,  to  a  general  assembly. 
XXIX.  But  when  the  assembled  multitude  heard  the  same 
account,  they  were  so  highly  exasperated,  both  by  the  harsh¬ 
ness  of  the  order,  and  the  indignity  offered,  that,  even  if  they 
had  been  in  a  pacific  temper  before,  the  violent  impulse  of 

104 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  561. 

anger  which  they  then  felt,  would  have  been  sufficient  to 
rouse  them  to  war.  There  occurred,  beside,  the  difficulty 
of  executing  the  orders,  for,  how  was  it  possible  for  them, 
for  instance,  to  deliver  up  king  Amynander?”  It  happened 
also,  that  a  favourable  prospect  seemed  to  open  to  them;  for 
Nicander,  returning  from  king  Antiochus  at  that  juncture, 
filled  the  minds  of  the  people  with  unfounded  assurances, 
that  immense  preparations  for  war  were  going  on  both  by 
land  and  sea.  This  man,  after  finishing  the  business  of  bis 
embassy,  set  out  on  his  return  to  iEtoiia;  and,  on  the  twelfth 
day  after  he  embarked,  reached  Phalara,  on  the  Malian  bay. 
Having  conveyed  thence,  to  Lamia,  the  money  that  he  had 
brought,  he,  with  a  few  light  troops,  directed,  in  the  evening, 
his  course  towards  Hypata,  by  known  paths,  through  the 
country  which  lay  between  the  Roman  and  Macedonian 
camps.  Here  he  fell  in  with  an  advanced  guard  of  the  Ma» 
cedonians,  and  was  conducted  to  the  king,  who  had  not  yet 
risen  from  dinner.  Philip,  being  told  of  his  coming,  received 
him  as  a  guest,  not  an  enemy;  desired  him  to  take  a  seat, 
and  a  share  of  the  entertainment;  and  afterwards,  when  he 
dismissed  the  rest,  detained  him  alone,  and  told  him,  that 
he  had  nothing  to  fear  for  himself.  He  censured  severely 
the  conduct  of  the  iEtolians,  in  bringing,  first  the  Romans, 
and  afterwards  Antiochus,  into  Greece;  designs  which  ori¬ 
ginated  in  a  want  of  judgment,  and  always  fell  heavy  on 
their  own  heads.  But  he  would  forget,”  he  said,  all  past 
transactions,  which  it  was  easier  to  blame  than  to  amend;  nor 
would  he  act  in  such  a  manner  as  to  appear  to  insult  their 
misfortunes.  On  the  other  hand,  it  would  become  the  .^to* 
bans  to  lav  aside,  at  length,  their  animosity  towards  him; 
and  it  would  become  Nicander  himself,  in  his  private  capa¬ 
city,  to  remember  that  day,  on  which  he  was  to  be  indebted 
to  him  for  his  preservation.”  He  then  gave  him  an  escort  to 
a  place  of  safety;  and  Nicander  arrived  at  Hypata,  while  his 
countrymen  were  consultiug  about  the  peace  with  Rome. 

B.  C.  101.] 

BOOK  XXXVL 

105 

XXX.  Manias  Acilius  having  sold,  or  given  to  the  sol¬ 
diers,  the  booty  found  near  Heraclea,  and  having  learned  that 
the  councils  adopted  at  Hypata  were  not  of  a  pacific  nature, 
but  that  the  iEtolians  had  hastily  assembled  at  Nau pactum, 
with  intention  to  make  a  stand  there  against  all  their  adver¬ 
saries,  sent  forward  Appius  Claudius,  with  four  thousand 
men,  to  seize  the  tops  of  the  hills,  where  the  passes  were 
difficult;  and  he  himself,  ascending  mount  Oeta,  offered  sa¬ 
crifice  to  Hercules  in  the  spot  called  Pyra,*  because  there 
the  mortal  part  of  that  demi-god  was  burned.  He  then  set 
out  with  the  main  body  of  the  army,  and  marched  all  the 
rest  of  the  way  with  tolerable  ease  and  expedition.  But 
when  they  came  to  Corax,  a  very  high  mountain  between 
Callipolis  and  Naupactum,  great  numbers  of  the  beasts  of 
burden,  together  with  their  loads,  tumbled  down  the  preci¬ 
pices,  by  which  many  of  the  men  were  hurt.  This  clearly 
showed  an  extraordinary  degree  of  negligence  in  the  enemy, 
who  had  not  secured  the  pass  by  a  guard,  and  which  must 
have  greatly  incommoded  the  Romans;  for,  even  as  the  case 
was,  the  army  suffered  considerably.  Hence  he  marched 
down  to  Naupactum;  and  having  erected  a  fort  against  the 
citadel,  he  invested  the  other  parts  of  the  city,  dividing  his 
forces  according  to  the  situation  of  the  walls.  Nor  was  this 
siege  likely  to  prove  less  difficult  and  laborious  than  that  of 
Heraclea. 
XXXI.  At  the  same  time,  the  Achseans  laid  siege  to  Mes- 
sene,  in  Peloponnesus,  because  it  refused  to  become  a  mem- 
ber  of  their  body;  for  the  two  states  of  Mcssene  and  Elis 
were  unconnected  with  the  Achaean  confederacy,  and  favour¬ 
ed  the  designs  of  the  iEtolians.  However  the  Eleans,  after 
Antiochus  had  been  driven  out  of  Greece,  answered  the  de¬ 
puties,  sent  by  the  Achaeans,  with  more  moderation;  that 
when  the  king’s  troops  were  removed,  they  would  consider 
^  The  funeral  pile. 
VOL.  V.— P 

106 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  561. 

what  part  they  should  take.”  But  the  Messenians  had  dis¬ 
missed  the  deputies  without  an  answer,  and  prepared  for 
war.  Alarmed,  afterwards,  at  the  danger  of  their  situation, 
when  they  saw  the  enemv  ravaging  their  country  without 
control,  and  pitching  their  camp  almost  at  their  gates,  they 
sent  deputies  to  Chalcis,  to  Titus  Q^uintius,  the  author  of 
their  liberty,  to  acquaint  him,  that  the  Messenians  were 
w  illing,  both  to  open  their  gates,  and  surrender  their  city  to 
the  Homans,  but  not  to  the  Ach^ans.”  On  hearing  this, 
Quintius  immediately  set  out,  and  despatched  from  Megalo- 
polls  a  messenger  to  Diophanes,  praetor  of  the  Achseans,  re¬ 
quiring  him  to  draw  off  his  army  instantly  from  Messene, 
and  to  come  to  him*  Diophanes  obeyed  the  order;  raising  the 
siege,  he  hastened  forward  himself  before  the  army  and  met 
Quintius  near  Andania,  a  small  town  between  Megalopolis 
and  Messene.  When  he  began  to  explain  the  reasons  for 
commencing  the  siege,  Quintius,  gently  reproving  him  for 
undertaking  a  business  of  that  importance  without  consulting 
him,  ordered  him  to  disband  his  forces,  and  not  to  disturb  a 
peace  which  had  been  established  on  terms  highly  beneficial 
to  all.  He  commanded  the  Messenians  to  recal  the  exiles- 
and  to  unite  themselves  to  the  confederacy  of  the  Achaeans; 
and  if  there  were  any  particulars  to  which  they  chose  to  ob¬ 
ject,  or  any  precautions  judged  requisite  against  future  contin¬ 
gencies,  the}  might  apply  to  him  at  Corinth.  He  then  gave 
directions  to  Diophanes,  to  convene  immediately  a  general 
council  of  the  Achaeans,  that  he  might  settle  some  business 
with  them. 
XXXII,  In  this  assembly,  he  complained  of  their  having 
acquired  possession  of  the  Island  of  Zacynthus  by  unfair 
means,  and  demanded  that  it  should  be  restored  to  the  Ro¬ 
mans.  Zacynthus  had  formerly  belonged  to  Philip,  king  of 
Macedonia,  and  he  had  made  it  over  to  Amynander,  in  re¬ 
quital  of  his  having  given  him  leave  to  march  an  army.. 

C.  191.] 

BOOK  xxxvr. 

107 

through  Athamania,  into  the  upper  part  of  Altolia,  on  that 
expedition  wherein  he  reduced  the  iEtolians  to  despair,  and 
compelled  them  to  sue  for  peace.  Amynander  gave  the  go¬ 
vernment  of  the  island  to  Philip,  the  IVIegalopolitan:  and  af¬ 
terwards,  during  the  war  in  which  he  acted  in  conjunction 
with  Antiochus  against  the  Romans,  having  called  out  Philip 
to  a  command  in  the  field,  he  sent  as  his  successor,  Hiero- 
cles,  of  Agrigentum.  This  man,  after  the  defeat  of  Antio¬ 
chus  at  Thermopylae,  and  the  expulsion  of  Amynander  from 
Athamania  by  Philip,  sent  emissaries  of  his  own  accord  to 
Diophanes,  prator  of  the  Achseans;  and  having  bargained 
for  a  sum  money,  put  the  Acha^ans  in  possession  of  the  isl¬ 
and.  This  acquisition,  made  during  the  w^ar,  the  Romans 
claimed  as  their  own;  for  thev  said,  that  it  was  not  for 
Diophanes  and  the  Achteans,  that  the  consul  Manias  Acilius, 
and  the  Roman  legions,  fought  at  Thennojjylas.''’  Diophanes, 
in  answer,  sometimes  apologized  for  himself  and  his  nation; 
sometimes  insisted  on  the  justice  of  the  proceeding.  But 
several  of  the  Achaeans  testified  that  they  had,  from  the  be¬ 
ginning,  disapproved  of  that  business,  and  they  now'  blamed 
the  obstinacy  of  the  praetor.  Pursuant  to  their  advice,  a  de¬ 
cree  was  made,  that  the  affair  should  be  left  entirely  to  the 
disposal  of  Titus  Quintius.  As  Quintius  was  severe  to  such 
as  made  opposition,  so,  when  complied  with,  he  was  easily 
appeased.  Laying  aside,  therefore,  every  thing  stern  in  his 
voice  and  looks,  he  said, — ‘‘  If,  Achaeans,  I  thought  the  pos¬ 
session  of  that  island  advantageous  to  you,  I  w'ould  be  the 
first  to  advise  the  senate  and  people  of  Rome  to  leave  it  in 
vour  hands.  But  as  I  see  that  a  tortoise,  when  collected 
within  its  natural  covering,  is  safe  against  blows  of  any  kind, 
and  whenever  it  thrusts  out  any  of  its  members,  it  feels  what¬ 
ever  it  has  thus  uncovered,  weak  and  liable  to  every  injury, 
so  vou,  Achaeans,  being  inclosed  on  all  sides  by  the  sea,  can 
easily  unite  among  yourselves,  and  maintain  by  that  union  all 
that  is  comprehended  within  the  limits  of  Peloponnesus;  but 

108 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  561. 
whenever,  through  ambition  of  enlarging  your  possessions, 
you  overstep  these  limits,  then  all  that  you  hold  beyond  them 
is  naked,  and  exposed  to  every  attack.”  The  whole  assem¬ 
bly  declaring  their  assent,  and  Diophanes  not  daring  to  give 
farther  opposition,  Zacynthus  was  ceded  to  the  Romans. 
XXXI 11.  When  the  consul  was  on  his  march  to  Naupac- 
tum,  king  Philip  proposed,  that  if  it  was  agreeable  to  him, 
he  would,  in  the  mean  time,  retake  those  cities  that  had  re¬ 
volted  from  their  alliance  with  Rome.  Having  obtained  per¬ 
mission  so  to  do,  he,  about  this  time,  marched  his  army  to 
Demetrias,  where  he  knew  that  great  distraction  prevailed: 
for  the  garrison,  being  destitute  of  all  hope  of  succour  since 
they  were  abandoned  by  Antiochus,  and  having  no  reliance 
on  the  iEtolians,  daily  and  nightly  expected  the  arrival  of 
Philip  or  the  Homans,  whom  they  had  most  reason  to  dread, 
as  these  were  more  justly  incensed  against  them.  There 
was,  in  the  place,  an  irregular  multitude  of  the  king’s  sol¬ 
diers,  a  few  of  whom  had  been  at  first  stationed  there  as  a 
garrison,  but  the  greater  part  had  fled  thither  after  the  de¬ 
feat  of  his  army,  most  of  them  without  arms,  and  without 
either  strength  or  courage  sufficient  to  sustain  a  siege. 
Wherefore,  on  Philip's  sending  on  messengers,  to  offer  them 
hopes  of  favourable  terms,  they  answered,  that  their  gates 
were  open  for  the  king.  On  his  first  entrance,  several  of  the 
chiefs  left  the  city;  Eurvlochus  killed  himself.  The  soldiers 
of  Antiochus,  in  conformity  to  a  stipulation,  were  escorted, 
through  Macedonia  and  Thrace,  by  a  body  of  Macedonians, 
and  conducted  to  Lysimachia.  There  were,  also,  a  few  ships 
at  Demetrias,  under  the  command  of  Isidorus,  which,  to¬ 
gether  with  their  commander,  were  dismissed.  Philip  then 
reduced  Dolopia,  Aperantia,  and  several  cities  of  Perrhsebia. 
XXXIV.  While  Philip  was  thus  employed,  Titus  Quin- 
tius,  after  receiving  from  the  Achaean  council  the  cession  of 
Zacynthus,  crossed  over  to  Naupactum,  which  had  stood  a 
siege  of  near  two  months,  but  was  now  reduced  to  a  despe- 

BOOK  XXXVL 

109 

B.  C.  191.] 
rate  condition:  and  it  was  supposed,  that  if  it  should  be  ta¬ 
ken  by  storm,  the  whole  nation  of  the  iEtolians  would  be 
sunk  thereby  in  utter  destruction.  But,  although  he  had 
good  reason  to  be  angry  with  the  ^tolians,  from  the  recol¬ 
lection,  that  they  alone  had  attempted  to  depreciate  his  me¬ 
rits,  when  he  was  giving  liberty  to  Greece;  and  had  refused 
to  pay  any  regard  to  his  advice,  when  he  endeavoured,  by 
forewarning  them  of  the  events  which  had  since  occurred,  to 
deter  them  from  their  mad  undertaking:  nevertheless,  think¬ 
ing  it  particularly  incumbent  on  him,  who  had  asserted  the 
freedom  of  the  country,  to  prevent  any  of  its  states  from 
being  entirely  subverted,  he  first  walked  about  near  the  walls, 
that  he  might  be  easily  known  by  the  J^tolians,  He  was 
quickly  distinguished  by  the  first  advanced  guards,  and  the 
news  spread  from  rank  to  rank,  that  Quintius  was  there.  On 
this,  the  people  from  all  sides  ran  to  the  walls,  and  eagerly 
stretching  out  their  hands,  all  in  one  joint  cry,  besought 
Quintius,  by  name,  to  assist  and  sa\e  them.  Although  he 
was  much  affected  by  these  entreaties,  yet  for  that  time  he 
made  signs  with  his  hand,  that  they  were  to  expect  no  as¬ 
sistance  from  him.  However,  when  he  met  the  consul,  he 
accosted  him  thus: — *’*  ^lanius  Acilius,  are  you  unapprised 
of  what  is  passing;  or  do  you  know  it,  and  think  it  immate¬ 
rial  to  the  interest  of  the  commonw^ealth?’’  These  words  rais¬ 
ing  the  consurs  curiosity,  he  requested  him  to  explain  what 
he  meant,  Quintius  then  said, — Do  you  not  see  that,  since 
the  defeat  of  Antiochus,  you  have  been  wasting  time  in  be¬ 
sieging  two  cities,  though  the  year  of  your  command  is 
near  expiring;  but  that  Philip,  who  never  faced  the  enemy, 
or  even  saw^  their  standards,  has  annexed  to  his  dominions 
such  a  number,  not  only  of  cities,  but  of  nations, — Athama- 
nia,  Perrhaebia,  Aperantia,  Dolopia?  But,  surely,  we  are  not 
so  deeply  interested  in  diminishing  the  strength  and  resour¬ 
ces  of  the  iEtolians,  as  in  hindering  those  of  Philip  from  be- 
ing  augmented  beyond  measure;  and  in  you,  and  your  sob 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

110 

[Y.  R.  561. 

diers,  not  having  yet  gained,  to  reward  your  victory,  as  many 
towns  as  Philip  has  gained  Grecian  states.” 
XXXV.  The  consul  assented  to  the  justness  of  his  re¬ 
marks,  but  was  ashamed  to  let  himself  be  foiled  in  his  at¬ 
tempt,  and  to  raise  the  siege.  At  length,  the  matter  was  left 
entirely  to  the  management  of  Quintius.  He  went  again  to 
that  part  of  the  wall,  whence  the  iEtohans  had  called  to  him 
a  little  before,  and  on  tbei)-  entreating  him  now,  with  still 
greater  earnestness,  to  take  compassion  on  the  nation  of  the 
/Ktoiians,  he  desired  that  some  of  them  might  come  out  to 
him.  Accordingly,  Pha?neas  himself,  with  some  others  of 
the  principal  men,  instantly  came,  and  threw  themselves  at 
his  feet.  He  then  said, — Your  condition  causes  me  to  re¬ 
strain  my  resentment  and  my  reproofs.  The  events  which  I 
foretold,  have  come  to  pass,  and  you  have  not  even  so  much 
consolation  left,  as  the  reflection,  that  you  have  not  deserved 
what  has  fallen  upon  you.  Nevertheless,  since  fate  has,  in 
some  manner,  destined  me  to  the  office  of  cherishing  the  in¬ 
terests  of  Greece,  I  will  not  cease  to  show  kindness,  even  to 
the  unthankful.  Send  a  suppliant  embassy  to  the  consul, 
and  let  them  petition  liiiii  for  a  suspension  of  hostilities,  for 
so  long  a  time  as  will  allow  you  to  send  ambassadors  to 
Rome,  to  surrender  \  ourselves  to  the  will  of  the  senate.  I 
will  intercede,  and  plead  in  your  favour  with  the  consul.” 
They  did  as  Quintius  directed;  nor  did  the  consul  reject 
their  application.  He  granted  them  a  truce  for  a  certain 
time,  until  an  account  might  be  brought  from  Rome  of  the 
result  of  their  embassy;  and  then,  raising  the  siege,  he  sent 
his  army  into  Phocis.  The  consul,  with  Titus  Quintius, 
crossed  over  thence  to  .Egium,  to  confer  with  the  council  of 
the  Achieans,  wdiere  the  business  of  the  Eleans  was  in¬ 
troduced,  and  also  a  proposal  of  restoring  the  Lacedaemonian 
exiles.  But  neither  was  carried  into  execution,  because  the 
Achseans  chose  to  reserve  to  themselves  the  merit  of  effect- 

BOOK  XXXVI. 

in 

B.  C.19KJ 

ing  the  latter;  and  the  Eleans  preferred  being  united  to  the 
Achaean  confederacy  by  a  voluntary  act  of  their  own,  rather 
than  through  the  mediation  of  the  Romans.  Ambassadors 
came  hither  to  the  consul  from  the  Epirots,  who,  it  was  well 
known,  had  not  fulfilled  with  sincerity  the  engagements  to 
which  they  were  bound  by  the  treaty  of  alliance.  Although 
they  had  not  furnished  Antiochus  with  any  soldiers,  yet  they 
were  charged  with  having  assisted  him  with  money;  and  they 
did  not  disavow  the  having  sent  ambassadors  to  him.  They 
requested  that  they  might  be  permitted  to  continue  on  the 
former  footing  of  friendship.  To  which  the  consul  answered, 
that  “  he  did  not  yet  know  whether  he  was  to  consider  them 
as  friends  or  foes.  The  senate  must  be  the  judge  of  that 
matter.  He  would  therefore  take  no  step  in  the  business,  but 
leave  it  to  be  determined  at  Rome;  and  for  that  purpose  he 
granted  them  a  truce  of  ninety  days.’'  When  the  Epirots, 
who  were  sent  to  Rome,  addressed  the  senate,  they  rather 
enumerated  hostile  acts  which  they  had  not  committed,  than 
cleared  themselves  of  those  laid  to  their  charge;  and  they  re¬ 
ceived  an  answer  of  such  a  kind,  as  showed  that  they  had  ra¬ 
ther  obtained  pardon  than  proved  their  innocence.  About 
the  same  time  ambassadors  from  king  Philip  were  intro¬ 
duced  to  the  senate,  and  presented  his  congratulations  on 
their  late  successes.  They  asked  leave  to  sacrifice  in  the  ca- 
pitol,  and  to  deposit  an  offering  of  gold  in  the  temple  of  Ju¬ 
piter  supremely  good  and  great.  This  was  granted  bv  the  se¬ 
nate,  and  they  presented  a  golden  crown  of  an  hundred 
pounds  weight.  The  senate  not  only  answered  the  ambassa¬ 
dors  with  kindness,  but  gave  them  Demetrius,  Philip's  son, 
who  was  at  Rome  as  an  hostage,  to  be  conducted  home  to 
his  father. — Such  \vas  the  conclusion  of  the  w  ar  waged  in 
Greece  by  the  consul  Manius  Acilius  against  Antiochus. 
XXX V^I.  The  other  consul,  Pubhus  Cornelius  Scipio,  to 
whose  lot  the  province  of  Gaul  had  iailen,  before  he  set  out 
to  take  the  field  against  the  Boians,  demanded  of  the  senate, 

112 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  561. 

by  a  decree,  to  order  him  money  for  the  exhibition  of  games 
which,  when  acting  as  propraetor  in  Spain,  he  had  vowed  at 
a  critical  time  of  a  battle.  His  demand  was  deemed  un¬ 
precedented  and  unreasonable,  and  they  therefore  voted, 
that  whatever  games  he  had  vowed,  on  his  own  single 
judgment,  without  consulting  the  senate,  he  should  cele¬ 
brate  out  of  the  spoils,  if  he  had  reserved  any  for  the  pur¬ 
pose;  otherwise,  at  his  own  expense.”  Accordingly,  Pub¬ 
lius  Cornelius  exhibited  those  games  through  the  space  of 
ten  days.  About  this  time,  the  temple  of  the  great  Idsean 
Mother  was  dedicated;  which  deity,  on  her  being  brought 
from  Asia,  in  the  consulate  of  Publius  Cornelius  Scipio, 
afterwards  surnamed  Africanus,  and  Publius  Licinius,  the 
above-mentioned  Publius  Cornelius  had  conducted  from  the 
sea-side  to  the  Palatine.  In  pursuance  of  a  decree  of  the 
senate,  Marcus  Liv  ius  and  Caius  Claudius,  censors,  in  the 
consulate  of  Marcus  Cornelius  and  Publius  Sempronius,  had 
contracted  w'ith  builders  to  erect  the  goddess’s  temple;  and, 
thirteen  years  after  that,  it  was  dedicated  by  Marcus  Junius 
Brutus,  and  games  were  celebrated  on  occasion  of  its  dedi¬ 
cation:  in  which,  according  to  the  account  of  Valerius  Anti- 
as,  dramatic  entertainments  were,  for  the  first  time,  intro¬ 
duced  into  the  Megalesian  games.  Likewise,  Caius  Licini 
us  Lucullus,  being  appointed  duumvir,  dedicated  the  tern 
pie  of  Youth  in  the  great  Circus.  This  temple  had  been 
vowed  sixteen  years  before  by  Marcus  Livius,  consul,  on  the 
day  whereon  he  cut  off  Hasdrubal  and  his  army;  and  the 
same  person,  when  censor,  in  the  consulate  of  Marcus  Cor¬ 
nelius  and  Publius  Sempronius,  had  contracted  for  the 
building  of  it.  Games  were  also  exhibited  on  occasion  of 
this  consecration,  and  every  thing  was  performed  with  the 
greater  degree  of  religious  zeal,  on  account  of  the  impend¬ 
ing  war  with  Antiochus. 
XXXVII.  At  the  beginning  of  the  year  in  which  those 
transactions  passed,  after  Manius  Acilius  had  gone  to  open 

BOOK  3KXVI. 

115 

B.  C.  101.] 

the  campaign,  and  while  the  other  i^nsuL,  Pid>}uis  Corneli¬ 
us,  yet  remained  in  Rome,  two  tanie  oxen,  it  is  said,  climb’ 
ed  up  by  ladders  on  the  tiles  of  a  house  in  the  Carina*  The 
haruspices  ordered  diem  to  be  burned  alive,  and  their*  ashes 
to  be  thrown  into  the  Tiber,  It  was  reported,  that  several 
showers  of  stones  had  fallen  at  Tarracina  and  Amiternum; 
that,  at  Minturnae,  the  temple  of  Jupiter,  and  the  shops 
round  the  Forum,  were  struck  by  lightning;  that,  at  Vul- 
turnum,  in  the  mouth  of  the  river,  two  ships  were  struck  by 
lightning,  and  burnt  to  ashes.  On  occasion  of  these  prodi¬ 
gies,  the  decemvirs,  being  ordered  by  a  decree  of  the  senate 
to  consult  the  Sibylline  books,  declared,  that  a  fast  ought 
to  be  instituted  in  honour  of  Ceres,  -  and  the  same  observed 
every  fifth  year;  that  the  nine  days’  worship  ought  to  be 
solemnized,  and  a  supplication  for  one  day;  and  that,  when 
employed  in  the  supplication,  the  people  should  wear  g^- 
lands  on  their  heads;  also,  that  the  consul  Publius  Cornelius 
should  sacrifice  to  such  deities,  and  with  such  victims,  as  the 
decemvirs  should  direct*”  When  he  had  used  every  means 
to  4|vert  the  wrath  of  the  gods,  by  duly  fulfilling  vows,  and 
expiating  prodigies,  the  consul  went  to  his  province;  and, 
ordering  the  proconsul  Cneius  Domitius  to  disband  his  army, 
and  go  home  to  Home,  he  marched  his  own  legions  into  the 
territory  of  the  Boians. 
XXXVI I L  Nearly  at  the  same  time,  the  Ligurians,  hav¬ 
ing  collected  an  army  under  the  sanction  of  their  devoting 
law,  made  an  unexpected  attack,  in  the  night,  on  the  camp  of 
the  proconsul  Quintus  Minucius.  Minucius  kept  his  troops, 
until  daylight,  drawn  up  within  the  rampait,  and  watch¬ 
ful  to  prevent  the  enemy  from  scaling  any  part  of  the  fortifi- 
catiot^.  At  the  first  light,  he  made  a  sally  by  two  gates  at 
once:  but  the  Ligurians  did  not,  as  he  had  expected,  give 
way  to  his  first  onset;  on  the  contrary,  they  maintained  a 
dubious  contest  for  more  than  two  hours.  At  last,  as  sup¬ 
plies  of  troops  continu^ly  came  out  from  the  camp,  and 
VOL.  V. — Q 

114, 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  561, 

fresh  men  took  the  places  of  those  who  were  wearied  in  the 
fight,  the  Ligurians,  who  besides  other  hardships,  felt  a 
great  loss  of  strength  from  the  want  of  sleep,  after  a  severe 
struggle  betook  themselves  to  flight.  Above  four  thousand 
of  the  enemy  were  killed;  the  Romans  and  allies  lost  not 
quite  three  hundred.  About  two  months  after  this,  the  con¬ 
sul  Publius  Cornelius  fought  a  pitched  battle  with  the  army 
of  the  Boians  with  extraordinary  success,  Valerius  Antias 
affirms,  that  twenty-eight  thousand  of  the  enemy  were  slain, 
and  three  thousand  four  hundred  taken,  with  an  hundred 
and  twenty -four  military  standards,  one  thousand  two  hun¬ 
dred  and  thirty  horses,  and  two  hundred  and  forty  seven 
wagons;  and  that  of  the  conquerors,  there  fell  one  thousand 
four  hundred  and  eighty-four.  Though  we  may  not  entire¬ 
ly  credit  this  writer  with  respect  to  the  numbers,  as  he  al¬ 
ways  exaggerates  most  extravagantly,  yet  it  is  certain  that 
the  victory  on  this  occasion  was  very  complete;  because  the 
enemy’s  camp  was  taken,  while  immediately  after  the  battle, 
the  Boians  surrendered  themselves;  and  because  a  supplica¬ 
tion  was  decreed  by  the  senate  on  account  of  it,  and  victims 
of  the  greater  kinds  were  sacrificed, 
XXXIX.  The  consul  Publius  Cornelius,  having  received 
hostages  from  the  Boians,  punished  them  so  far  as  to  appro¬ 
priate  almost  one  half  of  their  lands  for  the  use  of  the  Ro¬ 
man  people,  and  into  which  they  might  afterwards,  if  they 
chose,  send  colonies.  Then,  returning  home  in  full  confi¬ 
dence  of  a  triumph,  he  dismissed  his  troops,  and  ordered 
them  to  attend  on  the  day  of  his  rejoicing  at  Rome,  The 
next  day  after  his  arrival,  he  held  a  meeting  of  the  senate, 
in  the  temple  of  Bellona;  and,  after  recounting  his  services, 
demanded  permission  to  ride  through  the  city  in  triumph. 
Publius  Sempronius  Blsesus,  tribune  of  the  people,  advised^ 
that  the  honour  of  a  triumph  should  not  be  refused  to  Sci- 
pio,  but  postponed.  Wars  of  the  Ligurians,”  he  said,  were 
always  united  with  wars  of  the  Gauls;  for  these  nations  ly. 

BOOK  XXXVI. 

115 

B.  C.  J91.] 

ing  so  near,  sent  mutual  assistance  to  each  other.  If  Pub¬ 
lius  Scipio,  after  subduing  the  Boians  in  battle,  had  either 
gone  himself,  with  his  victorious  army,  into  the  country  of  the 
Ligurians,  or  sent  a  part  of  his  forces  to  Quintus  Minucius, 
who  was  detained  there,  now  the  third  year,  by  a  war,  of 
which  the  issue  was  still  uncertain,  that  with  the  Ligurians 
tnight  have  been  brought  to  an  end;  instead  of  which,  he 
had,  in  order  to  procure  a  full  attendance  on  his  triumph, 
brought  home  the  troops,  who  might  have  performed  most 
material  services  to  the  state;  and  might  do  so  still,  if  the 
senate  thought  proper,  by  deferring  this  token  of  victory,  to 
redeem  the  omission  occasioned  by  haste  to  obtain  distinc¬ 
tion.  If  they  would  order  the  consul  to  return  with  his  le" 
gions  into  his  province,  and  to  give  his  assistance  towards 
subduing  the  Ligurians,  (for,  unless  these  were  reduced  un¬ 
der  the  dominion  and  jurisdiction  of  the  Roman  people, 
neither  would  the  Boians  ever  remain  quiet,)  there  must  be 
either  peace  or  war  with  both.  When  the  Ligurians  should 
be  subdued,  Publius  Cornelius,  in  quality  of  proconsul, 
might  triumph,  a  few  months  later,  as  had  been  the  case  of 
many,  who  did  not  attain  that  honour  until  the  expiration  of 
their  office.” 
XL.  To  this  the  consul  answered,  that  ‘‘•neither  had  the 
province  of  Liguria  fallen  to  his  lot,  nor  had  he  waged  war 
with  the  Ligurians,  nor  did  he  demand  a  triumph  over  them. 
He  confidently  hoped,  that  in  a  short  time,  Quintus  Minu- 
cius,  after  completing  their  reduction,  would  demand  and 
obtain  a  well  deserved  triumph.  For  his  part,  he  demanded 
that  note  of  celebrity  from  having  vanquished  the  Boian 
Gauls,  whom  he  had  driven  out  of  their  camp;  of  whose 
whole  nation  he  had  received  an  absolute  submission  within 
two  days  after  the  fight;  and  from  whom  he  had  brought 
home  hostages  to  secure  peace  in  future.  But  there  was 
another  circumstance,  of  much  greater  magnitude:  he  had 
slain  in  battle  so  great  a  number  of  Gauls,  that  no  command- 

116 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  561. 

cr,  before  him,  could  say  that  he  ever  met  m  the  field  so 
many  thousands,  at  least  of  the  Boians.  Out  of  fifty  thou¬ 
sand  men,  more  than  one  half  were  killed;  and  many  thou¬ 
sands  made  prisoners;  so  that  the  Boians  had  now  remain¬ 
ing  only  old  men  and  boys.  Could  it,  then,  be  a  matter  oi 
surprise  to  any  one,  that  a  victorious  army,  which  had  not 
left  one  enemy  in  the  province,  should  come  to  Rome  td 
attend  the  triumph  of  their  consul?  And  if  the  senate  should 
choose  to  employ  the  services  of  these  troops  in  another 
province  also, — of  the  two  kinds  of  treatment,  which,  could 
it  be  supposed,  would  make  them  enter  on  a  new  course  of 
danger  and  fatigue  with  the  greater  alacrity;  the  paying 
them  the  reward  of  their  former  toils  and  dangers  without 
defalcation;  or,  the  sending  them  away,  with  the  shadow  in¬ 
stead  of  the  substance,  after  their  fil*st  hopes  had  terminated 
in  disappointment?  As  to  what  concerned  himself  personally, 
he  had  acquired  a  stock  of  glory  sufficient  for  his  whole  life, 
on  that  day,  when  the  senate  adjudged  him  to  be  the  best 
man  in  the  state,  and  commissioned  him  to  give  a  reception 
to  the  Idaean  Mother.  With  this  inscription,  (though  nei¬ 
ther  consulship  nor  triumph  were  added,)  the  statue  of  Pub¬ 
lius  Scipio  Nasica  would  he  sufficiently  honoured  and  digni¬ 
fied.’'  The  senate  not  only  gave  their  unanimous  vote  for 
the  solicited  honour,  but  by  their  influence  prevailed  on  the 
tribune  to  desist  from  his  intention  of  protesting  against 
it.  Publius  Cornelius,  consul,  triumphed  over  the  Boians* 
In  this  procession  he  carried,  on  Gallic  wagons,  arms, 
standards,  and  spoils  of  all  sorts;  the  brazen  utensils  of  the 
Gauls;  and,  together  with  the  prisoners  of  distinction,  he 
led  a  train  of  captured  horses.  He  deposited  in  the  treasury 
a  thousand  four  hundred  and  seventy  golden  chains;  and 
besides  these,  two  hundred  and  forty-five  pounds  weight  of 
gold;  two  thousand  three  hundred  and  forty  pounds  weight 
ol  silver,  some  unwrought,  and  some  formed  in  vessels  oi 
the  Gallic  fashion,  not  without  beauty;  and  two  hundred  and 

BOOK  XXXVI, 

117 

thirty-three  thousand  denariuses*’^  To  the  soldiers^  who 
followed  his  chariot,  he  distributed  three  hundred  and  twen¬ 
ty-five  each,  double  to  a  centurion,  triple  to  a  horse¬ 
man.  Next  day,  he  summoned  an  assembly,  and  after  ex¬ 
patiating  on  his  own  services  and  the  ill-treatment  shown 
him  by  the  tribune,  who  wanted  to  entangle  him  in  a  war 
which  did  not  belong  to  him,  in  order  to  defraud  him  of  the 
fruits  of  his  success,  he  absolved  the  soldiers  of  their  oath, 
and  discharged  them. 
XLI.  While  this  passed  in  Italv,  Antiochuswas  at  Ephe¬ 
sus,  devested  of  all  concern  respecting  the  war  with  Rome,  as 
supposing  that  the  Romans  had  no  intention  of  coming  into 
Asia;  into  which  state  of  security  he  was  lulled  by  the  erro¬ 
neous  opinions  or  the  flattering  representations  of  the  great¬ 
er  part  of  his  friends.  Hannibal  alone,  whose  judgment  was, 
at  that  time,  the  most  highly  respected  by  the  king,  declar¬ 
ed,  that  he  rather  wondered  the  Romans  were  not  already 
in  Asia,  than  entertained  a  doubt  of  their  coming.  The  pas¬ 
sage  was  easier  from  Greece  to  Asia,  than  from  Italy  to 
Greece,  and  Antiochuswas  a  much  more  inviting  object  than 
the  iEtolians.  Tor  the  Homan  wars  were  not  less  powerful 
on  sea,  than  on  land.  Their  fleet  had  long  been  at  Malea, 
and  he  had  heard  that  a  reinforcement  of  ships  and  a  new 
commander  had  lately  come  from  Italy,  with  intent  to  enter 
on  action.  He  therefore  advised  Antiochus  not  to  form  to 
himself  vain  hopes  of  peace.  He  must  necessarily  in  a  short 
time  maintain  a  contest  with  the  Romans  both  by  sea  and 
land;  in  Asia,  and  for  Asia  itself;  and  must  either  wrest  the 
power  out  of  hands  that  grasped  at  the  empire  of  the  world, 
or  lose  his  own  dominions.”  Hannibal  seemed  to  be  the  only 
person  who  had  judgment  to  foresee,  and  sincerity  to  foretel, 
wTiat  was  to  happen,  I'he  king,  therefore,  with  the  ships  which 
were  in  readiness,  sailed  to  the  Chersonesus,  in  order  to  se- 

7.5231.  16*. 

I  1/.  4^.  ^  1-2 

118 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  56E 

cure  the  places  there  with  garrisons^  lest  the  Romans  should 
happen  to  come  by  land.  He  left  orders  with  Polyxenidas  to 
fit  out  the  rest  of  the  fleet,  and  put  to  sea;  and  sent  out  ad¬ 
vice-boats  among  the  islands  to  procure  intelligence  of  every 
thing  that  was  passing. 
XL II.  When  Caius  Livius,  commander  of  the  Roman  fleet, 
sailed  with  fifty  decked  ships  from  Rome,  he  went  to  Nea-r 
polis,  where  he  had  appointed  the  rendezvous  of  the  undeck¬ 
ed  ships,  which  were  due  by  treaty  from  the  allies  on  that 
coast;  and  thence  he  proceeded  to  Sicily,  where,  as  he  sailed 
through  the  streight  beyond  Messana,  he  was  joined  by  six 
Carthaginian  ships,  sent  to  his  assistance;  and  then,  having 
collected  the  vessels  due  from  the  Rhegians,  Locrians,  and 
other  allies,  who  were  bound  by  the  same  conditions,  he  pu¬ 
rified  the  fleet  at  Lacinium,  and  put  forth  into  the  open  sea. 
On  his  arrival  at  Corcyra,  which  was  the  first  Grecian  coun¬ 
try  where  he  touched,  inquiring  about  the  state  of  the  war, 
(for  the  commotions  in  Greece  were  not  yet  entirely  com¬ 
posed,)  and  about  the  Roman  fleet,  he  was  told,  that  the 
consul  and  the  king  were  posted  at  the  pass  of  Thermopylae, 
and  that  the  fleet  lay  at  Pyraeeus;  on  which,  judging  expedi¬ 
tion  necessary  on  every  account,  he  sailed  directly  forward 
to  Peloponnesus.  Having  on  his  passage  ravaged  Samos  and 
Zacynihus,  because  they  favoured  the  party  of  the  ^tolians, 
he  bent  his  course  to  Malea;  and,  meeting  very  favourable 
weather,  arrived  in  a  few  days  at  Pyrseeus,  where  he  joined 
the  old  fleet.  At  Scyilaeum  he  w^as  met  by  king  Eumenes, 
with  three  ships,  who  had  long  hesitated  at  .digina  whethei 
he  should  go  home  to  defend  his  own  kingdom,  on  hearing 
that  Antiochus  was  preparing  both  marine  and  land  forces 
at  Ephesus;  or  whether  he  should  unite  himself  inseparably 
to  the  Romans,  on  whose  destiny  his  own  depended.  A  ulus 
Atilius,  having  delivered  to  his  successor  twenty-five  decked 
ships,  left  Pyrateus,  and  sailed  for  Rome.  Livius,  with 
eighty-one  beaked  ships,  beside  many  others  of  inferior  rates. 

BOOK  XXXVL 

119 

B.  C.  191.] 

some  of  which  were  open  and  furnished  with  beaks,  others 
without  beaks,  fit  for  advice  boats,  crossed  over  to  Delos. 
XLIIl.  At  this  time,  the  consul  Acilius  was  engaged  in 
the  siege  of  Naupactum*  Livius  was  detained  several  days 
at  Delos  by  contrary  winds,  for  that  tract  among  the  Cy¬ 
clades,  which  are  separated  in  some  places  by  larger  streights, 
in  others  by  smaller,  is  remarkably  subject  to  storms.  Polyx« 
enidas,  receiving  intelligence  from  his  scout-ships,  which  he 
had  stationed  in  various  places,  that  the  Roman  fleet  lay  at 
Delos,  sent  off  an  express  to  the  king,  who,  quitting  the  bu¬ 
siness  in  which  he  was  employed  in  Hellespontus,  and  taking 
with  him  all  the  ships  of  war,  returned  to  Ephesus  with  all 
possible  speed,  and  instantly  called  a  council,  to  determine 
whether  he  should  risk  an  engagement  at  sea.  Polyxenidas 
affirmed,  that  “  it  was  particularly  requisite  so  to  do,  before 
the  fleet  of  Eumenes  and  the  Rhodian  ships  should  join  the 
Romans;  in  w’hich  case,  even,  they  would  scarcely  be  infe¬ 
rior  in  number,  and  in  every  other  particular  would  have  a 
great  superiority,  by  reason  of  the  agility  of  their  vessels, 
and  a  variety  of  favourable  circumstances.  For  the  Roman 
ships,  being  unskilfully  constructed,  were  slow  in  their  mo¬ 
tions,  and,  besides  that,  as  they  were  coming  to  an  enemv’s 
coast,  they  would  be  heavily  laden  with  provisions;  whereas 
their  own,  leaving  none  but  friends  in  all  the  countries  round, 
would  have  nothing  on  board  but  men  and  arms.  They 
would,  also,  have  a  great  advantage  in  their  knowledge  of 
the  sea,  of  the  adjacent  lands,  and  of  the  winds;  of  all  which 
the  Romans,  being  ignorant,  would  find  themselves  much 
distressed.”  Every  one  was  convinced  by  his  arguments,  es¬ 
pecially  as  the  same  person  who  gave  the  advice,  was  also 
to  carry  it  into  execution.  Two  days  only  were  passed  in 
making  preparations;  and  on  the  third,  setting  sail  with  an 
hundred  ships,  of  w^hich  seventy  had  decks,  and  the  rest  were 
open,  but  all  of  the  smaller  rates,  they  steered  their  course 
Phocsea.  The  king,  as  he  did  not  intend  to  be  present  in 

120 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R,  561. 

the  naval  combat,  on  hearing  that  the  Rqp^air  fleet  was 
preaching,  withdrew  to  Magnesia,  near  Sipjlus,  to  collect 
his  land-forces,  while  his  ships  proceeded  to  Cyssus,  a  port 
of  Erythr^ea,  where  it  was  supposed  they  might  with  more 
convenience  wait  for  the.  enemy.  The  Romans,  as  soon  as 
the  north  wind,  which  had  held  for  several  days,  ceased, 
sailed  from  Delo.s  to  Phana;,  a  port  in  Chios,  opposite  the 
iEgian  sea.  The)'  afterwards  brought  round  the  fleet  to  the 
cit)  of  Chips,  and  having  taken  in  provisions  there,  sailed 
over  to  Phocsea.  Eumenes,  who.  had  gone  to  join  bis  fleetat 
Ehea,  returned  a  few  days  after,  with  twenty-four  decked 
ships,  and  a  greater  number  bf  open  ones,  to  Phocfea,  where 
he  the  Romans,  who  were  fitting  and  preparing  them¬ 
selves  for  a  sea-fight.  The  fleet,  which  now  consisted  of  an 
hundrt  d  and  five  decked  ships,  and  about  fift\  open  ones,  on 
set  ring  san,  was  tor  some  time  driven  forcibly  towards  the 
land,  bv  a  north  wind  olowing  across  its  course.  The  ships 
were  thereby  obliged  to  go,  for  the  most  part  singly,  one  af¬ 
ter  another,  in  a  thin  line;  afterwards,  when  the  violence  of 
the  wind  abated,  they  endeavoured  to  stretch  over  to  the 
harbour  of  Corycus,  beyond  Cyssus. 
XLIV.  When  Polyxenidas  heard  that  the  enemy  were  ap¬ 
proaching,  rejoiced  at  an  opportunity  of  engaging  them,  he 
drew  out  the  left  squadron  towards  the  open  sea;  at  the  same 
time  ordering  the  commanders  of  the  ships  to  extend  the 
right  division  towards  the  land;  and  then  advanced  to  the 
fight,  with  his  fleet  in  a  regular  line  of  battle  a-head.  The 
Roman  commander,  on  seeing  this,  furled  his  sails,  lowered 
his  masts,  and,  at  the  same  time  adjusting, his  rigging,  wait¬ 
ed  for  the  ships  which  were  coming  up.  There  were  now 
about  thirty  in  the  line;  and  in  order  that  his  left  squadron 
might  form  a  front  in  like  directiem^  he  hoisted  his  top-saiis, 
and  stretched  out  into  the  deep,  ordering  the  others  to  push 
forward,  between  him  and  the  land,  against  the  right  squa¬ 
dron  of  the  enemy,  Eumenes  brought  up  the  rear;  who,  as 

B.  C.  19L] 

BOOK  XXXVL 

121 

soon  as  he  saw  the  bustle  of  taking  down  the  rigging  begin, 
likewise  led  on  his  division  with  all  possible  speed.  All 
their  ships  were  by  this  time  in  sight;  two  Carthaginians, 
however,  which  advanced  before  the  Romans,  were  attacked 
by  three  belonging  to  the  king.  As  the  numbers  were  un¬ 
equal,  two  of  the  king’s  ships  fell  upon  one,  and,  in  the  first 
place,  swept  away  the  oars  from  both  its  sides;  the  armed 
mariners  then  boarded,  and  killing  some  of  the  crew,  and 
driving  others  into  the  sea,  took  the  ship.  I'he  one  which 
had  engaged  in  an  equal  contest,  on  seeing  her  companion 
taken,  lest  she  should  be  surrounded  by  the  three,  fled  back 
to  the  fleet.  Livius,  fired  with  indignation,  bore  down  against 
the  enemy.  The  two  which  had  overpowered  the  Cartha¬ 
ginian  ship,  in  hopes  of  the  same  siirress  against  this  one,  ad¬ 
vanced  to  the  attack,  on  which  he  ordered  the  rowers  on  both 
sides  to  plunge  their  oars  in  the  water,  in  order  to  hold  the 
ship  steady,  and  to  throw  grappling  irons  into  the  enemy’s 
vessels  as  they  came  up.  Having,  by  these  means,  rendered 
the  business  something  like  a  fight  on  land,  he  desired  his 
men  to  act  with  the  courage  of  Romans,  and  to  consider  that 
their  adversaries  were  the  slaves  of  a  king.  Accordingly, 
this  single  ship  now  defeated  and  captured  the  two,  with 
more  ease  than  the  two  had  before  taken  one.  By  this  time 
the  entire  fleets  were  engaged  and  intermixed  with  each 
other.  Eumenes,  who  had  come  up  last,  and  after  the  battle 
was  begun,  when  he  saw  the  left  squadron  of  the  enemy 
thrown  into  disorder  by  Livius,  directed  his  own  attack  against 
their  right,  where  the  contest  was  yet  equal. 
XLV.  In  a  short  time,  the  left  squadron  began  to  fly:  for 
Polyxenidas,  perceiving  that  he  was  evidently  overmatched 
with  respect  to  the  bravery  of  the  men,  hoisted  his  top-sails, 
and  got  away;  and,  quickly  after  those  who  Avere  engaged 
with  Eumenes  near  the  land,  did  the  same.  The  Romans 
and  Eumenes  pursued  with  much  perseverance,  as  long  as 
the  rowers  were  able  to  hold  out,  and  they  had  any  pros* 
voi.  v.-^K 

122 

HISTORY  OF  HOME. 

rY.  R.  ::6i. 

pect  of  annoying  the  rear  of  the  enemy:  but,  finding  that 
the  latter,  by  reason  of  the  lightnesb  and  fleetness  of  their 
ships,  baffled  every  effort  that  could  be  made  by  their’s  load- 
ed  as  they  were  with  provisions,  they  at  length  desisted, 
having  taken  thirteen  ships,  together  with  the  soldiers  and 
rowers,  and  sunk  ten.  Of  the  Roman  fleet,  only  the  one 
Carthaginian  ship,  which,  at  the  beginning  of  the  action, 
had  been  attacked  bv  two,  was  lost  Polyxeuidas  continued 
his  flight,  until  he  got  into  the  harbour  of  Ephesus.  The 
Romans  staid,  during  the  remainder  of  that  day,  in  the  port 
from  which  the  king's  fleet  had  sailed  out,  and,  on  the  day 
following,  proceeded  in  the  pursuit.  About  midw’ay,  they 
were  met  by  t\venty-f)ve  Rhodian  decked  ships,  commanded 
by  Pausistratus;  and,  in  ro-' jnnrtit >n  with  tht-se,  hdlowed  the 
runaways  to  Ephe^^us,  where  they  stood  for  some  time,  in 
order  of  battle,  before  the  mouth  of  the  harbour.  Having 
thus  extorted  from  the  enemy  a  full  confession  of  their  being 
defeated,  the  Romans  sent  home  the  Rhodians  and  Eumenes. 
and  steered  their  course  to  Chios,  When  they  had  passed 
Phienicus,  a  port  of  Erythraea,  thev  cast  anchor  for  the  night; 
and,  proceeding  next  day  to  the  island,  came  up  to  the  city 
itself.  After  halting  here  a  fetv  days,  for  the  purpose  chief!} 
of  refreshing  the  row’ers,  they  sailed  over  to  Phocsea.  Here 
the\  left  tour  quinqueremes  for  the  defence  of  the  citv,  while 
the  rest  of  the  fleet  proceeded  to  Canse,  where,  as  the  winter 
now  approached,  the  ships  w’ere  hauled  on  shore,  and  sur¬ 
rounded  with  a  trench  and  rampart.  At  the  close  of  the  year, 
the  elections  were  held  at  Rome,  in  w^hich  were  chosen  con* 
suls,  Lucius  Cornelius  Scipio  and  Caius  Lselius,  from  whom 
all  men  expected  the  conclusion  of  the  war  with  Antiochus, 
Next  day  were  elected  praetors,  Marcus  Tuccius,  Lucius 
Aurunculeiust  Cneius  Fulvius,  Lucius  A^milius,  Publius  Ju* 
nius,  and  Caius  Atinius  Labeo. 

THE 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

BOOK  XXXVII. 
Lucms  lyornetius  Scipio,  consul,  accompanied  by  bis  broltiei.  Publiu^ 
Scipiu  Atricanub.  seui  lolo  .Y.-^ia  agrainst  Antiochiis.  tht  brat  Roman  >vhr, 
ever  led  au  armv  tmtiicr  ifujiiliu-  Kejilfja.  aided  b\  the  Kiiodian^ 
defeats  Antioclne'-  at  M\unhc=u-.  Tiie  son  of  Scipio  Afncaniis. 
taken  pris.iner  b\   tioeim^  ^ent  bt.ek  to  ni' fatiier.  Marcus  Acilius 
Glabrio.  havini^ driven  Autiochu-  out  of  Greece,  triumphs  over  him  and 
the  ^-Eitiiians.  Luciu^  C  u^neiius  Scipio,  assisted  by  Eumenes.  kiDff  of 
Perg-amus.  vanquishes  Aatiochus;  grrauts  fiitn  peace,  on  condition  of  his 
evacuaimg  ah  the  countries  on  the  lather  side  of  Mount  Taurus  Lands 
and  cities  priven  to-  Eurnenes.  to  requitt'  In-  a^aistaiice  in  the  conquest 
of  AnUochu  .  aNo  to  thi  Rhodians,  on  the  like  account.  A  netv  colon} 
established,  i-alled  the  Bononian.  iEfuilins  Reiriliu=:  triumphs  on  ac¬ 
count  of  hi^  naval  Victor} .  Lucius  Cornelius  Scipio  obtains  the  sur 
name  of  Asiatic  us. 
I.  On  the  commencement  of  the  consulship  of  ^ 
Lucius  Cornelius  Scipio  and  Caius  La^lius,  the  first  P-  ^ 
business  introduced  in  the  senate,  after  the  concerns  of  reli' 
gion,  was  that  of  the  .Ltolians,  whose  ambassadors  were  im¬ 
portunate  to  have  it  brought  on,  because  the  period  of  the 
truce  granted  them  was  short;  and  they  were  seconded  by 
Titus  Quintius,  who  had,  by  this  time,  come  home  from 
Greece  to  Rome.  The  .Etolians,  as  they  rested  their  hopes 
on  the  compassion  of  the  senate,  mi^re  than  on  the  merits  of 
their  cause,  acted  the  parts  of  suppliants,  humfily  represent- 

124 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  562. 

ing  their  former  services,  as  a  counterbalance  to  their  late 
misbehaviour.  While  present,  they  were  teazed  b}^  all  the 
senators  with  questions  tending  to  draw  from  them  a  confes¬ 
sion  of  guilt  rather  than  information;  and,  after  they  were 
ordered  to  withdraw,  they  became  the  subject  of  a  warm 
dispute.  Resentment  had  more  power  in  their  case  than 
compassion;  for  the  senate  were  incensed  against  them,  not 
merely  as  enemies,  but  as  an  uncivilized  and  unsocial  race. 
After  a  debate,  which  lasted  several  days,  it  was  at  last  re¬ 
solved,  that  peace  should  neither  be  granted  nor  refused 
The  option  was  given  them  of  two  conditions;  either  to 
submit  themselves  absolutely  to  the  disposal  of  the  senate,  or 
to  pav  one  thousand  talents,^  and  have  no  other  allies  or 
enemies  than  those  who  were  such  to  Rome.  They  wished 
to  have  the  extent  of  that  power  defined,  which  the  senate 
was  to  exercise  over  them,  but  received  no  positive  answer. 
They  were,  therefore,  dismissed,  without  having  concluded 
any  treaty  of  peace,  and  were  ordered  to  quit  the  city  that  very 
day,  and  Italy  within  fifteen  days.  The  next  business  pro¬ 
ceeded  on  w’as,  the  appointing  the  provinces  of  the  consuls. 
Both  of  these  wished  for  Greece.  La^lius  had  a  powerful  in¬ 
terest  in  the  senate;  and  wdien  an  order  was  passed  there, 
that  the  consuls  should  either  cast  lots  for  the  provinces,  or 
settle  them  between  themselves,  he  observed,  that  they  would 
act  more  judiciously  in  leaving  that  matter  to  the  wisdom  of 
the  senators,  than  to  the  decision  of  lots.  To  this  Scipio  an¬ 
swered,  that  he  would  take  advice  how  he  ought  to  act.  He 
consulted  his  brother  only,  who  desired  him  to  leave  it,  with 
confidence,  to  the  senate:  and  then  he  answered  his  colleague 
that  he  would  do  as  was  recommended.  This  mode  of  pro¬ 
ceeding  was  either  perfectly  new;  or,  if  there  had  been  any 
precedent,  it  was  of  so  old  a  date,  that  all  memory  of  it  was 
lost;  a  warm  debate  was  therefore  expected,  on  its  being  pro- 

^  l9a.'?50A 

B.  C.  190.] 

BOOK  XXXVIL 

125 

posed  to  the  senate.  But  Publius  Scipio  African  us  offering, 
that  “  if  they  decreed  that  province  tg  his  brother,  Lucius 
Scipio,  he  would  go  along  with  him,  as  his  lieutenant-gene¬ 
ral;”  his  proposal  was  received  with  universal  approbation, 
and  put  an  end  to  all  dispute.  The  senate  were  well  pleased 
to  make  the  trial,  whether  king  Antiochus  should  receive 
more  effectual  aid  from  the  vanquished  Hannibal,  or  the  Bo- 
man  consul  and  legions  from  his  conqueror  Africanus;  and 
they  almost  unanimously  voted  Greece  to  Scipio,  and  Italy 
to  Laelius.  The  praetors  then  cast  lots  for  their  provinces: 
Lucius  Aurunculeius  obtained  the  city  jurisdiction,  Cneius 
Fulvius  the  foreign;  Lucius  iEmilius  Regillus,  the  fleet; 
Publius  Junius  Brutus,  Tuscany,  Marcus  Tuccius,  Apulia 
and  Bruttium;  and  Caius  Atinius,  Sicily. 
IL  Orders  were  then  issued,  that  the  consul  to  whom  the 
province  of  Greece  had  been  decreed,  should,  in  addition  to 
the  army  which  he  was  to  receive  from  Manius  Acilius,  and 
which  consisted  of  two  legions,  have  a  reinforcement  of  three 
thousand  Roman  foot,  and  one  hundred  horse;  and  of  the 
Latine  confederates,  five  thousand  foot,  and  two  hundred 
horse:  and  it  was  farther  ordered,  that  if,  when  he  arrived  in 
his  province,  he  should  judge  it  conducive  to  the  public  in¬ 
terest,  he  should  be  at  liberty  to  carry  over  the  armv  into 
Asia.  To  the  other  consul  was  decreed  an  army  entire!}' new; 
two  Roman  legions,  and  of  the  Latine  confederates  fifteen 
thousand  foot,  and  six  hundred  horse.  Quintus  Minucius 
was  ordered  to  remove  his  forces  out  of  Liguria,  (which  pro¬ 
vince,  according  to  his  letters,  was  entirely  reduced,  the 
whole  nation  having  submitted,)  into  the  country  of  the  Boi- 
ans,  and  to  give  up  the  command  to  Publius  Cornelius,  pro- 
consul.  The  two  city  legions,  enlisted  the  vear  before,  were 
brought  home  from  the  country  taken  from  the  Boians,  and 
assigned  to  Marcus  Tuccius,  praetor,  together  with  fifteen 
thousand  foot,  and  six  hundred  horse,  of  the  Latine  confede¬ 
rates,  for  the  defence  of  Apulia  and  Bruttium.  Aulus  Cor- 

125 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  K.  562. 

nelius,  a  praetor  of  the  preceding  year,  who  had  the  command 
of  an  army  in  Bruttium,  received  an  order,  that,  if  the  consul 
judged  it  proper,  he  should  transport  his  legions  intf»  ^Etolia, 
and  give  them  to  Manius  Acilius,  provided  the  latter  was 
inclined  to  remain  there;  but  if  Acilius  wi'^hed  to  come  to 
Rome,  that  then  Aulus  Cornelius  should  stav  in  ^Etoliu  with 
tha^  army.  It  was  resolved  that  Caius  Atinius  Lahro  should 
receive  from  Alarcus  iEmilius  the  province  of  Sicilv,  and 
the  army  there;  and  should  if  he  deemed  it  proper,  enlist  in 
the  province  itself  two  thousand  foot  and  one  hundred  horse, 
to  fill  up  deficiencies.  Publius  Junius  Brutus  was  ordered  to 
raise  a  new'  army  for  Tuscany,  consisting  of  one  Roman  le¬ 
gion,  and  ten  thousand  Latine  foot,  and  lour  hundred  horse, 
Lucius  J^milius  was  ordered  to  receive  from  Marcus  Junius, 
praetor  or  the  former  year,  tvventv  ship^  of  war,  with  theii 
crews,  and  himself  to  enlist  one  thousand  marines  and  two 
thousand  foot  soldiers,  with  which  ships  and  soldiers  he  was 
to  sail  to  Asia;  and  receive  the  command  of  the  fleet  from 
Caius  Livius,  The  present  governors  of  the  two  Spains,  and 
of  Sardinia,  w'ere  continued  in  command,  and  ordered  to 
keep  the  same  armies,  Sicily  and  Sardinia  were,  this  year, 
assessed  in  two-tenths  of  their  corn.  All  the  corn  from  Sicily 
was  ordered  to  be  carried  into  Ailtolia,  to  the  army  there;  of 
that  to  be  collected  from  Sardinia,  one  half  to  Rome,  and  the 
other  half  into  iEtolia,  for  the  same  use  as  the  corn  from 
Sicily, 
III.  It  was  judged  proper,  that,  previous  to  the  departure 
of  the  consuls  for  their  provinces,  the  prodigies  which  had 
occurred  should  he  expiated  under  the  direction  of  the  pon¬ 
tiffs.  The  temple  of  Juno  Lucina  at  Rome  was  struck  by 
lightning  in  such  a  manner,  that  the  ceiling  and  the  folding- 
doors  were  much  damaged.  At  Puteoli,  several  parts  of  the 
wall,  and  a  gate,  were  struck  by  lightning,  and  two  men 
killed.  It  was  clearly  proved,  that,  at  Nursia,  in  the  midst 
of  a  calm,  a  tempest  suddenly  burst  forth;  and  there  also  two 

B.  C.  190.1 

BOOK  XXXVII. 

127 

nien  of  free  condition  were  killed.  The  Tusculans  reported^ 
that  a  shower  of  earth  fell  in  their  country;  and  the  Reatines, 
that  a  mule  brought  forth  young  in  their’s.  Expiations  were 
performed  for  all  these,  and  the  Latine  festival  was  celebrated 
a  second  time,  because  the  flesh-meat  due  to  the  Laurentians 
had  not  been  given  them.  There  was  also  a  supplication 
made  on  account  of  those  portents,  the  decemvirs  giving  di¬ 
rections  from  the  books  to  w  hich  of  the  gods  it  should  be 
performed.  Ten  free-born  youths,  and  ten  virgins,  all  of 
whom  had  their  fathers  and  mothers  living,  were  employed 
in  that  ceremony;  and  the  decemvirs  sacrihced  in  the  night 
young  cattle  not  weaned  from  the  dam.  Publius  Cornelius 
Scipio  African  us,  before  he  left  the  city,  erected  an  arch  on 
the  hill  of  the  capited,  facing  the  road  that  leads  up  to  the  tern- 
pie,  adorned  it  with  seven  gilded  statues,  and  two  horses,  and 
placed  two  marldle  cisterns  in  the  front  of  the  arch.  About 
this  time  forty-three  of  the  principal  ..EtoHans,  among  wdiom 
were  Damocrltus  and  his  brother,  %vere  brought  to  Home  by 
two  cohorts,  sent  by  IVIanius  Aciilus,  and  were  thrown  into 
the  prison  called  Lautumiaa  or  the  quarry;  the  cohorts  were 
ordered,  by  the  consul  Lucius  Cornelius,  to  return  to  the 
army.  Ambassadors  came  from  Ptolemy  and  Cleopatra,  kintr 
and  queen  of  Egypt,  congratulating  the  Romans  on  their 
consul  Manius  Acilius  having  driven  king  Antiochus  out  of 
Greece,  and  advising  that  he  should  carry  over  his  armv  into 
Asia,  For  all  places,  not  onlv  in  Asia,  but  also  in  Syria, 
were  fiiUd  wdth  consternation;  and  that  the  king  and  queen 
of  Egypt  w’ouid  hold  themselves  in  readiness  to  act  as  the 
senate  should  direct.’'  Thanks  were  returned  to  the  king  and 
queen,  and  presmts  were  ordered  to  be  made  to  the  ambas¬ 
sadors,  four  thousand  asses'^  to  each, 
IV.  The  consul  Lucius  Cornelius,  having  finished  w’hat 
was  necessary  to  be  done  at  Rome,  gave  public  notice,  in  an 

1-2/  U..V, 

128 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

[Y.  R.  562. 

assembly  of  the  people,  that  the  soldiers,  whom  himself  had 
enlisted  for  supplying  deficiencies,  and  those  who  were  in 
Bruttium  with  Aulus  Cornelius,  propraetor,  should  all  meet 
him  at  Brundusium  on  the  Ides  of  July.  He  likewise  ap¬ 
pointed  three  iieutenants-general;  Sextus  Digitius,  Lucius 
Apustius,  and  Caius  Fabricius  Luscinus;  who  were  to  bring 
together  ships  Irom  all  parts  of  the  sea-coast  to  Brundusium: 
and  now  every  thing  being  ready,  he  set  out  from  the  city 
in  his  military  robe  of  state.  No  less  than  five  thousand 
volunteers  of  the  Romans  and  allies,  who  had  served  out  the 
legal  term,  under  the  command  of  Publius  Africanus,  attend¬ 
ed  Corneliub  at  his  departure,  and  offered  their  services. 
Lucius  iEmilius  Regillus,  w^ho  commanded  the  fleet,  set  out 
likewise  at  the  same  time.  Just  at  the  time  when  the  con¬ 
sul  went  to  join  the*  army,  during  the  celebration  of  the 
Apoliinarian  games,  on  the  fifth  of  the  ides  of  July,  though 
the  hk\  was  serene,  the  light  was  obscured  in  the  middle  of 
the  day  by  the  moon  passing  over  the  orb  of  the  sun,  Lu¬ 
cius  Aurunculeius  was  commissioned  by  the  senate  to  build 
thirty  quinqueremes  and  twenty  triremes,  in  consequence  oi 
a  report  prevailing,  that  Antiochus,  since  the  engagement  at 
sea,  was  fitting  out  a  much  larger  fleet.  When  the  ^tolians 
learned  from  their  anibassadors,  who  returned  from  Rome, 
that  there  was  no  prospect  of  peace,  notwithstanding  that 
their  whole  sea-coast,  opposite  to  Peloponnesus,  was  ravag¬ 
ed  by  the  Achseans,  yet,  regarding  the  danger  impending 
more  than  tneir  losses,  they  seized  on  mount  Corax,  in  order 
to  shut  up  the  pass  against  the  Romans;  for  they  had  no 
doubt  of  their  returning  in  the  beginning  of  spring,  and  re¬ 
newing  the  siege  of  Naupactum.  Acilius,  who  knew  that 
this  was  expected,  judged  it  more  advisable  to  undertake  an 
enterprise  that  was  not  foreseen,  and  lu  lay  siege  to  Lamia; 
for  the  garrison  had  been  reduced  by  Philip  almost  to  a  state 
of  desperation;  and  at  present,  from  the  very  circumstance 
of  their  not  apprehending  any  such  attempt,  they  might  proba* 

BOOK  XXXVIL 

12^ 

B.  C.  190J 
bly  be  surprised  and  overpowered.  Marching  from  Elatia, 
he  formed  his  first  encampment  in  the  enemy’s  country  on 
the  banks  of  the  river  Sperchius,  and  decamping  thence  in  the 
night,  he  at  break  of  day  made  a  general  assault  on  the  town. 
V*  In  consequence  of  the  unexpectedness  of  the  affair, 
great  consternation  and  tumult  ensued;  yet  the  besieged 
fought  with  greater  resolution  than  any  one  could  suppose 
them  capable  of  under  such  a  sudden  alarm,  and  the  women 
brought  weapons  of  every  kind,  and  stones  to  the  walls;  so 
that,  although  scaling-ladders  were  raised  in  various  places, 
yet,  for  that  day,  they  maintained  the  defence  of  the  place. 
About  mid-day  Acilius  gave  the  signal  of  retreat,  and  drew 
off  his  men  to  their  camp.  After  their  strength  was  repaired 
by  food  and  rest,  before  he  dismissed  the  meeting  in  the 
Prsetorium,  he  gave  them  notice,  to  be  ready,  under  arms, 
before  day;  and  that  they  were  not  to  return  to  their  tents 
until  the  city  should  be  taken.’’  Next  day,  at  the  same  hour 
as  before  he  began  the  assault  again,  in  a  greater  number  of 
places;  and,  as  not  only  the  strength,  but  also  the  weapons, 
and  above  all,  the  courage  of  the  garrison  began  to  fail,  he 
made  himself  master  of  the  town  in  the  space  of  a  few  hours. 
One-half  of  the  spoil  found  there,  he  sold;  the  other  he  gave 
to  the  soldiers;  and  then  he  held  a  council,  to  determine 
what  he  should  next  undertake.  No  one  approved  of  going 
against  Naupactum,  while  the  pass  at  Corax  was  occupied 
by  the  ^Etolians.  But,  not  to  lie  in  idleness,  or,  by  his  su¬ 
pineness,  to  allow  the  iEtolians  that  state  of  peace  which  they 
could  not  obtain  from  the  senate,  Acilius  resolved  to  be¬ 
siege  Amphissa;  and  he  led  his  army  thither  from  Heraclea 
by  Oeta.  Having  encamped  under  the  walls,  he  proceeded 
against  the  place,  not  by  general  assault,  as  at  Lamia,  but  by 
regular  approaches.  The  ram  was  brought  up  to  the  walls 
in  many  places  at  once;  and  though  these  were  shaken  by  it, 
vet  the  townsmen  never  endeavoured  to  provide  or  contrive 
any  sort  of  defence  against  attacks  of  that  kind;  but  placing 
VOL.  V. — S 

130 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R,  562. 

all  their  hopes  in  their  arras  and  daring  courage,  by  frequent 
sallies  they  much  annoyed  not  only  the  advanced  guards  of 
the  Romans,  but  even  those  who  were  employed  at  the  works 
and  machines. 
VL  There  were  now  many  breaches  made,  when  the  con¬ 
sul  received  intelligence  that  his  successor,  having  landed 
his  army  at  Apollonia,  was  coming  at  the  head  of  thirteen 
thousand  foot  and  five  hundred  horse.  He  had  lately  arriv¬ 
ed  at  the  Malian  bay,  and  sent  a  message  to  Hypata,  demand¬ 
ing  the  surrender  of  the  city;  but  the  inhabitants  answ^ered^ 
that  they  would  do  nothing  without  a  decree  of  the  general 
council  of  iEtolia:  on  which,  unwilling  to  be  detained  in  the 
siege  of  Hypata,  while  that  of  Amphissa  was  still  unfinished, 
he  sent  on  his  brother  Africanus  before  him,  and  marched 
himself  towards  Amphissa.  A  little  before  their  arrival,  the 
townspeople  abandoned  the  city,  for  it  was  now  for  the  most 
part  stripped  of  its  walls;  and  they,  one  and  all,  armed  and 
unarmed,  retired  into  the  citadel  w^hich  they  deemed  an  im¬ 
pregnable  fortress.  The  consul  pitched  his  camp  at  the  dis¬ 
tance  of  about  six  miles  from  the  town;  and  thither  came 
ambassadors  from  the  Athenians,  addressing,  first,  Publius 
Scipio,  who  preceded  the  main  body  as  before  mentioned, 
and  afterwards  the  consul  with  earnest  supplications  in  fa¬ 
vour  of  the  Aitolians.  They  received  a  milder  answer  from 
Africanus,  who  wished  for  an  honourable  pretext  for  relin¬ 
quishing  the  iEtolian  war,  than  they  had  from  Rome.  He 
was  desirous  of  directing  his  views  towards  Asia  and  king 
Antiochus,  and  had  recommended  to  the  Athenians  to  per¬ 
suade,  not  the  Romans  only,  but  the  .Etolians  likewise,  to  pre¬ 
fer  peace  to  war.  Pursuant  to  the  advice  of  the  Athenians, 
a  numerous  embassy  of  the  iEtoiians  came  speedily  from  Hy¬ 
pata,  and  the  discourse  of  Africanus,  whom  they  addressed 
first,  augmented  their  hopes  of  peace;  for  he  mentioned,  that 
“many  nations  and  states,  first  in  Spain,  and  afterwards  in  Afri¬ 
ca,  had  surrendered  themselves  to  him;  and  that,  in  all  of  them 

B.  C.  190.] 

BOOK  XXXVIL 

131 

he  had  left  greater  monuments  of  clemency  and  kindness  than 
of  military  prowess.”  The  business  seemed  to  be  concluded^ 
when  the  consul,  on  being  applied  to,  repeated  the  very  same 
answer  with  which  they  had  been  so  much  dismayed  by  the 
senate.  The  iEtolians,  thunderstruck  at  this,  as  if  they 
had  never  heard  it  betore,  (^tor  they  now^  perceived  that  no 
good  was  likely  to  arise,  either  from  the  Athenian  embassy, 
or  the  favourable  re  pi}  of  African  us,)  observed,  that  they 
wished  to  consult  their  countrymen  on  the  affair. 
VIL  They  then  returned  to  Hypata,  where  the  council 
was  utterly  at  a  loss  what  course  to  take;  for  they  had  no 
means  of  paying  the  thousand  talents:  and,  in  case  of  an  un¬ 
conditional  submission,  they  dreaded  being  subjected  to  bo- 
dih  severities.  They,  therefore,  ordered  the  same  ambas¬ 
sadors  to  return  to  the  consul  and  Africanus,  and  to  request, 
that  if  they  meant,  in  reality,  to  grant  them  peace,  and  not 
merely  to  amuse  them  with  a  prospect  of  it,  frustrating  the 
hopes  of  the  WT.  tched,  they  would  either  remit  some  part  of 
the  money  required  to  be  paid,  or  order  that  their  persons 
might  be  exempted  in  the  terms  of  the  surrender.  The  con¬ 
sul  could  not  be  prevailed  on  to  make  any  change;  and  that 
embassy,  also,  was  dismissed  without  effect.  The  Athenian 
ambassadors  accompanied  them,  with  Echedemus,  their 
principal.  These, — while  the  .Etolians,  after  so  many  re¬ 
pulses,  were  sunk  into  total  dejection,  and  deplored  with  una. 
vailing  lamentations,  the  hard  fate  of  their  nation, — revived 
once  more  their  hopes,  by  advising  them  to  request  a  suspen¬ 
sion  of  arms  for  six  months,  in  order  that  they  might  send 
an  embassy  to  Rome.  He  urged,  that  “  the  delay  could  add 
nothing  to  their  present  calamities,  which  were  already  se¬ 
vere  in  the  extreme;  but  that,  if  time  were  gained,  many 
fortuitous  events  might  occur,  and  lighten  the  distresses  they 
then  laboured  under.”  Agreeably  to  this  advice  of  Eche¬ 
demus,  the  same  ambassadors  were  sent  again;  who,  making 
their  first  application  to  Publius  Scipio,  obtained,  through 

152 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  562. 

him,  from  the  consul,  a  suspension  of  arms  for  the  time  they 
desired.  The  siege  of  Amphissa  was  then  raised;  Marcus 
Acilius  gave  up  the  command  of  the  army  to  the  consul,  and 
left  the  province;  and  the  consul  returned  from  Amphissa 
into  Thessaly,  with  intention  to  pass  through  Macedonia 
and  Thrace  into  Asia.  Here  Africanus  said  to  his  brother, 
Lucius  Scipio,  I  agree  with  you  in  approving  the  rout, 
which  you  have  chosen.  But  the  whole  matter  rests  on  the 
inclinations  of  Philip;  for  if  he  is  faithful  lo  our  government 
he  win  afford  us  a  passage,  and  provisions  and  every  thing 
requisite  to  the  maintenance  and  convenience  of  an  army  on 
a  long  march.  But  if  he  should  fail  in  this,  you  will  find  no 
safety  in  any  part  of  Thrace.  In  my  opinion,  therefore,  the 
king’s  disposition  ought  in  the  first  place  to  be  discovered; 
and  the  best  method  to  discover  it,  will  be,  to  let  the  person 
sent  approach  him  suddenly,  and  see  how  he  is  employed 
when  not  expecting  any  such  visit.”  They  chose  for  this 
purpose,  Tiberius  Sempronius  Gracchus,  a  young  man,  re¬ 
markable  for  his  activity  beyond  all  the  youth  of  the  time; 
by  means  of  relays  of  horses,  and  travelling  with  almost  in¬ 
credible  expedition,  he  made  good  the  journey  from  Amphis¬ 
sa,  whence  he  tvas  despatched,  to  Pella,  on  the  third  day. 
The  king  was  sitting  at  a  banquet,  and  had  drank  freely  of 
wine;  which  circumstance  of  his  indulging  such  relaxation 
of  mind,  removed  all  suspicion  of  any  intention  of  changing 
his  measures.  His  guest  was,  for  the  present,  kindly  enter¬ 
tained;  and  next  day,  he  saw  plenty  of  provisions,  already 
prepared  for  the  army,  bridges  made  over  rivers,  and  roads 
formed  where  the  ground  was  difficult  to  be  passed.  As  he 
was  bringing  back  this  intelligence,  with  the  same  speed 
which  he  had  used  in  coming,  he  met  the  consul  at  Thau- 
maci.  The  army,  in  high  spirits  at  finding  their  hopes  thus 
confirmed  and  augmented,  advanced  into  Macedonia,  where 
every  thing  was  ready  for  their  accommodation.  On  their 
arrival,  the  king  received  them  with  royal  magnificence,  and 

BOOK  XXXVIL 

B.  C. 1900 

I3S 

accompanied  them  on  their  march.  He  showed  a  great  deal 
of  pleasantry  and  good  humour,  which  recommended  him 
much  to  Africanus,  who,  with  all  the  extraordinary  endow¬ 
ments  that  he  possessed,  was  not  averse  from  mirth  when 
confined  within  the  bounds  of  decency.  Philip  then  escorted 
them,  not  only  through  Macedonia,  but  through  Thrace  also; 
furnishing  them  with  every  accommodation,  until  they  arriv¬ 
ed  at  the  Hellespont. 
VIII.  Antiochus,  after  the  sea-fight  at  Corycus,  being 
left  at  liberty  during  the  whole  winter,  to  carry  on  his  pre¬ 
parations  by  land  and  water,  employed  his  principal  attention 
on  the  refitting  of  his  ships,  lest  he  should  be  entirely  ex¬ 
cluded  from  the  sea.  He  reflected  that  “  he  had  been  defeat¬ 
ed,  when  the  Rhodian  fleet  was  absent,  but  if  that  fleet  were 
present  in  an  engagement,  (and  the  Rhodians  would  certain¬ 
ly  take  care  not  to  be  dilatory  a  second  time,)  he  required  a 
vast  number  of  ships,  to  set  him  on  an  equality  with  the  fleet 
of  the  enemy,  considering  the  strength  and  size  of  their  ves¬ 
sels.”  Fur  this  reason,  he  sent  Hannibal  into  Svria,  to  bring 
in  the  Phoenician  navy,  and  gave  orders  to  Polyxenidas,  that, 
the  more  unsuccessful  he  had  been  before,  the  more  dili¬ 
gence  he  should  now  exert,  in  repairing  the  ships  which  he 
had,  and  procuring  others.  He  himself  passed  the  winter  in 
Phrygia,  calling  in  auxiliaries  from  every  quarter.  He  even 
sent  for  that  purpose  to  Gallograecia.  The  people  of  that 
country  were  then  more  warlike,  than  at  present,  retaining 
the  Gallic  spirit,  as  the  generation  which  had  emigrated 
thither  was  not  yet  extinct.  He  left  his  son  Seleucus  with 
an  army  in  iEtolia,  to  keep  in  obedience  the  maritime  cities, 
which  were  solicited  to  revolt,  on  one  side,  by  Eumenes, 
from  Pergamus,  on  the  other,  by  the  Romans  from  Phocoea 
and  Erythrae.  The  Roman  fleet,  as  mentioned  before,  win¬ 
tered  at  Canae:  thither,  about  the  middle  of  the  season,  came 
king  Eumenes,  with  two  thousand  foot  and  one  hundred 
horse.  He  aflSrmed,  that  vast  quantities  of  spoil  might  be 

134 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  562. 
brought  off  from  the  enemy’s  country  round  Thyatira;  and, 
by  his  persuasions,  prevailed  on  Livius  to  send  with  him 
live  thousand  soldiers.  This  party  within  a  few  days  carried 
off  an  immense  booty. 
IX.  Meanwhile,  a  sedition  broke  out  at  Phoceea,  in  con¬ 
sequence  of  the  endeavours  used  by  some,  to  bring  over  the 
multitude  to  the  party  of  Antiochus.  The  people  were  dis¬ 
tressed  by  the  ships  wintering  there:  they  were  distressed 
by  a  tax  imposed,  for  they  were  ordered  to  furnish  five  hun¬ 
dred  gowns  and  five  hundred  tunicks;  and  they  were  further 
distressed  by  a  scarcity  of  corn,  which  obliged  the  Roman 
garrison  and  ships  to  leave  the  place.  The  faction,  which 
laboured  in  their  assemblies  to  draw  the  commonalty  over  to 
Antiochus,  was  now  freed  from  all  apprehension:  the  senate, 
and  higher  ranks,  were  disposed  to  adhere  to  the  alliance 
with  Rome,  but  the  advisers  of  a  revolt  had  greater  Influence 
with  the  multitude.  The  Rhodians,  sensible  of  having  been  too 
tardy  the  year  before,  were  therefore  the  earlier  in  their  pro¬ 
ceedings  now;  and,  at  the  vernal  sequinox,  they  sent  the  same 
Pausistratus,  commander  of  the  fleet  with  thirty-six  ships. 
At  this  time,  Livius  with  thirty  ships,  and  seven  quadrire- 
mes,  which  king  Eumenes  had  brought  with  him,  was  on  his 
passage  from  Canee  to  the  Hellespont,  in  order  to  prepare 
every  thing  necessary  for  the  transportation  of  the  army, 
which  he  expected  to  come  by  land.  He  first  put  into  the 
harbour,  called  the  Achsean;  whence,  going  up  to  Ilium,  he 
offered  sacrifice  to  Minerva,  and  gave  a  kind  reception  to  se¬ 
veral  embassies  from  the  states  in  the  neighbourhood;  from 
Eaelus,  Dardanus,  and  Rhetseum,  who  came  to  surrender 
their  respective  states  to  him.  Then  he  sailed  to  the  en¬ 
trance  of  the  Hellespont;  and,  leaving  ten  ships  stationed  op¬ 
posite  to  Abydus,  he  crossed  over  to  Europe,  with  the  rest 
of  the  fleet,  to  attack  Sestos.  As  the  troops  were  advancing 
up  to  the  walls,  they  were  met,  first,  by  a  number  of  the 

B.  C.  190.]  BOOK  XXXVIL  135 
priests  of  Cybele,*  using  extravagant  gestures,  and  clad  in 
the  dress  worn  on  their  solemn  processions.  These  said,  that, 
by  order  of  the  Mother  of  the  gods,  they,  the  immediate 
servants  of  the  goddess,  were  come  to  pray  the  Roman  com¬ 
mander  to  spare  the  walls  and  the  city.”  No  violence  was 
offered  to  any  of  them,  and,  presently,  the  whole  senate,  and 
the  magistrates,  came  out  to  surrender  the  place.  The  fleel 
then  sailed  over  to  Abydus;  where,  on  sounding  the  temper 
of  the  inhabitants,  in  conferences,  and  finding  no  disposition 
to  peaceful  measures,  they  prepared  themselves  for  a  siege. 
X.  While  these  transactions  passed  at  the  Hellespont,  Po- 
lyxenidas,  the  commander  of  the  king’s  fleet,  an  exile  from 
Rhodes,  having  heard  that  the  ships  of  his  countrymen  had 
sailed  from  home,  and  that  Pausistratus,  who  commanded 
them  had,  in  a  public  speech,  uttered  several  haughty  and 
contemptuous  expressions  respecting  him,  conceived  the  most 
violent  jealousy  against  him  in  particular,  and  studied 
nothing  else,  night  or  day,  but  how,  by  deeds,  to  refute  his 
arrogant  words.  He  sent  a  person,  who  %vas  known  to  him, 
to  say,  that,  “  if  allowed,  he  was  ready  to  perform  an  emi¬ 
nent  service  to  Pausistratus,  and  to  his  native  country:  and 
that  Pausistratus  might  restore  him  to  the  same.”  Pau¬ 
sistratus,  in  surprise,  asked  by  what  means  such  things  could 
be  effected;  and,  at  the  other’s  request,  pledged  his  faith, 
that  he  would  either  concur  in  the  execution  of  the  design, 
or  bury  it  in  silence.  The  emissary  then  told  him,  that 
Polxyenidas  would  deliver  into  his  hands,  either  the  whole 
of  the  king’s  fleet,  or  the  greater  part  of  it;  and  that  in  re¬ 
turn  for  so  great  a  service,  he  stipulated  for  nothing  more, 
than  being  allowed  to  return  to  his  native  country.’'  The 
proposal  was  of  such  magnitude,  as  made  him  neither 
implicitly  credit,  nor  at  once  reject  it.  He  sailed  to  Panot- 
mus,  in  the  Samian  territory,  and  halted  there,  in  order  to 
examine  thoroughly  the  business  proposed  to  him.  Several 

Called  Galli,  and  Corybantes. 

136 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  562. 

messeiigers  passed  between  them,  nor  was  Pausistratus 
satisfied  of  the  other’s  sincerity,  until,  in  the  presence  of  his 
messenger,  Polxyenidas  wrote,  with  his  own  hand  an  engage¬ 
ment,  that  he  would  perform  all  that  he  had  promised,  and 
sent  the  tablets  sealed  with  his  own  seal.  By  such  a  pledge 
as  this,  he  thought  he  had  acquired  a  kind  of  absolute  do¬ 
minion  over  the  plotter;  for  that  “  he  who  lived  under  a 
king  would  never  act  so  absurdly,  as  to  give  evidence  of 
guilt  against  himself,  attested  by  his  own  signature.”  The 
method  of  conducting  the  pretended  plot  was  then  settled; 
Polyxenidas  said,  that  “  he  would  neglect  every  kind  of 
preparation;  that  he  would  not  keep  any  considerable  num¬ 
bers  on  board,  either  of  rowers  or  mariners;  that  he  would 
haul  up,  on  land,  some  of  the  ships,  under  pretence  of  refit¬ 
ting  them;  would  send  away^  others  into  the  neighbouring 
ports,  and  keep  a  few  at  sea  before  the  harbour  of  Ephesus, 
which,  if  circumstances  made  it  necessary  to  come  out,  he 
would  expose  to  a  battle.”  The  negligence,  which  Pau¬ 
sistratus  was  told  Polyxenidas  would  use  in  his  fleet,  he  him¬ 
self  immediately  practised.  Part  of  his  ships  he  sent  to 
Halicarnassus  to  bring  provisions,  another  part  to  the  city 
of  Samos,  while  he  himself  waited  at  Panormus,  that  he 
might  be  ready  to  make  an  attack,  when  he  should  receive 
the  signal  from  the  traitor.  Polyxenidas  continued  to  en¬ 
courage  his  mistake  by  counterfeiting  neglect;  hauled  up 
some  ships,  and,  as  if  he  intended  to  haul  up  others,  put  the 
docks  in  repair;  he  did  not  call  the  rowers  from  their  winter- 
quarters  to  Ephesus,  but  assembled  them  secretly  at  Mag¬ 
nesia. 
XL  It  happened,  that  one  of  Antiochus’s  soldiers,  having 
come  to  Samos  on  some  business  of  his  own,  was  seized 
as  a  spy,  and  brought  to  Panormus  to  Pausistratus.  This 
man,  moved  either  by  fear  or  treachery  towards  his  coun¬ 
trymen,  on  being  asked,  what  was  doing  at  Ephesus,  laid 
open  every  particular;  that  the  fleet  lay  in  harbour  fully 

B.  C,  190.] 

BOOK  XXXVII. 

137 

equipped,  and  ready  for  sea;  that  all  the  rowers  had  been 
sent  to  Magnesia;  that  very  few  of  the  ships  had  been  hauled 
on  land;  that  the  docks  were  shut,  and  that  never  was  greater 
diligence  employed  in  conducting"  the  business  of  the  fleet. 
But  the  mind  of  Pausi stratus  was  so  prepossessed,  by  mis¬ 
placed  confidence,  and  vain  hopes,  that  he  gave  no  credit  to 
this  account.  Polvxenidas,  having  fully  adjusteil  all  his 
measures,  called  in  the  rowers  from  Magnesia,  launched 
hastily  the  ships  that  were  in  dock,  and  letting  the  next  day 
pass,  not  so  much  because  he  had  any  preparations  to  make, 
as  because  he  was  unwilling  that  the  fleet  should  be  seen 
going  to  sea,  set  sail  after  sun-set,  with  seventy  decked  ships, 
but,  the  wind  being  contrary,  put  into  the  harbour  of  Pygela 
before  day  appeared.  After  lying  by  there,  during  the  day, 
for  the  same  reason  as  before,  he  passed  over,  in  the  nighty 
to  the  nearest  part  of  the  Samian  territory.  From  this  place, 
he  detached  one  Nicander,  an  archpirate,  at  the  head  of  a 
squadron  of  five  decked  ships,  with  orders  to  sail  to  Pali- 
nurus,  and  thence  to  lead  his  armed  men ,  by  the  shortest 
road,  through  the  fields  toward  Panormus,  and  so  to  come 
behind  the  enemy^  In  the  meantime,  himself,  with  his  fleet 
in  two  divisions,  in  order  that  it  might  command  the  mouth 
of  the  harbour  on  both  sides,  proceeded  to  Panormus.  This 
event,  so  utterly  unexpected,  at  first,  confounded  Pausistra- 
tus;  but,  being  an  experienced  warrior,  he  quickly  recollect¬ 
ed  his  spirits,  and  judging  that  it  w^ould  be  easier  to  repel 
the  enemy  from  the  land  than  on  sea,  he  marched  his  armed 
forces,  in  two  bodies,  to  the  promontories,  which,  by  their 
heads  projecting  into  the  deep,  formed  the  harbour;  for  he 
thought  that  he  should  be  able,  with  ease,  to  effect  his  pur¬ 
pose,  by  the  discharges  of  weapons  from  both  sides.  The 
sight  of  Nicander  on  the  land  quite  disconcerted  this  design; 
he,  therefore,  suddenly  changed  his  plan,  and  ordered  all 
to  go  on  bo^rd  the  ships.  This  produced  the  greatest  dis¬ 
may  and  confusion,  among  both  soldiers  and  sailors,  who, 
VOL.  V  — T 

158 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

CY.  R.  562. 

seeing  themselves  inclosed  by  the  enemy ^  on  land  and  sea 
at  once,  hurried  on  board  like  men  running  away.  The  only 
method  of  saving  the  fleet,  that  occurred  to  Pausistratus,  was, 
to  force  through  the  narrow  entrance  of  the  port,  and  push 
out  into  the  open  sea.  As  soon,  therefore,  as  he  saw  his 
men  embarked,  ordering  the  rest  to  follow,  he  himself  led 
the  way,  and,  with  the  utmost  exertions  of  his  oars,  pressed 
to  the  mouth  of  the  harbour.  Just  as  his  ship  was  clearing 
the  entrance,  Polyxenidas,  with  three  quinqueremes,  sur¬ 
rounded  it.  The  vessel,  shattered  by  their  beaks,  sunk;  the 
crew  were  overwhelmed  with  weapons,  and,  among  them, 
Pausistratus,  fighting  gallantly,  was  slain.  Of  the  rest  of 
the  ships,  some  were  taken  outside*  of  the  harbour,  some 
within,  and  others  by  Nicander,  while  they  were  putting  off 
from  the  shore.  Only  five  Rhodian,  and  two  Coan  ships, 
effected  an  escape;  making  a  passage  for  themselves  through 
the  thick  of  the  enemy,  by  the  terror  of  blazing  flames;  for 
they  carried  before  them,  on  two  poles  projecting  from  their 
prows,  a  great  quantity  of  fire  contained  in  iron  vessels. 
Some  Erythraean  triremes,  which  were  coming  to  their  assis¬ 
tance,  met  the  Rhodian  ships  flying,  not  far  from  Samos, 
and  therefore  steered  away  to  the  Hellespont  to  join  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  About  the  same  time,  Seleucus  got  possession  of 
Phocae,  which  w’as  betrayed  by  the  guards  admitting  him  by 
one  of  the  gates.  Cyme,  with  the  other  cities  on  that 
coast,  were  induced  by  their  fears  to  join  him. 
XII.  During  these  transactions  in  iEtolia,  Abydus  endured 
a  siege  of  several  days,  a  garrison  of  the  king’s  troops  de¬ 
fending  the  w^alls;  but  then,  all  growing  weary,  and  Philotas 
himself,  the  commander  of  the  garrison,  giving  his  permis¬ 
sion,  the  magistrates  entered  into  a  treaty  with  Livius,  about 
the  terms  of  a  capitulation.  The  business  was  protracted  for 
some  time,  as  they  could  not  agree  whether  the  king’s  troops 
should  march  out  with  their  arms,  or  without  them.  W  hile 
this  negociation  was  depending,  news  arrived  of  the  defeat 
of  the  Rhodians;  in  consequence  of  which,  the  whole  matter 

BOOK  XXXVIL 

139 

B.  C,  190.] 

was  dropped,  when  on  the  point  of  being  concluded.  For 
Livius,  fearing  lest  Polyxenidas,  elated  by  his  recent  success 
in  such  an  important  enterprise,  might  surprise  the  fleet 
which  lay  at  Canae,  instandy  abandoned  the  siege  of  Abydus, 
and  the  guard  of  the  Hellespont,  and  drew  out  the  ships  that 
were  in  dock  at  Canae.  Euraenes  came,  at  this  time,  to  Elea. 
Livius,  with  the  whole  fleet,  which  had  been  joined  by  two 
triremes  of  Mitylene,  sailed  to  Phocaea;  but,  having  learned 
that  this  place  was  held  by  a  strong  garrison  of  the  king’s 
troops,  and  that  Seleucus  was  encamped  at  no  great  distance, 
he  ravaged  the  sea- coast,  hastily  conveying  on  board  the 
booty,  which  consisted  chiefly  of  men,  and  waiting  only  until 
Eumenes,  with  his  fleet,  came  up,  bent  his  course  to  Samos. 
Among  the  Rhodians,  the  news  of  their  misfortune  excited, 
at  first,  both  consternation,  and  the  greatest  grief,  at  the  same 
time.  For,  besides  the  loss  of  their  ships  and  soldiers,  the 
whole  flower  of  their  youth  had  perished,  many  young  men 
of  distinction  having  embarked  in  the  expeditioft,  led,  among 
other  motives,  principally,  by  the  character  of  Pausistratus, 
which  was,  deservedly,  very  high  among  his  countrymen. 
Afterwards,  when  they  reflected,  that  they  had  been  circum¬ 
vented  by  treachery,  and  that,  of  ail  men,  a  countryman  of 
their  own  had  been  the  perpetrator,  their  grief  was  converted 
into  anger.  Immediatelv  they  sent  out  ten  ships,  and  in  a  few 
days,  ten  more,  giving  the  command  of  the  whole  to  Euda- 
mus;  w^ho,  though  far  inferior  to  Pausistratus,  in  warlike 
qualifications,  would  yet  they  supposed,  prove  a  more  cau¬ 
tious  leader,  as  he  was  not  of  so  high  a  spirit.  The  Romans, 
and  king  Eumenes,  put  in  w’ith  their  fleet,  first,  at  Erythrsea; 
and  staying  there  one  night,  they,  next  day  reached  Corycus, 
a  promontory  in  I'eios.  They  intended  to  pass  over  hence, 
to  the  nearest  part  of  the  Samian  territory;  but,  not  waiting 
for  the  rising  of  the  sun,  from  which  the  pilots  could  learn 
the  state  of  the  weather,  they  exposed  themselves  to  a  stonn, 
which  deprived  them  of  the  power  of  directing  their  course. 

140 

HISTORY  OF  ROME  [Y.  R.  562. 

About  the  middle  of  the  passage,  the  wind  changed  from 
north-east  to  north,  and  they  found  themselves  tossed  about 
on  the  sea,  which  rolled  in  very  tremendous  billows. 
XIII.  Polyxenidas,  taking  it  for  granted  that  the  enemy 
would  go  to  Samos  to  join  the  Rhodian  fleet,  set  sail  from 
Ephesus,  and  halted,  first,  at  Myonnesus,  from  whence  he 
crossed  over  to  the  island  of  Macris;  in  order  that,  when  the 
enemy’s  fleet  should  sail  by,  he  might  attack,  with  advan¬ 
tage,  either  any  ships  that  straggled  from  the  main  body,  or 
the  rear  of  the  fleet  itself.  When  he  saw  the  same  dispersed 
by  the  storm,  he  thought  this  a  good  opportunity  to  attack 
itj  but,  in  a  little  time,  the  wind  increased,  and  raised  the 
v/aves  to  such  a  height,  that  he  could  not  possibly  come  up 
with  them:  he  therefore  steered  to  the  island  of  iEthalia,  that, 
from  thence,  he  might,  next  day,  fall  on  the  ships  as  they 
made  for  Samos,  from  the  main  sea.  A  small  number  of 
Roman  vessels,  just  as  it  grew  dark,  got  into  a  desert  harbour 
on  the  Samiafi  coast;  the  rest,  after  being  tossed  about  all  night, 
ran  into  the  same  harbour  in  the  morning.  Having  learned 
here,  from  the  country  people,  that  the  enemy’s  fleet  lay  at 
iEthalia,  they  held  a  consultation  w^hether  they  should  attack 
them  immediately,  or  wait  for  that  of  the  Rhodians.  Their  de¬ 
termination  was  to  postpone  the  attack,  and  they  sailed  away 
to  Corycus,  whence  they  had  come.  Polyxenidas,  also,  having 
kept  his  station  for  some  time,  without  effecting  any  thing, 
sailed  home  to  Ephesus.  On  this,  the  Roman  ships,  having 
the  sea  now  clear  of  the  enemy,  sailed  to  Samos;  where,  a  few 
days  after,  they  were  joined  by  the  fleet  from  Rhodes,  and,  to 
show  that  they  had  only  waited  for  this,  they  immediately 
sailed  away  to  Ephesus,  resolved  either  to  fight  the  enemy, 
or,  in  case  they  should  decline  a  battle,  to  extort  from  them 
a  confession  of  fear,  which  would  have  the  best  effect  on  the 
minds  of  the  states  of  Asia.  They  lay  for  some  time  oppo¬ 
site  the  entrance  of  the  harbour,  with  the  fleet  formed  in  a 
line  abreast,  but  none  came  out  against  them;  on  which  they 
divided;  and  while  one  part  lay  at  anchor,  before  the  mouth 

BOOK  mVIL 

B*  C.  190.] 

141 

of  the  harbour^  the  other  landed  a  body  of  soldiers.  These 
made  depredations  over  a  great  extent  of  the  country,  and, 
as  they  were  conveying  to  the  ships  the  great  booty  which 
they  had  seized,  Andronichus,  a  Macedonian,  who  was  in 
garrison  at  Ephesus,  sallied  out  on  them,  when  they  came 
near  the  walls,  stripped  them  of  the  greatest  part  of  their 
plunder,  and  drove  them  down  to  the  shore  to  their  ships. 
On  the  day  following,  the  Romans  laid  an  ambuscade  about 
the  middle  of  the  way,  and  marched  in  a  body  to  the  city, 
in  order  to  entice  the  Macedonians  out  of  the  gates;  but  these 
were  deterred  from  coming  out,  and  the  Romans  returned 
to  their  ships.  As  the  enemy  thus  avoided  fighting,  either 
on  land  or  sea,  the  fleet  sailed  back  to  Samos,  whence  it 
came.  The  praetor  then  detached  two  Rhodian  triremes,  and 
two  belonging  to  the  Italian  allies,  under  the  command  of 
Epicrates,  a  Rhodian,  to  guard  the  streight  of  Cephallenia, 
which  was  infested  with  piracies  by  Hybristas,  a  Lacedaemo¬ 
nian,  at  the  head  of  a  band  of  young  Cephallenians,  so  that 
the  passage  was  shut  against  the  convoys  from  Italy. 
XIV.  Epicratus  met,  at  Piraeeus,  Lucius  iEmilius  Re- 
gillus,  who  was  on  his  way  to  take  the  command  of  the  fleet* 
On  hearing  of  the  defeat  of  the  Rhodians,  as  he  had  only 
two  quinqueremes,  he  carried  back  with  him,  to  Asia,  Epi¬ 
crates  and  his  four  ships.  He  w^as  attended  also  by  some 
ufidecked  vessels  of  the  Athenians.  He  crossed  the  iEgean 
sea  to  Chios,  to  which  place  came,  in  the  middle  of  the  night, 
Tima^icrates,  a  Rhodian,  with  two  quadriremes  from  Samos, 
and,  being  presented  to  jEmilius,  he  told  him,  that  he  was 
despatched  for  the  purpose  of  convoying  him  in  safety,  be¬ 
cause  the  king’s  ships,  by  frequent  excursions  from  the  Hel¬ 
lespont,  and  Abydus,  rendered  the  sea  on  that  coast  dange¬ 
rous  to  transports.  In  his  passage  from  Chios  to  Samos, 
iEmiiius  was  met  by  two  Rhodian  quadriremes,  sent  by  Li- 
vius  to  attend  him,  and  by  king  Eumenes  with  two  quinque¬ 
remes.  On  his  arrival  at  Samos,  as  soon  as  he  had  received 

142 

HISTORY  OF  ROME* 

fY.  R.  562. 
the  command  of  the  fleet  from  Livius,  and  duly  performed 
the  usual  sacrifices,  he  called  a  council.  Here,  Caius  Livius, 
whose  opinion  was  first  asked,  said,  that  “  no  one  could  give 
advice,  with  more  sincerity  than  he,  who  recommended  to 
another,  what  himself  would  do,  in  the  same  case.  That 
his  intention  had  been,  to  have  sailed  with  the  whole  fleet  to 
Ephesus;  to  have  taken  with  him  ships  of  burden,  heavily 
laden  with  ballast,  and  to  have  sunk  them  in  the  entrance  of 
the  harbour.  That  the  passage  might  be  shut  up,  in  this 
manner,  with  little  difficulty;  because  the  mouth  of  it  was 
like  a  river,  long  and  narrow,  and  full  of  shoals.  By  this  ex¬ 
pedient,  he  would  have  cut  off  the  enemy’s  communication 
with  the  sea,  and  rendered  their  fleet  useless,” 
XV.  This  plan  was  not  approved  of  by  any  of  the  council. 
King  Eumenes  asked,  Whether,  when,  by  sinking  the  ships, 
they  should  have  barred  the  pass  to  the  sea,  their  own  fleet 
would  be  at  liberty  to  go  away  and  succour  their  allies,  and 
infuse  terror  in  their  enemies;  or  whether  they  might  not, 
nevertheless,  be  obliged  to  block  up  the  port  with  their  whole 
force?  For,  if  they  should  withdraw,  who  could  doubt  that 
the  enemy  would  weigh  up  the  hulks  that  were  sunk,  and 
open  the  port  with  less  labour  than  it  had  cost  to  shut  it? 
But  if,  after  all,  they  were  to  remain  there,  what  advantage 
would  accrue  from  the  harbour  being  closed?  Nay,  on  the 
contrary,  the  enemy  enjoying  a  safe  haven,  and  an  opule^ 
city,  furnished,  at  the  same  time,  with  every  thing  from  Asia, 
would  pass  the  summer  at  their  ease,  while  the  Romans,  ex¬ 
posed  in  the  open  sea  to  winds  and  waves,  and  in  want  of 
every  accommodation^  must  continue  on  guard,  without  in¬ 
termission;  and  might  more  properly  be  said  to  be,  them¬ 
selves,  tied  down,  and  hindered  from  doing  any  thing  that 
ought  to  be  done,  than  to  keep  the  enemy  shut  up.”  Euda- 
mus,  commander  of  the  Rhodian  fleet,  rather  showed  his 
disapprobation  of  the  plan  proposed,  than  recommended  any 
himself.  Epicrates,  the  Rhodian,  advised,  “  not  to  think  of 

BOOK  XXXVIL 

143 

B.  C,  190.] 
Ephesus  for  the  present,  but  to  send  a  part  of  the  fleet  tq 
Lycia,  and  bring  Patara,  the  metropolis  of  that  nation,  into 
a  treaty  of  alliance.  This  would  conduce  to  two  important 
purposes:  first,  the  Rhodians,  by  peace  being  established  in 
the  countries  opposite  to  their  island,  would  be  at  liberty  to 
apply  the  whole  of  their  strength  to  the  war  against  Antio- 
chus;  and  then  the  fleet  which  the  enemy  were  fitting  out  in 
Lycia,  would  be  blocked  up,  and  prevented  from  joining 
Polyxenidas,”  This  plan  was  the  most  approved  of.  Never¬ 
theless,  it  was  determined  that  Regillus  should  sail,  with  the 
entire  fleet,  to  the  harbour  of  Ephesus,  to  strike  terror  into 
the  enemy. 
XVI.  Caius  Livius  was  sent  to  Lycia,  with  two  Roman 
quinqueremes,  four  Rhodian  quadriremes,  and  two  open  ves¬ 
sels  of  Smyrna;  being  ordered  to  proceed,  first,  to  Rhodes, 
and  to  communicate  all  his  designs  to  the  government  there. 
The  states,  which  he  passed  in  his  W’ay,  Miletus,  Mx  ndus, 
Halicarnassus,  Cnidus,  and  Cous,  cheerfully  obeyed  his  or¬ 
ders.  When  he  came  to  Rhodes,  he  explained  to  the  persons 
in  authority,  the  business  on  which  he  was  sent,  and,  at  the 
same  time,  desired  their  opinion.  They  all  approved^the  de¬ 
sign;  and  gave  him  three  quadriremes,  in  addition  to  his 
squadron;  and  with  these  he  set  sail  for  Patara.  The  wind, 
being  favourable  at  first,  carried  them  very  near  the  city,  and 
they  were  in  hopes  of  effecting  something  by  surprise;  but 
this  suddenly  veering,  they  had  to  labour  in  a  \  ery  heavy 
sea.  However,  by  dint  of  rowing,  they  reached  the  land,  but 
there  was  no  safe  anchorage  there,  nor  could  they  ride  in  the 
road,  as  the  sea  was  rough,  and  night  was  coming  on.  They 
therefore  sailed  past  the  city,  to  the  port  of  Phellus,  which 
was  not  quite  two  miles  distant,  and  which  afforded  shelter 
from  the  violence  of  the  waves,  but  was  overlooked  by  high 
cliffs;  and  these  the  townspeople,  joined  by  the  king's  troops 
in  garrison  there,  immediately  seized.  Livius,  though  the 
landing-place  was  rugged  and  difficult,  sent  against  them  a 

144 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  562. 

party  of  the  auxiliaries,  composed  of  Issaeans,  and  light  in¬ 
fantry  of  Smyrna.  These,  (as  long  as  the  business  was  car¬ 
ried  on  with  missile  weapons,  and  in  slight  attacks  on  the 
few  who  were  there  at  first,  and  which  was  rather  a  skirmish 
than  a  battle,)  supported  the  contest  sufficiently  well.  But 
greater  numbers  flocking  thither  from  the  city,  and,  at  length, 
the  whole  multitude  poured  out,  which  made  Livius  fear, 
not  only  that  the  auxiliaries  might  be  cut  off,  but  that  the 
ships  would  be  in  danger  lying  so  near  the  land.  In  conse- 
quence  he  led  out  to  the  engagement,  not  only  the  soldiers, 
but  the  marines,  and  even  the  crowd  of  rowers,  armed  with 
such  weapons  as  each  could  find.  After  all,  however,  the 
fight  was  doubtful;  and,  besides  a  considerable  number  ol 
soldiers,  Lucius  Apustius  fell  in  this  disorderly  combat.  At 
last  the  Lycians  were  routed,  and  driven  within  their  gates; 
and  the  Homans,  victorious,  but  not  without  loss  of  blood, 
returned  to  their  ships.  They  then  proceeded  to  the  gulf  of 
Tclonessus,  which  washes  Caria  on  one  side,  and  Lycia  on 
the  other,  where  all  thoughts  of  any  farther  attempt  on  Pa- 
tara  w  ere  laid  aside,  the  Rhodians  were  sent  home,  and  Li¬ 
vius,  sajling-along  the  coast  of  Asia,  crossed  over  to  Greece, 
that  he  might  have  a  meeting  with  the  Scipios,  who  were  at 
that  time  in  Thessaly,  and  then  take  his  passage  to  Italy. 
XVlI.  iEmilius,  although  himself  had  been  driven  off  from 
Ephesus  by  a  storm,  and  had  returned  to  Samos,  without 
effecting  any  thing,  yet  hearing  that  the  expedition  to  Lycia 
was  dropped,  and  that  Livius  had  gone  to  Italy,  he  thought 
the  miscarriage  of  the  attempt  on  Patra  disgraceful,  and  ac¬ 
cordingly  resolved  to  go  thither,  and  attack  the  city  with  his 
utmost  force.  Having  sailed  past  Miletus,  and  the  rest  of 
the  coast  ol  the  allies,  he  made  a  descent  in  the  bav  of  Bar- 
gyllae,  with  design  to  reduce  Jassus,  The  city  was  held  by 
a  garrison  of  the  king’s  troops,  and  the  Romans  made  hos¬ 
tile  depredations  on  all  the  country  round.  He  then  sent 
persons  to  confer  with  the  magistrates,  and  principal  inhabi- 

BOOK  XXXVIL 

145 

B.  C.  190.] 

tants,  and  sound  their  dispositions;  but,  being  told  by  them, 
that  nothing  was  in  their  power,  he  advanced  to  lay  siege  to 
the  city.  There  were,  with  the  Homans,  some  exiles  from 
Jassus,  who,  in  a  body  earnestly  importuned  the  Rhodians 
^Siot  to  sufter  an  unoffending  city,  which  was  both  their 
neighbour,  and  connected  with  them  in  consanguinity,  to  be 
ruined.  They  themselves,  were  banished  for  no  other  cause 
than  their  faithful  attachment  to  the  Romans;  and  those, 
who  remained  in  the  place,  were  held  in  subjection  by  the 
same  force  by  which  they  had  been  expelled.  The  people 
of  Jassus  had  all  but  one  wdsh,  to  escape  from  a  state  of  sla¬ 
very  under  the  king.”  The  Rhodians,  moved  in  their  en- 
treaties,  and  calling  in  the  assistance  of  king  Eumenes,  re¬ 
presented,  at  the  same  time,  their  own  connexions  with  them, 
and  also  the  unfortunate  condition  of  the  city,  which  was 
kept  in  bondage  by  the  king’s  garrison;  and  bv  these  means 
prevailed  on  iEmilius  to  drop  the  siege.  Departing  hence, 
and  coasting  along  the  shore  of  Asia,  where  every  other 
place  %vas  favourably  disposed,  he  arrived  at  Loryma,  a  port 
opposite  to  Rhodes.  Here,  the  military  tribunes,  in  their 
meeting  at  the  Praetorium,  began,  at  first,  in  p«-ivatc  conver¬ 
sation,  to  make  observations,  which  afterwards  reached  the 
ears  of  iEmilius,  that  the  fleet  was  going  off  to  a  distance 
from  Ephesus,  from  the  war  which  concerned  themselves; 
so  that  the  enemy,  being  left  behind,  without  control,  might 
safely  make  whatever  attempts  they  pleased,  against  so  ma¬ 
ny  states  of  the  allies,  in  their  neighbourhood,  ^milius  felt 
the  justness  of  these  remarks,  and  calling  the  Rhodians  to 
him,  asked  them,  whether  the  whole  fleet  could  lie  in  the 
harbour  of  Patara;  to  which  they  answered  in  the  negative. 
Eurnished  with  this  excuse  for  laying  aside  the  design,  he 
sailed  back  to  Samos. 
XVIIL  In  the  mean  time  Seleucus,  son  of  Antiochus, 
who  had  kept  his  army  in  iEtolia,  through  the  whole  of  the 
winter,  employing  it,  partly,  in  succouring  his  allies,  partly 
VOL.  V. - U 

146 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  562. 

in  ravaging  the  lands  of  those  whom  he  could  not  seduce  to 
his  side,  resolved  to  make  an  incursion  on  the  territory  of 
king  Eumenes,  while  he,  at  a  great  distance  from  home, 
was  assisting  the  Romans  and  Rhodians,  in  attacks  on  the 
maritime  parts  of  Lycia.  He  advanced,  as  an  enemy,  first, 
to  Elaea,  but  soon  laid  aside  the  design  of  besieging  it;  and, 
having  wasted  the  country,  in  a  hostile  manner,  he  led  his 
army  to  lay  siege  to  Pergamus,  the  capital,  and  the  princi¬ 
pal  fortress  of  the  kingdom.  Attains,  at  first,  placing  ad¬ 
vanced  guards  outside  the  city,  and  sending  out  parties  of 
cavalry  and  light  infantrv,  acted  an  offensive,  rather  than  a 
defensive  part.  But,  after  some  time,  having  discovered,  in 
slight  skirmishes,  that  he  %vas  not  a  match  for  the  enemy, 
in  any  respect,  he  drew  back  his  men  within  the  fortifica¬ 
tions,  and  then  the  siege  was  formed.  About  this  time, 
Antioch  us  leaving  Apamea,  with  a  vast  army  compounded 
of  various  nations,  encamped,  first,  at  Sardis,  and  afterwards 
took  post  at  a  small  distance  from  the  camp  of  Seleucus,  at 
the  head  of  the  ri\er  Caicus.  The  most  formidable  part  of 
his  force  was  a  body  of  four  thousand  Gauls,  whom  he  had 
procured  for  hire;  these,  with  a  few  others  intermixed,  he 
detached,  with  orders  to  waste  utterly  the  country  about 
Pergamus.  When  news  of  these  transactions  arrived  at  Sa¬ 
mos,  Eumcnes,  being  thus  recalled  by  a  war  in  his  own  do¬ 
minions,  sailed  with  his  fleet  to  Elaea;  and  finding  there,  in 
readiness,  some  light  troops  of  horse  and  foot,  he  took  them 
for  an  escort,  and  proceeded  directly  to  Pergamus,  before 
the  enemy  could  be  apprised  of  his  arrival,  or  take  any 
steps  to  intercept  him.  The  garrison  now  began  again  to 
sally  out,  and  skirmish;  but  Eumenes,  evidently  avoided 
risking  a  decisive  engagement.  In  a  few  days  after,  the 
Combined  fleet  of  the  Romans  and  Rhodians  came  from  Sa¬ 
mos  to  Elsea,  to  support  the  king.  When  Antiochus  was 
informed  that  these  had  landed  troops  at  Elsea,  and  that  so 
many  fleets  were  assembled  in  one  harbour,  and  at  the  same 

BOOK  XXXVIL 

ur 

B.  C.  190.J 
time,  heard  that  the  consul,  with  his  army,  was  already  in 
Macedonia,  and  was  making  the  necessary  preparations  for 
his  passage  over  the  Hellespont,  he  judged  that  now  was 
the  time  for  negociation,  before  he  should  be  pressed  on  sea 
and  land  at  once;  and  with  this  view  he  chose  for  his  camp 
a  rising  ground  opposite  to  Elsea.  Leaving  there  all  the  in¬ 
fantry,  with  his  cavalry,  amounting  to  six  thousand,  he  went 
down  into  the  plains  which  lay  under  the  walls  of  the  town, 
having  despatched  a  herald  to  iEmilius,  to  acquaint  him  that 
he  wished  to  treat  of  peace. 
XIX.  iEmilius  sent  to  Pergamus  for  Eumenes,  and,  de¬ 
siring  the  Rhodians  to  be  present,  held  a  council  on  the 
message.  The  Rhodians  were  not  averse  from  a  pacifica¬ 
tion;  but  Eumenes  affirmed,  that  they  could  not  treat  of 
peace,  at  such  a  juncture;  nor  could  a  business  of  the  kind 
be  concluded,  For,’^  said  he  how  can  we,  shut  up  as  we 
are,  within  our  walls,  and  besieged,  with  honour  accept 
terms  of  peace?  Or  who  will  deem  such  treaty  valid,  which 
we  shall  conclude,  without  the  presence  of  the  consul,  with¬ 
out  a  vote  of  the  senate,  and  without  an  order  of  the  Ro¬ 
man  people?  For,  let  me  ask,  supposing  the  matter  conclud¬ 
ed  by  you,  would  you  immediately  go  home  to  Italy,  and 
carry  away  your  fleet  and  army,  or  would  you  wait  to  know 
the  consuFs  determination  on  the  case;  what  the  senate 
should  decree,  or  the  people  order?  It  is  plain  then,  that 
you  must  stay  in  Asia,  that  your  troops  must  be  led  back 
to  the  quarters,  where  they  wintered,  and,  without  having 
any  thing  to  do  against  the  enemy,  exhaust  the  allies  by  their 
consumption  of  provisions;  and  then,  if  it  seem  fit  to  those, 
who  have  the  power  of  determining,  we  must  begin  the 
whole  war  anew.  Whereas,  if  the  present  vigorous  pro¬ 
ceedings  suffer  no  obstruction  from  delay,  we  may,  with  the 
will  of  the  gods,  bring  it  to  a  conclusion  before  the  winter.’^ 
His  opinion  was  approved;  and  the  answer  given  to  Antio- 
chus  was,  that  no  treaty  of  peace  could  be  admitted  before 

148 

HISTORY  OF  ROME- 

[Y.  R.  562, 

the  arrival  of  the  consul.  Antiochus,  frustrated  in  this 
scheme  for  putting  an  end  to  the  war,  ravaged,  first,  the  ter¬ 
ritory  of  Ela?a,  then  that  of  Pergamus;  and,  leaving  there 
his  son  Seleucus,  marched  in  a  hostile  manner,  to  Adramyt- 
teum,  whence  he  proceeded  to  an  opulent  tract  of  country 
called  the  Plain  of  Thebes,  a  city  celebrated  in  one  of  Ho¬ 
mer’s  poems;  and  in  no  other  place  in  Asia  did  the  king’s 
soldiers  find  such  a  plenty  of  booty,  jEmilius  and  Eumenes 
also,  sailing  round  with  the  fleet,  came  to  Adramytteum, 
:o  protect  the  city. 
XX.  It  happened,  just  at  this  time,  that  ten  thousand  foot 
and  one  hundred  horse,  all  under  the  command  of  Diophanes, 
arrived  from  Achaia  at  Elsea,  who,  on  landing,  were  conduct¬ 
ed  in  the  night  into  Pergamus,  by  persons  sent  for  the  purpose, 
by  Attalus.  They  were  all  veterans,  well  skilled  in  war;  and 
their  commander  was  a  disciple  of  Philopaemen’s  the  most 
consLimmace  general  among  the  Greeks,  in  that  age.  They  set 
apart  two  days  to  give  rest  to  the  men  and  horses,  and,  at 
the  same  time,  to  view  the  posts  of  the  enemy,  and  to  learn  at 
what  places,  and  what  times,  they  advanced  and  retired. 
The  king’s  troops,  generally^  approached  to  the  foot  of  the 
hill,  on  which  the  town  stands,  so  that  their  detachments 
could  plunder  all  the  country  behind,  at  will,  for  not  a  man 
ever  sallied  out,  even  to  throw  darts,  from  a  distance  against 
their  guards.  When  the  garrison  once  became  so  dispirited  as 
to  confine  themselves  within  the  walls,  the  king’s  troops  con¬ 
ceived  a  great  contempt  of  them,  and  thence,  fell  into  a  care¬ 
lessness  on  their  part.  The  greater  number  did  not  keep 
their  horses  either  saddled  or  bridled,  while  few  remained 
under  arms,  and  in  the  ranks;  the  rest  slipping  away,  were 
scattered  all  over  the  plain,  some  diverting  themselves  with 
youthful  sports  and  tricks,  others  eating  in  the  shade,  and 
some  even  stretched  on  the  ground  asleep.  When  Dio¬ 
phanes  observed  all  these  particulars,  which  the  high  situa¬ 
tion  of  Pergamus  enabled  him  to  do  fully;  he  ordered  his 

B.  C.  190.j 

BOOK  XXXVIL 

149 

men  to  take  arms  and  to  be  ready  at  a  particular  gate.  He 
himself  went  to  Attains^  and  told  him  that  he  had  a  mind  to 
try  his  fortune  against  the  enemy’s  advanced  guards.  Atta¬ 
ins  gave  consent,  but  not  without  reluctance,  as  he  saw  that 
one  hundred  horse  must  fight  against  three  hundred,  one 
thousand  foot  against  four  thousand.  Diophanes  then  march¬ 
ed  by  the  gate,  and  took  post  at  a  small  distance  from  the 
enemy’s  guard,  waiting  bis  opportunity.  On  one  side,  the 
people  in  Pergamus  thought  that  he  was  actuated  by  mad¬ 
ness  rather  than  by  courage;  and,  on  the  other,  the  enem}\ 
after  observing  his  party  lor  a  short  time,  and  seeing  no 
movement  among  them,  were  not  in  any  degree  roused  from 
their  supineness,  but  even  ridiculed  the  smallness  of  the  num¬ 
ber.  Diophanes,  for  a  long  time,  kept  his  men  quiet,  as  if 
they  had  been  brought  out  merely  for  the  purpose  of  looking 
about  them;  but,  as  soon  as  he  perceived  that  the  enemy  had 
quitted  their  ranks,  ordering  the  infantry  to  follow,  as  fast 
as  they  could,  he  himself,  with  his  own  troop  led  the  way  at 
the  head  of  the  cavalrv,  and  pushing  on,  with  all  possible 
speed,  made  a  sudden  charge  on  the  enemy’s  party,  while  a 
shout  was  raised  by  every  horseman  and  footman  at  once. 
Not  the  men  only  so  attacked,  were  terrified,  but  the  horses 
also;  insomuch  that  they  broke  their  collars,  and  caused 
great  confusion  and  tumult  throughout.  A  few  of  the  hor¬ 
ses,  indeed,  stood  unafFrighted;  but  even  these  the  troopers 
could  not  easily  saddle,  or  bridle,  or  mount;  for  the  Achse- 
ans  struck  much  greater  terror  than  would  be  supposed  from 
so  small  a  party  of  horse.  But  now  the  infantry,  in  due  or¬ 
der  and  preparation,  assailed  the  enemy,  dispersed  through 
their  own  negligence,  and  almost  half  asleep;  and  slaughter 
and  flight  ensued  in  every  part  of  the  plain.  Diophanes  pur¬ 
sued  the  runaways  as'  lar  as  he  could  with  safety,  and  then 
returned  into  garrison,  after  acquiring  very  great  honour  to 
the  Achiean  nation;  for  the  whole  affair  had  been  seen  from 
the  walls  of  Pergamus,  by  the  men,  and  even  by  the  women. 

150 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R,  562. 

XXL  Next  day,  the  enemy’s  guard,  in  more  regular  and 
orderly  condition,  pitched  their  camp  five  hundred  paces 
farther  from  the  city,  and  the  Achseans  marched  out  at  near¬ 
ly  the  same  time  as  before,  and  to  the  same  place.  During 
many  hours,  both  parties  stood,  attentively  watching  each 
other,  in  continual  expectation  of  an  immediate  attack.  At 
the  approach  of  sunset,  the  usual  time  of  their  returning  to 
the  main  camp,  the  king’s  troops,  forming  together  in  a  body, 
began  to  retire,  Diophanes  did  not  stir  until  they  were  out 
of  sighti  and  then  he  rushed  on  their  rear  guard  with  the 
same  vehemence  as  before,  and  again  excited  such  dismay 
and  confusion,  that,  though  the  hindmost  were  put  to  the 
sword,  not  one  of  them  halted,  or  thought  of  fighting;  so  that 
they  were  driven  into  their  camp  in  confusion,  and  scarcely 
observing  any  order  in  their  march.  These  daring  exertions 
of  the  Acbaeans  obliged  Seleucus  to  decamp,  and  quit  the  ter¬ 
ritory  of  Pergamus.  Antiochus,  having  learned  that  the  Ro- 
mans  and  Eumenes  were  come  to  protect  Adramytteum, 
made  no  attempt  on  that  city,  but  ravaged  the  country  ad¬ 
joining.  He  afterwards  reduced  Pera^a,  a  colony  of  Mityle- 
neans;  while  Cotton,  Corylenus,  Aphrodisias,  and  Crene, 
were  all  taken  at  the  first  assault.  He  then  returned  through 
'Thyatira  to  Sardis.  Seleucus  remained  on  the  sea-coast, 
keeping  the  favourers  of  one  party  in  fear,  and  protecting 
those  of  the  other.  The  Roman  fleet,  with  Eumenes  and  the 
Rhodians,  retired,  first  to  Mitylene,  atjd  then  to  Elsea,  whence 
they  had  set  out.  On  their  way  to  Phoceea  they  put  in  at 
an  island  called  Bachius,  near  the  city  of  Phocgea;  and, 
though  they  had  formerly  spared  the  temples  and  statues, 
with  which  kind  of  decorations  the  island  abounded  in  an  ex¬ 
traordinary  degree,  yet  they  now  pillaged  them  all,  and  then 
passed  over  to  the  city.  They  commenced  the  attack  of  it 
on  three  different  sides,  according  to  a  plan  concerted;  but 
soon  perceiving  that  it  could  not  be  taken  by  scalade  and  as¬ 
sault,  without  regular  works,  and  learning  that  a  reinforce- 

B.  C.  190.] 

BOOK  XXXVIL 

151 

ment  of  three  thousand  soldiers,  sent  by  Antiochus,  had  got 
into  the  city,  they  immediately  broke  up  the  siege,  and  the 
fleet  retired  to  the  island,  \yithout  having  effected  any  thing 
more  than  the  devastation  of  the  enemy’s  country  in  the 
neighbourhood. 
XXII.  Here  it  was  resolved  that  Eumenes  should  return 
home,  and  make  every  necessary  preparation  for  the  passage 
of  the  consul,  and  his  army,  over  the  Hellespontj  and  that  the 
Roman  and  Rhodian  fleets  should  sail  back  to  Samos,  and 
remain  stationed  there,  to  prevent  any  attempt  being  made 
by  Polyxenidas.  Accordingly  the  king  returned  to  Elaea, 
the  Romans  and  Rhodians  to  Samos.  There,  Marcus  .£rai- 
lius,  brother  to  the  praetor,  died.  When  his  obsequies  were 
performed,  the  Rhodians,  on  a  report  that  a  fleet  was  on  its 
way  from  Syria,  sailed  away,  with  thirteen  of  their  own  ships, 
one  Coan,  and  one  Cnidian  quinqucreme,  to  Rhodes,  where 
they  were  to  lie.  Two  days  before  the  arrival  of  Eudamus, 
and  the  fleet  from  Samos,  another  fleet  of  thirteen  ships,  un¬ 
der  the  command  of  Pamhiiadas,  had  been  sent  out  against 
the  same  Syrian  fleet,  and  taking  with  them  four  ships,  which 
had  been  left  to  protect  Caria,  they  relieved  Daedala,  and 
several  other  fortresses  of  Per^ea,  which  were  besieged  by  the 
king's  troops.  It  was  determined  that  Eudamus  should  pu^ 
to  sea  directly,  and  an  addition  of  six  undecked  ships  was 
made  to  his  fleet.  He  accordingly  set  sail;  and,  using  all 
possible  expedition,  overtook  the  first  S(|uadron  at  a  port 
called  Megiste,  from  whence  they  proceeded  in  one  body,  to 
Phaselis,  resolving  to  wait  there  for  the  enemy. 
XXllL  Phaselis  stands  on  the  confines  of  Lycia  and 
Pamphylia;  it  projects  far  into  the  sea,  and  is  the  first  land 
seen  by  persons  coming  from  Cilicia  to  Rhodes,  and,  from 
hence,  ships  can  be  seen  at  a  great  distance.  For  this  rea¬ 
son,  chiefly,  this  place  was  made  choice  of,  that  they  might 
lie  directly  in  the  way  of  the  enemy's  fleet.  But  an  event 
took  place,  which  they  did  not  foresee;  for,  in  consequence 

152 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y,  R.  562. 

of  the  unwholesomeness  of  the  place,  and  of  the  season  of 
the  year,  it  being  now  the  middle  of  summer,  diseases  be¬ 
gan  to  spread  with  violence,  particularly  among  the  rowers. 
The  fear  of  this  pestilential  malady  made  them  quit  the 
place;  and,  sailing  by  the  Pamphylian  bay,  they  put  into 
port  at  the  river  Eurymedon,  where  they  learned,  from  the 
people  of  As  pen  die,  that  the  enemy  were  then  at  Sida.  The 
king’s  fleet  had  been  the  slower  in  its  passage,  by  reason  of 
the  unfavourable  wind,  called  the  Etesian;  that  being  the 
time  when  it  blows  periodically  from  the  north-west.  The 
Rhodians  had  thirty  two  quadriremes,  and  four  triremes. 
In  the  king’s  fleet  were  thirty-seven  ships  of  the  larger  rates; 
among  which  were  three  of  seven,  and  four  of  six  banks  of 
oars;  and  besides  these,  ten  triremes.  Both  fleets,  at  the 
dawn  of  the  next  day,  moved  out  of  port,  as  resolved  to 
come  to  an  immediate  engagement;  and,  as  soon  as  the  Rho¬ 
dians  passed  the  promontory,  that  stretches  into  the  deep 
from  Sida,  they  tlescried  the  enemy,  and  were  descried  by 
them.  The  leit  squadron  of  the  king’s  fleet,  which  was  on 
the  outside  next  the  main  sea,  was  commanded  by  Hannibal, 
the  right  by  Apollonius,  one  of  the  nobles,  and  they  had 
their  ships  already  formed  in  a  line,  ahead.  The  Rhodians 
approached  in  a  long  line  ahead,  also.  Eudamus,  in  the  com¬ 
mander’s  ship,  led  the  van;  Chariclitus  brought  up  the  rear; 
and  Pamphilidas  commanded  the  centre  division,  ^\'hen  Eu- 
damis  saw  the  enemy's  line  formed,  and  ready  for  battle,  ht 
pushed  out  towards  the  main,  ordering  the  ships  that  fol¬ 
lowed,  to  form,  regularly,  as  they  came  up,  in  a  line  of  bat¬ 
tle.  This  caused  some  confusion,  at  first;  for  he  had  not 
stretched  out  to  the  main  far  enough  to  give  room  for  all  the 
ships  to  come  into  a  line  between  him  and  the  land,  while 
himself  was  so  impatient,  as,  with  only  five  ships,  to  engage 
with  Hannibal;  the  rest,  having  received  orders  to  form 
their  line,  did  not  come  up.  The  rear  division  had  no  room 
left  for  it,  next  to  the  land,  and  whiU*  they  were  in  disorder 
the  fight  was  already  begun,  on  the  right,  against  Hannibal 

BOOK  XXXVII. 

153 

B.C.  190.] 
XXIV.  But  the  goodness  of  their  ships,  and  the  expert¬ 
ness  of  their  men  in  nautical  business,  quickly  freed  the  Rho" 
dians  from  all  embarrasment.  They  pushed  out,  hastily  to¬ 
wards  the  main;  by  which  means  each  made  room,  next  the 
land,  for  the  one  immediately  behind;  and  when  any  made 
a  stroke  with  its  beak  against  a  ship  of  the  enemy,  it  either 
shattered  its  prow,  or  swept  off  its  oars;  or,  passing  by  it,  in 
the  clear  space  between  the  vessels,  made  an  attack  on  its 
stem.  One  of  the  king’s  seven-banked  ships,  being  sunk, 
with  one  stroke,  by  a  Rhodian  vessel  of  much  smaller  size, 
dispirited  his  fleet  in  a  very  great  degree,  insomuch  that 
their  right  squadron  gave  evident  indications  of  an  in¬ 
tention  to  fly.  Hannibal,  in  the  open  sea,  pressed  Eudamus 
hard,  by  means,  chiefly,  of  his  superior  number  of  ships; 
for,  in  every  other  respect,  Eudamus  had  greatly  the  advan¬ 
tage;  and  he  would  have  surrounded  and  overpowered  him, 
had  not  the  signal,  for  a  dispersed  fleet  collecting  together 
again,  been  displayed  from  the  commander’s  ship.  On  which, 
all  the  ships  which  had  been  victorious  in  the  left  squadron, 
hastened  up  to  succour  their  friends.  This  made  Hannibal 
himself,  with  all  his  division,  betake  themselves  to  flight, 
while  the  Rhodians  could  not  pursue,  because  their  rowers, 
being  most  of  them  sick,  were,  therefore,  the  sooner  wea¬ 
ried.  While  lying  to,  to  take  refreshment,  Eudamus,  ob¬ 
serving  the  enemy  towing,  by  means  of  their  open  vessels, 
several  damaged  and  crippled  ships,  with  more  than  twenty 
that  were  going  off  unhurt,  commanded  silence,  from  the 
castle  of  the  commander’s  ship,  and  then  called  out,  Arise, 
and  feast  your  eyes  with  an  extraordinary  sight.”  They  all 
started  up,  and  perceiving  the  disorderly  flight  of  the  ene¬ 
my,  cried  out,  almost  with  one  voice,  that  they  ought  to  pur¬ 
sue.  Eudamus’s  ship  was  bulged  in  many  places;  he,  there¬ 
fore,  ordered  Pamphilidas  and  Chariclitus  to  pursue  as  far 
as  they  should  think  it  safe.  They,  accordingly,  pursued  for 
VOL.  V. — X 

154 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  562. 

a  considerable  time;  but,  seeing  Hannibal  make-in  close  to 
the  land,  fearing  to  be  wind-bound  on  an  enemy’s  coast,  they 
steered  back  to  Eudamus,  and  with  difficulty  towed  to  Pha- 
selis,  a  captured  seven-banked  ship,  which  had  been  damaged 
in  the  beginning  of  the  engagement.  They  then  sailed  home 
to  Rhodes,  not  so  much  exulting  in  their  victory,  as  blaming 
one  another,  for  not,  when  it  was  in  their  power,  having  sunk 
or  taken  the  whole  of  the  enemy’s  fleet.  Hannibal  was  so  dis¬ 
heartened  by  the  loss  of  this  one  battle,  that,  notwithstand¬ 
ing  their  departure,  he  durst  not  sail  along  the  coast  of  Ly- 
cia,  though  he  wished  to  join  the  king’s  main  fleet,  as  soon 
as  possible.  That  he  might  not  effect  this  junction  without 
opposition,  the  Rhodians  sent  Chariclitus,  with  twenty  ships, 
to  Patara,  and  the  harbour  of  Megiste.  They,  then,  ordered 
Eudamus,  with  seven  of  the  largest  vessels,  belonging  to  the 
fleet  which  he  had  commanded,  to  rejoin  the  Romans  at  Sa¬ 
mos,  and  to  endeavour,  by  every  argument,  and  by  all  his 
influence,  to  prevail  on  the  Homans  to  besiege  Patara.  - 
XXV.  Great  was  the  joy  felt  by  the  Romans;  first,  on 
receiving  the  news  of  the  victory^  and,  afterw'ards,  on  the  ar¬ 
rival  of  the  Rhodians:  and,  there  was  abundant  reason  to 
believe,  that,  If  these  were  freed  from  care,  they  would  ren¬ 
der  the  seas  in  that  part  of  the  world  safe.  But,  as  Antio- 
chus  had  marched  out  of  Sardis,  they  could  not  allow  them 
to  quit  the  guard  of  Ionia  and  ^Eolia,  lest  the  maritime  cities 
should  be  crushed  by  his  arms.  However,  they  sent  Pam- 
philidas,  with  four  decked  ships,  to  join  the  fleet  which  was 
at  Patara.  Antiochus  not  only  collected  aids  from  the  cir¬ 
cumjacent  states,  but  also,  sent  ambassadors  to  Prusias,  king 
of  Bithynia,  with  a  letter,  in  which  he  represented,  in  strong 
colours,  the  evil  designs  of  the  Romans  in  coming  into  Asia. 
Their  intentions  were,”  he  said,  to  abolish  all  kingly  go¬ 
vernments;  so  that  there  should  be  no  empire  in  any  part  of 
the  world.  They  had  already  reduced  Philip  and  Nabis;  and 
they  were  now  falling  on  him.  Thus  the  conflagration  would 

BOOK  XXXVIL 

155 

•B.  C.  190.] 

spread,  without  interruption,  from  one  to  another,  as  each  lay 
nearest  to  the  one  last  ruined,  until  it  enveloped  them  all. 
From  him  there  was  but  one  step  to  Bithynia,  now  that  Eu- 
menes  had  submitted  to  voluntary  servitude.”  This  letter 
made  a  strong  impression  on  Prusias;  but  he  was  convinced 
of  such  a  suspicion  being  groundless,  by  a  letter  from  the 
consul,  Scipio;  and  still  more  so,  by  one  from  his  brother 
Africanus,  who,  besides  urging  the  invariable  practice  of  the 
Roman  people,  of  augmenting  by  every  honourable  addi¬ 
tion,  the  grandeur  of  kings  in  alliance  with  them,  demon¬ 
strated,  by  instances  taken  from  his  own  family,  that  it  was 
the  interest  of  Prusias  to  court  their  friendship.  “  The  petty 
chieftains  in  Spain,”  he  said,  and  who  had  been  received 
into  alliance,  he  had  left  kings.  Masinissa  he  had  not  only  re¬ 
established  in  his  father’s  kingdom,  but  had  put  him  in  pos¬ 
session  of  that  of  Syphax,  by  whom  he  had  been  formerly 
dethroned:  so  that  he  was,  at  the  present,  not  only  by  far  the 
most  powerful  of  all  the  kings  in  Africa,  but  equal,  both  in 
dignity  and  strength,  to  any  monarch  in  any  part  of  the 
world.  Philip  and  Nabis,  avowed  enemies,  were  conquered 
in  war  bv  Titus  Quintius;  nevertheless,  they  were  left  in 
possession  of  their  kingdoms,  Philip  even  had  the  tribute  re¬ 
mitted  to  him  last  year,  and  his  son,  who  was  an  hostage, 
restored.  Through  the  indulgence  of  the  Roman  command¬ 
ers,  he  had  also  got  possession  of  several  states  beyond  the 
boundaries  of  Macedonia.  As  to  Nabis,  he  might  have  re¬ 
mained  in  the  same  honourable  rank,  had  not,  first,  his  own 
madness,  and,  afterwards,  the  treachery  of  the  JEtolians, 
brought  him  to  ruin,”  But  what  contributed,  more  than  all, 
to  fix  the  king’s  resolution,  w^as,  that  Caius  Livius,  who  had 
commanded  the  fleet  as  praetor,  came  to  him  ambassador 
from  Rome.  Livius  showed  him,  how  much  better  reason 
the  Romans  had  to  expect  success  than  Antiochusj  and  how 
much  more  scrupulously,  and  constantly,  they  would  main¬ 
tain  a  friendship  once  formed. 

156 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  562.  • 
• 
XXVI.  Antiochus,  having  lost  all  prospect  of  an  alUance 
v^ith  Prusias,  went  from  Sardis  to  Ephesus,  to  review  the 
fleet,  which  was  fitted  out,*  and  lay  there  ready,  for  several 
months  past;  to  which  he  now  gave  attention,  rather  because 
he  saw  it  impossible,  with  his  land  forces,  to  make  any  stand 
against  the  Roman  army,  and  the  two  Scipios,  its  comman¬ 
ders,  than  that  his  naval  force,  by  itself,  had  ever  been  suc¬ 
cessful,  in  any  trial  that  he  had  made  of  it,  or  afforded  at 
this  juncture,  any  great  or  well-grounded  expectation.  Yet 
there  were  at  the  time  some  circumstances  which  flattered 
his  hopes;  for  he  had  heard,  that  a  large  portion  of  the  Rho¬ 
dian  fleet  was  at  Patara,  and  that  king  Eumenes  had  gone 
to  the  Hellespont,  with  all  his  ships,  to  meet  the  consul. 
Besides, — the  destruction  of  the  Rhodian  fleet  at  Samos, 
under  circumstances  in  which-it  had  been  artfully  entangled, 
helped  to  inspire  some  degree  of  confidence.  Buoyed  up  by 
these  considerations,  he  sent  Polyxenidas  with  orders  to  try, 
at  all  events,  the  fortune  of  a  naval  engagement;  while  he 
himself  marched  his  land  forces  to  Notium,  This  town, 
which  belongs  to  Colophon,  stands  close  to  the  sea,  at  the 
distance  of  about  two  miles  from  Old  Colophon.  He  wished 
to  get  this  city  into  his  power,  because  it  was  so  near  to 
Ephesus  that  nothing  could  be  done  there,  on  sea  or  land, 
that  was  not  open  to  the  view  of  the  Colophonians,  and 
through  them,  instantly  known  to  the  Romans;  and  he  had 
no  doubt  that  the  latter,  on  hearing  of  the  siege,  would  bring 
their  fleet  from  Samos  to  the  relief  of  an  ally,  which  would 
give  Polyxenidas  an  opportunity  of  coming  to  action.  He 
therefore  laid  regular  siege  to  the  city,  making  his  ap¬ 
proaches  at  the  same  time  on  the  two  sides  next  the  sea;  in 
both  places,  advancing  his  engines  and  mounds  to  the  wall, 
and  bringing  up  the  rams  under  covered  galleries.  The 
Colophonians,  terrified  at  the  dangers  threatening  them,  sent 
envoys  to  Lucius  iEmilius,  at  Samos,  imploring  the  pro¬ 
tection  of  the  prsetor  and  people  of  Rome.  iEmilius,  think- 

BOOK  XXXVIL 

157 

B.  C.  190,] 

ing  nothing  more  improbable,  than  that  Polyxenidas,  whom 
he  had  twice  challenged,  in  vain,  to  fight,  should  ever  oflFer 
him  battle,  was,  for  some  time  past  uneasy  at  lying  so  long 
inactive  at  Samos;  and  he  considered  it  as  dishonourable, 
that  the  fleet  of  Eumenes  should  assist  the, consul  in  convey¬ 
ing  the  legions  into  Asia,  while  himself  should  be  con¬ 
fined  to  one  particular  spot,  and  assisting  Colophon  under  a 
siege,  without  knowing  what  would  be  the  issue.  Eudamus, 
the.  Rhodian,  (who  had  before  prevailed  upon  him  to  stay 
at  Samos,  when  he  wished  to  go  to  the  Hellespont,)  with  all 
the  other  ofiicers,  pressed  him  to  comply,  representing  ‘‘  how 
much  more  eligible  it  would  be,  either  to  relieve  confeder¬ 
ates  from  a  siege,  or  to  vanquish  that  fleet  which  he  had 
vanquished  before;  in  a  word,  to  drive  the  enemy  entirely 
away,  than  to  abandon  allies  to  destruction,  leave  Antiochus 
master  of  Asia,  by  sea  and  land,  and,  deserting  that  share  of 
the  war  which  properly  belonged  to  him,  to  sail  for  the 
Hellespont,  when  the  fleet  of  Eumenes  was  sufficient  for 
that  station.” 
XXVIL  They,  accordingly,  set  sail  from  Samos  in  quest 
of  provisions,  their  stock  being  consumed,  with  an  intention 
to  pass  over  to  Chios.  Samos  served  as  a  granary  to  the 
Romans,  and  thither  all  the  storeships,  sent  from  Rome, 
directed  their  course.  When  they  had  sailed  round  from  the 
city,  to  the  back  of  the  island,  which  looks  northward  to¬ 
wards  Chios  and  Erythrse,  and  were  preparing  to  cross  over, 
the  praetor  received  a  letter  informing  him,  that  a  vast 
quantity  of  corn  had  arrived  at  Chios,  from  Italy;  but  that 
the  vessels,  laden  with  wine,  were  detained  by  storms.  At 
the  same  time  accounts  were  received,  that  the  people  of 
Teios  had  furnished  large  supplies  of  provisions  to  the  king'^s 
fleet,  and  had  promised  five  thousand  vessels  of  wine.  On 
this  the  praetor,  immediately,  changed  his  course,  and 
steered  away  to  Teios,  resolved  either  to  make  use  of  the 
provisions  prepared  for  the  enemy,  with  the  consent  of  the 

158 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

[Y.  R.  562. 

inhabitants,  or  to  treat  them  as  foes.  As  the  shins  were 
making  up  to  the  land,  about  fifteen  vessels  appeared  in  sight 
near  Myonnesus.  The  praetor,  at  first,  thought  that  these 
belonged  to  the  king’s  fleet,  and  sailed  in  pursuit  of  them ; 
but  it  appeared  afterwards,  that  they  were  a  squadron  of 
pirates.  They  had  ravaged  the  sea-coast  of  Chios,  and  were 
returning  with  booty  of  every  kind,  when,  on  seeing  the  fleet 
approaching  from  the  main  sea,  they^  betook  themselves  to 
flight.  They  had  much  the  advantage,  both  in  point  of 
swiftness,  as  being  lighter,  and  constructed  for  the  purpose, 
and  also  in  being  nearer  the  land;  so  that  before  iEmilius 
could  overtake  them,  they  made  their  escape  to  Myonnesus; 
while  he,  unacquainted  with  the  place,  followed  in  expecta¬ 
tion  of  forcing  their  ships  out  of  the  harbour.  Myonnesus  is 
a  promontory  between  Teios  and  Samos.  It  consists  of  a 
hill  rising  from  a  pretty  large  base  to  a  sharp  top,  in  shape 
of  an  obelisk.  From  the  land,  the  access  to  it  is  by  a  narrow 
path;  towards  the  sea  it  is  terminated  by  cliffs,  undermined 
by  the  waves,  so  that  in  some  places,  the  superimpending 
rocks  project  beyond  the  vessels  that  lie  at  anchor.  7'he 
ships  not  daring  to  approach  lest  they  should  be  exposed  to 
the  weapons  of  the  pirates,  who  stood  above  on  the  cliffs, 
wasted  the  day  to  no  purpose.  At  length,  a  little  before 
nightfall,  they  gave  over  the  attempt,  and  retired,  and  next 
day,  reached  Teios.  Here,  the  praitor,  after  mooring  in  the 
port,  at  the  back  of  the  city,  called  by  the  inhabitants 
Ger^esticum,  sent  out  the  soldiers  to  ravage  the  adjacent 
ports. 
XXVIII.  The  Teians,  as  these  ravages  passed  under  their 
eyes,  sent  deputies  to  the  Roman  commander,  carrying  fil¬ 
lets,  and  other  badges  of  suppliants,  who  assured  him,  that 
their  state  was  innocent  of  any  hostile  word  or  deed  against 
the  Romans.  But  he  strongly  charged  them  with  having 
assisted  the  enemy’s  fleet  with  provisions,  and  with  having 
promised  a  supply  of  wine  to  Polyxenidas.”  He  farther  told 

B,  C.  190.] 

BOOK  XXXVIL 

159 

them,  that  if  they  would  furnish  the  same  supplies  to  the 
Roman  fleet,  he  would  recal  his  troops  from  plundering; 
otherwise,  they  should  be  treated  as  enemies.”  When  the 
deputies  carried  back  this  distressing  answer,  the  people  were 
summoned  to  an  assembly,  by  the  magistrates,  to  consult  on 
the  measures  proper  to  be  taken.  It  happened  that  Polvxe- 
nidas,  who  had  sailed  with  the  king’s  fleet  from  Colophon, 
having  heard  that  the  Romans  had  left  Samos  and  pursued 
the  pirates  to  Myonnesus;  that  they  were  ravaging  the  lands 
of  the  Teians,  and  that  their  fleet  lay  in  the  harbour  of  Ge- 
raesticum,  cast  anchor,  just  at  this  time,  in  a  retired  harbour 
of  an  island  called  Maoris,  opposite  to  Myonnesus.  Lying 
so  near,  he  easily  discovered  the  motions  of  the  enemy;  and, 
at  first,  entertained  strong  hopes  of  vanquishing  the  Roman 
fleet  here,  in  like  manner  as  he  had  vanquished  the  Rhodian 
at  Samos;  by  securing,  with  a  proper  force,  both  sides  of  the 
harbour's  mouth.  Nor  was  the  place  in  its  nature  unlike  to 
that  at  Samos;  by  the  promontories  advancing  their  points  to¬ 
wards  each  other,  the  harbour  is  inclosed  in  such  a  manner, 
that  two  ships  can  scarcely  go  out  together.  Polyxenidas  in¬ 
tended  to  seize  this  narrow  pass  in  the  night;  and,  while  ten 
ships  stood  at  each  of  the  promontories,  to  attack,  from  the 
right  and  left,  both  sides  of  the  enemy's  fleet  sailing  out;  to 
land  the  armed  men  out  of  the  rest  of  the  fleet,  as  he  had 
done  at  Panormus,  and  by  that  means  to  overpower  the  Ro¬ 
man,  on  land  and  sea,  at  once.  His  plan  would  probably 
have  succeeded  to  his  w  ish,  had  not  the  Romans,  on  the 
Teians  promising  to  comply  with  their  demands,  judged  it 
more  convenient  for  receiving  the  provisions,  to  remove  the 
fleet  into  the  inner  port  in  front  of  the  city.  It  is  said,  also, 
that  Eudamus,  the  Rhodian,  had  pointed  out  the  fault  of  the 
outer  harbour,  on  occasion  of  two  ships  happening  to  entan¬ 
gle  their  oars  together,  so  as  to  break  them,  in  the  narrow 
entrance.  Among  other  motives,  the  consideration  of  the 
danger  to  be  apprehended  from  the  land,  as  Antiochus  lay 

160  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  562. 
encamped  at  no  great  distance,  inclined  the  praetor  to  change 
his  station. 
XXIX.  When  the  fleet  was  brought  round  to  the  city,  as 
they  had  not  the  least  notion  of  the  enemy  being  so  near, 
both  soldiers  and  sailors  went  on  shore  to  divide  the  provi¬ 
sions,  and  the  wine  particularly,  among  the  ships;  when,  about 
mid-day,  a  peasant  happened  to  be  brought  before  the  praetor, 
who  told  him,  that  the  enemy's  fleet  was  lying  at  the  island 
of  Macris  these  two  days;  and  that,  a  little  while  ago,  some 
of  them  were  observed  to  be  In  motion,  as  if  preparing  to 
sail.  Greatly  alarmed  at  this  unexpected  event,  the  praetor 
ordered  the  trumpets  to  sound,  to  call  in  such  as  might  have 
straggled  into  the  country,  and  sent  the  tribunes  into  the 
city,  to  hasten  the  soldiers  and  sailors  on  board.  The  confu¬ 
sion  was  not  less  than  if  the  place  were  on  fire,  or  taken  by 
an  enemy;  some  running  to  call  out  the  men;  others  hurry¬ 
ing  to  the  ships,  while  the  orders  of  the  officers  were  con¬ 
founded  by  irregular  shouts,  intermixed  and  heightened  by 
the  clangor  of  the  trumpets,  until  at  length  the  crowd  col¬ 
lected  at  the  ships.  Here  scarcely  could  each  know  his  own 
ship,  or  make  his  way  through  the  tumult;  and  the  disorder 
would  probably  have  been  productive  of  much  mischief,  on 
land  and  sea,  if  the  commanders  had  not  exerted  themselves 
quickly.  iEmilius,  in  the  commander’s  ship,  sailed  out,  first, 
into  the  main;  where  receiving  the  rest;  he  put  each  into  its 
own  place,  so  as  to  form  a  line  abreast:  and  Eudamus  with 
the  Rhodian  fleet,  waited  at  the  shore,  that  the  men  might 
be  embarked  without  confusion,  and  that  every  ship,  as  soon 
as  ready,  might  leave  the  harbour.  By  these  means,  the  fore¬ 
most  division  formed  under  the  eye  of  the  prsetor,  while  the 
rear  was  brought  up  by  the  Rhodians;  and  then,  the  whole 
line,  in  as  regular  order  as  if  within  sight  of  the  foe,  advan¬ 
ced  into  the  open  sea.  They  were  between  Myonnesus  and 
the  promontory  of  Corycus  when  they  first  got  sight  of  the 
enemy.  The  king’s  fleet,  which  was  coming  in  a  long  line. 

BOOK  XXXVIL 

161 

B.  C.  190.] 
with  only  two  vessels  abreast,  then  formed  themselves  in 
order  of  battle,  stretching  out  their  left  division  so  far,  as 
that  it  might  inclose  the  right  of  the  Romans.  When  £uda« 
mus,  who  commanded  in  the  rear,  perceived  that  the  Ro¬ 
mans  could  not  form  an  equal  front,  but  were  just  on  the 
point  of  being  surrounded,  he  pushed  up  his  ships.  They 
were  Rhodians,  by  far  the  fastest  sailers  of  any  in  the  fleet; 
and,  having  filled  up  the  deficiency  in  the  extent  of  the  line, 
he  opposed  his  own  ship  to  the  commander’s,  on  board  of 
which  was  Polyxenidas. 
XXX.  The  fleets  were,  by  this  time,  engaged  in  every 
part.  The  Romans  fought  eighty  ships,  of  which  twenty-two 
tvere  Rhodian.  The  enemy’s  fleet  consisted  of  eighty^ight 
ships,  and  they  had  of  the  largest  rates,  three  of  six,  and 
two  of  seven  banks.  In  the  strength  of  the  vessels,  and  valour 
of  the  soldiers,  the  Romans  had,  greatly,  the  advantage  of 
the  king’s  party;  as  had  the  Rhodians  in  the  activity  of  their 
vessels,  the  skill  of  the  pilots,  and  the  dexterity  of  the  row¬ 
ers:  yet  the  enemy  was  chiefly  terrified  by  those  that  carried 
fires  before  them;  and  what  was  the  sole  cause  of  their  pre¬ 
servation  when  they  were  surrounded  at  Panormus,  proved 
here  the  principal  means  of  victory  to  the  Romans.  For  the 
king’s  ships,  through  fear  of  the  fire,  turned  aside,  and  to 
avoid  at  the  same  time  encountering  the  enemy’s  prow  with 
their  own;  so  that  they  could  not  strike  their  antagonist  with 
the  beaks,  but  exposed  the  side  of  their  ships  to  his  strokes; 
and,  if  any  did  venture  an  encounter,  it  was  immediately 
overspread  with  the  fire  that  was  poured  in;  while  the  men 
were  more  hurried  and  disordered  by  their  efforts  to  quench 
the  flames,  than  by  fighting.  However,  the  bravery  of  the 
soldiers,  as  is  generally  the  case,  was  what  chiefly  availed  in 
deciding  the  fate  of  the  battle.  For  the  Romans,  having 
broke  through  the  centre  of  the  enemy’s  line,  tacked  about 
and  fell  upon  the  rear  of  the  division  which  was  engaged 
with  the  Rhodians;  and,  in  an  instant  of  time,  both  Antio- 
VOL.  V. —  Y 

162 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  562. 

chus’s  centre  division,  and  the  ships  on  the  left,  were  sunk. 
The  squadron  on  the  right,  which  was  still  entire,  was  terri¬ 
fied  rather  by  the  disaster  of  their  friends,  than  any  imme¬ 
diate  danger  threatening  themselves;  but,  when  they  saw  the 
others  surrounded,  and  Polyxenidas’s  ship  deserting  its  as¬ 
sociates,  and  sailing  away,  they  quickly  hoisted  their  top¬ 
sails,  and  betook  themselves  to  flight,  having  a  favourable 
wind  for  making  Ephesus.  They  lost,  in  that  battle,  forty- 
two  ships;  of  which  thirteen  struck,  and  fell  into  the  hands 
of  the  Romans;  the  rest  were  burned  or  sunk.  Two  Roman 
ships  were  so  shattered  that  they  foundered,  and  several 
were  much  damaged.  One  Rhodian  vessel  was  taken  by  an 
extraordinary  casualty;  for,  on  its  striking  a  Sidenian  ship 
with  its  beak,  its  anchor,  thrown  out  by  the  force  of  the  shock, 
caught  fast  hold  of  the  other^s  prow  with  its  flake,  as  if  it 
were  a  grappling  iron  thrown  in.  Great  confusion  ensuing, 
the  Rhodians,  who  wished  to  disengage  themselves,  pulled 
back,  by  which  means  its  cable  being  dragged  forcibly,  and 
at  the  same  lime  entangled  with  the  oars,  swept  off  the  whole 
set  on  one  side.  The  vessel,  thus  crippled,  became  the  prize 
of  the  very  ship  which  it  had  wounded  with  its  beak  and 
grappled.  Such  was  the  issue  of  the  sea-fight  at  Myonnesus. 
XXXI.  Antiochus  was  much  dismayed  at  this  defeat,  and  on 
finding  himself  driven  from  the  sea;  despairing  therefore  of 
being  able  to  defend  distant  posts,  he  commanded  the  garrison 
to  be  withdrawn  from  Lysimachia,  lest  it  should  be  over¬ 
powered  by  the  Romans.  This  was  ill-judged,  as  events  af¬ 
terwards  proved.  For  it  would  have  been  easy  for  him,  not 
only  to  defend  Lysimachia  from  the  first  attack  of  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  but  to  have  protracted  the  siege  through  the  whole 
winter,  and,  by  thus  prolonging  the  time,  to  have  reduced 
the  besiegers  to  the  extremity  of  want;  while  he  might,  in 
the  mean  time  have  tried  every  opportunity  that  offered  for 
effecting  an  accommodation.  But,  after  the  defeat  at  sea, 
he  not  only  gave  up  Lysimachia,  but  even  raised  the  siege  of 

B.  C.  190*] 

BOOK  XXXVIL 

1«S 
Colophon,  and  retired  to  Sardis.  Here,  bending  all  his 
thoughts  to  one  single  object,  that  of  meetiifg  the  enemy  in 
the  field,  he  sent  into  Cappadocia,  to  Ariarathes,  to  request 
assistance,  and  to  every  other  place  within  his  power,  to  col¬ 
lect  forces,  .fimilius  Regillus  after  his  victory  at  sea,  pro¬ 
ceeded  to  Ephesus,  drew  up  his  ships  before  the  harbour, 
and,  having  extorted  from  the  enemy  a  final  acknowledg¬ 
ment  of  their  having  surrendered  the  dominion  of  the  sea, 
sailed  to  Chios,  w'hither  he  intended  to  have  gone,  before 
the  sea-fight  happened.  As  soon  as  he  had  refitted  the  ships 
that  had  been  damaged  in  the  battle,  he  sent  oflf  Lucius 
iEmilius  Scaurus,  with  thirty  others,  to  the  Hellespont,  to 
carry  over  the  army;  and  decorating  the  Rhodian  vessels 
with  naval  spoils,  and  allowing  them  a  part  of  the  booty,  he 
ordered  them  to  return  home.  The  Rhodians  spiritedly 
resolved  to  do  business  first.  They  therefore  proceeded  to 
assist  in  transporting  the  consul’s  forces,  and  when  they  had 
completed  that  service,  they  returned  to  Rhodes.  The  Ro* 
man  fleet  sailed  from  Chios  to  Phocsea.  This  city  stands  at 
the  bottom  of  a  bay,  and  is  of  an  oblong  shape.  The  wall 
encompasses  a  space  of  two  miles  and  a  half  in  length,  and 
then  contracts  on  both  sides  into  a  narrow  wedge -like  form, 
which  place  they  call  Lampter,  or  the  light-house.  The 
breadth,  here,  is  one  thousand  two  hundred  paces,  and  a 
tongue  of  land  stretching  out  about  a  mile  toward  the  sea, 
divides  the  bay  nearly  in  the  middle,  as  if  with  a  line,  and, 
where  it  is  connected  with  the  main  land,  by  a  narrow  isth¬ 
mus;  so  as  to  form  two  very  safe  harbours,  one  on  each  side. 
The  one  that  fronts  the  south  is  called  Naustathmos,  the 
station  for  ships,  from  the  circumstance  of  its  being  capable 
of  containing  a  vast  number;  the  other  is  close  to  Lampter. 
XXXIL  The  Roman  fleet,  having  taken  possession  of  these 
harbours,  where  they  rode  in  perfect  safety,  the  praetor 
thought  proper,  before  he  attempted  the  fortifications,  either 
by  scalade  or  works,  to  send  persons  to  sound  the  disposi- 

164 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  562. 

tion  of  the  magistrates  and  principal  people  in  the  place;  but 
finding  them  obstinate,  he  formed  two  attacks,  which  he 
carried  on  at  the  same  time.  In  the  part  against  which 
one  attack  was  directed,  the  houses  were  few,  the  temples  of 
the  gods  occupying  a  great  deal  of  the  ground.  In  this 
place  he  first  brought  jup  his  rams,  and  began  to  batter  the 
wall  and  towers;  and  when  the  multitude,  within,  ran  thith¬ 
er  to  defend  that  spot,  the  battering  rams  were  applied  in 
the  other  quarter.  The  walls  now  began  to  fall  in  both  pla¬ 
ces;  on  which  the  Romans  made  an  assault,  scrambling  over 
the  ruins  as  they  fell,  while  others  of  them  attempted  to 
scale  the  parts  that  were  standing;  but  the  townsmen  made 
such  an  obstinate  resistance,  as  plainly  showed,  that  they 
had  a  firmer  dependence  on  their  arms  and  courage,  than  on 
their  fortifications.  The  praetor,  therefore,  seeing  the  dan¬ 
ger  which  awaited  his  men,  was  obliged  to  sound  a  retreat; 
the  more  especially  as  they  were  now  become  so  furious 
through  rage  and  despair,  as  to  expose  themselves  rashly* 
Although  the  fighting  ceased,  yet  the  besieged  did  not,  even 
then,  think  of  rest;  but  all  hastened,  from  every  quarter,  to 
strengthen  the  walls,  and  to  raise  new  ones  in  the  place  of 
those  that  had  been  demolished.  While  they  were  busily 
employed  in  this  manner,  Quintus  Antonius  came  to  them, 
with  a  message  irom  the  praetor.  After  blaming  them  for 
their  obstinacy,  he  assured  them,  that  “  the  Romans  were 
more  anxious  than  they  were  themselves  to  prevent  the 
siege  being  carried  to  the  ruin. of  the  city.  If  they  would 
desist  from  their  madness,  ./Emilius  would  allow  them  to 
capitulate  on  the  same  terms  on  which  they  formerly  sur¬ 
rendered  to  Caius  Livius,”  On  hearing  this,  they  desired 
five  days’  time  to  deliberate;  during  which  they  sent  to  learn 
whether  they  might  hope  for  succour  from  Antiochus;  and 
having  received  an  answer,  by  their  deputies,  that  it  was 
not  in  his  power  to  relieve  them,  they  opened  their  gates  on 
the  single  condition  of  not  being  ill-treated.  When  the 

BOOK  XXXVII. 

16S 

B.  C,  190.] 

troops  were  marching  into  the  city,  and  the  praetor  had  pro* 
claimed  that  it  was  his  pleasure  that  the  surrendered  towns¬ 
men  should  be  spared^  there  arose  an  universal  clamour, 
that  it  was  shameful  to  suffer  the  Phocseans,  who  had  ne¬ 
ver  been  faithful  to  any  alliance,  and  had  always  been  bitter 
in  enmity,  to  escape  with  impunity.”  After  which  words, 
as  if  a  signal  had  been  given  by  the  praetor,  they  ran^in  par¬ 
ties,  every  way,  to  plunder  the  city.  Aimilius,  at  first,  en¬ 
deavoured  to  stop  them;  calling  them  back,  and  telling 
them,  that  towns  taken  by  storm,  and  not  such  as  surren¬ 
dered,  were  to  be  plundered;  and  that,  even  with  regard  to 
the  former,  the  determination  lay  with  the  commander,  not 
with  the  soldiers.”  But  rage  and  avarice  were  too  strong 
for  his  authority;  wherefore,  despatching  heralds,  through  all 
parts  of  the  city,  ht  ordered,  that  all  persons  of  free  condi¬ 
tions  should  come  to  him  in  the  Forum,  to  avoid  ill-treat¬ 
ment;  and  in  every  particular,  as  far  as  he  was  able,  he  ful¬ 
filled  his  promise  to  them.  He  restored  to  them  their  city, 
their  lands,  and  their  laws;  and,  as  the  winter  now  approach¬ 
ed,  he  chose  the  harbour  of  Phocaea  for  the  station  of  his  fleet 
until  spring. 
XXXIII.  About  the  same  time,  as  the  consul  was  march¬ 
ing  along  the  frontiers  of  the  j£nians  and  Maronites,  he  re¬ 
ceived  the  Hews  of  the  victory  over  the  king’s  fleet  at  My- 
oanesus;  and  of  Lysimachia  being  ev^acuated  by  the  garri¬ 
son.  This  latter  event  gave  much  more  satisfaction  than 
even  the  success  at  sea;  especially,  when,  arriving  at  that  ci¬ 
ty,  which  was  replenished  with  stores  of  every  kind,  as  if 
purposely  laid  in  for  the  reception  of  the  army,  the  troops 
found  comfortable  accommodation;  a  place  in  the  besieging 
of  which  they  had  expected  to  meet  with  extreme  want  and 
hardship.  There  they  halted  a  few  days,  to  give  time  for 
the  coming  up  of  the  baggage,  and  of  the  sick;  for  many, 
overcome  by  diseases,  or  the  length  of  the  way,  had  been  left 
behind  in  all  the  forts  of  Thrace.  When  ail  had  joined,  they 

166 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  562. 

began  again  their  march  through  the  Chersonese^  and  arriv¬ 
ed  at  the  Hellespont;  where,  every  thing  requisite  for  their 
passage  having  been  previously  got  ready,  by  the  care  of 
king  Eumenes,  they  crossed  over,  without  opposition  or  con¬ 
fusion,  as  if  to  friendly  shores,  and  the  ships  put  in  at  seve¬ 
ral  different  places.  This  raised,  to  a  high  degree,  the  spirits 
of  the  Romans,  who  saw  the  passage  into  Asia  left  open  to 
them;  for  they  had  always  supposed  that  they  could  not  ac¬ 
complish  it  without  a  violent  contest.  They  afterwards  re¬ 
mained  encamped,  a  considerable  time  at  the  Hellespont; 
this  happening  to  be  the  time  of  the  festival  wherein  the 
sacred  bucklers  are  carried  about,  during  which  it  is  not 
allowed  to  march.  The  same  festival  had  occasioned  Pub¬ 
lius  Scipio’s  being  separated  from  the  army;  for  he  was 
bound  by  a  duty  more  particularly  incumbent  on  him,  as  be¬ 
ing  one  of  the  Salian  priests;  himself  therefore  caused  some 
further  delay. 
XXXIV.  In  the  mean  time  an  ambassador  came  from 
Anttochus  to  the  camp, — Heraclides,  a  Byzantian,  with  a 
commission  to  treat  of  peace.  His  hopes  of  obtaining  it  were 
greatly  encouraged  by  the  dilatory  proceeding  of  the  Ro¬ 
mans;  for  he  had  imagined,  that,  as  soon  as  they  set  foot  in 
Asia,  they  would  have  advanced  rapidly  against  the  king. 
He  resolved,  however,  not  to  address  himself  to  the  consul 
until  he  had  first  applied  to  Publius  Scipio,  having  received 
instructions  to  that  purpose,  from  the  king.  Indeed  his  high¬ 
est  expectations  were  from  Scipio,  because  his  greatness  of 
soul,  and  the  fullness  of  his  glory,  naturally  tended  to  pro¬ 
duce  a  placable  temper.  Beside,  all  the  world  knew  how 
he  had  behaved  during  a  flow  of  success,  both  in  Spain  and 
afterwards  in  Africa,  and  also,  and  more  especially,  because 
his  son  was  then  a  prisoner  with  Antiochus.  Where,  and 
when,  and  by  what  accident,  he  became  a  prisoner,  are  points, 
like  very  many  others,  not  ascertained  among  writers.  Some 
say,  that  in  the  beginniiig  of  the  war,  as  he  was  going  from 

BOOK  XXXVII. 

167 

B.  C.  190.] 
Chalcis  to  Oreum,  he  was  intercepted  by  some  of  the  king’s 
ships;  others,  that  after  the  army  came  into  Asia,  he  was 
sent  with  a  troop  of  Fregelians,  to  Antiochus’s  camp,  to  gain 
iatelli«;ence;  that,  on  the  cavalry  salhing  out  against  him, 
he  retreated,  and  having  fallen  from  his  horse,  in  the  ccmi- 
fusion,  he  was,  together  with  two  horsemen,  overpowered, 
and  thus  conducted  to  the  king.  In  one  particular  all  are 
agreed;  that,  if  peace  had  still  subsisted  with  the  Romans, 
and  likewise  a  personal  friendship  between  the  king  and  the 
Scipios,  the  young  man  could  not  have  been  treated  and  dis¬ 
tinguished  with  greater  generosity  and  kindness  than  he  met 
with.  The  ambassador,  for  these  reasons,  waited  the  arrival 
of  Publius  Scipio;  and,  as  soon  as  he  came,  applied  to  the 
consul,  requesting  his  permission  to  lay  before  him  the  busi* 
ness  with  which  he  was  charged. 
XXXV.  A  full  council  being  assembled,  audience  was 
given  to  the  ambassador,  who  said,  that  “  notwithstanding 
many  embassies  about  peace  had  already  been  sent,  back¬ 
wards  and  forwards,  without  producing  any  effect,  yet  he 
conceived  strong  hopes  of  obtaining  it  from  the  very  circum¬ 
stance  of  the  former  delegates  having  obtained  nothing. 
For  the  objects  of  contention  in  those  discussions  were  Smyr¬ 
na  and  Lampsacus,  the  Trojan  Alexandria,  and  Lysimachia 
in  Europe.  Of  these,  the  king  had  already  ceded  Lysima¬ 
chia,  that  it  might  rot  be  said  that  he  possessed  any  thing 
in  Europe;  and  those  cities  which  lay  in  Asia  he  was  now 
ready  to  deliver  up,  as  well  as  any  others,  which  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  in  consideration  of  having  joined  their  party,  might 
wish  to  render  independent  of  the  king’s  government.  The 
king  was  also  willing  to  pay  to  the  Roman  people  half  of 
the  charges  of  the  war.”  These  were  the  conditions  pro¬ 
posed.  In  the  rest  of  his  discourse  he  exhorted  them  to 
‘‘  consider  the  instability  of  human  affairs;  to  use  with  mode¬ 
ration  the  advantages  afforded  by  their  own  situation,  and  not 
to  bear  too  hard  on  that  of  others;  to  be  content  with  the  em- 

168 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  562. 

pir«  of  Europe;  that  in  it^lf  was  itnmense.  It  was  an  ea¬ 
sier  matter  to  make  acquisitions,  one  after  another,  than  to 
retain  them  when  acquired*  But,  if  their  wishes  were  so 
unbounded  as  not  to  be .  ^atisfied^  without  taking  away  part 
of  Asia  also,  if  they  would  define  it  by  indisputable  limits, 
the  king,  for  the  sake  of  peace  and  harmony,  would  willing¬ 
ly  .suffer  his  own  moderate  temper  to  be  overcome  by  the 
insatiableness  of  the  Romans*”  These  concessions,  which 
appeared  to  the  ambassador  of  great  moment  towards  ob¬ 
taining  a  peace,  the  Romans  deemed  trifling.  They  thought 
it  reasonable,  that  the  king  should  defray  the  whole  ex¬ 
pense  occasioned  by  the  war;  because  it  was,  through  his 
fault,  that  it  was  begun.  And  that,  not  only  Iona,  and  iEo- 
lia,  ought  to  be  evacuated  by  the  king’s  troops;  but  as  all 
Greece  had  been  set  free,  so  all  the  cities  of  that  nation,  in 
Asia,  should  also  be  free,  which  could  no  other  way  be  ef¬ 
fected,  thsm  by  Antiochus  relinquishing  the  possession  of 
that  part  of  Asia,  on  the  hither  side  of  Mount  Taurus.” 
XXXVI.  The  ambassador,  perceiving  that  no  reasonable 
terms  were  to  be  obtained  from  the  council,  made  a  separate 
application  to  Publius  Scipio,  as  he  had  been  ordered:  and, 
to  prevail  on  him  to  favour  his  cause,  told  him,  first,  that  the 
king  would  restore  him  his  son,  without  a  ransom;  and  then, 
as  ignorant  of  the  disposition  of  Scipio,  as  he  was  of  the  Ro¬ 
man  manners,  he  promised  an  immense  weight  of  gold,  and, 
excepting  the  title  of  king,  an  absolute  partnership  in  fhe 
sovereignty,  if,  through  his  means,  he  should  obtain  a  peace. 
To  which  Scipio  answered,  "‘’lam  the  less  surprised  at  your 
ignorance  ©f  the  Roman  character  in  general,  and  of  mine,  to 
whom  you  have  been  sent,  when  I  see  that  you  are  unac¬ 
quainted  with  the  situation,  even  of  the  person  from  whom 
you  come*  You  ought  to  have  kept  Lysiraachia,  to  prevent 
our  entering  the  Chersonese,  or  to  have  opjmsed  us  at  the 
Hellespont,  to  hinder  our  passing  into  Asia,  if  you  meant  to 
ask  peace  from  us,  as  from  people  solicitous  about  the  issue 

BOOK  XXXVIL 

169 

B,  C.  1§0.] 
of  the  war*  But,  after  leaving  the  passage  into  Asia  open, 
and  receiving  not  only  a  bridle,  but  also  a  yoke,  how  can  you 
pretend  to  negociate  on  a  footing  of  equality,  and  when  you 
know  that  you  must  submit  to  ordersr  I  shall  consider  my 
son  as  the  greatest  gift  that  the  king's  munificence  can  con¬ 
fer;  any  other  instances  of  it,  I  trust  in  the  gods,  my  circum¬ 
stances  will  never  need,  my  mind  certainly  never  will.  For 
such  an  act  of  generosity  to  me,  he  shall  find  me  grateful  if, 
for  a  personal  favour,  he  will  accept  a  personal  return  of  gra¬ 
titude*  In  my  public  capacity,  I  will  neither  accept  from 
him,  nor  give  him  any  thing.  All  that  is  in  my  power  at 
present,  to  give  him,  is  sincere  advice.  Go  then,  and  desire 
him,  in  my  name,  to  cease  hostilities,  and  to  refuse  no  terms 
of  peace,”  I'his  counsel  had  no  effect  on  the  king,  who 
thought  that  no  chance  of  war  could  make  his  condition  worse, 
since  terms  were  dictated  to  him  already,  as  if  he  were  to¬ 
tally  vanquished.  Laying  aside,  therefore,  for  the  present, 
all  farther  mention  of  peace,  he  turned  his  whole  attention  to 
the  preparations  for  war. 
XXXVIL  The  consul,  having  made  the  necessary  prepa¬ 
rations  for  the  execution  of  his  designs,  quitted  the  post 
where  he  lay,  and  marched,  first,  to  Dardanus,  and  then,  to 
Rhajteum;  from  both  which  places  the  people  came  out  in 
crowds  to  meet  him.  He  then  advanced  to  Troy,  and  hav¬ 
ing  pitched  his  camp  in  the  plain,  under  the  walls,  w^ent  up 
to  the  city,  and  into  the  citadel,  where  he  offered  sacrifice 
to  Minerva,  the  tutelar  deity  of  the  place.  The  Trojans, 
by  every  act  and  expression  of  respect,  showed  themselves 
proud  of  the  Romans  being  descended  from  them,  while  the 
Romans  testified  their  happiness  in  having  sprung  from 
that  origin.  The  army,  marching  thence,  ai rived,  on  the 
sixth  day,  at  the  source  of  the  river  Caicus.  Here  they  were 
joined  by  king  Eumenes.  He  had,  at  first,  endeavoured  to 
bring  back  his  fleet,  from  the  Hellespont,  to  Elcea,  for  the 
winter;  hut,  being  prevented,  during  many  days,  by  contrary 
voi .  V, — Z 

170 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  562. 

winds  from  passing  the  promontory  of  Lectos,  and  unwilling 
to  be  absent  at  the  commencement  of  operations,  he  landed, 
and  came,  with  a  small  body  of  men,  by  the  shortest  road  to 
the  Roman  camp.  From  the  camp  he  was  sent  home  to  Per- 
gamus,  to  hasten  supplies  of  provisions;  and,  as  soon  as  he  had 
delivered  the  corn,  to  the  persons  appointed  by  the  consul,  he 
returned  to  the  camp,  which  remained  on  the  same  spot.  The 
plan  now  adopted  was,  to  have  provision  prepared  sufficient 
for  a  great  many  days,  and  to  march,  directly,  against  the 
enemy  before  the  winter  should  come  on  to  stop  them.  The 
king’s  camp  was  near  Thyatira,  and  Antiochus  hearing  there 
that  Publius  Scipio  had  fallen  sick,  and  was  conveyed  to  Elsea, 
sent  ambassadors  to  conduct  his  son  to  him.  As  this  pre¬ 
sent  was  highly  grateful  to  the  mind  of  the  father,  so  was  the 
satisfaction  which  it  gave  no  less  salutary  to  his  body.  After 
long  indulging  his  rapture,  in  the  embraces  of  his  son,  at 
length  he  said  to  the  ambassadors,  Tell  the  king,  that  I  re¬ 
turn  him  thanks;  that,  at  present,  I  can  make  him  no  other 
requital,  than  my  advice;  which  is  not  to  come  to  an  engage¬ 
ment  until  he  shall  have  heard  thatl  have  rejoined  the  army.’' 
Although  an  army  of  seventy  thousand  foot  and  more  than 
twelve  thousand  horse,  inspired  Antiochus  at  times  with  con¬ 
fidence,  to  hope  for  a  favourable  issue  of  a  battle;  yet,  moved 
by  the  advice  of  scr  great  a  man  as  Scipio,  in  whom,  when 
he  considered  the  uncertainty  of  the  events  of  war,  he  placed 
his  greatest  hope  for  safety,  in  any  kind  of  fortune  that 
might  befall  him,  he  retired  beyond  the  river  Phrigius,  and 
pitched  his  camp  near  Magnesia  of  Sipylus.  However,  and 
lest,  while  he  wished  to  prolong  the  time,  the  Romans  might 
attempt  his  works,  he  drew  round  it  a  fosse  six  cubits  deep 
and  twelve  broad;  and  on  the  outside,  a  double  rampart, 
raising,  on  the  inside  bank,  a  wall  flanked  with  towers  at 
small  distances,  by  means  of  which  it  was  easy  to  hinder  the 
enemy  from  passing  the  moat. 

B.  C.  190.] 

BOOK  XXXVII. 

171 

XXXVIIL  The  consul,  thinking  that  the  king  was  still  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  Thyatira,  marched  five  days  without 
halting,  until  he  came  down  into  the  Hyrcanian  plains.  Then 
hearing  of  his  departure,  he  followed  his  tracts,  and  encarflp- 
ed  on  the  hither  side  of  the  river  Phrigius,  at  the  distance 
of  lour  miles  from  his  post.  Here,  a  body  of  about  one 
thousand  horse,  the  greatest  part  of  w^hom  were  Gallogre- 
cians,  the  rest  Dahans,  and  archers  on  horseback,  of  other 
nations  intermixed,  passing  the  river  with  great  fury,  made 
an  attack  on  the  advanced  Roman  guards,  who,  being  unpre¬ 
pared,  were  at  first,  thrown  into  disorder.  But,  as  the  dis¬ 
pute  was  maintained,  notwithstanding,  and  as  the  Romans, 
(who  could  easily  be  reinforced  from  their  camp  lying  so 
near,)  increased  in  strength,  the  king’s  troops  becoming 
weary,  and  unable  to  withstand  superior  numbers,  endea¬ 
voured  to  retreat;  but,  before  they  could  reach  the  river,  verv 
many  were  killed,  on  the  hank,  by  the  enemv  pressing  on 
their  rear.  For  two  da)s  after,  all  remained  quiet,  neither 
party  passing  the  river.  On  the  third,  the  Romans  passed  it 
with  their  whole  lorce,  and  encamped  at  the  distance  of  about 
two  miles  and  a  half  trom  the  enem\.  While  they  were  lay¬ 
ing  out  and  lortifying  the  camp,  a  bodv  of  the  king’s  troops, 
consisting  of  three  thousand  chosen  horse  and  foot  approached 
with  great  rapidity  and  violence.  7'he  party  on  guard,  though 
much  inferior  in  number,  (being  only  two  thousand,)  without 
calling  off  any  of  the  soldiers  from  the  fortifying  of  the  camp, 
sustained  the  combat  with  equal  success  at  first,  and,  in  the 
progress  ot  it,  repulsed  the  enemy,  killing  one  hundred,  and 
taking  about  the  same  number.  For  the  four  ensuing  days, 
both  armies  stood  in  order  of  battle,  before  their  respective 
camps.  On  the  filth,  the  Romans  advanced  into  the  middle 
of  the  plain,  but  Antiochus  did  not  stir;  so  that  his  rear  was 
not  so  tar  as  one  thousand  feet  from  his  rampart, 
XXXIX.  iEmilius,  seeing  him  unwilling  to  fight,  called 
a  council  next  dav,  and  asked  their  opinion,  how  he  ought 

172 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  562, 

to  act  if  Antioch  us  would  not  give  him  an  opportunity  of 
engaging.  For  the  winter  was  at  hand,  and  he  must  either 
keep  the  soldiers  in  camp,  or,  if  they  chose  to  retire  to  winter 
quarters,  defer  the  business  of  the  war  until  summer.”  The 
Romans  never  entertained  a  more  contemptuous  opinion  of 
any  people.  The  whole  assembly  therefore,  called  on  him 
to  lead  on  immediately,  and  make  use  of  the  present  ardour 
of  the  troops,  who,  as  if  the  business  were  not  to  fight 
against  so  many  thousands  but  to  slaughter  an  equal  number 
of  cattle,  were  ready  to  force  their  way,  through  trenches 
and  ramparts,  into  the  camp,  if  the  enemy  would  not  come 
out  to  battle.  Cneius  Domitius  was  then  sent  to  discover 
the  nature  of  the  ground,  by  which  they  were  to  march,  and 
on  what  side  they  could  best  approach  the  enemy’s  rampart. 
On  his  returning,  with  a  full  account  of  every  particular,  it 
was  resolved  that  the  camp  should  next  day  be  moved  nearer 
to  the  enemy.  On  the  third  day,  the  standards  were  carried 
forward  into  the  middle  of  the  plain,  and  the  troops  began  to 
form  their  line.  Antiochus  now  thought  it  would  be  wrong 
to  defer  matters  longer  lest,  by  declining  a  battle,  he  should 
damp  the  courage  of  his  men,  and  add  to  the  confidence  of 
the  enemy.  He,  therefore,  drew  out  his  forces,  advancing 
only  so  far  as  to  show  that  he  was  willing  to  come  to  an  en¬ 
gagement.  The  Roman  line  was  nearly  uniform  through¬ 
out  in  respect  both  of  men  and  armour.  There  were  two 
Roman  legions,  and  two  brigades  of  allies  and  Latines  each 
containing  five  thousand  four  hundred  men.  The  Romans 
formed  the  centre,  the  Latines  the  wings.  The  spearmen 
composed  the  first  line,  the  first-rank  men  the  second,  and 
the  veterans  closed  the  rear.  Besides  this  regular  body,  the 
consul  formed,  on  the  right  of  it,  and  in  a  straight  line  with 
it,  the  auxiliary  troops  of  Eumenes,  intermixed  with  Achaean 
targeteers,  making  about  three  thousand  foot;  beyond  these 
he  posted  somewhat  less  than  three  thousand  horse,  of  which, 
eight  hundred  belonged  to  Eumenes;  all  the  rest  of  the 

15.  C.  190.] 

HOOK  XXXVIL 

173 

cavalry  was  Roman:  and,  in  the  extremity  of  the  line,  he 
placed  bodies  of  Trallians  and  Cietans,  equal'  in  number, 
each  making  up  five  hundred  men.  His  left  wing  did  not 
need  such  supports,  because  it  was  flanked  by  a  river  with 
steep  banks.  However,  four  troops  of  horse  were  posted 
there.  This  was  the  whole  amount  of  the  Roman  force. 
Two  thousand  Macedonians  and  Thracians,  who  had,  of 
their  own  accord,  accompanied  the  army,  were  left  to  guard 
the  camp.  Sixteen  elephants  were  placed  behind  the  veterans 
in  reserve;  lor  besides,  that  they  were  not  supposed  capable 
of  withstanding  the  great  number  of  the  king’s  elephants,  no 
less  than  fifty-four,  the  African  elephants  are  not  able  to 
cope  with  an  equal  number  of  Indians,  being  inferior  to 
them  both  in  size,  and  in  steadiness  of  courage. 
XL,  The  king’s  line  was  more  chequered  with  troops  of 
many  nations,  dissimilar  both  in  their  persons,  and  armour. 
There  was  a  body  of  sixteen  thousand  men  armed  after  the 
manner  of  the  Macedonians,  which  they  called  a  phalanx.  This 
formed  the  centre,  had  five  hundred  men  in  front,  and  was 
divided  into  ten  parts,  which  parts  were  separated  by  two  ele¬ 
phants  placed  between  each  two;  its  depth,  from  the  front, 
was  thirty -two  ranks.  This  was  the  main  strength  of  the 
king’s  army,  and  it  exhibited  a  formidable  sight,  both  in  the 
other  particulars  of  its  appearance,  and  in  the  elephants, 
towering  so  high  above  the  heads  of  the  soldiers.  They 
were  of  huge  bulk,  and  were  rendered  more  terrific  by  the 
caparisons  of  their  foreheads  and  crests,  and  the  towers  fixed 
on  their  backs;  four  armed  men  stood  on  each  tower,  besides 
the  managers  of  the  beasts.  On  the  right  of  the  phalanx, 
were  placed  five  hundred  Gallogrccian  horsemen,  to  whom 
were  joined  three  thousand  horsemen,  clad  in  complete  ar¬ 
mour,  whom  they  call  cataphracti,  or  mailed.  To  these 
were  added  a  brigade  of  near  a  thousand  horse,  which  body 
they  called  agema.  They  were  Medes,  all  picked  men,  with 
a  mixture  of  horsemen  from  manv  other  nations  in  that  part 

174 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  562, 

of  the  world.  Adjoining  these,  a  body  of  sixteen  elephants 
was  placed  In  reserve.  On  the  same  side,  a  little  farther  on 
towards  the  wing,  was  the  royal  cohort;  these  were  called 
Argyraspides,*  from  the  kind  of  armour  which  they  wore. 
Next  to  these,  stood  one  thousand  two  hundred  Dahan  bow¬ 
men  on  horseback;  then,  three  thousand  light-infantry,  nearly 
half  Cretans  and  half  Trallians;  adjoining  these,  two  thousand 
five  hundred  Mysian  archers,  and  the  flank  of  the  whole  was 
covered  by  four  thousand  Cyrtaean  slingers,  and  Elymsean 
archers,  intermixed.  Next  to  the  left  flank  of  the  pha¬ 
lanx,  stood  one  thousand  five  hundred  Gallogrecian  horse, 
and  two  thousand  Cappadocian  sent  by  king  Ariarathes, 
wearing  the  same  kind  of  armour;  then,  auxiliaries  of  all 
kinds,  mixed  together,  two  thousand  seven  hundred;  then, 
three  thousand  mailed  horsemen:  then,  one  thousand  othei 
horsemen,  being  a  royal  cohort,  equipped,  with  lighter 
coverings,  for  themselves  and  their  horses,  but,  in  other 
respects,  not  unlike  the  rest:  they  were  mostly  Syrians,  with 
a  mixture  of  Phrygians  and  Lydians.  In  the  front  of  this 
body  of  cavalry,  were  the  chariots,  armed  with  scythes,  and 
a  kind  of  camels,  called  dromedaries.  These  were  rode  by 
Arabian  archers,  who  carried  thin  swords  four  cubits  long, 
that  they  might  be  able  to  reach  the  enemy  from  so  great  a 
height.  Then  followed  another  multitude,  like  that  in  the 
right  wing, — first,  Tarentines;  then,  two  thousand  five  hun¬ 
dred  Gallogrecian  horsemen;  then,  one  thousand  new  Cre¬ 
tans,  and  one  thousand  five  hundred  Carians  and  Cilicians, 
armed  in  the  same  manner;  then,  an  equal  number  of  Tral¬ 
lians,  with  three  thousand  targeteers,  Pisidians,  Pamphylians 
and  Lvcians;  then  came  brigades  of  Cyrt?eans  and  Elym?eans, 
equal  to  those  posted  in  the  right  wing,  and  sixteen,  ele¬ 
phants,  standing  at  a  small  distance.  The  king  himselt 
took  post  in  the  right  wing,  the  command  of  the  left  he  gave 
to  his  son  Seleucus,  and  Antipater,  the  son  of  his  brother; 

*  Silver  shield-bearers. 

B.  C.  190.]  BOOK  XXXVIL  175 
that  of  the  centre  to  Minio,  Zeuxis,  and  Philip,  the  mastei 
of  the  elephants. 
XL  I.  A  morning  fog,  which,  as  the  day  advanced,  rose 
up  in  clouds,  spread  a  general  darkness;  and  the  moisture, 
issuing  from  it,  and  coming  from  the  southward,  wetted 
every  thing.  This  circumstance,  which  was  scarcely  any 
inconvenience  to  the  Romans,  was  of  extreme  prejudice  to 
the  king's  troops.  For  the  line  of  the  Romans  was  of  a 
moderate  length,  and  the  obscuring  of  the  light  did  not 
hinder  their  seeing  ♦  ev<  ry  part  of  it;  they  were,  besides, 
mostly  heavy  armed  troops,  so  that  the  fog  had  no  tendency 
to  blunt  their  swords  and  javelins.  But  the  king’s  line  was 
so  very  extensive,  that,  from  the  centre  of  it,  the  wings  could 
not  be  seen,  much  less  could  those  at  the  extremities  see 
one  another;  and  then,  the  moisture  relaxed  the  strings  of 
their  bows,  their  slings,  and  the  thongs  of  their  javelins. 
Besides,  the  armed  chariots,  by  means  of  which  Antiochus 
had  trusted  utterly  to  disorder  the  enemy’s  line,  turned  the 
terror  of  their  operations  on  their  owners.  The  manner  in  which 
they  were  armed  was  this;  from  the  yoke,  on  both  sides  of  the 
pole,  they  had  ten  scythes,  each  of  a  cubit  in  length,  standing  out 
like  horns,  to  transfix  any  thing  that  they  met;  at  each  extremity 
of  the  yoke,  two  scythes  projected,  one  on  a  line  with  the 
yoke,  the  other  on  its  lower  side,  pointing  to  the  ground;  the 
former  to  cut  through  any  thing  that  might  come  within  its 
reach  on  the  side,  the  other  to  catch  such  as  fell,  or  endea¬ 
voured  to  go  under  it.  At  each  extremity  of  the  axle  of 
the  wheels,  two  knives  were  fastened,  in  the  same  manner 
The  chariots,  thus  armed,  if  the)  had  been  placed  in  the 
rear,  or  between  the  ranks,  must  have  been  driven  through 
his  own  ranks;  the  king,  therefore,  as  already  mentioned, 
placed  them  in  front.  Eumenes,  seeing  this,  and  being  not 
unexperienced  in  such  kind  of  fight;  knowing,  likewise,  that 
those  machines  might  prove  as  dangerous  to  their  employers. 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  :62. 

irb 
as  to  their  antagonists,  if  means  were  used  to  frighten  the 
horses,  rather  than  a  regular  attack,  ordered  the  Cretan 
bowmen,  and  sUngers,  and  javelin  bearers,  with  some  troops 
of  horse,  not  in  a  body,  but  scattering  themselves  as  widely 
as  possible,  to  rush  forwards,  and  pour  weapons  on  them 
from  all  sides  at  once.  This  storm,  as  it  were,  partly,  by 
the  wounds  made  by  the  missile  weapons,  thrown  from  every 
quarter,  and,  partly,  by  the  discordant  shouts  raised,  so 
terrified  the  horses,  that,  immediately,  as  if  unbridled,  they 
galloped  about  at  random.  The  lighwinfantry,  the  lightly 
accoutred  slingers,  and  the  active  Cretans,  quickly  evaded 
their  encounter.  1  he  horsemen,  following  them,  increased 
the  tumult  and  the  terror  of  the  horses  and  camels  at  the 
same  time,  while  the  crov  d  of  followers  redoubled  their 
shouts.  By  these  means,  the  chariots  were  driven  out  of 
the  ground  between  the  two  lines.  When  this  empty  piece 
of  parade  was  removed,  both  parties  gave  the  signal,  and 
advanced  to  a  regular  engagement. 
XLII.  But  these  chariots,  thus  ineffective  against  the  ene- 
m) ,  soon  proved  the  cause  of  great  mischief  to  the  army  of 
the  king.  For  the  troops  posted  next  behind,  being  terrified 
at  the  wild  disorder  of  the  horses,  betook  themselves  to  flight, 
leaving  all  exposed,  as  far  as  to  the  post  of  the  mailed  horse¬ 
men;  and  even  these,  when  the  Romans,  after  dispersing  the 
reserves,  approached,  did  not  sustain  their  first  onset.  Some 
fled,  and  others,  being  delayed  by  the  weight  of  their  cover¬ 
ings  and  armour,  were  put  to  the  sword.  The  whole  left 
wing  then  gave  vvay,  and  the  auxiliaries,  posted  between  the 
cavalry  and  the  phalanx,  being  thrown  into  confusion,  the 
terror  spread  even  to  the  centre.  Here  the  ranks  were  bro¬ 
ken,  by  the  flying  soldiers  rushing  in  between  them,  while  the 
same  cause  deprived  the  men  of  the  use  of  their  long  spears^ 
called  by  the  Macedonians,  sarissas.  While  they  were  in  this 
disorder,  the  Roman  legions,  advancing,  discharged  their  ja¬ 
velins  among  them.  Even  the  elephants,  standing  in  tlie  way. 

C.  190,] 

BOOK  XXXVII. 

177 

did  not  deter  the  Roman  soldiers,  who  liad  learned,  by  expe¬ 
rience  in  the  African  wars,  both  to  evade  the  onset  of  the 
animal,  and,  getting  at  one  side  of  it,  either  to  ply  it  with 
darts,  or,  if  they  could  come  near  enough,  to  wound  its 
sinews  with  their  swords.  The  front  of  the  centre  was  now 
almost  cut  to  pieces,  and  the  reserve  being  surrounded,  was 
attacked  on  the  rear,  when  the  Romams  perceived  their  troops 
in  another  quarter  flying,  and  heard  shouts  of  dismay  almost 
close  to  their  camp.  For  Antiochus,  who  commanded  on 
the  right  wing,  having  observed  that  the  enemy,  relying  on 
the  river  for  security,  had  placed  no  reserve  there,  except 
four  troops  of  horse,  and  that  these,  keeping  close  to  the  in¬ 
fantry,  left  an  open  space  on  the  bank  of  the  river,  made  a 
charge  on  them,  with  a  body  of  auxiliaries  and  mailed  horse¬ 
men.  He  not  only  attacked  them  in  front,  but,  going  round 
the  extremity  of  their  line,  near  the  river,  pressed  them  in 
flank  also;  until,  having  routed  the  cavalry  first  and  then  the 
infantry,  he  made  them  ily  with  precipitation  to  their  camp. 
XLIIL  The  camp  was  commanded  by  Marcus  ^milius,  a 
military  tribune^  son  of  Marcus  Lepidus,  who,  in  a  few  years 
after,  became  chief  pontiff.  On  seeing  the  troops  fiytng,  he 
went  out  with  his  whole  guard,  to  meet  them.  He  ordered 
them,  first,  to  halt,  and  then  to  return  to  the  fig^t;  at  the 
same  time  upbraiding  them  with  cowardice.  He  then  pro¬ 
ceeded  to  threats, — ^that  if  they  did  not  obey  his  orders,  they 
would  rush  blindly  on  their  own  destruction.  At  last,  he 
gave  orders  to  his  own  men,  to  kill  the  foremost  of  the 
runaways,  and  with  their  swords  to  drive  the  crowd,  that 
followed,  back  to  their  station.  The  greater  fear  now  over¬ 
came  the  less.  Compelled  by  the  danger  on  either  side,  they 
first  halted,  and  then  marched,  as  commanded  to  meet  the 
enemy.  jEmilius,  with  his  guard,  consisting  of  two  thou¬ 
sand  men  of  distinguished  valour,  gave  a  vigorous  check  to 
the  furious  pursuit  of  Antiochus,  At  the  same  time,  Attalus, 
the  brother  of  Eumenes,  having,  from  the  right  wing,  where 
VOL.  V. — ^A  a 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  562* 

irs 
the  left  of  the  enemy  had  been  routed,  at  the  beginning  of 
the  engagement,  observed  the  flight  of  his  friends  on  the 
left,  and  the  tumult  near  the  camp,  came  up  seasonably  with 
two  hundred  horse.  When  Antiochus  saw  those  men  re¬ 
newing  the  fight,  whom,  but  just  before,  he  had  seen  run¬ 
ning  away,  and  another  large  body  advancing  from  the  camp, 
with  a  third  from  the  line,  he  turned  about  his  horse  and 
fled.  The  Romans,  thus  victorious  in  both  wings,  advanced 
over  heaps  of  slain,  which  were  most  numerous  in  the  cen¬ 
tre,  where  the  strength  of  the  bravest  men  and  the  heavy 
armour  had  prevented  flight,  and  proceeded  to  rifle  the 
camp.  The  horsemen  of  Eumenes,  first,  and  then  the  rest  of 
the  cavalry,  pursued  the  enemy  through  all  parts  of  the  plain, 
and  killed  the  hindmost  as  they  overtook  them.  But  the 
fugitives  were  exposed  to  more  severe  distress  by  the  cha. 
riots,  elephants  and  camels  intermixed,  and  by  their  own  dis¬ 
orderly  haste j  for,  after  they  once  broke  their  ranks,  the}^ 
rushed,  as  if  blind,  one  upon  another,  and  were  trodden  to 
death  by  their  numerous  beasts.  In  the  camp  also  there  was 
great  slaughter  committed,  rather  greater  than  even  in  the 
field:  for  the  first  that  quitted  it,  in  general,  directed  their 
flight  to  the  camp.  The  guard,  encouraged  by  the  great  num¬ 
ber  of  these,  defended  their  works  with  the  more  obstinacy. 
The  Romans  having  been  stopped  at  the  gates  and  rampart, 
which  they  had  expected  to  master  at  the  first  push,  when 
they  did,  at  length,  break  through,  were  led  by  rage  to  make 
the  more  dreadful  carnage. 
XLIV.  According  to  the  accounts  given  by  historians, 
there  w^ere  killed,  on  that  day,  fifty  thousand  foot  and  four 
thousand  horse;  taken  one  thousand  four  hundred,  with  fif¬ 
teen  elephants  and  their  managers.  Of  the  Romans,  many 
were  wounded,  but  no  more  than  three  hundred  foot  and 
twenty-four  horsemen  killed;  and  of  the  troops  of  Eumenes 
twenty-five.  That  day  the  victors,  after  plundering  the  ene¬ 
my’s  camp,  returned  with  great  store  of  booty  to  their  own 

BOOK  mVIL 

B.  C.  190.] 

179 

On  the  day  followings  they  stripped  the  bodies  of  the  slmn, 
and  collected  the  prisoners.  A-mbassadors  came  from  Thya- 
tira  and  Magnesia,  near  Sipylus,  with  a  surrender  of  those 
cities.  Antiochus  fled,  with  very  few  attendants,  but  greater 
,  numbers,  collecting  about  him  on  the  road,  he  arrived  at 
Sardis,  with  a  numerous  body  of  soldiers,  about  the  middle 
of  the  night,  and  hearing  there  that  his  son  Seleucus,  and 
several  of  his  friends,  had  gone  on  to  Apamea,  he  likewise, 
at  the  fourth  watch,  set  out  for  that  city,  with  his  wife  and 
daughter,  having  committed  to  Zeno  the  command  of  the 
city,  and  the  government  of  Lydia  to  Timon;  but  the  towns¬ 
people  disregarding  both  these,  and  the  soldiers  who  were  in 
the  citadel,  agreed  to  send  deputies  to  the  consul. 
XLV.  About  this  time  deputies  came  from  Tralles,  from 
Magnesia  on  the  Mseander,  and  from  Ephesus,  to  surrender 
those  cities.  Polyxenidas  had  quitted  Ephesus,  as  soon  as 
he  heard  of  the  battle;  and,  sailing  with  the  fleet  as  far  as 
Patara,  in  Lycia,  where,  through  fear  of  the  Rhodian  fleet 
stationed  at  Megiste,  he  landed,  and,  with  a  small  retinue, 
pursued  his  journey,  by  land,  into  Syria.  The  several  states 
Asia  submitted  themselves  to  the  disposal  of  the  consul, 
and  to  the  dominion  of  the  Roman  people.  He  was  now  at 
Sardis,  whither  Publius  Scipio  came  from  Elaea,  as  soon  as 
he  was  able  to  endure  the  fatigue  of  travelling.  Shortly  af¬ 
ter,  arrived  a  herald  from  Antiochus,  who  solicited,  through 
Publius  Scipio,  and  obtained  from  the  consul,  permission  for 
the  king  to  send  ^ambassadors.  In  a  few  days  time,  Zeuxis, 
who  had  been  governor  of  Lydia,  and  Antipatcr  the  king’s 
nephew,  arrived  in  that  character.  These,  having  first  had  a 
meeting  with  Eumenes,  whom  they  expected  to  find  most 
averse  from  peace,  on  account  of  old  disputes,  and  seeing 
him  better  disposed  to  a  reconciliation  than  either  they  or  the 
king  had  hoped,  addressed  themselves  then  to  PubHus  Scipio, 
and,  through^  him,  to  the  consul.  At  their  request,  a  full 
council  was  assembled  to  hear  the  business  of  their  commis- 

180 

HISTORY  OR  ROME. 

[Y.  R,  ses¬ 

sion,  when  Zeuxis  spoke  to  this  effect:  ‘‘  Romans,  we  are  not 
prepared  to  make  any  proposal  from  ourselves;  but  rather 
desire  to  know^  from  you,  by  what  atonements  we  can  expi¬ 
ate  the  error  of  our  king,  and  obtain  pardon  and  peace  from 
our  conquerors.  You  have  ever  displayed  the  greatest  mag¬ 
nanimity,  in  pardoning  vanquished  kings  and  nations,  and 
ought  you  not  to  show  a  much  greater,  and  more  placable 
spirit,  after  your  late  victory,  which  has  made  you  masters 
of  the  whole  world?  You  ought,  now,  like  deities,  laying 
aside  all  disputes  with  mortal  beings,  to  protect  and  spare 
the  human  race/’  It  had  been  determined,  before  the  am¬ 
bassadors  came,  what  answer  should  be  given  them;  and  it 
was  agreed  that  Africanus  should  deliver  it.  He  is  said  to 
have  spoken  thus:  Of  those  things  that  are  in  the  gift  of 
the  immortal  gods,  we  Romans  possess  as  much  as  the  gods 
have  been  pleased  to  bestow.  Our  spirit,  which  is  in  the  di¬ 
rection  of  our  own  mind,  is  the  same  to-day,  that  it  has  al¬ 
ways  been,  in  every  state  of  fortune;  prosperity  has  never 
elated,  nor  adversity  depressed  it.  Of  the  truth  of  this,  (to 
omit  other  instances,)  I  might  produce  your  friend  Hannibal 
as  a  convincing  proof;  but  I  can  appeal  to  yourselves.  Aftef 
we  had  passed  the  Hellespont;  before  we  saw  the  king’s  camp 
or  his  army;  whei*  the  chance  of  war  was  open  to  both,  and 
the  issue  uncertain;  on  your  proposing  to  treat  of  peace  we 
offered  you  terms,  at  a  time  when  we  were,  both  of  us,  on  a 
footing  of  equality;  and  the  very  same  terms  we  offer  you 
now,  when  we  are  victorious  and  you  vanquished.  Resign 
all  pretensions  in  Europe,  and  cede  that  part  of  Asia,  which 
lies  on  this  side  of  Mount  Taurus.  Then,  towards  the  ex¬ 
penses  of  the  war,  ye  shall  pay  fifteen  thousand  talents  of 
Eubfea;*  five  hundred  immediately,  two  thousand  five  hun¬ 
dred  when  the  senate  and  people  of  Rome  shall  have  ratified 
the  peace,  and  one  thousand,  annually,  for  twelve  years  after. 

About  2,900,000/. 

B.  C.  190,] 

BOOK  XXXVIL 

181 

It  is  likewise  thought  ht,  that  four  hundred  talents  be  paid 
to  Eumenes,  and  the  quantity  of  com  remaining  unpaid,  of 
what  was  due  to  his  father.  When  we  shall  have  settled  these 
articles,  it  will  be  a  kind  of  assurance  to  us  of  your  perform¬ 
ance  of  them,  if  you  give  twenty  hostages,  such  as  we  shall 
choose.  But  never  can  we  be  properly  satisfied,  ihat  the  Ro¬ 
man  people  will  enjoy  peace  on  the  side  of  that  country  in 
which  Hannibal  shall  be.  Him,  therefore,  we  demand,  above 
all.  Ye  shall  also  deliver  up  Thoas,  the  iEtolian,  the  fomen- 
ter  of  the  iEtolian  war,  who  armed  you  against  us  by  the  as¬ 
surances  of  their  support,  and  them  by  assurances  of  yours; 
and,  together  with  him,  Mnesilochus,  the  Acamanian,  and 
Philo,  and  Eubulidas,  of  Chalcis.  The  king  will  now  make 
peace  under  worse  circumstances,  on  his  side,  because  he 
makes  it  later  than  he  might  have  done.  If  he  now  causes 
any  delay,  let  him  consider,  that  it  is  more  difficult  to  pull 
down  the  majesty  of  kings,  from  the  highest  to  the  middle 
stage,  than  it  is  to  precipitate  it  from  the  middle  to  the  low¬ 
est.”  The  king’s  instructions  to  his  ambassadors  were,  to 
accede  to  any  terms  of  peace.  It  was  settled,  therefore,  that 
ambassadors  should  be  sent  to  Rome.  The  consul  distributed 
his  army  in  winter  quarters  at  Magnesia  on  the  Maeander, 
Tralles,  and  Ephesus.  In  a  few  days  after,  the  king  brought 
the  hostages  to  Ephesus  to  the  consul;  and  also  the  ambas¬ 
sadors  who  were  to  go  to  Rome,  arrived.  Eumenes  set  out 
for  Rome  at  the  same  time  with  the  king’s  ambassadors, 
and  they  were  followed  by  eml)assies  from  all  the  states  of 
Asia. 
XLVI.  During  the  time  of  these  transactions  in  Asia,  two 
proconsuls  arrived,  almost  together,  at  Rome,  from  their  pro¬ 
vinces,  with  hopes  of  triumphing:  Quintus  Minucius,  from 
Liguria,  and  Manias  Acilius,  from  ^tolia.  After  hearing 
recitals ^f  their  services,  the  senate  refused  a  triumph  to 
Minucius,  but,  with  great  cheerfulness,  decreed  one  to  Aci¬ 
lius,  and  he  rode  through  the  city  in  triumph  over  king  An- 

182 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  562. 
tiochus  and  the  iEtolians.  In  the  procession  were  carried, 
two  hundred  and  thirty  military  ensigns;  of  unwroaght  silver, 
three  thousand  pounds  weight;  of  coin,  one  hundred  and 
thirteen  thousand  Attic  tetradrachms;*  and  two  hundred 
and  forty-eight  thousandf  cistophoruses;:):  of  chased  silver 
vessels,  a  great  number,  and  of  great  weight.  He  bore  also, 
the  king’s  plate,  furniture,  and  splendid  wardrobe;  golden 
crowns,  presents  from  the  allied  states,  forty-five,  with  spoils 
of  all  kinds.  He  led  thirty-six  prisoners  of  distinction,  offi¬ 
cers  in  the  armies  of  the  king,  and  of  the  iEtolians.  Damo- 
critus,  the  ^tolian  general,  a  short  time  before,  escaped  out 
of  prison  in  the  night;  but,  being  overtaken  by  the  guards  on 
the  bank  of  the  Tiber,  he  stabbed  himself  with  a  sword  be¬ 
fore  he  Avas  seized.  Nothing  was  wanted  but  the  soldiers,  to 
follow  the  general’s  chariot;  in  every  other  respeci  the  tri¬ 
umph  was  magnificent,  both  in  the  grandeur  of  the  procession, 
and  the  splendour  of  his  exploits.  The  joy,  however,  was 
much  damped  by  melancholy  news  from  Spain: — that  the 
army,  under  the  command  of  Lucius  iEmilius,  proconsul, 
had  been  defeated  in  a  battle  with  .the  Lacitanians,  at  the 
town  of  Lycon,  in  the  country  of  the  Vastitans;  that  six 
thousand  of  the  Romans  were  killed;  and  that  the  rest,  being 
driven  in  a  panic  within  their  rampart,  found  it  difficult  to 
defend  the  camp,  and  had  retreated,  by  long  marches,  as  if 
flying,  into  a  friendly  country.  Such  were  the  accounts  from 
Spain.  From  Gaul,  Lucius  Aurunculeius,  praetor,  introduced 
to  the  senate  deputies  from  Placentia  and  Cremona,  who 
represented  those  polonies  as  distressed  by  the  want  of  inha¬ 
bitants;  some  having  been  carried  off  by  the  casualties  of  war, 
others  by  sickness;  and  several  weary  of  the  neighbourhood 
of  the  Gauls,  having  removed  from  them.  On  this,  the  se- 
^  14,596/.  16^.  8rf.  T  4,270/.  19^.  9d.  ^ 
t  A  coin  so  called,  from  its  bearing  tbe  image  of  a  priest  carrying  in  a 
box  (cistus)  the  consecrated  things,  used  in  the  mystenes  of  Ceres,  and  of 
other  deities.  In  value  7^(/.  were  equal  to  four  drachmas. 

B,  C.  190.] 

BOOK  XXXVII. 

183 

nate  decreed,  that  “  Caius  Laelius,  the  consul,  if  he  thought 
proper,  should  enrol  six  thousand  families,  to  be  distributed 
and  settled  at  the  before  mentioned  places;  and  that  Lucius 
Aurunculeius,  praetor,  should  appoint  commissioners  to  con¬ 
duct  them.”  Accordingly,  Marcus  Atilius  Serranus,  Lucius 
Valerius  Flaccus,  son  of  Publius,  and  Lucius  Valerius  Tap- 
pus,  son  of  Caius,  were  named  to  that  office. 
XL  VII.  Not  long  after,  as  the  time  of  the  consular  elec¬ 
tions  drew  nigh,  the  consul,  Caius  Laelius,  came  home  to 
Rome,  from  Gaul.  He  not  only  enrolled  the  colonists,  or¬ 
dered  by  the  decree  of  senate,  passed  in  his  absence,  as  a 
supplement  to  Cremona  and  Placentia,  but  proposed, — and, 
on  his  recommendation,  the  senate  voted, — ^that  two  new 
colonies  should  be  established  in  the  lands  which  had  be¬ 
longed  to  the  Boians.  At  the  same  time  arrived  a  letter  from 
the  praetor,  Lucius  jEmilius,  containing  an  account  of  the 
sea  fight  at  Myonnesus,  and  of  the  consul,  Lucius  Scipio, 
having  transported  his  army  into  Asia.  A  supplication  for 
one  day  was  decreed,  on  account  of  the  naval  victory,  and 
another,  for  a  second  day,  to  implore  the  gods,  that,  as  the 
Roman  army  had  then,  for  the  first  time,  pitched  a  camp  in 
Asia,  that  event  might,  in  the  issue,  prove  prosperous  and 
happy.  The  consul  was  ordered  to  sacrifice  twenty  of  the 
greater  victims,  on  occasion  of  each  supplication.  The  elec¬ 
tion  of  consuls  was  then  held,  and  was  attended  with  a  strong 
contest.  One  of  the  candidates,  Marcus  iEmilius  Lepidus, 
lay  under  general  censure,  for  having,  in  order  to  sue  for  the 
office,  left  his  province  of  Sicily  without  asking  leave  of  the 
senate.  The  other  candidates  were  Marcus  Fulvius  Nobi- 
lior,  Cneius  Manlius  Vulso,  and  Marcus  Valerius  Messa- 
la.  Fulvius  alone  was  elected  consul,  the  rest  not  having 
gained  a  majority  of  the  centuries;  and,  the  next  day,  reject¬ 
ing  Lepidus  (for  Messala  had  declined)  he  declared  Cneius 
Manlius  his  colleague.  Then  were  chosen  praetors,  two  of 
the  name  of  Quintus  Fabius  Labeo,  and  Pictor;  the  latter 

184 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  563. 
of  whom  had,  in  that  year,  been  inaugurated  flamen  quirina- 
lis,  Marcus  Sempronius  Tuditanus,  Spurius  Postumius  Al¬ 
binos,  Lucius  Plautius  Hypsaeus,  and  Lucius  Baebius  Dives. 
T  R  563  XL VI I L  Valerius  Antias  says,  that  at  the  time 
B.  C.  189.  when  Marcus  Fulvius  Nobilior  and  Cneius  Manlius 
Vulso  came  into  the  consulship,  a  rumour  prevailed  strongly 
at  Rome,  and  was  received,  as  almost  certain,  that  the  consul, 
Lucius  Scipio,  and,  with  him,  Publius  Africanus,  had  been 
invited  by  the  king  to  a  conference,  under  pretence  of  re¬ 
storing  young  Scipio;  that  they  were  both  seized,  and  that, 
when  their  leaders  were  thus  made  prisoners,  the  enemy^s 
army  was  immediately  led  up  to  the  Roman  camp;  that  this 
was  stormed,  and  the  forces  entirely  cut  off;  that,  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  this,  the  iEtolians  had  taken  courage,  and  refused  to 
obey  orders;  and  that  several  of  their  principal  men  had  gone 
into  Macedonia,  Dardania,  and  Thrace,  to  hire  auxiliaries, 
that  Aulus  Terentius  Varro,  and  Marcus  Claudius  Lepidus, 
had  been  sent  by  Aulus  Cornelius,  propraetor,  from  ^tolia,  to 
carry  this  intelligence  to  Rome.  To  this  story  he  adds,  that  the 
iEtolian  ambassadors  being  asked  in  the  senate,  among  other 
questions,  from  whom  they  had  received  the  account  of  the 
Roman  generals  being  made  prisoners  in  Asia  by  king  An- 
tiochus,  and  the  army  being  cut  off,  answered,  that  they  had 
the  information  from  their  own  ambassadors  who  were  with 
the  consul.  As  I  do  not  find  that  any  other  writer  mentions 
this  rumour,  I  neither  take  upon  myself  to  affirm  the  ac¬ 
count  as  true,  nor  yet  to  pass  it  by  as  groundless. 
XLIX.  When  the  jEtolian  ambassadors  were  brought  to 
an  audience  of  the  senate,  although  their  cause  and  their 
circumstances,  rather  required  that  they  should  confess,  and 
humbly  ^eek  pardon  for  their  crime,  or  error,  yet  they  began 
with  enumerating  their  services  to  the  Roman  people;  and, 
in  an  upbraiding  kind  of  manner,  talked  of  their  own  bra, 
very,  in  the  war  with  Philip,  so  as  to  give  very  general  of¬ 
fence  by  the  insolence  of  their  discourse.  The  effect  of 

B.  C.  189/^  BOOK  XXXVII.  185 
their  thus  recalling  to  people’s  minds  old  matters  which  had 
been  forgotten,  was,  that  the  senators  recollected  many  more 
injuries  than  services  done  by  the  iEtoUans;  and  that,  when 
they  stood  in  need  of  compassion,  they  pros  oked  anger  and 
hatred.  They  were  asked  by  one  senator,  whether  they  sub¬ 
mitted  themselves  to  the  disposal  of  the  Roman  people;  then, 
by  another,  whether  they  would  have  the  same  allies  and  ene¬ 
mies  as  the  Roman  people:  hue  they  gave  no  answer;  on 
which  they  were  ordered  to  withdraw.  The  whole  senate, 
then,  almost  with  one  voice,  cried  out,  that  the  ^tolians 
were  still  entirely  devoted  to  Antiochus;  and  that  they  were 
supported  solely  by  their  expectations  from  him.  Wherefore 
the  war  ought  to  be  carried  on  against  such  open  enemies, 
and  their  haughty^  spirits  tamed.’'  Another  circumstance 
which  helped  to  inflame  the  resentment  of  the  senate,  was 
that  in  the  very  moment  of  soliciting  peace  from  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  they  were  making  war  on  Dolopia  and  Athamania.  A 
decree  of  the  senate  was  made,  on  the  motion  of  Manius 
Acilius,  who  had  defeated  Antiochus  and  the  ittolians,  that, 
the  Jbtolian  ambassadors  should  be  ordered  to  leave  the 
chy  that  day,  and  to  quit  ItaW  within  fifteen  days.”  Aulus 
Terentius  Varro  was  appointed  to  escort  them  on  the  road, 
and  notice  was  given  to  them,  that,  ‘‘  if  anv  ambassadors 
from  the  yEtolians  should  thence forw^ard  come  to  Rome, 
without  the  permission  of  the  general  commanding  in  that 
province,  and  without  being  accompanied  by  a  Roman  depu¬ 
ty,  all  such  would  be  treated  as  enemies.” — In  this  manner 
were  the  ^Ttolians  dismissed. 
L.  The  consuls  then  consulted  the  senate  on  the  distribu¬ 
tion  of  the  provinces;  and  it  was  resolved,  that  thev  should 
cast  lots  for  yEtolia  and  Asia.  To  him,  to  whose  lot  Asia 
should  fall,  was  assigned  the  army,  then  under  Lucius  Scipio; 
and,  to  recruit  its  numbers,  four  thousand  Roman  foot,  and 
two  hundred  horse,  aud,  of  the  allies  and  Latines,  eight 
ihousand  foot,  and  four  hundred  horse:  with  which  force  ht 
voj  .  V. — R  b 

186 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y,  R.  563. 

was  to  carry  on  the  war  with  Antiochus.  To  the  other  con¬ 
sul  was  decreed,  the  army  in  jEtolia;  and  he  was  allowed  to 
raise,  for  a  reinforcement,  the  same  number  of  natives  and 
allies,  allotted  to  his  colleague.  He  was,  likewise,  ordered  to 
equip,  and  take  with  him,  the  ships  that  had  been  fitted  out 
the  year  before;  and  not  only  to  wage  war  with  the  iEto- 
lians,  but  also  to  pass  over  into  the  island  of  Cephallenia. 
He  was  farther  directed,  if  he  could  do  it  without  injury  to 
the  public  service,  to  come  home  to  Rome  to  hold  the  elec¬ 
tions;  for,  besides  replacing  the  annual  magistrates,  it  was 
resolved,  that  censors  also  should  be  created;  and  if  any  par¬ 
ticular  business  should  detain  him,  he  was,  then,  to  acquaint 
the  senate,  that  he  could  not  attend  at  the  time  of  the  elec¬ 
tions.  aEtolia  fell,  by  lot,  to  Marcus  Fulvius;  Asia  to  Cneius 
3Ianlius.  The  praetors  then  cast  lots,  and  Spurius  Postumius 
Albinus  obtained  the  city,  and  foreign  jurisdiction.  Marcus 
Sernpronius  Tuditanus,  Sicily;  Quinius  Fabius  Pictor,  the 
flamen  quirinalis,  Sardinia;  Quintus  Fabius  Labeo,  the  fleet; 
Lucius  Plautius  Hypsa'us,  hither  Spain;  Lucius  Baebius 
Dives,  farther  Spain*  For  Sicily,  was  allotted  one  legion, 
with  the  squadron  then  in’ the  province;  and  the  praetor  was 
ordered  to  lew,  on  the  Sicilians,  two-tenths  of  the  corn;  one 
of  which  he  was  to  send  into  Asia,  the  other  into  iEtoiia.  It 
was  also  ordered,  that  the  same  impost  should  be  collected 
in  Sardinia,  and  the  corn  sent  to  the  same  armies  as  the  Sici¬ 
lian  corn.  A  reinforcement  was  given  to  Lucius  B^bius,  for 
Snain,  of  one  thousand  Roman  foot  and  fifty  horse,  with  six 
thousand  Latine  foot  and  two  hundred  horse.  To  Plautius 
Hypsseus,  for  the  hither  Spain,  were  assigned  one  thousand 
Roman  foot,  and  two  thousand  Latines,  with  two  hundred 
horse;  so  that,  with  these  supplies,  each  of  the  two  Spains 
should  have  a  legion.  Of  the  magistrates  of  the  preceding 
vear,  Caius  L&lius  was  continued  in  command,  for  a  year, 
with  his  present  army,  as  was  Publius  Junius,  proprsetor  in 
Etriiriii,  with  the  forces  then  in  the  province,  and  Marcus 
Tuccius.  praetor  in  Bruttium  and  Apulia. 

B.  C,189.] 

BOOKXXXVIL  ^ 

187 

LI,  Before  the  praetors  went  into  their  provinces,  a  dis« 
pute  arose  between  Publius  Licinius,  chief  pontiff,  and  Quin¬ 
tus  Fabius  Pictor,  flamen  quirinalis;  such  as  had  happened, 
in  the  time  of  their  fathers,  between  Lucius  Metellus,  and 
Postumius  Albinus.  Metellus,  who  was  chief  pontiff  at  the 
time,  had  detained,  for  the  performance  of  the  business  of 
religion,  Albinus,  who  was  consul,  and  was  setting  out,  with 
hiS' colleague,  Caius  Lutatius,  to  the  fleet  at  Sicily;  and  now, 
Publius  Licinius  detained  the  praetor  Fabius,  from  going  to 
Sardinia.  The  matter  was  agitated  in  very  warm  debates, 
both  in  the  senate  and  before  the  commons:  authoritative 
commands  were  issued  on  both  sides;  pledges  seized  to  se¬ 
cure  appearance,  fines  imposed,  applications  made  to  the  tri¬ 
bunes,  and  appeals  to  the  people.  At  last,  considerations  of 
religion  prevailed,  and  the  flamen  obeyed  the  order  of  the 
pontiff;  whereupon,  the  fines  were  remitted,  by  order  of  the 
people.  The  pranor,  thus  bereft  of  his  province,  resolved  tc^ 
abdicate  his  office,  but  was  deterred  by  the  authority  of  the 
senate,  who  decreed,  that  he  should  hold  the  civil  jurisdic¬ 
tion  between  natives  and  foreigners.  The  levies  being  finish¬ 
ed  in  a  few  days,  (for  the  soldiers  to  be  enlisted  were  not 
many,)  the  consuls  and  prsetors  repaired  to  their  provinces. 
There  w^as  spread,  at  this  time,  an  unauthenticated  report, 
the  author  of  which,  no  one  knew,  of  the  transactions  that 
had  passed  in  Asia;  and,  in  a  few  days  after,  certain  infor¬ 
mation,  and  a  letter  from  the  general,  arrived  at  Rome.  The 
satisfaction  which  this  occasioned  was  great,  not  so  much  be¬ 
cause  of  any  apprehensions,  entertained  of  late, — (for  Antio- 
chus,  since  his  defeat  at  Altolia,  was  no  longer  an  object  of 
dread,)  as  because  of  the  opinion  which  had  been  formerly 
conceived;  for  when  this  war  was  first  begun,  he  was  consider¬ 
ed  as  a  very  formidable  cnemv,  both  on  account  of  his  own 
strength,  and  of  his  having  Hannibal  to  direct  the  business 
of  the  war.  The  senate,  however,  made  no  change  in  the 
plan  of  sending  the  consul  into  Asia;  nor  did  they  lessen  the 

188 

BtSfORY  OF  ROME, 

[Y,  R.  563- 

force  intended  for  that  province,  because  they  feared  that 
they  might  be  engaged  in  a  war  with  the  Gauls  settled  in 
that  country. 
LII.  In  a  short  time  after,  Marcus  Aurelius  Cotta,  deputy 
from  Lucius  Scipio,  also  ambassadors  from  king  Eumenes, 
Antiochus,  with  others  from  Rhodes,  arrived  at  Rome. 
Cotta,  first,  in  the  senate,  and  then,  by  their  order,  in  the 
assembly  of  the  people,  gave  a  narrative  of  the  services  per¬ 
formed  in  Asia.  On  which  a  decree  was  passed,  ordering  a 
supplication,  of  three  days  continuance,  and  that  forty  vic¬ 
tims  of  the  greater  kinds  should  be  offered  on  the  occasion. 
Then  audience  was  given,  first,  to  Eumenes.  After  briefly 
returning  thanks  to  the  senate,  for  having  relieved  him  and 
his  brother  from  a  siege,  and  protecting  his  kingdom  from 
the  unjust  attacks  of  Andochus;  and  then,  congratulating 
them  on  the  success  of  their  arms,  b}  sea  and  land,  whereby 
they  had  utterly  routed  Antiochus,  driven  him  out  of  his 
camp,  and  expelled  him,  first,  from  Europe,  and  then  from 
all  Asia,  on  this  side  of  Mount  Taurus;  he  added,  that  with 
respect  to  his  services,  he  wished  them  to  be  learned  from 
their  own  generals  and  their  own  deputies,  rather  than  from 
his  mouth.  All  were  pleased  with  his  discourse,  and  de¬ 
sired  him  to  lay  aside  his  modesty  so  far,  as  to  tell  frankly 
what  recompense  he  thought  himself  deserving  of  from  the 
senate  and  people  of  Rome:  assuring  him,  that  the  senate 
were  inclined  to  act  with  greater  zeal,  and  more  abundant 
liberality,  if  possible,  than  even  his  deserts  demanded.”  To 
this  the  king  answered,  that  had  others  offered  him  a  choice 
of  rewards,  and  allovred  him  the  privilege  of  consulting  the 
Roman  senate,  he  would  have  applied  to  that  most  august 
body  for  their  advice;  that  he  might  not  appear  to  hav^e 
wanted  either  moderation  in  his  wishes,  or  modesty  in  his 
requests.  But  now,  when  they  themselves  were  the  donors, 
it  was  much  more  proper  that  their  munificence,  towards  him 
and  his  brothers,  should  be  regulated  by  their  own  judg- 

BOOK  XXXVII. 

189 

B.  C.  189.] 
ment/’  The  senate,  not  discouraged  by  this  answer,  still 
urged  him  to  speak;  and,  after  a  long  contest,  of  kindness  on 
one  side,  and  reservation  on  the  other,  Euinenes,  with  a  de¬ 
gree  of  complaisance  as  insuperable  as  it  was  equal  in  both 
parties,  withdrew  from  the  senate-house.  The  senate  per¬ 
sisted  in  their  resolution,  and  said,  that  it  was  idle  to  sup¬ 
pose  that  the  king  was  unable  to  inform  them  of  the  objects 
of  his  hopes,  and  of  his  views  in  coining.  He  best  knew 
what  would  be  suitable  to  his  own  dominions.  He  was  much 
better  acquainted  with  Asia  than  were  the  senate.  They 
ought,  therefore,  to  call  him  back,  and  insist  on  his  explain¬ 
ing  his  wishes  and  sentiments.” 
LIII.  The  king  being  brought  back,  by  the  praetor,  and 
desired  to  speak  freeh,  began  thus:  ‘‘Conscript  Fathers,  I 
should  have  persevered  in  declining  to  speak,  but  that  I  knttw 
you  would  presently  call  in  the  Rhodian  ambassadors,  and 
that  when  they  had  been  heard,  I  must,  of  necessitv,  have 
spoken.  And  my  task  therein  will  be  the  more  difficult  as 
their  demands  will  be  of  such  a  nature,  that,  so  far  from  ap¬ 
pearing  to  contain  any  thing  detrimental  to  me,  they  will  not 
even  seem  to  hav'e  anv  immediate  connection  with  their  own 
interest.  For  they  will  plead  the  cause  of  the  Grecian  states, 
and  allege,  that  they  ought  to  be  set  free;  w^hich  point  being 
gained,  is  it  not  plain  to  every  one,  that  they  will  alienate  from 
us  not  only  those  states  which  shall  be  liberated,  but  likewise 
those  that  have  been  tributary  to  us  since  the  earliest  times; 
and  that,  after  having  bound  them  under  so  great  an  obliga¬ 
tion,  they  will  keep  them  under  the  denomination  of  allies, 
in  reality  subject  their  government,  and  entirely  at  their 
disposal.  Now  while  they  are  aspiring  to  such  a  height  of 
power,  they  will  pretend  that  the  business  no  w'ays  concerns 
themselves;  thev  will  only  sa\ ,  that  it  is  becoming  of  you, 
and  conformable  to  your  past  conduct.  It  will  be  proper, 
therefore,  to  be  on  your  guard,  lest  you  be  deceived  by  such 
specious  arguments,  and  lest  by  an  unfair  distribution,  you 

190 

HISTORY  OF  ROML. 

tY.  R,  56^. 

not  only  ^lepress  some  of  your  allies  too  much,  while  you 
exalt  others  beyond  measure,  but,  also,  put  those,  who  bore 
arms  against  you,  in  a  better  state  than  your  friends.  As  to 
what  regards  myself,  in  other  cases,  I  should  rather  wish  it 
to  be  thought  I  had  yielded  somewhat  of  the  full  extent  of 
my  right,  than  that  I  had  kept  up  too  obstinate  a  struggle  to 
maintain  it;  but,  in  a  contest  of  friendship  and  good-will  to¬ 
wards  you,  and  of  the  respect  to  be  paid  to  you,  I  cannot, 
with  any  patience,  bear  to  be  outdone.  Friendship  with  you 
was  the  principal  inheritance  that  I  received  from  my  father; 
who,  of  all  the  inhabitants  of  Asia  and  Greece,  was  the  first 
who  formed  a  league  of  amity  with  you;  and  this  he  main¬ 
tained,  with  constant  and  invariable  fidelity,  to  the  last  hour 
of  his  life.  Nor  did  he  demonstrate,  merely,  a  faithful  and 
kind  inclination  towards  you,  but  took  an  active  part  in  all 
the  wars  which  you  waged  in  Greece,  w’hether  on  land  or 
sea;  he  supplied  you  with  all  kinds  of  provisions  in  such  a 
manner,  that  not  one  of  your  allies  could  vie  with  him  in  any 
respect;  and,  finally,  while  he  was  exhorting  the  Boeotians  to 
alliance  with  you,  in  the  middle  of  his  discourse,  he  was 
struck  by  a  fit,  and  expired  soon  after.  In  his  steps  I  have 
trod;  and  though  I  could  not  surpass  the  warmth  of  his 
wishes,  and  the  zeal  with  which  he  cultivated  your  friend¬ 
ship^ — for  these  could  not  be  exceeded,  yet — fortune,  the 
times,  Antioclius,  and  the  war  waged  in  Asia,  afforded  me 
occasions  of  outdoing  him  in  real  acts,  in  meritorious  and  ex¬ 
pensive  services.  Antiochus,  king  of  Asia,  and  of  a  part  ot 
Europe,  olfered  me  his  daughter  in  marriage;  offered  to  re^ 
store  immediately  the  states  that  had  revolted  from  us,  and 
gave  great  hopes  of  enlarging  my  dominions,  if  1  would  have 
joined  him  in  the  war  against  Rome.  I  will  not  boast,  as  oi 
a  matter  of  merit,  that  I  was  guilty  of  no  trespass  against 
vou;  but  I  will  rather  mentipn  those  instances  of  conduct 
which  are  worthy  of  the  very  early  friendship  between  oui 
house  and  you.  I  gave  your  commanders  such  succours  of 

B.  C.  189.] 

BOOK  XXXVIL 

191 

land  and  sea  forces,  that  not  one  of  your  allies  can  stand  in 
competition  with  me.  1  supplied  them  with  provisions  for 
both  services;  in  all  the  naval  engagements,  fought  in  various 
places,  I  took  my  share,  and  I  never  was  sparing  of  my  la¬ 
bour  or  danger.  What,  among  all  the  calamities  of  war,  is 
the  most  grievous,  I  underwent  a  siege;  being  shut  up  in  Per- 
gamus,  in  the  utmost  danger  both  of  my  kingdom  and  of  my 
life.  When  this  was  raised,  notwithstanding  that  Antiochus 
was  encamped  on  one  side  of  the  capital  of  my  dominions, 
and  Seieucus  on  another,  regardless  of  my  own  affairs,  I  w^ent 
with  my  whole  fleet  to  the  Hellespont,  to  meet  your  consul, 
Lucius  Scipio,  and  to  assist  in  transporting  his  army.  From 
the  time  that  the  army  came  over  into  Asia,  I  never  quitted 
the  consul;  no  Roman  soldier  was  more  regular  in  his  atten¬ 
dance  in  your  camp  than  I  and  my  brothers.  No  expedition, 
no  battle  of  cavalrv  was  undertaken  without  me.  In  the  field. 
I  took  that  post,  and  I  maintained  that  ground,  which  the 
consurs  pleasure  allotted  to  me.  I  do  not  intend,  Conscript 
Fathers,  to  sav  who  can  compare  his  services,  during  that 
war,  to  mine.  There  is  not  one  of  all  those  nations,  or  kings, 
vou  hold  in  high  esteem,  with  whom  I  do  not  set  myself  on 
a  level.  Masinissa  was  your  enemy  before  he  became  your 
ally;  nor  did  he,  while  his  kingdom  flourished,  come  to  your 
aid  at  the  head  of  his  troops;  but  dethroned,  exiled,  and 
stripped  of  all  his  forces,  he  fled  for  refuge  to  your  camp  with 
one  troop  of  horse.  Nevertheless,  because  he  faithfully  and 
diligently  adhered  to  your  cause  in  Africa,  against  Syphax 
and  the  Carthaginians,  you  not  only  restored  hi  fa  to  the 
throne  of  his  father,  but,  by  adding  to  his  own  domain,  the 
most  opulent  part  of  the  kingdom  of  Syphax,  rendered  him 
the  most  potent  of  all  the  kings  in  Africa.  What  reward  then, 
and  what  honour  do  we  deserve  at  your  hands,  who  have 
never  been  foes,  but  always  allies?  My  father,  myself,  my 
brothers,  have  carried  arms  in  your  cause  by  sea  and  land, 
not  onlv  in  Asia,  hut  in  countries  remote  from  our  home;  in 

192 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

LY.  R.  563. 

Peloponnesus,  in  Boeotia,  in  iEtolia,  during  the  wars  with 
Philip,  and  Antiochus,  and  the  iEtolians.  It  may  be  asked 
me.  What  then  are  your  demands?  Conscript  Fathers,  since 
I  must  comply  with  what  I  perceive  is  your  desire,  and  ex¬ 
plain  my  wishes:  if  you  have  removed  Antiochus  beyond  the 
mountains  of  I'aurus  with  the  intention  of  holding  those 
countries  yourselves,  I  wish  for  no  other  people  to  settle 
near  me,  no  other  neighbours  than  you;  nor  do  1  expect  that 
any  other  event  could  give  greater  safetv  and  stability  to  my 
gcvernnient.  But,  if  your  purpose  is  to  retire  hence,  and 
withdraw  your  armies,  I  may  venture  to  affirm,  that  not  one 
of  you  allies  is  more  deserving  than  I  am  of  possessing  what 
you  have  acquired.  But  then  it  will  be  a  glorious  act  to  li¬ 
berate  slates  from  bondage.  I  agree  that  it  will,  provided 
they  have  committed  nothing  hostile  against  you.  But,  if  they 
took  part  with  Antiochus,  is  it  not  much  more  becoming 
your  wisdom  and  equity,  to  consult  the  interest  of  your  well- 
deserving  friends,  than  that  of  your  enemies.” 
LIV.  The  senate  was  well  pleased  with  the  king’s  dis¬ 
course,  and  plainly  manifested  a  disposition  to  act,  in  every 
particular,  with  liberality,  and  an  earnest  desire  to  gratify 
him.  An  embassy  from  Smyrna  w^as  next  introduced,  be¬ 
cause  some  of  the  Rhodian  ambassadors  were  not  present, 
but  this  was  quickly  despatched.  The  Smyrnasans  were  very 
highly  commended  for  having  resolved  to  endure  the  last  ex¬ 
tremities  rather  than  surrender  to  the  king.  The  Rhodians 
were  next  introduced.  The  chief  of  their  embassy,  after 
taking  a  view  of  the  early  periods  of  their  friendship  with 
the  Roman  people,  and  displaying  the  merits  of  the  Rhodians 
in  the  war  with  Philip,  and,  afterwards,  in  that  with  Antio¬ 
chus,  proceeded  thus:  “  Conscript  Fathers,  there  is  nothing 
in  the  whole  course  of  our  business  that  gives  us  more  trou¬ 
ble  and  uneasiness  than  having  a  debate  with  Eumenes;  with 
whom  alone,  of  all  the  kings  in  the  world,  each  of  us,  as  in¬ 
dividuals,  and  what  weighs  more  with  us,  our  state,  as  a 

BOOK  XXXVII. 

193 

B.  C.  189.] 

community,  is  closely  connected  in  friendship.  But,  Con¬ 
script  Fathers,  not  our  own  incUnations  disunite  us,  but 
the  nature  of  things,  whose  sway  is  all-powerful,  according 
to  which,  we  being  free  ourselves,  plead  the  cause  of  other 
men’s  freedom;  while  kings  wish  to  have  all  things  subser¬ 
vient,  and  subject  to  their  will.  Yet,  however  that  matter 
may  be,  we  are  more  embarrassed  by  our  respect  towards 
the  king,  than  either  by  any  intricacy  in  the  subject  of  debate, 
or  any  perplexity  which  it  seems  likely  to  occasion  in  your 
deliberations.  For  if  you  could  make  no  honourable  requi¬ 
tal  to  the  king,  your  friend  and  ally,  who  has  merited  highly 
in  this  very  war,  and  the  rewarding  of  whose  services  is  now 
under  your  consideration,  by  any  other  means  than  by  deliver¬ 
ing  free  states  into  his  power,  you  might,  then  indeed,  find 
it  hard  to  determine  between  the  sending  away  your  friend, 
the  king,  without  an  honourable  requital,  and  the  departing 
from  your  own  established  practice;  tarnishing,  now,  by  the 
servitude  of  so  many  states,  the  glory  which  you  acquired 
in  the  war  with  Philip.  But,  from  this  necessity  of  retrench¬ 
ing,  either  from  your  grateful  intentions  towards  your  friend, 
or  from  your  own  glory,  fortune  completely  frees  you.  For 
through  the  bounty  of  the  gods,  your  victory  is  not  more  glo¬ 
rious  than  it  is  rich,  so  that  it  can  easily  acquit  you  of  that 
debt.  Lycaonia,  and  both  the  Phrygias,  with  Pisidia,  the 
Chersonese,  and  the  adjoining  parts  of  Europe,  are  all  in 
your  power;  and  any  one  of  these,  added  to  Eumenes’  pos¬ 
sessions,  would  more  than  double  his  dominions;  but,  if  they 
were  all  conferred  upon  him,  they  would  set  him  on  a  level 
with  the  greatest  of  kings.  You  have  it,  therefore,  in  your 
power  to  enrich  your  allies  with  the  prizes  of  the  war;  and, 
at  the  same  time  to  adhere  to  your  established  mode  of  con¬ 
duct,  by  keeping  in  mind  what  motive  you  assigned  as  your 
cause  of  war,  first  against  Philip,  now  against  Antiochus. 
what  line  of  conducft  you  pursued  after  your  conquest  of  Phi¬ 
lip;  what  is  now  desired  and  expected  from  you,  not  so  much 
vox.,  V. — C  c 

194 

history  op  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  563. 

because  you  have  done  it  before,  as  because  it  is  suitable  to 
your  character  to  do  it.  For,  what  to  some  is  both  a  spe- 
cious  and  an  honourable  incitement  for  taking  arms,  is  not  so 
to  others.  Some  go  to  war  to  get  possession  of  land,  some 
of  villages,  some  of  towns,  some  of  ports,  and  some  of  the 
sea-coast.  Such  things  you  never  coveted,  when  you  had 
them  not;  and  you  cannot  covet  them  now,  when  the  whole 
world  is  under  your  dominion.  You  ever  fought  for  the  ex¬ 
altation  of  your  dignity  and  glory,  in  the  sight  of  the  whole 
human  race,  who,  for  a  long  time  past,  have  revered  your 
name  and  empire  next  to  that  of  the  immortal  gods.  What 
was  arduous  in  the  pursuit  and  acquisition,  may,  perhaps, 
prove  more  difficult  to  be  maintained.  You  have  undertaken 
to  deliver  out  of  bondage  under  kings,  a  nation  the  most  an¬ 
cient  and  most  highly  distinguished,  both  by  the  fame  of  its 
exploits,  and  by  universal  praise  for  politeness  and  learning; 
and  the  whole  of  it,  having  been  received  under  your  care 
and  protection,  has  a  claim  on  you  for  your  patronage  for 
ever.  The  cities,  standing  on  the  original  soil,  are  not  more 
Grecian  than  their  colonies,  which  formerly  migrated  thence 
into  Asia;  nor  has  change  of  country  changed  either  their 
race  or  manners.  Every  state  among  us  has  ventured  to 
maintain  a  dutiful  contest  with  its  parents  and  founders, 
vying  with  them  in  every  virtue  and  valuable  qualification. 
Most  of  you  have  visited  the  cities  in  Greece,  and  those  in 
Asia.  We  acknowledge  an  inferiority  in  no  other  respect, 
than  in  our  being  farther  distant  from  you.  The  Massilians, 
(whom,  if  the  nature  implanted,  as  it  were,  in  the  disposition 
of  their  country,  could  have  been  overcome,  the  many  bar¬ 
barous  tribes,  surrounding  them,  would,  by  this  time,  have 
rendered  as  savage  as  themselves,)  are,  as  we  hear,  deserv 
edly  held  in  as  high  esteem  by  you  as  if  they  were  inhabitants 
of  the  very  heart  of  Greece,  For  they  have  preserved  not  only 
the  sound  of  the  language,  the  mode  of  dress,  and  the  habit; 
but,  what  is  more  material  than  any  thing  else,  the  manners. 

B.  C.  189,] 

BOOK  XXXVII. 

195 

the  laws^  and  a  mind  pure  and  untainted  by  contagion  from 
their  neighbours*  The  boundary  of  your  empire,  at  present, 
is  Mount  Taurus.  Nothing  within  that  line  ought  to  be 
thought  remote.  To  whatever  extent  your  arms  have  reach¬ 
ed,  let  the  emanations  of  your  justice,  from  this  centre,  reach 
to  the  same  length.  Let  barbarians,  with  whom  the  commands 
of  masters  have  always  served  instead  of  laws,  have  kings, 
as  it  is  their  wish;  but  Greeks,  in  whatever  condition  for¬ 
tune  assigns  them,  carry  spirits  like  your  own.  They  too, 
in  former  times  supported  empire  by  their  internal  strengdi. 
They  now  pray  that  empire  may  remain  to  eternity,  where 
it  is  lodged  at  present.  They  are  well  pleased  at  their  liberty 
being  protected  by  your  arms,  since  they  are  unable  to  pro¬ 
tect  it  by  their  own,  Bi#it  is  objected,  that  some  of  their 
states  sided  widi  Antiochus.  So  did  others,  before,  with 
Philip;  so  did  the  Tarentines  with  Pyrrhus.  Not  to  enume¬ 
rate  other  nations,  Carthage  enjoys  liberty  ^jd  its  own  laws. 
Consider,  Conscript  FjUhers,  how  much  you  owe  to  this  pre¬ 
cedent  set  by  yourselves.  You  will  surely  be  disposed  to  re¬ 
fuse  to  the  ambition  of  Eumeaes,  what  you  refused  to  your 
own  most  ju^t  resentment.  With  what  brave  and  faithful 
exertions,  we,  Rhodi^s,  have  assisted  you,  both  in  this  late 
war,  and  in  all  tht  wars  that  you  have  waged  in  that  part  of 
the  world,  we  leave  to  your  own  judgment,  W'e,  now,  in 
peace,  offer  you  such  advice,  that  if  you  conform  to  it,  all 
the  world  will  judge,  that  your  use  of  the  victory  redounds 
more  to  the  splendour  of  your  glory  than  the  victory  itself.’’ 
Their  arguments  seemed  well  adapted  to  the  Roman  gran¬ 
deur. 
LV.  After  the  Rhodians,  the  ambassadors  of  Antiochus 
were  called.  These,  after  the  common  practice  of  petition¬ 
ers  for  pardon,  ackowledged  the  king’s  error,  and  besought 
the  Conscript  Fathers  to  “  let  their  deliberations  be  direct¬ 
ed  rather  by  their  own  clemency,  than  by  the  misconduct  of 
the  king,  who  had  suffered  punishment  fully  sufficient;  in 

196 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  56S. 

fine,  to  ratify,  by  their  authority,  the  terms  of  the  peace 
granted  by  their  general  Lucius  Scipio.’’  The  senate  voted, 
that  the  peace  should  be  observed;  and  the  people,  a  few 
days  after,  passed  an  order  to  the  same  purpose.  The  treaty 
was  concluded  in  the  capitol  with  Antipater,  chief  of  the 
embassy,  and  nephew  of  king  Antiochus,  Then  audience 
was  given  to  the  other  embassies  from  Asia,  to  all  of  whom 
was  returned  the  same  answer,  that  “  the  senate,  in  con¬ 
formity  to  the  usage  of  their  ancestors,  would  send  ten 
ambassadors  to  examine  and  adjust  the  affairs  of  Asia.  That 
the  outline  of  the  arrangement  was  to  be  this:  that  the  places 
on  the  hither  side  of  Mount  Taurus,  which  had  been  within 
the  limits  of  the  realm  of  Antiochus,  should  be  assigned  to 
Eumenes,  expecting  Lycia  and^aria,  as  far  as  the  river 
Mseander;  and  that  these  last  mentioned  should  become  the 
property  of  the  Rhodians.  The  other  states  of  Asia,  which 
had  been  tributary  to  Attalus,  should  likewise  pay  tribute  to 
Eumenes;  and  such  as  had  been  tributary  to  Antiochus, 
should  be  free  and  independent,’’  The  ten  ambassadors  ap¬ 
pointed  were  Quintus  Minucius  Rufus,  Lucius  Furius  Pur- 
pureo,  Quintus  Minneius  Thermus,  Appius  Claudius  Nero, 
Cneius  Cornelius  Merula,  Marcus  Junius  Brutus,  Lucius 
Aurunculeius,  Lucius  iEniilius  Paulus,  Publius  Cornelius 
Lentulus,  and  Publius  .^lius  Tubero. 
LVI.  These  were  commissioned,  with  full  powers,  to  de¬ 
termine  all  points,  that  required  investigation  on  the  spot. 
The  general  plan  the  senate  settled  thus:  That  ‘‘  all  Lyca- 
onia,  both  the  Phrygias,  and  Mysia,  the  royal  forests,  and 
Lydia,  and  Ionia,  excepting  those  towns  which  had  been  free 
on  the  day  whereon  the  battle  was  fought  with  Antiochus, 
and  excepting,  by  name.  Magnesia  at  Sipylus;  then  the  city 
of  Caria,  called  also  Hydrela,  and  the  territory  of  Hydrela, 
stretching  towards  Phrygia,  and  the  forts  and  villages  on  the 
river  Mseander,  and  likewise  the  towns,  excepting  such  as 
had  been  free  before  the  war,  and  excepting,  by  name,  Teh 

BOOK  mVIL 

197 

B.  C.  189.] 
missus,  and  the  fort  of  Telmissium,  and  the  lands  which  had 
belonged  to  Ptolemy  of  Telmissus;  all  these  should  be  given 
to  king  Eumenes.  Lycia  was  assigned  to  the  Rhodians, 
excepting  the  same  Telmissus,  and  the  fort  of  Telmissium, 
with  the  lands  which  had  belonged  to  Ptolemy  of  Telmissus; 
these  were  withheld  from  both  Eumenes  and  the  Rhodians. 
To  the  latter  was  given  also  that  part  of  Caria  which  lies 
beyond  the  river  Maeander  nearest  to  the  island  of  Rhodes, 
with  its  towns,  villages,  forts,  and  lands,  extending  to  Pisidia, 
excepting  those  towns  which  had  been  in  a  state  of  freedom 
on  the  day  before  that  of  the  battle  with  Antiochus.’^  The 
Rhodians,  after  returning  thanks  for  these  favours,  mention¬ 
ed  the  city  of  Soli  in  Cilicia,  “  the  inhabitants  of  which,” 
they  said,  as  well  as  themselves,  derived  their  origin  from 
Argos;  and,  in  consequences  of  this  relation,  a  brotherly 
affection  subsisted  between  the  two  states.  They,  therefore, 
requested  the  senate,  as  an  extraordinary  favour,  to  exempt 
that  city  from  subjection  to  the  king.”  The  ambassadors 
of  Antiochus  were  called  in,  and  the  matter  was  proposed  to 
them,  but  their  consent  could  not  be  obtained;  Antipater 
appealing  to  the  treaty,  irr  opposition  to  which,  the  Rhodians 
were  striving  to  become  masters,  not  only  of  the  city  of  Soli, 
but  of  all  Cilicia,  and  to  pass  beyond  the  summits  of  Taurus, 
The  Rhodians  were  called  again  before  the  senate,  and  the 
Fathers,  after  acquainting  them  how  earnestly  the  king’s 
ambassadors  opposed  the  measure,  added,  that  if  the  Rho¬ 
dians  were  of  opinion  that  the  affair  was  particularly  interest¬ 
ing  to  the  dignity  of  their  state,  they  would  use  every  means 
to  overcome  the  obstinacy  of  the  ambassadors.”  Here¬ 
upon  the  Rhodians,  with  greater  warmth  than  before,  testi¬ 
fied  their  gratitude,  and  declared,  that  they  would  rather 
give  way  to  the  arrogance  of  Antipater,  than  afford  any 
reason  for  disturbing  the  peace.  So  no  change  was  made 
with  respect  to  Soli. 
LVII.  During  the  time  of  these  transactions,  intelUgenct 

19B 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  563, 
was  brought,  by  messengers  from  Marseilles,  that  Lucii^ 
Baebius,  the  praetor,  on  his  way  into  his  province  of  Spain, 
had  been  surrounded  by  the  Ligurians,  great  part  of  his  reti* 
nue  slain,  and  himself  wounded;  that  he  had  made  his  escape, 
without  his  lictors,  and  with  but  few  attendants,  to  Mar¬ 
seilles,  and  in  three  days  after  expired.  The  senate,  on  hear¬ 
ing  of  this  misfortune,  decreed,  that  Publius  Junius  Brutus, 
who  was  propraetor  in  Etruria,  should  leave  the  command  of 
the  province  and  army  to  a  lieutenant-general,  and  go  him¬ 
self  into  farther  Spain,  which  must  be  his  province.  I’hi^ 
decree,  accompanied  with  a  letter,  the  praetor,  Spurius  Pos- 
tumius,  sent  into  Etruria,  and  Publius  Junius  Brutus,  the 
propraetor,  set  out  accordingly.  But  long  before  the  new  go¬ 
vernor’s  arrival  in  that  province,  Lucius  iEmilius  Paulus,  who 
afterw^ards,  with  great  glory,  conquered  king  Perseus,  thou^ 
his  efforts  had  been  unsuccessful  the  year  before,  hastily  col¬ 
lected  a  body  of  troops,  and  fought  a  pitched  battle  with  the 
Lusitanians.  The  enemy  were  routed,  and  put  to  flightj  eigh¬ 
teen  thousand  were  killed,  three  thousand  three  hundred  ta¬ 
ken,  and  their  camp  stormed.  This  victory  contributed  much 
to  tranquillize  affairs  in  Spain.  During  the  same  year,  on 
the  third  day  before  the  calends  of  January,  Lucius  Valerius 
Flaccus,  Marcus  Atilius  Serranus,  and  Lucius  Valerius 
Tappus,  triumvirs,  pursuant  to  a  decree  of  senate,  settled  a 
Latine  colony  at  Bononia,  The  number  of  the  settlers  was 
three  thousand  men.  Seventy  acres  were  given  to  each  horse¬ 
man,  fifty  to  each  of  the  other  colonists.  l*he  land  had  been 
taken  from  the  Boian  Gauls,  who  had  formerly  expelled  the 
Tuscans, 
LVIIL  There  were  many  candidates  for  the  censorship 
this  year,  all  of  them  men  of  illustrious  characters;  and  this 
business,  as  if  it  were  not  in  itself  sufficient  to  excite  dispute, 
gave  rise  to  another  contest  of  a  much  more  violent  nature. 
The  candidates  were  Titus  Quintius  Flamininus,  Publius 
Cornelius  Scipio,  son  of  Cneius,  Lucius  Valerius  Flaccus, 

BOOK  mVIL 

199 

B.  C,  189J 
Marcus  Porcius  Cato,  Marcus  Claudius  Marcellus,  and  Ma¬ 
nias  Acilius  Glabrio,  who  had  defeated  Antiochus  and  the 
iEtolians  at  Thermopylae.  The  general  favour  inclined  chief¬ 
ly  to  this  last;  because  he  had  been  liberal  of  his  largesses, 
and  had  thereby  attached  great  numbers  to  his  interest*  As 
it  was  a  severe  mortification  to  so  many  of  the  nobility  to  see 
a  new  man  preferred  so  far  before  them,  Publius  Sempro- 
nius  Gracchus,  and  Caius  Sempronius  Rutilus,  plebeian  tri- 
bunes,  commenced  a  prosecution  against  him,  on  a  charge, 
that  he  had  neither  exhibited  in  his  triumph,  nor  lodged  in 
the  treasury,  a  large  part  of  the  royal  treasure,  and  of  the 
booty  taken  in  the  camp  of  Antiochus.  The  depositions  of 
the  lieutenants-general  and  military’  tribunes  varied.  Beyond 
all  the  other  witnesses  Marcus  Cato  was  remarkable;  but 
the  deference  due  to  his  assertions,  from  the  constant  tenor 
of  his  life,  was  greatly  impaired  by  the  circumstance  of  his 
being  himself  a  candidate.  On  being  examined,  he  affirmed^ 
that  he  had  not  observed,  in  the  triumph,  the  gold  and  silver 
vessels  which  on  the  taking  of  the  camp,  he  .had  seen  among 
the  other  spoils  of  the  king.  At  last,  Glabrio  declared,  that 
he  declined  the  election,  and  that  chiefly  with  the  view  ot 
reflecting  discredit  on  Cato.  Men  of  noble  families  resented 
the  matter  in  silence,  but  he,  a  competitor,  (whose  preten¬ 
sions  to  nobility  were  no  higher  than  his  own,)  endeavoured 
to  counterwork  him  by  perjury,  so  atrocious,  that  no  fine 
could  be  adequate  to  its  guilt.  The  penalty  which  his  pro¬ 
secutors  proposed  to  have  inflicted  was  an  hundred  thousand 
asses;*  and  this  point  was  twice  argued,  but,  at  a  third  hear¬ 
ing,  as  the  accused  had  declined  the  election,  and  the  people 
were  unwilling  to  vote  about  the  fine,  the  tribunes,  also  drop¬ 
ped  the  business.  The  censors  elected  were,  Titus  Quin ti us 
Flamininus  and  Marcus  Claudius  Marcellus. 
LIX.  At  the  same  time,  Lucius  iEmilius  RegUlus,  who^ 

'  \VZ2l.  \^s.  4<l 

200 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R,  563. 

at  the  head  of  the  Roman  fleet,  had  defeated  that  of  king 
Antiochus,  had  audience  of  the  senate  in  the  temple  of  Apol¬ 
lo,  outside  the  city;  and,  after  hearing  the  recital  of  his  ser¬ 
vices;  his  numerous  engagements  with  the  enemy;  how  ma¬ 
ny  of  their  ships  he  had  sunk  and  taken,  they  unanimously 
voted  him  a  naval  triumph.  He  triumphed  on  the  calends 
of  February.  In  this  procession  were  carried  forty-nine 
golden  crowns;*  but  the  quantity  of  money  was  not  near  so 
great  as  might  be  expected  in  a  triumph  over  a  king,  be¬ 
ing  only  thirty-four  thousand  seven  hundred  Attic  tetra- 
drachms,^  and  one  hundred  and  thirty-one  thousand  three 
hundred  cistophoruses*]-.  Supplications  were  then  perform¬ 
ed,  by  order  of  the  senate,  in  consideration  of  the  success¬ 
ful  services  to  the  state,  achieved  in  Spain  by  Lucius  -/Emi- 
lius  Paulus.  Not  long  after,  Lucius  Scipio  arrived  at  the 
city;  and,  that  he  might  be  equal  to  his  brother  in  point  of  a 
surname,  he  chose  to  be  called  Asiaticus.  He  recited  his 
services  before  both  the  senate  and  a  general  assembly. 
There  were  some  who  imugained  that  the  war  he  had  con¬ 
ducted  was  magnified  in  the  representation  beyond  its  real 
importance;  for  it  was  terminated  entirely  by  one  memora¬ 
ble  engagement;  and  that,  of  the  glory  acquired  there,  a 
share  was  due  to  those  who  conquered  before  at  Thermopy¬ 
lae.  But,  to  any  person  j  udging  impartially,  it  must  appear 
that  the  fight  at  Thermopylae  was  with  the  iEtolians,  rather 
than  with  the  king.  For  how  small  a  portion  of  his  own 
strength  did  Antiochus  employ  in  that  battle?  whereas,  in 
the  other,  in  Asia,  the  strength  of  the  whole  Asiatic  conti¬ 
nent  stood  combined;  for  he  had  collected  auxiliaries  of  all 
nations  from  the  remotest  quarters  oi  the  east.  With  good 
reason,  therefore,  the  greatest  possible  honours  were  paid  to 
the  immortal  gods,  for  having  rendered  a  most  important 
victory  easy  in  the  acquisition;  and  a  triumph  was  decreed 

‘  44n2/.  It.  HfA 

r  About  2260Z 

B.  C.  189.] 

BOOK  XXXVII. 

201 

to  the  commander.  He  triumphed  in  the  intercalary  month, 
the  day  before  the  calends  of  March;  but  his  triumph,  though 
in  the  magnificence  of  the  procession,  superior  to  that  of  his 
brother  Africanus,  yet  when  we  recollect  the  exploits  on 
which  they  were  grounded,  and  estimate  the  dangers  and 
difficulties  surmounted,  it  was  no  more  to  be  compared  to  it, 
than  one  general  to  the  other,  or  Antiochus,  as  a  captain,  to 
Hannibal.  He  carried,  in  his  triumph,  military  standards  two 
hundred  and  thirty-four;  models  of  towns,  one  hundred  and 
thirty -four;  elephants’  teeth  one  thousand  two  hundred  and 
twenty;  crowns  of  gold",  two  hundred  and  twenty-four; 
pounds  weight  of  silver,  one  hundred  and  thirty-seven  thou¬ 
sand  four  hundred  and  twenty;  Attic  tetradrachms,  two  hun¬ 
dred  and  twenty-four  thousand;*  cistophoruses,  three  hun¬ 
dred  and  thirty-one  thousand  and  seventy ;t  gold  pieces  cal¬ 
led  Philippics,  one  hundred  and  forty  thousand;]:  silver  va 
ses,  all  engraved,  to  the  amount  of  one  thousand  four  hun^ 
dred  and  twenty -four  pounds  weight;  of  golden  vases,  one 
thousand  and  twenty-four  pounds  weight;  and  of  the  king’s  ge¬ 
nerals,  governors,  and  principal  courtiers,  thirty-two,  were 
led  before  his  chariot.  He  gave  to  his  soldiers  twenty-five 
denari useb§  each;  double  to  a  centurion,  triple  to  a  horseman: 
and  after  the  triumph,  their  pay  and  allow^ance  of  corn  were 
doubled.  He  had  already  doubled  them  after  the  battle  in 
Asia.  His  triumph  was  celebrated  about  a  year  after  the 
expiration  of  his  consulship. 
LX.  Cneius  Manlius,  consul,  arrived  in  Asia,  and  Quintus 
Fabius  Labeo,  prietor,  at  the  fleet,  nearly  at  the  same  time.  The 
consul  did  not  want  reasons  for  employing  his  arms  against 
the  Gauls:  but,  at  sea,  since  the  final  defeat  of  Antiochus, 
all  was  quiet.  Fabius,  therefore,  turned  his  thoughts  to  con¬ 
sider  what  employment  he  should  undertake,  that  he  might 
Bot  appear  to  have  held  a  province  where  nothing  was  to  be 
t  77,629i.  3^ 
voi .  V, — D  d 

j  5G9P/.  85. 
:  iGs.  1  1-2(1 

202 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  563. 

done;  and  he  could  discover  no  better  plan  than  to  sail  over 
to  the  island  of  Crete.  The  Cydonians  were  engaged  in  war 
against  the  Gortynians  and  Gnossians,  and  it  was  reported, 
that  there  were  a  great  number  of  Roman  and  other  Italian 
captives,  in  slavery,  in  various  parts  of  the  island.  Having 
sailed  with  the  fleet  from  Ephesus,  as  soon  as  he  touched  the 
shore  of  Crete,  he  despatched  orders  to  all  the  states  to  cease 
from  hostilities,  and  each  of  them*  to  search  for  the  captives 
in  its  own  cities  and  territory,  and  bring  them  to  him;  also,  to 
send  ambassadors  to  him,  to  treat  of  matters  which  equally 
concerned  the  Romans  and  Cretan^.  The  Cretans  took  lit¬ 
tle  notice  of  his  message.  Excepting  the  Gortynians,  none 
of  them  restored  the  captives.  Valerius  Antias  writes,  that 
there  were  restored  out  of  the  whole  island,  no  less  than 
four  thousand  captives,  in  consequence  of  the  fears  excited 
by  his  threats  of  a  war;  and  that  this  was  deemed  a  suffi¬ 
cient  reason  for  Fabius  obtaining  from  the  senate  a  naval 
triumph,  although  he  performed  no  other  business.  From 
Crete  he  returned  to  Ephesus,  and  despatched  thence  three 
ships  to  the  coast  of  Thrace,  with  orders  to  remove  the  gar¬ 
risons  of  Antiochus  from  iEnos  and  Maronea,  that  these 
cities  might  be  left  at  liberty. 

THE 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

BOOK  XXXVIII. 
Marcus  Fulvius,  consul,  receives  the  surrender  of  Ambracia,  in  Epirus, 
lubdues  Cephalienia;  grants  peace  to  the  iEtolians.  His  colleague,  Man¬ 
lius,  subdues  the  GaiJogrecians,  ToUstoboians,  Tectosagians,  and  Troc> 
mians.  A  census  held,  in  which  the  number  of  Roman  citizens  is  found 
to  amount  to  two  hundred  and  fifty-eight  thousand  tliree  hundred  and 
twenty -eight.  Treaty  of  friendship  witii  Ariaratbes,  King  of  Cappado¬ 
cia.  'Manlius  triumphs  over  the  Gallogrecians.  Scipio  Africanus,  pro¬ 
secuted  by  the  plebeian  tribunes,  on  a  charge  of  embezzling  the  public 
money,  goes  into  voluntary  exile  at  Liternum.  Whether  be  died  there, 
or  at  Rome,  is  uncertain,  itionuments  to  his  memory  being  erected  in 
both  places,  Scipio  Asiaticus.  charged  with  the  like  crime,  convicted, 
and  ordered  to  prison,  is  enlarged  by  Tiberius  Sempronius  Gracchus, 
hitherto  at  enmity  with  him.  Hi^  property  being  found  unequal  to  the 
discharge  of  his  fine,  his  friends  raise  it  by  contnbuUon  amongst  them¬ 
selves,  which  he  refuses. 
I.  While  the  war  raged  in  Asia,  ^-Etolia  was  y. R.  568» 
not  free  from  commotions,  which  took  their  rise 
from  the  nation  of  the  Athamanians.  At  that  period,  since 
the  expulsion  of  Amynander,  Athamania  was  kept  in  sub¬ 
jection  by  royal  garrisons,  under  governors  appointed  by 
Philip,  who,  by  their  haughty  and  overbearing  conduct  in 
command,  had  made  the  people  regret  the  loss  of  Amynan¬ 
der.  Amynander,  then  in  exile  in  iEtolia,  from  the  letters  of 
his  friends,  which  discovered  the  condition  of  Athamania, 

204 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  563. 

conceived  hopes  of  recovering  his  throne,  and  sent  persons 
to  Argithea,  the  metropolis,  to  inform  the  principal  men, 
that,  if  they  were  sufficiently  assured  of  the  inclinations  of 
their  countrymen,  he  would  obtain  succours  from  the  Aito- 
lians,  and  come  into  Athamania  with  the  select  council  of  that 
nation,  and  their  praetor,  Nicandor.  Finding  that  they  were 
ready  for  any  undertaking,  he  gave  them  notice,  from  time 
to  time,  of  the  day  on  which  he  would  enter  Athamania  at 
the  head  of  an  army.  Four  persons,  at  first,  conspired  against 
the  Macedonian  garrison;  then  each  of  these  associated  with 
himself  six  assistants,  for  the  execution  of  the  business;  but, 
afterwards,  thinking  it  unsafe  to  rely  upon  so  small  a  num¬ 
ber,  which  was  rather  calculated  for  the  concealment,  than 
for  the  execution  of  the  design,  they  took  in  a  number  of  as¬ 
sociates,  equal  to  the  former.  Being  thus  increased  to  fifty- 
two,  they  divided  themselves  into  four  parties,  one  of  which 
repaired  to  Heraclea,  another  to  Tetraphylia,  where  the  royal 
treasure  used  to  be  kept,  a  third  to  Theudoria,  and  the  fourth 
to  Argithea.  It  was  agreed,  that  they  should  at  first  appear 
in  the  Forum  publicly,  without  any  bustle,  as  if  they  had 
come  about  their  own  ordinary  concerns;  and  then,  on  a  cer¬ 
tain  day,  raise  the  whole  populace,  so  as  to  dislodge  the  Ma¬ 
cedonian  garrisons  from  the  citadels.  At  the  appointed  time, 
Amynander  appeared  on  the  frontiers  with  a  thousand  vEto- 
lians,  when,  as  had  been  concerted,  the  Macedonian  garri¬ 
sons  were  driven  from  the  four  places  at  once:  while  letters 
were  despatched  to  the  other  cities,  calling  on  them  to  rescue 
themselves  from  the  exorbitant  tyranny  of  Philip,  and  to  re¬ 
instate  their  hereditary  and  lawful  prince.  Accordingly,  the 
Macedonians  were,  every  where,  expelled.  The  town  of 
Theium,  (in  consequence  of  the  letters  being  intercepted  by 
Teno,  commander  of  the  garrison,  and  of  the  citadel  being 
occupied  by  the  king’s  troops,)  stood  a  siege  of  a  few  days, 
and  then  surrendered,  as  the  rest  had  done,  to  Amynander. 

BOOK  XXXVIII. 

205 

B,  C.  189.] 

who  had  now  all  Athamania  in  his  power,  except  the  fort  of 
Athenaeum,  on  the  borders  of  Macedonia. 
II.  When  Philip  heard  of  the  defection  of  Athamania,  he 
set  out,  at  the  head  of  six  thousand  men,  and  preceded,  with 
the  utmost  speed,  to  Gomphi.  There  he  left  the  greater 
part  of  his  force,  as  they  would  not  have  been  equal  to  such 
long  marches,  and  went  forward,  with  two  thousand,  to 
Athenseum,  the  only  place  of  which  his  troops  had  kept  the 
possession.  From  some  trials,  which  he  made  on  the  nearest 
places,  he  clearly  perceived,  that  all  the  rest  of  the  country 
was  hostile  to  him;  returning,  therefore,  to  Gomphi,  he 
brought  the  whole  of  his  army  into  Athamania.  He  then 
sent  Zeno,  at  the  head  of  one  thousand  foot,  wdth  orders  to 
seize  on  Ethopia,  w^hich  stands  advantageously  for  com¬ 
manding  Argithea;  and,  as  soon  as  he  understood  that  his 
party  were  in  possession  of  that  post,  he  himself  followed, 
and  encamped  near  the  temple  of  Acraean  Jupiter.  Here  he 
was  detained  one  whole  dav,by  a  tremendous  storm;  and,  on 
the  next,  marched  on  towards  Argithea.  The  troops  had  but 
just  begun  to  move,  when  they  immediately  descried  the 
Athamanians,  hastening  to  the  hills  which  overlooked  the 
road.  On  the  sight  of  these,  the  foremost  battalions  halted, 
fear  and  confusion  spread  through  the  whole  army,  and  every 
one  began  to  consider  what  might  have  been  the  consequence, 
if  the  troops  had  gone  down  into  the  vallies  commanded  in' 
those  cliffs.  The  king,  who  wished,  if  his  men  would  follow 
him,  to  push  on  rapidly  through  the  defile,  was  obliged,  by 
the  confusion  that  prevailed  among  them,  to  call  back  the 
foremost,  and  return  by  the  same  road  by  which  he  came. 
The  Athamanians,  for  some  time,  followed  at  a  distance, 
without  making  any  attempt;  but,  being  joined  by  the  ^to- 
lians,  they  left  these  to  harass  the  rear,  while  themselves 
pressed  forward  on  both  flanks.  Some  of  them,  b\  taking  a 
shorter  way,  through  known  paths,  got  before  the  enemy, 
and  seized  the  passes;  and  with  such  dismay  were  the  Ma* 

206 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  563, 

cedonians  struck^  that  they  repassed  the  river  in  a  manner 
more  like  a  hasty  flight,  than  a  regular  march,  leaving  be¬ 
hind  many  of  their  men  and  arms.  Here  the  pursuit  ended, 
and  the  Macedonians,  without  farther  injury,  returned  to 
Gomphi,  and  from  thence  into  Macedonia.  The  Athama- 
nians  and  iEtolians  ran  together,  from  all  sides,  to  Ethopia, 
to  crush  Zeno  and  his  thousand  Macedonians;  who  having 
little  dependence  on  that  post,  removed  to  a  hill,  which  was 
higher  and  steeper  on  all  sides.  But  the  Athamanians,  ma¬ 
king  their  way  up,  in  several  places,  soon  dislodged  them; 
and,  while  they  were  dispersed,  and  unable  to  find  the  road, 
through  a  pathless  and  unknown  country,  covered  with  rocks, 
slew  many,  and  made  many  prisoners.  Great  numbers,  in 
their  panic,  tumbled  down  the  precipices;  and  a  very  few, 
with  Zeno,  effected  their  escape  to  the  king.  They  were  af¬ 
terwards  allowed  liberty  to  bury  the  dead;  for  which  pur¬ 
pose  a  suspension  of  arms  was  agreed  to. 
HI.  Amynander,  on  recovering  possession  of  his  king¬ 
dom,  sent  ambassadors,  both  to  the  senate  at*  Rome,  and  to 
the  Scipios  in  Asia,  who,  since  the  grand  battle  with  Antio- 
chus,  resided  at  Ephesus.  He  requested  a  treaty  of  amity, 
apologized  for  having  had  recourse  to  the  iEtolians,  for  the 
recovery^  of  his  hereditary  dominions,  and  made  many  charges 
against  Philip.  The  iEtolians  from  Athamania  proceeded 
into  Amphilochia,  and,  with  the  consent  of  the  greater  part 
of  the  inhabitants,  reduced  that  nation  under  their  power  and 
dominion.  After  the  recovery  of  Amphilochia,  for  it  had 
formerly  belonged  to  the  iEtolians,  they  passed  on,  with 
hopes  of  equal  success,  into  Aperantia,  which  for  the  most 
part,  surrendered  likewise  to  the  iEtolians  without  a  contest. 
The  Dolopians  had  never  been  subject  to  the  iEtolians,  but 
they  were  to  Philip.  These,  at  first,  ran  to  arms;  but  when 
they  where  informed  of  the  Amphilochians  taking  part  with 
the  iEtolians,  of  Philip’s  flight  out  of  Athamania,  and  the 
destruction  of  his  detachment,  they  also  revolted  from  Philip 

B.  C.  189^2 

BOOK  XXXVIII. 

2or 
to  the  iEtolians.  While  these  latter  flattered  themselves  with 
being  sufficiently  secured  against  the  Macedonians,  as  being 
screened  on  all  aides  by  those  states,  they  received  the  news 
of  Antiochus  being  defeated  in  Asia,  by  the  Romans;  and, 
in  a  short  time  after  their  ambassadors  came  home  from 
Rome;  not  only  without  any  prospect  of  peace,  but  also  with 
intelligence,  that  the  consul,  Fulvius,  with  his  army,  had  al¬ 
ready  crossed  the  sea.  Dismayed  at  these  accounts,  they 
first  sent  ambassadors  to  solicit  Rhodes  and  Athens,  hoping, 
through  the  influence  of  those  states,  that  their  petitions, 
lately  rejected,  might  meet  with  a  more  favourable  reception 
from  the  senate.  They  then  despatched  some  of  the  chief 
men  of  their  nation  to  Rome,  to  try  the  issue  of  their  last 
hope,  as  they  had  taken  no  kind  of  precaution,  to  avert  the 
wai,  until  the  enemy  was. almost  within  sight.  Marcus  Ful¬ 
vius,  having  brought  over  his  army  to  Apollonia,  was,  at  this 
time,  consulting  with  the  Epirot  chiefs,  where  he  should 
commence  his  operations.  These  recommended  it  to  him  to 
attack  Ambracia,  which  had  lately  united  itself  to  iEtolia; 
alleging,  that,  ‘‘  in  case  the  ^tolians  should  come  to  its  re¬ 
lief,  there  were  open  plains  around  it,  to  fight  in;  and  that  if 
they  should  avoid  a  battle,  there  would  be  no  great  difficulty 
in  the  siege,  as  there  were  at  hand  abundant  materials  for  rais¬ 
ing  mounds  and  other  works,  while  the  Aretho,  a  navigable 
river,  affording  an  easy  conveyance  of  every  thing  requisite, 
flowed  by  the  tvalls;  besides,  the  summer  was  just  approach¬ 
ing,  the  fittest  season  for  the. enterprise/^  By  these  argu¬ 
ments  they  persuaded  him  to  march  on,  through  Epirus. 
IV.  When  the  consul  came  to  Ambracia,  he  perceived 
that  the  siege  would  be  a  work  of  no  small  difficulty.  Am¬ 
bracia  stands  at  the  foot  of  a  rocky  hill,  called  by  the  natives 
Perranthe:  the  city,  where  the  wall  faces  the  plain  and  the 
river,  is  situated  towards  the  yrcst;  the  citadel,  which  is  seat¬ 
ed  on  the  hill,  towards  the  east.  The  river  Aretho,  which 
rises  in  Acamania,  falls  here  into  a  gulf  of  the  sea,  called 

20U 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

[Y.  R,  563. 

the  Ambracian,  from  the  name  of  the  adjacent  city.  Besides 
the  place  being  strengthened,  on  one  side,  by  the  river,  and 
on  another  by  hills,  it  was  defended  by  a  firm  wail,  extend¬ 
ing  in  circuit  somewhat  more  than  three  miles,  on  the  side 
opposite  the  plain.  Fulvius  formed  two  camps,  at  a  short 
distance  from  each  other,  with  one  fort  on  the  high  ground 
opposite  to  the  citadel;  all  which  he  intended  to  join  together 
by  a  rampart  and  trench,  in  such  a  manner  as  to  leave  no 
passage  for  the  besieged  to  go  out  of  the  city;  or  for  anv  re¬ 
inforcement  to  get  in.  The  iEtolians,  on  the  report  of  Am- 
bracia  being  besieged,  were,  by  this  time  assembled  at  Stra¬ 
tum,  in  obedience  to  an  edict  of  their  prsstor,  Nicander.  At 
first  they  intended  to  hav'C  marched  hence,  with  their  whole 
force,  to  raise  the  siege;  but  when  they  heard  that  the  place 
was  already,  in  a  great  measure,  surrounded  with  works, 
and  that  the  Epirots  were  encamped  on  level  ground,  on  the 
other  side  of  the  river,  they  resolved  to  divide  their  forces- 
Eupolemus,  with  one  thousand  light  troops,  marching  to 
Ambracia,  made  his  way  into  the  city,  through  openings, 
where  the  works  were  not  yet  joined.  Nicander’s  first  plan 
was,  to  have  attacked  the  camp  of  the  Epirots,  in  the  night, 
with  the  rest  of  the  troops,  as  it  would  not  be  easy  for  them 
to  receive  succour  from  the  Romans,  the  river  running  be¬ 
tween.  This  enterprise  he,  afterwards,  judged  too  hazard¬ 
ous,  lest  the  Romans  might  happen,  to  discover  it,  and  cut 
off  his  retreat.  Being  deterred  by  these  considerations  from 
the  prosecution  of  that  design,  he  marched  away  to  ravage 
the  country  of  Acamania. 
V.  The  consul,  having  completed  his  works  for  the  cir- 
cumvallation  of  the  city,  and  likewise  those  which  were  to 
be  brought  forward  to  the  walls,  formed  five  attacks,  at  once, 
against  the  place;  three,  at  equal  distances  from  each  other, 
he  directed  against  the  quarter  which  they  called  Pyrrheum; 
to  which,  as  it  lay  next  the  plain,  the  approach  was  the  easi¬ 
er;  one  opposite  to  the  temple  of  iEsculapius,  and  one  against 

B,  C.  189.] 

BOOK  XXXVIIL 

209 

the  citadel.  The  battlements  were  at  one  post  battered  with 
rams,  and  at  another  tore  down  with  poles,  armed  at  the 
end  with  hooks.  At  first,  the  formidable  appearance  of  the 
works,  and  the  shocks  given  to  the  w'alls,  attended  with  a 
dreadful  noise,  filled  the  townsmen  wdth  terror  and  dismay: 
but  as,  beyond  their  hopes,  these  still  stood,  they  again  re¬ 
sumed  courage,  and,  by  means  of  cranes,  threw*  down  upon 
the  battering  rams  weighty  masses  of  lead,  or  stone,  or  beams 
of  timber.  Catching,  likew  ise,  the  armed  poles  wdth  iron 
grapples,  they  drew  them  within  the  wails,  and  broke  off  the 
hooks;  while,  by  sallies,*  both  in  the  night  against  the  watch- 
guards,  and,  in  the  day,  against  the  advanced  posts,  they 
kept  the  besiegers  in  a  state  of  continual  alarm.  While  af* 
fairs  at  Ambracia  were  in  this  state,  the  ^tolians,  having 
returned  from  ravaging  Acarnania,  to  Stratum,  their  praetor, 
Nicander,  conceived  hopes  of  raising  the  siege,  by  a  bold  ef¬ 
fort.  He  sent  a  person,  called  Nicodamus,  accompanied  by 
five  hundred  iEtolians,  with  orders  to  get  into  Ambracia, 
having  fixed  on  a  certain  night,  and  even  on  the  hour,  when, 
from  within  the  city,  they  were  to  assault  the  works  of  the 
enemy,  opposite  to  the  Pyrrheum,  while  himself  should 
alarm  the  Roman  camp.  His  opinion  was,  that,  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  the  tumult  in  both  places  at  once,  and  of  darkness 
augmenting  the  enemy’s  fears,  he  might  be  able  to  effect 
something  of  importance.  Nicodamus,  during  the  dead 
of  the  night,  (having  escaped  the  notice  of  some  of  the  par¬ 
ties  on  watch,  and  broken  through  others,)  without  halting, 
passed  the  intrenchment,  and  made  his  way  into  the  city; 
which  gave  the  besieged  new  hopes,  and  courage  for  any  en¬ 
terprise.  As  soon  as  the  appointed  time  arrived,  according 
to  concert,  he  made  a  sudden  assault  on  the  works;  but  the 
attempt,  though  formidable  at  first,  produced  no  great  effect, 
there  being  no  attack  made  from  without:  for  the  praetor  of 
the  iElolians  had  either  been  deterred  by  fear,  or  had  judg¬ 
ed  it  more  advisable  to  carry  succours  to  Amphilochia,  which 
vr»T..  V. — K  e 

210 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  563. 

had  been  lately  reduced,  and  was  now  very  vigorously  be> 
sieged  by  Philip’s  son  Perseus,  sent  by  his  father  to  recover 
both  that  and  Dolopla. 
VI.  The  Romans,  as  has  been  mentioned,  carried  on  their 
works  against  the  Pyrrheum  in  three  different  places,  all 
which  works  the  iEtolians  assaulted  at  once,  but  not  with 
like  weapons,  or  like  force.  Some  advanced  with  burning 
torches,  others  carrying  tow  and  pitch,  and  firebrands,  so 
that  their  whole  band  appeared  in  a  blaze  of  fire.  Their 
first  assault  cut  off  many  of  the  men  on  guard;  but  when  the 
shout  and  uproar  reached  the  camp,  and  the  signal  was  giv¬ 
en  bv  the  consul,  the  troops  took  arms,  and  poured  out  of 
all  the  gates  to  succour  their  friends.  In  one  place,  the 
contest  was  carried  on  with  fire  and  sword;  from  the  other 
two,  the  J:ltoiians  retired  with  disappointment,  after  essay¬ 
ing,  rather  than  supporting  a  fight;  while  the  whole  brunt  of 
the  battle  fell  on  the  one  quarter  with  great  fury.  Here  the 
two  commanders,  Eupolemus  and  Nicodamus,  in  their  dif¬ 
ferent  posts,  encouraged  their  men,  and  animated  them  with 
hope  nearly  certain,  that  Nicander  w'ould,  according  to  his 
agreement,  come  up  speedily  and  attack  the  enemy’s  rear. 
This  expectation,  for  some  time,  supported  their  courage  in 
the  fight;  but,  at  last,  as  they  did  not  receive  the  concerted 
signal  from  their  friends,  and  saw  the  number  of  their  ene* 
mies  continually  increasing,  they  slackened  their  efforts,  con¬ 
sidering  themselves  as  deserted;  and,  in  a  short  time,  finally 
abandoned  the  attempt,  when  they  could  scarcely  retreat  with 
safety.  They  were  obliged  to  fly  into  the  city,  after  having 
burned  a  part  of  the  works,  however,  and  killed  a  much 
greater  number  than  they  lost.  If  the  affair  had  been  con¬ 
ducted  according  to  the  plan  concerted,  there  was  no  reason 
to  doubt,  but  one  part,  at  least,  of  the  works  might  have 
been  stormed  wuth  great  havoc  of  the  Romans.  The  Am- 
bracians,  and  the  ALtolians  who  were  wuthin,  not  only  re¬ 
nounced  the  enterprise  of  that  night,  but,  supposing  them- 

B.  C.  189.J 

BOOK  XXXVIII. 

211 

selves  betrayed  by  their  friends,  became  much  less  spirited. 
None  of  them  any  longer  sallied  out,  as  before,  against  the 
enemy’s  posts,  but  standing  on  the  walls  and  towers,  fought 
without  danger. 
VI I .  Perseus,  on  hearing  of  the  approach  of  the  ^tolians, 
raised  the  siege  of  the  city  in  which  he  was  employed;  and, 
having  done  nothing  more  than  ravage  the  country,  quitted 
Amphilochia,  and  returned  into  Macedonia.  The  iEtolians, 
too,  were  called  away  by  devastations  committed  on  their 
coasts.  Pleuratus,  king  of  the  Illyrians,  entered  the  Corin¬ 
thian  gulf  with  sixty  barks,  and  being  joined  by  the  ships 
of  tile  Achseans  lying  at  Patrae,  wasted  the  maritime  parts 
of  iEtolia.  Against  these  were  sent  one  thousand  iEtolians, 
who,  to  whatever  place  the  fleet  steered  round,  by  taking 
shorter  roads,  across  the  winding  of  the  coasts,  were  ready 
there  to  oppose  them.  The  Romans  at  Ambracia,  by  the 
battering  of  their  rams  in  many  ])laces  at  once,  laid  open  a 
great  part  of  the  city;  but,  nevertheless,  were  unable  to  pene¬ 
trate  into  the  heart  of  it.  For  no  sooner  was  a  part  of  the 
wall  demolished,  than  a  new  one  was  raised  in  its  place, 
%vhile  the  armed  men,  standing  on  the  ruins,  formed  a  kind 
of  bulwark.  The  consul,  therefore,  finding  that  he  made  no 
progress  by  open  force,  resolved  to  form  a  secret  mine,  cov¬ 
ering  the  ground  first  with  his  machines.  For  a  long  time 
his  workmen,  though  employed  both  night  and  day,  not  only 
in  digging  hut  also  in  carrying  away  the  earth,  escaped  the 
observation  of  the  enemy,  A  heap  of  it,  however,  rising 
suddenly,  gave  the  townsmen  the  first  intimation  of  what  was 
going  on,  and,  terrified,  lest  the  wall  should  be  already  un¬ 
dermined,  and  a  passage  opened  into  the  city,  they  drew  a 
trench  within,  opposite  to  the  work  that  was  covered  with 
machines.  I'his  they  sunk  as  deep  as  the  bottom  of  the 
mine  could  well  be;  then,  keeping  profound  silence,  they 
applied  their  ears  to  several  ditfcreni  places,  to  catch  the 

212 

HISTORY  OF  ROME 

[Y.  R.  56^;, 

s©und  of  the  miners  employed.  No  sooner  was  this  heard., 
than  they  opened  a  way  directly  towards  them,  which  did 
not  require  much  labour,  for  they  came  in  a  short  time  to 
where  the  wall  was  supported  with  props  by  the  enemy. 
The  works  joining  here,  and  the  passage  being  open,  from 
the  trench  to  the  mine,  the  parties  began  to  fight  in  the  dark 
under  ground;  the  miners  with  the  tools  which  they  had 
used  in  the  works,  but  they  were  soon  supported  by  armed 
men.  The  warmth,  however,  of  this  contest  soon  abated; 
for  the  besieged  had  it  in  their  power,  whenever  they  pleas¬ 
ed,  to  stop  the  passage,  sometimes  by  stretching  strong  hair¬ 
cloths  across  it,  sometimes  by  hastily  placing  doors  in  the 
way  of  their  antagonists.  They  also  played  off  against  those 
in  the  mine  a  contrivance  of  an  unusual  kind,  which  requir¬ 
ed  no  great  labour.  They  took  a  large  vessel,  and  bored  a 
hole  in  its  bottom  of  a  moderate  size;  in  this  they  fixed  an 
iron  pipe,  and  put  over  the  vessel  a  cover  also  of  iron, 
perforated  in  many  places:  this  vessel  they  filled  with 
small  feathers;  and,  turning  the  mouth  of  it  towards  the 
mine,*  through  the  holes  in  the  covering,  projected  those 
long  spears,  which  they  call  sarissas,  to  keep  oil  the  enemy 
Then  they  put  a  small  spark  of  fire  among  the  feathers, 
which  they  kindled  by  blowing  with  a  smith’s  bellows,  in¬ 
serted  into  the  end  of  the  pipe,  and  by  this  means  filled  the 
whole  mine  with  smoke,  which  was  not  only  thick,  but  so 
offensive,  from  the  nauseous  stench  of  the  burnt  feathers, 
that  it  was  scarcely  possible  for  any  one  to  remain  in  the 
way  of  it. 
VI II.  While  such  was  the  situation  of  affairs  at  Ambra- 
cia, — Phgeneas  and  Damoteles  came  to  the  consul,  as  ambas¬ 
sadors  from  the  iEtolians,  invested  with  full  powers  by  a 
decree  of  the  general  assembly  of  that  nation.  For  when 
their  preetor  saw,  on  one  side,  Ambracia  besieged;  on  ano¬ 
ther,  the  sea-coast  infested  by  the  enemy’s  ships;  on  a  third, 
Amphilocia  and  Dolopia  ravaged  by  the  Macedonians,  and 

BOOK  XXXVHL 

B.  C.  189.J 

21v> 

that  the  ^tolians  were  incapable  of  resisting  the  three  ene¬ 
mies  at  once,  he  summoned  a  council,  and  demanded  the 
judgment  of  the  chiefs  on  the  measures  to  be  pursued.  The 
opinions  of  all  tended  to  one  point;  that  peace  must  be  ob¬ 
tained  on  as  easy  terms  as  possible.  Having  undertaken  the 
war,  relying  on  the  support  of  Antiochus,  bow  thayAntio- 
chus  had  been  vanquished  on  land  and  sea,  and  driven  be¬ 
yond  the  mountains  of  Taurus,  indeed,  almost  out  of  the 
world,  what  hope  remained  of  their  being  able  to  support 
it?  Let  Phaeneas  and  Damotcles  act  to  the  best  of  thek  judg¬ 
ment,  for  the  service  of  the  ^kolians,  in  their  present  cir¬ 
cumstances.  But  what  room  for  counsel,  what  option  had 
fortune  left  themr"  The  ambassadors,  despatched  with  these 
instructions,  besought  the  consul  to  “  have  mercy  on  the  city, 
and  to  take  compassion  on  a  nation,  once  acknowledged  as 
an  ally;  and,  since,  driven  to  desperation,  they  would  not 
say,  by  ill-treatment,  but  undoubtedly  by  their  sufferings 
The  iEtolians,”  they  said,  had  not  in  Antiochus’  w  ar,  de¬ 
served  a  larger  share  of  punishment,  than  they  had  of  re¬ 
ward,  in  that  against  Philip;  and  as,  in  the  last-mentioned 
case,  the  compensation  made  to  thtm  was  not  very  liberal, 
neithe'*  ought  their  penalties  now  to  be  excessive.”  To  this 
the  consul  answered,  that  the  jLtolians  had  often,  indeed, 
sued  for  peace,  but  never  w  th  sincere  intentions.  Let  them, 
in  soliciting  peace,  imitate  Antiochus,  whom  thev  had  drawn 
into  the  war.  He  had  ceded,  not  the  few  cities,  whose  liberty 
was  the  ground  of  the  dispute,  but  an  opulent  kingdom,  all 
Asia,  on  this  side  Mount  Paurus.  That  he  fthe  consul) 
\vould  not  listen  to  any  overtures  w^hatever  from  the  iEtoli- 
ans,  until  they  laid  down  their  arms.  They  must,  in  the 
first  place,  deliver  up  these,  and  all  their  horses;  and  then 
pay  one  thousand  talents*  to  the  Roman  people;  half  of  which 
sum  must  be  laid  dowm  immediately,  if  they  wished  for 
peace*  To  these  articles  he  would  add,  in  the  treaty,  that 

'  193,750/ 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

>14 

[Y.  R.  563, 

they  must  have  the  same  allies,  and  the  same  enemies,  as 
the  Roman  people.” 
IX.  The  ambassadors,  considering  these  terms  as  very 
unreasonable,  and  knowing  the  changeful  tempers  of  their 
countrymen,  made  no  reply,  but  returned  home,  that  they 
might  again,  before  any  thing  was  concluded,  receive  the 
instructions  of  the  praetor  and  council.  They  were  received 
with  clamour,  and  reproaches,  for  protracting  the  business j 
and  commanded  to  bring  with  them  a  peace  of  some  kind 
or  othor.  But  as  they  were  going  back  to  Ambracia,  they 
were  caught  in  an  ambuscade,  laid,  near  the  road,  by  the 
Acarnanians,  with  whom  they  were  at  war,  and  carried  to 
Tyrrheum,  into  confinement.  This  accident  delayed  the  con¬ 
clusion  of  a  peace.  The  ambassadors  of  the  Athenians  and 
Rhodians,  who  had  come  to  mediate  in  their  favour,  were 
now  with  the  consul;  and  Amynander  also,  king  of  Atha- 
mania,  having  obtained  a  safe  conduct,  came  into  the  Roman 
camp,  being  more  concerned  for  the  city  of  Ambracia, 
where  he  had  spent  the  greatest  part  of  his  exile,  than  for 
the  nation  of  the  iEtolians.  When  the  consul  was  informed  by 
them  of  the  accident  which  had  befallen  the  ambassadors, 
he  ordered  them  to  be  brought  from  Tyrrheum;  and,  on  their 
arrival,  the  negociations  for  peace  were  opened.  Amynan- 
der,  as  that  vvas  his  principal  object,  laboured  assiduously  to 
persuade  the  Ambracians  to  a  capitulation.  But,  finding  that 
he  could  not  accomplish  this,  by  coming  under  the  walls,  and 
conferring  with  their  chiefs,  he,  at  last,  with  the  consul's 
permission,  went  into  the  city;  where,  partly  by  arguments, 
partly  by  entreaties,  he  prevailed  on  them  to  surrender 
themselves  to  the  Romans.  The  ^tolians  received  also  great 
assistance  from  the  consurs  uterine  brother,  Gains  V'alerius, 
the  son  of  Ltevinus,  the  first  who  had  made  a  treaty  of  al¬ 
liance  with  that  nation.  The  Ambracians,  having  first  stipu¬ 
lated  that  they  might  send  away  the  auxiliary  .Etolians  in 

B.  C.  189.J 

BOOK  XXXVIII. 

215 
safety,  opened  their  gates.  The  conditions  then  prescribed  to 
the  iEtolians  were,  that  “  they  should  pay  five  hundred  Eu- 
hoic  talents,*  two  hundred  at  present,  and  three  hundred  at 
six  equal  annual  payments;  that  they  should  deliver  up  to 
the  Romans  the  prisoners  and  deserters;  that  they  should 
not  claim  jurisdiction  over  any  city,  which,  since  the  first 
coming  of  Titus  Quintius  into  Greece,  had  either  been  taken 
by  the  arms  of  the  Romans,  or  voluntarily  entered  into  al¬ 
liance  with  them;  and  that  the  island  of  Ccphallenia  should 
not  be  included  in  the  treaty.”  Although  these  terms  were 
more  moderate  than  they  themselves  had  expected,  yet  the 
.Etolians  begged  permission  to  lay  them  before  the  council, 
and  their  request  was  granted.  The  council  spent  some  timt 
in  debating  about  the  cities,  which,  having  been  once  mem¬ 
bers  of  their  state,  they  could  not,  without  pain,  bear  n 
have  torn  off,  as  it  were,  from  their  body.  However,  the\ 
unanimously  voted  that  the  terms  of  peace  should  be  accept¬ 
ed.  The  Ambracians  presented  the  consul  with  a  golden 
crown  of  one  hundred  and  fifty  pounds  weight.  The  bra¬ 
zen  and  marble  statues  with  which  Ambracia  \vas  more  rich¬ 
ly  decorated  than  any  other  city  in  that  country,  as  having 
been  the  royal  residence  of  Pyrrhus,  were  all  removed  and 
carried  away;  hut  nothing  else  was  injured,  or  even  touched 
X,  The  consul,  marching  into  the  interior  parts  of  .Eto- 
lia,  encamped  at  Amphilochian  Argos,  t\vent\*two  miles 
from  Ambratia.  Here,  at  length,  the  ^Etolian  ambassadors, 
whose  dtla\  had  surprised  the  consul,  arrived.  Vhen  they 
informed  him  that  the  council  had  approved  the  terms  of 
peace,  he  ordered  them  to  go  to  Home  to  the  senate;  gave 
permission  for  the  Athenian  and  Rhodian  mediators  to  go 
with  them;  appointed  his  brother.  Cuius  Valerius,  to  accom¬ 
pany  them,  and  then  himself  passed  over  to  Cephallenia. 
The  ambassadors  found  the  ears  and  minds  of  all  the  princi¬ 
pal  people  at  Rome  prepossessed  bv  charges  made  again?*- 

Aboil  1 

216 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  56S. 

them  by  Philip,  who  had  complained,  both  by  ambassadors, 
and  by  letters,  that  Dolopia,  Amphilocia,  and  Athamania, 
had  been  forcibly  taken  from  him;  that  his  garrison,  and  at 
last,  even  his  son  Perseus,  had  been  driven  out  of  Amphi- 
lochia;  and  these  accusations  had  predisposed  the  senate  to  re¬ 
fuse  to  listen  to  their  entreaties.  The  Athamanians  and  Rho¬ 
dians  were,  nevertheless,  heard  with  attention.  One  of  the 
Athenian  ambassadors,  Leon,  son  of  Icesias,  is  said  to  have 
even  affected  them  much  by  his  eloquence.  Making  use  of  a 
common  simile,  and  comparing  the  multitude  of  the  ^Etoli- 
ans  to  a  calm  sea,  when  it  comes  to  be  ruffled  by  the  winds, 
he  said,  that  as  long  as  they  faithfullv  adhered  to  the  alli¬ 
ance  with  Rome,  the}  rested  in  the  calm  state  natural  to  the 
nati  jn;  but  that,  w'hen  1  hoas  and  Dicsearchus  began  to  blow 
from  Asia,  iVIenctasand  Damocritus  from  Europe,  then  was 
raised  that  storm  which  dashed  them  on  Antiuchus  as  on  a 
rock/' 
XI.  The  iEtolians,  after  long  suspense  and  uncertainty, at 
length  pre\  ailed  to  have  articles  of  peace  concluded.  They 
w^ere  these: — “  I'he  iEtolian  nation,  w  ithout  fraud  or  de¬ 
ceit,  shall  maintain  the  empire  and  majesty  of  the  Roman 
people:  they  shall  not  suffer  to  pass  through  their  territories, 
nor,  in  any  manner  whatever,  aid  nor  assist  any  army  that 
shall  march  against  the  allies  and  friends  of  the  Romans: 
the}'  shall  have  the  same  enemies  as  the  Roman  people;  and 
they  shall  bear  arms  against  them,  and  take  a  share  in  their 
wars:  they  shall  deliver  up  the  deserters,  fugitives,  and  pri¬ 
soners,  to  the  K  )mans  and  their  allies,  excepting  such  as, 
having  been  prisoners  before,  and  returned  home,  W’ere  af- 
terw’ards  captured;  and  also  such  as  at  tiie  time  of  their  be¬ 
ing  taken,  were  enemies  to  Rome,  while  the  /Ktolians  acted 
in  conjunction  with  the  Romans.  The  others  shall  be  de¬ 
livered  up  w  ithout  reserve,  to  the  magistrates  of  Corcyra, 
within  one  hundred  davs;  and  such  as  cannot  now  he  found, 
as  soon  as  thev  shall  be  discovered.  They  shall  give  forty 

BOOK  mVIIL 

217 

B.  C.  198.] 
hostages  to  be  chosen  by  the  Roman  consul,  none  younger 
than  twelve  years  nor  older  than  forty:  neither  the  praetor, 
nor  the  general  of  the  horse,  nor  the  public  secretary,  shall 
be  an  hostage;  nor  any  person  who  has  before  been  an  hos¬ 
tage  in  the  hands  of  the  Romans.  Cephallenia  not  to  be  in¬ 
cluded  in  these  articles.”  With  respect  to  the  sum  of  money 
which  they  were  to  pay,  and  the  mode  of  payment,  no  al¬ 
teration  was  made  in  the  arrangement  settled  by  the  consul. 
If  they  chose  to  give  gold  instead  of  silveis  it  was  agreed 
that  they  might  do  so,  provided  that  one  piece  of  gold  should 
be  deemed  equivalent  to  ten  of  silver  of  the  same  w^eight. 
“  Whatever  cities,  whatever  lands,  v/hatever  men  have  been 
formerly  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  iEtolians,  and  have, 
either  in  the  consulate  of  Titus  Quintius  and  Publius  ^lius, 
or  since  their  consulate,  either  been  subdued  by  the  arms  of 
the  Roman  people,  or  that  made  a  voluntary  submission  to 
them,  the  jEtolians  are  not  to  reclaim.  I'he  CEnians,  with 
their  city  and  lands,  arc  to  belong  to  the  Acarnanians.”  On 
these  conditions  was  the  treaty  concluded  with  the  Astolians. 
XII.  During  the  same  summer,  and  even  at  the  very  tune, 
when  the  consul  IVI  arcus  Fulvius  was  thus  employed  in 
lia,  the  other  consul,  Cneius  Manlius,  carried  on  war  in  Gah 
logrsecia;  the  progress  of  which  I  shall  now  relate.  At  the 
first  opening  of  spring  he  came  to  Ephesus,  and  having  re¬ 
ceived  the  command  of  the  army  from  Lucius  Scipio,  and 
purified  the  troops,  he  made  an  harangue  to  the  soldiers,  in 
which  he  praised  their  bravery  in  having  completely  con¬ 
quered  Antiochus  in  a  single  battle.  He  then  encouraged 
them  to  undertake,  with  spirit,  a  new  war  against  the  Gauls, 
who  had  supported  him  as  auxiliaries;  and  w'ere,  besides,  of 
such  untractable  tempers,  that  the  removing  of  that  monarch 
be\ond  the  mountains  of  Taurus  would  ansvver  no  purpose, 
unless  the  power  of  the  Gauls  were  reduced.  He  then  spoke 
briefly  of  himself  in  terms  neither  ill-grounded  nor  extrava¬ 
gant.  rhey  listened  to  his  discourse  w  ith  much  satisfaction, 
VOL.  V. — F  f 

218 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  563, 
and  universally  applauded  it;  for,  considering  the  Gauls  as 
having  been  a  part  of  the  strength  of  Antiochus,  they  thought, 
that,  since  that  king  had  been  vanquished,  the  forces  of  that 
people,  by  thciubelves,  would  be  an  easy  conquest.  The  ab¬ 
sence  of  Eumcnes,  who  was  then  at  Ronae,  seemed,  to  the 
consul,  an  unseasonable  circumstance,  as  he  was  well  ac¬ 
quainted  with  the  nature  of  the  country  and  of  the  inhabi¬ 
tants;  and  also,  as  his  own  interest  must  make  him  wish  to 
crush  the  power  of  the  Gauls.  He  therefore  sent  for  his 
brother  Attains,  from  Pergamus,  whom  he  persuaded  to  join 
in  undertaking  the  war;  and  who,  having  promised  his  as¬ 
sistance,  and  that  of  his  countrymen,  was  sent  home  to  make 
the  necessary  preparations.  A  few  days  after,  the  consul 
began  his  march  from  Ephesus,  and  at  Magnesia,  Attains 
met  him,  with  one  thousand  foot  and  two  hundred  horse, 
having  ordered  his  brother  Athenaeus  to  follow  with  the 
rest  of  the  troops,  committing  the  care  of  Pergamus  to  per- 
sons  whom  he  knew  to  be  faithful  to  his  brother,  and  to  his 
government.  The  consul  highly  commended  the  young 
prince,  and  advancing  with  all  his  forces,  encamped  on  the 
bank  of  the  Mseander;  for  that  river  not  being  fordable,  it 
was  necessary  to  collect  shipping  for  carrying  over  the  army. 
XIII.  Having  passed  the  Mseander,  they  came  to  Hiera 
Come.*  In  this  place  there  is  a  magnificent  temple,  and 
oracle  of  Apollo,  where  responses  are  said  to  be  given  in  not 
inelegant  verses.  From  hence,  in  two  days  march,  they 
reached  the  river  Harpasus;  whither  came  ambassadors  from 
the  Alabandians,  intreating  the  consul,  either  by  his  authori¬ 
ty  or  his  arms,  to  compel  a  fort,  which  had  lately  revolted 
from  them,  to  return  to  its  former  allegiance.  At  the  same 
place  he  was  joined  by  Athenseus,  the  brother  of  Eumenes, 
and  Attains,  with  Leusus,  a  Cretan,  and  Corragos,  a  Mace¬ 
donian  commander.  They  brought  with  them,  of  various  na- 

Holy  Town 

BOOK  XXXVIII. 

21S 

B.  C.  189.] 
tions,  one  thousand  foot  and  three  hundred  horse.  The  con¬ 
sul  detached  a  military  tribune,  with  a  small  party,  who 
retook  the  fort  by  assault,  and  restored  it  to  the  Alaban- 
dians.  He  did  not  himself  quit  his  route,  but  went  on  to 
Antiochia,  on  the  Maeander,  where  he  pitched  his  camp.  The 
source  of  this  river  rises  in  Celaense,  which  city  was  former¬ 
ly  the  metropolis  of  Phrygia.  The  inhabitants,  afterwards, 
removed  to  a  spot  not  far  distant  from  old  Celaenae,  which 
new  city  they  called  Apamea,  the  name  of  the  wife  of  king 
Seieucus.  The  river  Marsyas,  also,  rising  at  a  little  distance 
from  the  head  of  the  Maeander,  falls  into  the  latter  river,  and 
the  general  opinion  is,  that  at  Celaenae  happened  the  contest 
between  Marsyas  and  Apollo  in  playing  on  the  flute.  The 
Maeander,  springing  up  in  the  highest  part  of  the  citadel  of 
Celaenae,  runs  down  through  the  middle  of  the  city,  then 
through  Caria,  afterwards  through  Ionia,  and  empties  itself 
into  a  bay  which  lies  between  Priene  and  Miletus.  Seieu¬ 
cus,  son  of  Antiochus,  came  into  the  consurs  camp,  at  An¬ 
tiochia,  to  furnish  corn  for  the  troops,  in  conformity  to  the 
treaty  with  Scipio.  Here  a  small  dispute  arose,  concerning 
the  auxiliary  troops  of  Attalus;  for  Seieucus  affirmed,  that 
the  engagement  of  Antiochus  w^ent  no  farther  than  the  sup¬ 
plying  of  corn  to  the  Roman  soldiers.  This  difference  was 
soon  terminated  by  the  firmness  of  the  consul,  who  sent  a 
tribune,  with  orders  that  the  Roman  soldiers  should  receive 
none,  until  the  auxiliaries,  under  Attalus,  should  have  re¬ 
ceived  their  share.  From  hence  the  army  advanced  to  Gor- 
diutichos,*  as  it  is  called;  from  which  place  it  marched,  in 
three  days,  to  Tabae.  This  city  stands  on  the  confines  of  Pi- 
sidia,  on  the  side  opposite  the  Pamphylian  sea.  Before  the 
strength  of  that  country  was  reduced,  its  inhabitants  had 
been  remarkable,  as  valiant  warriors;  and  even  on  this  occa¬ 
sion,  their  horsemen,  sallying  out  on  the  Roman  troops. 

*  Ti»e  Gordian  wall 

220 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  ^:6J 

caused,  by  their  first  onset,  no  small  confusion;  but  soon 
finding  themselves  overmatched  both  in  number  and. bravery, 
they  fled  into  the  city,  on  which  the  townsmen,  begging  par¬ 
don  for  their  transgressions,  offered  to  surrender  the  place. 
They  were  ordered  to  pay  twenty-five  talents  of  silver,*  and 
ten  thousand  bushels  of  wheat;  and  on  these  terms  their 
surrender  was  accepted. 
XIV.  On  the  third  day  afur  their  leaving  this  place,  the 
army  reached  the  river  Chaos,  and  proceeding  thence,  took 
the  city  of  Eriza  at  the  first  assault.  The\  then  came  to 
Thabusios,  a  fort  standing  on  the  bank  of  the  river  Indus,  so 
called  from  an  Indian  thrown  into  it  from  an  elephant.  They 
were  now  not  far  from  Clbyra,  yet  no  embassy  appeared 
from  Moagetes,  the  tyrant  of  that  state;  a  man,  whose  con¬ 
duct,  in  every  circumstance,  was  branded  w’ith  infidelity  and 
injustice.  The  consul,  in  order  to  learn  his  intentions,  sent 
forward  Caius  Helvius,  with  four  thousand  foot  and  five 
hundred  horse.  When  this  party  entered  his  frontiers,  the}^ 
were  met  by  ambassadors,  who  declared  that  Moagetes  w’as 
willing  to  submit  to  their  orders;  intreated  Helvius  to  pass 
through  the  country  without  hostilities,  and  to  restrain  his 
soldiers  from  plundering  it;  bringing  with  them,  in  lieu  of  a 
golden  crown,  fifteen  talents.  Helvius  promised  to  protect 
their  territory,  and  ordered  the  ambassadors  to  go  on  to  the 
consul,  who,  on  the  same  message  being  delivered  by  them, 
answered,  ‘‘  We,  Romans,  see  no  sign  of  the  tyrant  having 
any  good  will  towards  us;  and  we  are  decidedly  of  opinion, 
that  such  is  his  character,  that  we  ought  rather  to  think  of 
punishing  than  of  comraefing  friendship  with  him.”  Struck 
with  astonishment  at  such  a  reception,  the  ambassadors  con¬ 
fined  their  request  to  his  acceptance  of  the  fifteen  talents, 
with  permission  for  their  master  to  come  before  him,  and 
vindicate  his  conduct.  Having  obtained  the  consuFs  leave. 

•  4f!43/,  15^.- 

B.  C.  189/1 

BOOK  XXXVIIL 

221 

the  tyrant  came,  next  day,  into  the  camp.  His  dress  and 
retinue  were  in  a  style  scarcely  becoming  a  private  person  of 
moderate  fortune;  while  his  discourse  was  humble  and  in¬ 
coherent,  tending  to  diminish  the  idea  of  his  wealth,  being 
filled  with  complaints  of  his  own  poverty,  and  that  oi  the 
cities  in  his  state.  He  had  under  his  dominion,  (beside  Ci* 
byra,)  Syleum,  and  the  city  called  Alimne.  Out  of  these  he 
promised,  (but  in  such  a  manner  as  if  he  were  diffident  of 
his  ability  to  accomplish  it,  by  stripping  hiaiself  and  his 
subjects,)  to  raise  twenty-five  talents.^  This,’*  said  the 
consul,  is  not  to  be  endured.  Was  it  not  enough  that  you 
should  endeavour  to  impose  upon  us  by  your  ambassadors, 
but  you  must  now  come  in  person  to  persist  in  the  falsehood. 
What!  twenty-five  talents  will  exhaust  your  dominions!  If, 
within  three  days,  you  do  not  pav  down  five  hundred  talents,! 
expect  to  see  your  lands  wasted,  and  vour  city  besieged." 
Although  terrified  by  this  menace,  yet  he  persisted  obsti¬ 
nately  in  his  plea  of  povertv;  gradually  advancing,  however, 
with  sordid  reluctance,  (sometimes  cavilling,  sometimes  re¬ 
curring  to  prayers  and  counterfeit  tears,)  he  was  brought  to 
agree  to  the  payment  of  one  hundred  talents, i  to  which  were 
added  ten  thousand  bushels  of  corn-  All  this  w^as  done 
"within  six  days. 
XV.  From  Cibyra  the  army  was  led  through  the  territory 
of  the  Sendians,  and,  after  crossing  the  river  Caular  encamp¬ 
ed.  Next  day  they  marched  along  the  side  of  the  lake  of 
Caralis,  and  passed  the  night  at  Mandropolis.  As  they  ad¬ 
vanced  to  the  next  city,  Lagos,  the  inhabitants  fled  through 
fear.  The  place  being  deserted,  yet  filled  with  abundance  of 
every  thing,  was  pillaged  by  the  soldiers.  Thev  next  day 
proceeded  by  the  head  of  the  river  Lvsis,  to  the  rivei  Cobu- 
latus.  At  this  time  the  I'ermessians  were  besieging  the  cit¬ 
adel  of  the  Isiondians,  after  having  taken  the  city.  The  he- 
I5y,  t  19,375/. 

222 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  563. 

sieged,  destitute  of  every  other  hope  of  relief,  sent  ambassa¬ 
dors  to  the  consul,  imploring  succour;  adding,  that,  being 
shut  up  in  the  citadel,  with  their  wives  and  children,  they 
were  in  daily  expectation  of  perishing,  either  by  the  sword 
or  famine.”  The  consul  was  well  pleased  at  an  occasion  of¬ 
fering  for  turning  aside  to  Pamphylia.  His  approach  rais¬ 
ed  the  siege  of  Isionda.  He  granted  peace  to  Termessus  on 
receiving  fifty  talents;*  and,  likewise,  to  the  Aspendians, 
and  other  states  of  Pamphylia.  In  his  return  out  of  that 
country  he  pitched  his  camp,  the  first  day,  at  the  river  Tau¬ 
rus,  and  the  second  at  Come  Xyline,f  as  they  call  it.  De- 
parti.. g  from  which,  he  proceeded,  by  uninterrupted  march¬ 
es  to  the  city  of  C  ormasa.  The  next  city  was  Darsa,  which 
he  found  abandoned  by  the  inhab  tants  through  fear,  but 
plentifully  stored  with  every  thing  useful.  As  he  marched 
thence  along  the  morasses,  he  wa.s  met  by  ambassadors  from 
Lvsinoe,  with  the  surrender  of  that  state.  He  then  came 
into  the  Sagalassenian  territory,  rich  and  abounding  in  eve¬ 
ry  kind  of  production.  The  inhabitants  are  Pisidians,  the 
best  soldiers,  by  fur,  of  an\  in  that  part  of  the  world.  This 
circumstance,  together  with  the  fertility  of  their  soil,  the 
multitude  of  their  people,  and  the  situation  of  their  city, 
which  is  stronger  than  most  others,  gave  them  boldness, 
Manlius,  as  no  embassy  attended  him  on  the  frontiers,  sent  a 
party  to  ravage  the  country;  which  overcame  their  obstinacy, 
as  they  saw  their  elfects  carried  and  driven  away.  1  hey 
then  sent  ambassadors:  and  on  their  agreeing  to  pay  fifty  ta¬ 
lents,  with  twenty  thousand  bushels  of  wheat  and  twenty  thou¬ 
sand  of  barley,  they  obtained  peace.  The  consul  then  march¬ 
ed  to  the  source  of  the  Obrima,  and  encamped  at  a  village 
called  Comi  Aporidos.  Hither  Seleucus  came,  next  day, 
from  Apamea;  to  which  place  the  sick,  and  the  useless  bag¬ 
gage,  were  sent;  and  the  army  being  furnished  with  guides 

9687^  \0s 

The  T^'ood  town 

B.  C.189.3 

BOOK  XXXVIII. 

223 

by  Seieucu$,  and  marching  that  day  into  the  plain  of  Metrop¬ 
olis,  advanced  on  the  day  following,  to  Dinise  in  P:.n  gia, 
and  thence  to  Synnas;  all  the  towns  on  every  side  being  ae- 
serted  by  the  inhabitants  through  fear.  The  spoil  oi  ‘hese 
overloaded  the  army,  and  retarded  its  motion  so  muelj  that 
it  scarcely  marched  five  miles  in  a  whole  day;  when  it  reach¬ 
ed  the  town  called  Old  Beudi.  Next  day  it  encan’ped  at 
Anabura;  on  the  folloMdng,  at  the  source  of  the  Alander, 
and  on  the  third  at  Abassus,  where  it  lay  for  several  days, 
being  now  arrived  at  the  borders  ol  the  Tolistoboians. 
XVI.  These  Gauls,  in  a  very  numerous  body,  quitting 
their  native  country,  under  the  conduct  of  Brennus,  either 
through  hopes  of  plunder,  or  in  consequence  of  a  scarcity  of 
land;  and,  thinking  that  no  nation  through  which  they  were 
to  pass  would  be  a  match  for  them  in  arms;  made  their  way 
into  Dardania.  There  a  dissension  arose,  and  twenty  thou¬ 
sand  of  them  under  the  chieftains  Leonorius  and  Lutarius, 
separating  from  Brennus,  turned  their  route  to  Thrace.  As 
they  went  along,  they  fought  with  such  as  resisted  them,  im¬ 
posed  a  tribute  on  such  as  sued  for  peace,  and,  arriving 
Byzantium,  held  possession  for  a  long  time,  of  the  cities  in 
that  quarter,  laying  the  coast  of  the  Propontis  under  contri¬ 
bution.  They  were  afterwards  seized  b\  a  desire  of  pass¬ 
ing  over  into  Asia,  from  the  accounts  which  they  heard,  in 
its  neighbourhood,  of  the  great  fruitfulness  of  its  lands;  and, 
having  taken  Lysimachia  by  treachery,  and  possessed  them¬ 
selves  of  the  w^hole  Chersonesus  by  force  of  arms,  they  went 
down  to  the  Hellespont.  V  hen  they  there  beheld  Asia  on 
the  other  side  of  a  narrow  streight,  their  wishes  to  pass  into 
it  were  much  more  highly  inflamed,  and  they  despatched 
envoys  to  Antipater,  governor  of  that  coast,  to  adjust  mat- 
ters  relating  to  their  passage.  But  this  business  being  pro¬ 
tracted  to  a  greater  length  than  they  expected,  a  new  quar¬ 
rel  broke  out  between  their  chieftains;  in  consequence  of 
which,  Leonorius,  with  the  greater  part  of  the  people,  wen^ 

224 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y,  R,  563. 

back  to  Byzantium,  whence  they  came;  and  Lutarius,  having 
taken  from  some  Macedonians,  (sent  by  Antipater  as  spies, 
under  the  pretext  of  an  embassy,)  two  decked  ships  and 
three  barks,  employed  these  in  carrying  over  one  division 
after  another,  by  day  or  by  night,  until,  within  a  few  days, 
he  had  transported  his  whole  army.  Not  long  after,  Leo- 
norius,  with  the  assistance  of  Nicomedes,  king  of  Bithy- 
nia,  passed  over  from  Byzantium.  The  Gauls  then  reunited 
their  forces,  and  assisted  Nicomedes  in  a  war  which  he  was 
carrying  on  against  Z>b(ea,  who  held  possession  of  a  part  of 
Bithvnia.  By  their  assistance  chiefly,  Zvbcea  was  subdued, 
and  the  whole  of  Bithynia  reduced  under  the  dominion  of 
Nicomedes,  Then  leaving  Bithynia,  they  advanced  into 
Asia;  and  although,  of  their  twenty  thousand  men,  not  more 
than  ten  carried  arms,  yet  such  a  degree  of  terror  did  the) 
strike  into  all  the  natives,  dwxlling  on  this  side  of  Taurus, 
that  those  which  they  visited,  and  those  which  they  did  not 
visit,  the  remotest  as  well  as  the  nearest,  submitted  to  their 
authority.  At  length,  as  there  were  three  tribes  of  them, 
the  Tolistoboians,  fhe  Trocmians,  and  the  Tectosagians,  they 
made  a  division  of  Asia  into  three  provinces,  according  to 
which  the  contributions  imposed  upon  them  were  to  be  paid 
to  each  of  their  states  respectively.  The  coast  of  the  Helles¬ 
pont  was  assigned  to  the  Trocmians;  Ionia  and  yEolia  were 
allotted  to  the  T  olistoboians,  and  the  inland  parts  of  Asia  to 
the  Tectosagians.  They  levied  tribute  throughout  every 
part  of  Asia,  but  chose  their  own  residence  on  the  banks  of 
the  river  Halys;  and  so  great  was  the  terror  of  their  name, 
their  numbers,  too,  increasing  by  a  rapid  population,  that  at 
last  even  the  kings  of  Syria  did  not  refuse  to  pay  them  tribute. 
The  first  of  all  the  inhabitants  of  Asia,  who  ventured  a  re¬ 
fusal,  was  Attalus,  the  father  of  king  Eumenes;  and,  beyond 
the  expectation  of  all,  fortune  favoured  his  bold  resolution. 
He  defeated  them  in  a  pitched  battle:  yet  he  did  not  so  ef¬ 
fectually  break  their  spirits,  as  to  make  them  give  up  theif 

B.  C*  189.J 

BOOK  XXXVIIL 

225 

pretensions  to  empire.  Their  power  continued  the  same 
until  the  war  between  Antioch  us  and  the  Romans,  and,  even 
then,  after  Antiochus  was  expelled  the  country,  they  still 
entertained  a  hope,  that,  as  they  lived  remote  from  the  sea, 
the  Roman  army  would  not  come  so  far. 
XVI I.  As  the  troops  were  about  to  act  against  this  ene¬ 
my,  so  terrible  to  all  in  that  part  of  the  world,  the  consul, 
calling  them  to  an  assembly,  spoke  to  this  effect:  “  It  is  not 
unknown  to  me,  that,  of  all  the  nations  inhabiting  Asia,  the 
Gauls  have  the  highest  reputation  as  soldiers.  A  fierce  na¬ 
tion,  after  overrunning  the  face  of  the  earth  with  its  arms, 
has  fixed  its  abode  in  the  midst  of  a  race  of  men  the  gentlest 
in  the  world.  Their  tall  persons,  their  long  red  hair,  their 
vast  shields,  and  swords  ot  enormous  length,  their  songs 
also,  when  they  arc  advancing  to  action,  their  yells  and  dances, 
and  the  horrid  clubbing  of  their  armour,  while  they  brandish 
their  shields  in  a  peculiar  manner,  practised  in  their  original 
country;  all  these  are  circumstances  calculated  to  strike  ter¬ 
ror.  But  let  Greeks  and  Phrygians,  and  Carians,  who  are 
unaccustomed  to,  and  unacquainted  with  these  things,  be 
frightened  by  such;  the  Romans,  long  acquainted  with  Gal¬ 
lic  tumults,  have  learned  the  emptiness  of  their  parade.  Once, 
indeed,  in  an  early  period,  they  defeated  our  ancestors  at  the 
Allia.  Ever  since  that  time,  for,  now,  two  hundred  years, 
the  Homans  drive  them  before  them  in  dismay,  and  kill  them 
like  cattle;  there  have,  indeed,  been  more  triumphs  celebrat¬ 
ed  o\er  the  Gauls,  than  over  almost  all  the  rest  of  the  world. 
It  is  now  well  known  by  experience,  that  if  vou  sustain  their 
first  onset,  which  they  make  with  fiery  eagerness  and  blind 
their  limbs  are  unnerved  with  sweat  and  fatigue;  their 
arms  flag;  and,  though  \ou  should  not  employ  a  weapon  on 
them,  the  sun,  dust,  and  thirst,  sink  their  inervate  bodies, 
and  their  no  less  inert  ate  minds.  We  have  tried  them, 
not  only  with  our  legions  against  theirs,  but  in  single  combat, 
man  to  man.  Titus  Manlius  and  Marcus  Valerius  have  de- 
VO  I.,  V. - G  g 

226 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  565. 

monstrated  how  far  Roman  valour  surpasses  Gallic  fury. 
Marcus  Manlius  singly,  thrust  back  the  Gauls  who  were 
mounting  the  capitol  in  a  body.  Our  forefathers  had  to  deal 
with  genuine  native  Gauls;  but  they  are  now  degenerate,  a 
mongrel  race,  and,  in  reality,  what  they  are  named,  Gallo- 
grecians;  just  as  is  the  case  of  vegetables;  the  seeds  not  be¬ 
ing  so  efficacious  for  preserving  their  original  constitution, 
as  the  properties  of  the  soil  and  climate  in  which  they  may 
be  reared,  when  changed,  are  towards  altering  it.  The  Ma¬ 
cedonians  who  settled  at  Alexandria  in  Egypt,  or  in  Seleucia, 
or  Babylonia,  or  in  any  other  of  their  colonies  scattered  over 
the  world,  have  sunk  into  Syrians,  Parthians,  or  Egyptians. 
Marseilles,  by  being  situated  in  the  midst  of  Gauls,  has  con¬ 
tracted  somewhat  of  the  disposition  of  its  adjoining  neigh¬ 
bours.  What  trace  do  the  Tarentines  retain  of  the  hardy 
rugged  discipline  of  Sparta?  Every  thing  that  grows  in  its 
own  natural  soil  attains  the  greater  perfection;  whatever  is 
planted  in  a  foreign  land,  by  a  gradual  change  in  its  nature, 
degenerates  into  a  similitude  to  that  which  affords  it  nurture. 
You  will  therefore  fight  with  men  of  the  like  description  as 
those  whom  you  have  already  vanquished  and  cut  to  pieces; 
those  Phrygians  encumbered  with  Gallic  armour,  in  the  bat¬ 
tle  with  Antiochus.  I  fear  that  they  will  not  oppose  us  suf¬ 
ficiently  so  as  that  we  may  acquire  honour  from  our  victory. 
King  Attains  often  routed  and  put  them  to  flight.  Brutes 
retain  for  a  time,  when  taken,  their  natural  ferocity;  but,  after 
being  long  fed  by  the  hands  of  men,  they  grow  tame.  Think 
ye,  then,  that  Nature  does  not  act  in  the  same  manner,  in 
softening  the  savage  tempers  of  men?  Do  you  believe  these 
to  be  of  the  same  kind  that  their  fathers  and  grandfathers 
were?  Driven  from  home  by  want  of  land,  they  marched 
along  the  craggy  coast  of  Illyricum;  then  fought  their  way^ 
against  the  fiercest  nations,  through  the  whole  length  of  Paeo- 
nia  and  Thrace,  and  took  possession  of  these  countries.  After 
being  hardened,  yet  soured,  by  so  great  hardships,  they  gain- 

BOOK  XXXVIIL 

B.  C.  189.J 

22  r 

ed  admittance  here;  a  territory  capable  of  glutting  them  with 
an  abundance  of  every  thing  desirable.  By  the  very  great  fer¬ 
tility  of  the  soil,  the  very  great  mildness  of  the  climate,  and 
the  gentle  dispositions  of  the  neighbouring  nations,  all  that 
barbarous  fierceness,  which  they  brought  with  them,  has  been 
quite  molified.  As  for  you,  who  are  sons  of  Mars,  believe 
me,  you  ought,  from  the  very  beginning,  to  guard  against, 
and  shun^  above  all  things,  the  enticing  delights  of  Asia;  so 
great  is  the  power  of  those  foreign  pleasures  in  extinguish¬ 
ing  the  vigour  of  the  mind,  so  strong  the  contagion  from  the 
relaxed  discipline  and  manners  of  the  people  about  you.  One 
thing  has  happened  fortunately;  that  though  they  will  not 
bring  against  you  a  degree  of  strength  by  any  means  equal 
to  what  they  formerly  possessed;  yet  they  still  retain  a  cha¬ 
racter  among  the  Greeks  equal  to  what  they  had  at  their  first 
coming;  consequently,  you  will  acquire  by  subduing  them, 
as  high  renown  among  the  allies  for  military  prowess,  as  if 
they  had  kept  up  to  their  ancient  standard  of  courage/’ 
XV III.  He  then  dismissed  the  assembly;  and,  having  des¬ 
patched  ambassadors  to  Epossognatus,  (who  alone,  of  all  the 
petty  princes,  had  remained  in  friendship  with  Eumenes, 
and  refused  to  assist  Antiochus  against  the  Romans,)  pro¬ 
ceeded  on  his  march.  He  came,  the  first  day,  to  the  river 
Alander,  and  the  next,  to  a  village  called  Tyscos.  Here  he 
was  met  by  ambassadors  from  the  Oroandians,  begging  to  be 
admitted  into  friendship.  He  ordered  them  to  pay  two  hun¬ 
dred  talents;*  and,  on  their  requesting  liberty  to  report  that 
matter  at  home,  gave  them  permission.  He  then  led  the  army 
to  Plitendos,  and,  proceeding  thence,  encamped  at  Alyatti. 
The  persons  sent  to  Epossognatus  returned  to  him  here,  and 
with  them  ambassadors  from  that  chieftain,  who  in  treated 
him  not  to  make  war  on  the  Tolistoboians,  for  that  Epossog- 
natus  himself  would  go  among  that  people  and  persuade  them 
to  submission.  This  request  of  the  prince  was  complied 

•  38,750^ 

228 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  563 

with.  The  army  then  marched  through  the  country  called 
Axylos,*  which  name  was  given  from  the  nature  of  the  place, 
being  entirely  destitute  not  only  of  timber,  but  even  ot  bram¬ 
bles,  or  any  species  of  fire-wood.  I'he  inhabitants,  instead 
of  wood,  use  cow-dung.  While  the  Romans  were  encamp¬ 
ed  at  Cuballum,  a  fort  of  Gallograecia,  a  party  of  the  ene¬ 
my’s  cavalry  appeared,  advancing  with  great  fury.  And 
they  not  only  disordered,  by  their  sudden  charge,  the  ad¬ 
vanced  guards  of  the  Romans,  but  killed  several  of  the  men. 
No  sooner,  however,  did  the  uproar  reach  the  camp,  than 
the  Roman  cavalry,  pouring  out  hastily  by  all  the  gates, 
routed  and  dispersed  the  Gauls,  killing  many  as  they  fled. 
The  consul,  now  perceiving  that  he  had  reached  the  enemy’s 
country,  took  care,  for  the  future,  to  explore  the  grountl 
through  which  his  route  led,  and  to  keep  a  proper  guard  on 
his  rear.  Having,  by  continued  marches,  arrived  at  the  river 
Sangarius,  he  set  about  constructing  a  bridge,  no  passable 
ford  being  any  where  found.  The  Sangarius,  running  from 
the  mountain  of  Adoreos,  through  Phrygia,  joins  the  rivet 
Thymbris  at  the  confines  of  Bithynia.  After  doubling  its 
quantity  of  water  by  this  junction,  it  proceeds,  in  a  more  co¬ 
pious  stream,  through  Bitiiynia,  and  empties  itself  into  the 
Euxinc  sea.  Yet  it  is  not  so  remarkable  for  the  size  of  its 
current,  as  for  the  vast  quantity  of  fish  which  it  sup])lies  to 
the  people  in  its  vicinity.  When  the  bridge  was  finished, 
and  the  army  had  passed  the  river,  they  were  marching 
along  the  bank,  they  were  met  by  the  Gallic  priests  of  the 
Great  Mother,  from  Pessinus  w  ith  the  symbols  of  their  of¬ 
fice;  who,  in  rhymes,  which  they  chaunted  as  if  they  w’ere 
inspired,  foretold,  that  the  goddess  would  grant  the  Romans 
a  safe  passage,  success  in  the  war,  and  the  empire  over  that 
country.  I'he  consul,  saying  that  he  embraced  the  omen, 
])itched  his  camp  on  that  very  spot.  On  the  following  day, 
he  arrived  at  Gordiuin.  This  town,  though  not  very  large. 

*  VV'oodless. 

B.C.  189.] 

BOOK  XXXVIIL 

is  a  celebrated  and  well-frequented  nnart,  exceeding,  in  that 
respect,  most  other  inland  places.  It  has  the  advantage  of 
three  seas,  nearly  equidistant  from  it;  that  at  Hellespontus, 
that  at  Sinope,  and  that  on  the  opposite  coast  of  Cilicia.  It 
is  also  contiguous  to  the  borders  of  many  and  great  nations, 
the  commerce  of  which,  mutual  convenience  caused  to  centre, 
principally,  in  this  place.  The  Romans  found  the  town  de¬ 
serted  by  the  inhabitants  through  tear,  yet  at  the  same  lime 
filled  with  plenty  of  everv  thing.  While  thev  halted  here, 
ambassadors  came  from  Epossognatus,  with  information, 
that  he  had  applied  to  the  petty  princes  of  the  Gauls,  but 
could  not  bring  them  to  reason;  that  thev  were  removing  in 
crowds  from  the  villages  and  lands  in  the  open  country;  and, 
with  their  wives  and  children,  carr\  ing  and  driving  what¬ 
ever  could  be  carried  or  driven,  were  going  to  mount  Olym¬ 
pus,  where  they  hoped  to  defend  themselves  by  their  arms 
and  the  nature  c>f  the  ground,” 
XIX.  Deputies  from  the  Oroaudians  Imought,  afterwards, 
more  particular  intelligence:  that  the  state  of  the  Tolisto- 
hoians  had  seized  mount  Olympus,  but  that  the  Tectosagians. 
taking  a  different  route,  were  gone  to  another  mountain,  cal* 
led  Magaba;  and  that  the  Trocmlans,  leaving  their  wives 
and  children  in  charge  with  the  l  ectosagians,  had  resolved 
to  carry  their  armed  force  tfi  the  assistance  of  the  Tolisto* 
boians.”  The  chieftains  of  the  three  states,  at  that  tim^ ,  wen* 
Ortiagon,  Comholumarus,  and  Gaulotiis;  and  thtir  principal 
3’eason  for  choosing  this  mode  of  conducting  the  war,  was, 
that,  ns  they  had  possession  of  the  highest  mountains  in  liiat 
part  of  the  world,  and  had  conveyed  thiiiu-r  stores  ^f  even 
kind,  sufficient  for  their  consumption  during  a  long  time,  the\ 
thought  that  iht  enemv  would  be  wearied  out  Uv  the  tedi¬ 
ousness  of  the  enterprise:  being  fully  persuaded,  that  tlle^ 
would  never  venture  toclimb  over  places  so  steep  and  uneven: 
that  if  such  an  attempt  should  be  made,  a  small  number  would 
[>e  able  to  repulse  and  drive  them  down,  and  that  thev  ncvei 

230 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

[Y.  R.  563. 

could  bring  themselves  to  sit  inactive.^  at  the  foot  of  bleak 
mountains,  exposed  to  cold  and  hunger.”  Although  the 
height  ol  their  posts  was,  in  itself,  a  strong  defence,  yet  they 
drew,  besides,  a  trench  and  other  fortifications  round  the 
summits  which  they  occupied.  The  least  part  of  their  care 
was  employed  in  providing  a  stock  of  missile  ^weapons;  for 
they  trusted  that  the  rocky  ground  itself  would  furnish  stones 
in  abundance. 
XX.  The  consul,  having  foreseen  that  his  men  could  not 
come  to  a  close  engagement,  in  the  attack  of  the  enemy's 
posts,  had  prepared  an  immense  quantity  of  javelins,  light- 
infantry  spears,  arrows,  balls  of  lead,  and  small  stones,  fit  to 
be  thrown  with  slings.  Furnished  with  this  stock  of  missile 
weapons,  he  marched  towards  mount  Olympus,  and  encamp¬ 
ed  within  five  miles  of  it.  Next  day,  accompanied  by  Atta¬ 
ins,  he  advanced,  with  an  escort  of  four  hundred  horse,  to 
examine  the  nature  of  the  mountain,  and  situation  of  the 
camp  of  the  Gauls;  but  a  party  of  the  enemv's  cavalry,  dou¬ 
ble  in  number  to  his,  sallying  out,  obliged  them  to  retire. 
He  even  lost  some  men  in  the  retreat,  and  had  more  wound¬ 
ed.  On  the  third  day  he  went  to  make  his  observations,  at 
the  head  of  all  his  cavalry;  and  none  of  the  enemy  coming 
out  beyond  their  fortifications,  he  rode  round  the  mountain 
with  safety.  He  saw  that,  on  the  south  side,  the  hills  were 
composed  of  earth,  and  rose  to  a  certain  height,  with  a  gentle 
slope,  but  that,  on  the  north,  there  was  nothing  but  steep  and 
almost  perpendicular  cliflfs.  He  found,  too,  that  there  were  but 
three  ways  by  which  the  troops  could  ascend;  one  at  the  mid¬ 
dle  of  the  mountain,  where  the  ground  was  earthy,  and  two 
others,  both  very  difficult,  one  on  the  southeast,  and  the 
other  on  the  northwest.  After  taking  a  full  view  of  all  these 
places,  he  pitched  his  camp,  that  day,  close  to  the  foot  of 
the  mountain.  On  the  day  following,  after  offering  sacrifice, 
in  which  the  first  victims  afforded  the  desired  omens,  he  ad- 
'  anced  against  the  enemy  with  his  army  in  three  divisions. 

B.  C.  189.] 

BOOK  XXXVIII. 

231 

He  himself,  with  the  greatest  part  of  the  forces,  marched  up 
where  the  mountain  afforded  the  easiest  ascent.  He  ordered 
his  brother,  Lucius  Manlius,  to  mount  on  the  southeast  side, 
as  far  as  the  ground  allowed  him  to  ascend  with  safety;  but, 
if  he  should  meet  such  precipices  as  he  could  not  surmount 
without  danger,  then,  not  to  contend  with  the  unfavourable 
nature  of  the  place,  or  attempt  to  conquer  obstacles  insuper¬ 
able,  but  to  come  sloping  across  the  mountain  towards  him, 
and  join  the  body  under  his  command;  and  he  directed  Cal- 
us  Heivius,  with  the  third  division,  to  march  round,  leisure¬ 
ly,  by  the  foot  of  the  mountain,  and  to  climb  the  hill  on  the 
northeast.  The  auxiliary  troops  of  Aitalus  he  distributed 
equally  among  the  three  divisions,  ordering  the  young  prince 
to  accompany  them  himselL  The  cavalry’  and  elephants  he 
left  in  the  plain,  at  the  foot  of  the  hills,  charging  the  com¬ 
manding  officers,  to  watch  attentively  every  thing  that  should 
happen,  and  to  be  expeditious  in  bringing  succour  where  vet- 
circumstances  should  require* 
XXL  The  Gauls,  (thoroughly  satisfied  that  the  ground  on 
their  two  flanks  was  impassable, J  in  order  to  secure,  bv  arms, 
the  ascent  on  the  south  side,  sent  about  four  thousand  sol¬ 
diers  to  keep  possession  of  a  hill  which  hung  over  the  road, 
at  the  distance  of  near  a  mile  from  their  camp;  hoping  that 
this  would  serve  as  a  fortress,  to  stop  the  enem\ 's  progress. 
On  seeing  this,  the  Romans  prepared  for  the  fight.  The  light- 
infantry  advanced,  at  a  small  distance,  in  the  front  of  the 
line;  and,  of  Attaius's  troops,  the  Cretan  archers  and  sling- 
ers,  the  Traliians  and  Thracians.  The  battalions  of  infantry, 
as  the  ground  was  steep,  marched  at  a  slow  pace,  holding 
their  shields  before  them,  merel\-  to  ward  off  missile  weapons, 
for  there  was  no4ikelihood  of  a  close  engagement.  As  soon 
as  they  came  wdthin  reach,  the  fight  commenced  with  the 
missile  weapons,  and  continued  for  a  short  time  equal;  the 
Gauls  having  the  advantage  in  situation,  the  Romans  in  va¬ 
riety  and  plenty  of  weapons.  But,  as  the  contest  advanced, 
this  equality  was  soon  lost:  the  (iauls  carried  loner  shields 

232 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  563, 

but  too  narrow  for  the  breadth  of  their  bodies;  and  even  these 
were  flat,  ancj  therefore  afforded  but  a  ]>ad  defence.  Besides, 
in  a  little  time  they  had  nothing  left  but  swords,  which,  as 
the  enemy  did  not  come  close,  were  useless.  They  had  only 
stones  to  throw,  and  those  not  of  a  pioper  size,  as  they  had 
laid  in  no  store  of  such,  but  used  whatever  each,  in  his  hur¬ 
ry  and  confusion,  found  next  at  hand;  and  then,  being  unused 
to  this  manner  of  fighting,  they  did  not  know  how  to  aid  the 
blow  with  either  skill  or  strength.  At  the  same  time  every’ 
part  was  assailed  with  arrows,  leaden  balls,  and  darts;  the 
approach  of  which  they  could  not  perceive,  and  scarcely  con¬ 
scious,  indeed,  of  what  they  were  doing,  so  blinded  were 
they  by  rage  and  fear  together;  while  they  found  themselves 
engaged  in  a  kind  of  fight,  for  which  they  were  utterly  un¬ 
qualified.  When  closed  with,  an  enemy,  and  where  they  can 
receiv  e  and  give  wounds  in  turn,  rage  inflames  their  courage; 
hut  when  they  are  wounded  at  a  distance,  with  light  wea- 
pcjns  from  unknown  hands,  and  have  no  object  on  which  thev 
can  vent  their  intemperate  fury,  like  wounded  wdld  beasts, 
they  rush  forward  at  random,  and  often  upon  their  own  party  * 
'Fheir  w'ounds  made  the  greater  show,  because  they  alway  s 
fight  naked.  I'heir  bodies  are  plump, — consequently’  the 
blood  flowed  in  the  greater  quantity, — and  their  skins  white, 
being  never  stripped  except  in  battle.  Thus  the  cuts  appear¬ 
ed  the  moi'e  shocking,  while  the  whiteness  of  their  skins 
made  the  black  stains  of  the  blood  more  conspicuous.  But 
they  were  not  much  affected  by  open  wounds.  Sometimes 
they  even  cut  the  skin,  when  the  wound  was  more  broad  than 
deep,  thinking  that  in  this  condition  they  fought  with  the 
greater  glory.  But  when  the  point  of  an  arrow,  or  a  ball, 
sinking  deep  in  the  flesh  tormented  them,  and  while,  not¬ 
withstanding  all  their  endeavours  to  extract  it,  the  weapon 
could  not  be  got  out,  then  they  fell  into  fits  of  phrenzy*  and 
shame,  at  being  destroyed  by  so  small  a  hurt;  and  dashing 
themselves  on  the  ground,  lay  scattered  over  the  place,  Somt 

B.  C.  189.] 

BOOK  XXXVIIL 

233 

rushing  against  the  enemy  were  overwhelmed  with  darts; 
and,  when  any  of  them  came  near,  they  were  cut  to  pieces 
by  the  light- infan  try.  A  soldier  of  this  description  carries 
a  shield  three  feet  long,  and,  tn  his  right  hand,  javelins,  which 
he  throws  at  a  distance^  He  has  at  his  side  a  Spanish  sword, 
which,  when  he  has  occasion  to  fight  close,  he  draws,  and 
shifts  the  spears  into  his  left  hand.  There  were  few  of  the 
Gauls  now  left;  and  these,  seeing  themselves  overpowered  by 
the  light-infantry,  and  the  battalions  of  the  legions  advanc¬ 
ing,  lied  in  contusion  to  the  camp;  w'hich,  by  this  time,  was 
full  of  tumult  and  dismay,  as  the  women,  children,  and 
others,  unfit  to  bear  arms,  were  all  crowded  together  there. 
The  hiiis,  thus  abandoned  by  the  enemy,  w^ere  seized  by  the 
victorious  Romans. 
XXII.  At  this  juncture,  Lucius  Manlius  and  Caius  Hel- 
vius,  having  marched  up  as  high  as  the  sloping  hills  allowed 
them  to  do,  and,  indeed,  to  insuperable  steeps,  turned  to- 
tvards  that  side  of  the  mountain,  where,  only,  the  ascent  was 
practicable;  and  began,  as  if  by  concert,  to  follow  the  consul’s 
party  at  moderate  distances,  being  driven  by  necessity  to 
adopt  the  plan,  now,  which  would  have  been  the  best  at  the 
beginning.  For  in  such  disadvantageous  grdbnd  reserves 
have  often  been  of  the  utmost  use;  as,  should  the  first  line 
happen  to  be  repulsed,  the  second  may  both  cover  their  re¬ 
treat,  and  succeed  to  their  place  in  the  fight.  The  consul, 
as  soon  as  the  vanguard  of  the  legions  reached  the  hills  taken 
by-the  light  infantry,  ordered  the  troops  to  halt,  and  take 
breath;  at  the  same  time  he  showed  them  the  bodies  of  the 
Gauls  spread  about  the  hills,  asking  them,  ‘‘‘  Since  the  light 
troops  had  fought  such  a  battle,  what  might  be  expected  from 
the  legions,  from  a  regular  army,  and  from  the  spirit  of  the 
bravest  soldiers?  They  ought  certainly  to  take  the  camp  into 
which  the  enemy  had  been  driven,  especially,  now,  that  they 
w^ere  in  dismay.”  He  then  sent  forward  the  light- ini  an  try, 
who,  while  the  army  halted,  had  employed  even  that  time  to 
VOL,  V. — H  h 

234 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  565, 

good  purpose  in  collecting  missiles  from  about  the  hills,  that 
they  might  have  a  sufficient  stock  for  the  occasion.  They 
now  approached  the  camp.  The  Gauls,  not  confiding  in  the 
strength  of  their  works,  had  posted  themselves,  in  arms,  on 
the  outside  of  the  rampart.  The  Romans  assailed  them  with 
a  shower  of  weapons  of  every  sort;  and,  as  they  stood  thick, 
the  less  apt  was  any  to  fall  without  effect.  They  were  driven 
in  an  instant  within  their  trenches,  leaving  only  strong  guards 
at  the  entrances  of  the  agates.  Against  the  crowd  that  fled 
into  the  camp  a  vast  quantity  of  missile  weapons  were  dis- 
charged,  and  the  shouts,  intermixed  with  lamentations  of  the 
women  and  children,  showed  that  great  numbers  were  wound¬ 
ed.  The  first  line  of  the  legions  hurled  their  javelins  against 
the  guards  posted  at  the  gates;  however,  these,  in  general, 
were  not  tvounded,  but  most  of  them,  having  their  shields 
pierced  through,  were  entangled  and  fastened  together,  nor 
did  they  longer  withstand  the  attack. 
XXIII.  The  gates  being  now  open,  the  Gauls,  in  order  tc' 
escape  the  conquerors,  fled  out  of  the  camp  to  all  quarters- 
They  rushed  on,  without  looking  before  them,  where  there 
w^ere  roads,  and  where  there  were  none;  no  craggy  cliffs,  nor 
even  perpendicular  rocks,  stopped  them,  for  they  now  feared 
nothing  but  the  enemy.  Great  numbers,  therefore,  falling 
down  precipices  of  vast  height,  w'erc  either  maimed  or  kill¬ 
ed.  The  consul,  taking  possession  of  the  camp,  restrained 
the  soldiers  from  plundering  it;  ordering  all  to  pursue  with 
their  utmost  speed,  to  press  on  the  enemy,  and  to  increase 
their  present  panic.  The  other  party,  under  Lucius  Manlius, 
now  came  up.  These  he  did  not  suffer  to  enter  the  camp, 
but  sent  them  forw^ard  in  the  pursuit,  and  whom  he  followed 
shortly  after,  committing  the  guard  of  the  prisoners  to  some 
military  tribunes:  for  he  hoped,  from  their  present  conster¬ 
nation,  that  he  might  by  exertion  put  an  entire  end  to  the 
war.  After  the  consul’s  departure,  Caius  Helvius  arrived, 
with  the  third  division.  It  was  not  in  his  power  to  prevent 

13.  C.189.] 

BOOK  XXXVIIL 

their  sacking  the  camp;  and,  by  one  of  fortune’s  most  unjub 
dispensations,  the  booty  fell  into  the  hands  of  men  who  had 
not  had  any  concern  in  the  action.  The  cavalry  stood  for  a 
lon:^  time  ignorant  of  the  fight,  and  of  the  success  of  their 
army.  At  last,  they  also,  as  far  as  their  horses  could  climb 
up  the  hills,  pursued  the  Gauls,  (who  were  now  dispersed 
round  the  foot  of  the  mountain,  i  killing  and  taking  many. 
The  number  of  the  slain  could  not  easih  be  ascertained,  on 
account  of  the  windings  of  the  hills,  among  which  they  were 
pursued.  Many  likewise  fell  from  impassable  cliffs,  into 
cavities  of  prodigious  depth;  others  were  killed  in  the  wood‘^ 
and  thickets.  Claudius,  who  mentions  two  battles  on  Mount 
Olvmpus,  asserts,  that  forty  thousand  fell  in  them;  yet  Vale¬ 
rius  Antias,  who  is  generally  addicted  to  great  exaggeration 
in  point  of  numbers,  says,  not  more  than  ten  thousand.  That, 
the  number  of  prisoners  amounted  to  forty  thousand  there 
is  no  doubt,  because  the  Gauls  had  dragged  along  with  them 
a  crowd  of  people  of  all  descriptions  and  of  all  ages,  like 
men  removing  to  another  country,  rather  than  going  out  to 
war.  The  consul  collected  in  one  heap,  and  burned,  the 
arms  of  the  enemy:  he  then  ordered  all  to  bring  together  the 
rest  of  the  booty,  and  selling  that  portion  which  was  to  be 
applied  to  the  use  of  the  public,  distributed  the  remainder 
among  the  soldiers,  taking  care  that  the  shares  should  be  as 
just  as  possible.  He  likewise  commended  them  in  public 
assemblies,  and  conferred  presents  according  to  the  deserts 
of  each;  distinguishing  Attains  above  all  others,  wuth  the 
general  approbation  of  all.  For  not  only  by  his  courage  and 
activity  in  undergoing  dangers  and  fatigue,  but  also  by  the 
modesty  of  his  deportment,  that  young  prince  had  rendered 
himself  eminently  conspicuous, 
XXIV.  The  war  with  the  Teciosagians  remained  still  to 
!)C  begun.  The  consul,  marching  against  them,  arrived,  on 
the  third  day,  at  Ancyra,  a  city  remarkable  in  those  parts, 
from  which  the  enemy  were  but  a  little  more  than  ten  miles 

236 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  565. 

^^stant.  While  he  lay  encamped  here,  a  memorable  action 
was  performed  by  a  female.  Atnong  many  other  captives, 
was  the  wife  of  the  Gallic  chieftain,  Ortiagon,  a  woman  of 
exquisite  beauty.  The  commander  of  the  guards  was  a 
centurion,  avaricious  and  lustful,  as  soldiers  often  are.  He, 
first,  endeavoured  to  learn  her  sentiments;  but,  finding  that 
she  abhorred  the  thought  of  voluntary  prostitution,  he  em¬ 
ployed  violence.  Afterwards,  in  order  to  make  some  atone¬ 
ment  for  the  injury  and  insult,  he  gave  her  hopes  of  liberty 
to  return  to  her  friends;  but  even  this  he  would  not  grant, 
tvithout  a  compensation.  He  stipulated  for  a  certain  weight 
of  gold,  but,  being  unwilling  that  his  countrymen  should  be 
priv\  to  the  business,  gave  her  leave  to  send  away  any  one 
of  the  prisoners,  whom  she  chose,  with  a  message  to  her 
friends.  He  appointed  a  spot  near  the  river,  to  which  tw'o 
of  this  woman’s  friends,  and  not  more,  were  to  ctiine  with 
the  gold  in  the  night  following,  and  to  receive  her  from  his 
hands.  It  happened  that,  among  the  prisoners,  under  the 
same  guard,  was  a  servant  of  her  own:  he  w’as  employed  as 
the  messenger,  and  the  centurion,  as  soon  as  it  grew  dark, 
conveyed  him  beyond  the  advanced  posts.  Her  friends  came 
to  the  place  at  the  appointed  time,  as  did  the  centurion  with 
his  prisoner.  Here,  on  their  producing  the  gold,  which 
amounted  to  an  Attic  talent,  for  that  was  the  sum  demanded, 
in  her  own  language,  she  ordered  them  to  draw  their  sw^ords, 
and  kill  the  centurion,  while  he  was  weighing  the  gold.  After 
he  was  slain,  she  caused  his  head  to  be  cut  off,  and  wrapping 
it  up  in  her  garment,  carried  it  to  her  husband  Ortiagon, 
who  had  fled  home  from  Olympus.  Before  she  would  em¬ 
brace  him,  she  threw  down  the  centurion’s  head  at  his  feet; 
and,  on  his  asking,  wdih  astonishment,  whose  head  it  was, 
and  what  was  the  meaning  of  such  a  proceeding,  so  unac¬ 
countable  in  a  female,  she  acknowledged  to  her  husband  the 
injury  committed  on  her  person,  and  the  vengeance  she  had 
taken  for  the  forcible  violation  of  her  chastity.  It  is  said. 

B,  C.  189.] 

BOOK  XXXVIIL 

237 

that,  she  maintained  to  the  last,  by  the  purity  and  strictness 
of  her  life,  the  glory  of  this  achievement,  so  honourable  to 
her  sex. 
XXV.  The  Tectosagians  sent  envoys  to  the  consul  at  An- 
cyra,  intreating  him  not  to  decamp,  until  he  had  held  a  con¬ 
ference  with  their  kings;  adding,  that  they  preferred  peace, 
on  any  conditions,  to  war.  The  time  was  fixed  for  the  next 
day  and  the  place,  a  spot  which  seemed  the  most  central  be¬ 
tween  the  camp  of  the  Gauls  and  Ancyra.  The  consul  came 
thither,  at  the  appointed  hour,  with  a  guard  of  five  hundred 
horse,  but,  seeing  none  of  the  Gauls  there,  he  returned  into 
bis  camp:  after  which  the  same  envoys  came  again,  with  an 
apology,  that  their  kings  could  not  come,  being  prevented  by 
religious  considerations;  but,  that  the  principal  men  of  the 
nation  would  attend,  and  that  the  business  might  be  as  well 
transacted  by  them.  To  which  the  consul  answered,  that  he 
would  send  Attalus  on  his  part.  To  this  meeting  both  par¬ 
ties  came,  Attalus,  attended  by  an  escort  of  three  hundred 
horse,  when  a  conversation  ensued  respecting  the  terms  of 
peace;  but,  as  this  could  not  be  finally  concluded  without  the 
presence  of  the  commanders  in  chief,  it  was  agreed,  that  the 
consul  and  the  kings  should  meet  in  the  same  place  on  the 
following  day.  Tht  intention  of  the  Gauls  in  postponing 
matters,  was,  first,  to  waste  time,  that  they  might  remove 
their  effects,  so  as  not  to  be  encumbered  in  case  of  danger, 
and  also  their  wives  and  children,  to  the  other  side  of  the 
river  Halys;  and,  secondly,  to  favour  a  plot  which  they  were 
forming  against  the  consul,  while  he  should  harbour  no  sus¬ 
picion  of  treachery  during  the  conference.  They  chose  for 
this  purpose,  one  thousand  horsemen  of  approved  intrepidity: 
and  their  plan  would  have  taken  effect,  had  not  fortune  ex¬ 
erted  herself  in  favour  of  the  law  of  nations,  which  the\ 
plotted  to  violate.  Fhe  Roman  parties,  who  went  out  for 
forage  and  wood,  were  led  towards  that  quarter  where  the 
conference  was  to  be  held;  for  the  tribunes  judged  that  to  Iv, 

238 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

lY.  R.  563. 

the  safest  course,  as  they  would  have  the  consul’s  escort,  and 
himself,  as  a  guard  between  them  and  the  enemy.  However, 
they  posted  another  guard  of  their  own,  of  six  hundred 
horse,  nearer  to  the  camp.  The  consul,  being  assured  by 
Attalus  that  the  kings  would  come,  and  that  the  business 
might  be  concluded,  set  out  from  his  camp  with  the  same 
attendants  as  before.  When  he  had  advanced  about  five 
miles,  and  was  near  the  place  appointed,  he  saw,  on  a  sud¬ 
den,  the  Gauls  coming  on  with  hostile  furv,  as  fast  as  their 
horses  could  gallop.  He  halted,  and  ordering  his  horsemen 
to  make  ready  their  arms,  and  their  courage,  received  the 
enemy's  first  charge  with  firmness,  and  kept  his  ground.  At 
length,  overpowered  by  numbers,  he  began  to  retreat  leisure¬ 
ly,  M'ithout  disturbing  the  order  of  the  troops,  but,  at  last, 
the  danger  of  delay  appearing  greater  than  any  advantage  to 
be  derived  from  keeping  their  ranks,  thev  all  fled  in  hurry 
and  disorder.  The  Gauls,  seeing  them  disperse,  pursued 
eagerly,  and  killed  several,  and  a  great  part  of  them  would 
have  been  cut  off,  had  not  the  six  hundred  horse,  the  guard 
of  the  foragers,  come  up  to  meet  them.  These,  on  hearing, 
at  a  distance,  the  shout  of  dismay,  raised  by  their  friends, 
made  ready  their  weapons  and  horses,  and,  with  their  vigour 
fresh,  renewed  the  fight -after  it  had  become  desperate.  The 
fortune  of  the  battle,  therefore,  was  instantly  reversed,  and 
dismay  retorted  on  the  victors.  At  the  first  charge  the 
Gauls  were  routed;  at  the  same  time  the  foragers  from  the 
fields  ran  together  towards  the  spot,  so  that  wherever  the 
fugitives  turned  they  met  an  enemy.  Thus,  they  could  not 
retreat  with  either  ease  or  safety,  especially  as  the  Romans 
pursued  on  fresh  horses,  while  theirs  \vere  fatigued.  Few 
therefore  escaped;  yet  not  one  was  taken;  the  far  greater  part 
paid  their  lives  as  ^  forfeit  for  having  violated  the  faith  of  a 
conference.  The  whole  army  of  the  Romans,  with  minds 
burning  with  rage,  marched  up,  next  day,  close  to  the  enemy. 
XX VI.  The  consul,  resolved  that  no  particular  should 

BOOK  XXXVIIL 

239 

B.  C.  189.] 
escape  his  knowledge,  spent  two  days  in  examining  the  na¬ 
ture  of  the  mountain  with  his  own  eyes.  On  the  third  day, 
after  taking  the  auspices,  and  then  offering  sacrifice,  he  form¬ 
ed  his  troops  in  four  divisions,  that  two  might  go  with  him 
up  the  middle  of  the  mountain,  while  the  other  two  should 
march,  one  on  each  side,  against  the  wings  of  the  Gauls. 
The  main  strength  of  the  enemy,  the  Tectosagians  and  Troc- 
mians,  amounting  to  fifty  thousand  men,  formed  the  centre 
of  their  line.  The  cavalry,  about  ten  thousand  men,  being 
dismounted,  (their  horses  being  useless  among  the  uneven 
rocks,)  were  placed  on  the  right  wing,  and  the  Cappadocians 
of  Ariarathes,  with  the  auxiliary  troops  of  Morzes,  making- 
up  near  four  thousand,  on  the  left.  The  consul,  as  he  had 
done  before,  at  Mount  Olympus,  placed  his  light  troops  in 
the  van,  taking  care  that  they  should  have  ready  at  hand  the 
same  abundance  of  weapons  of  every  sort.  When  they  ap¬ 
proached  the  enemy,  all  circumstances,  on  both  sides,  were 
the  same  as  in  the  former  battle,  excepting  that  the  spirits  of 
the  Romans  were  elated  b\  their  success,  and  those  of  the 
Gauls  depressed;  because,  though  themselves  had  not  been 
defeated,  yet  they  considered,  as  their  own,  the  overthrow 
of  people  of  their  own  race.  The  battle,  therefore,  com¬ 
mencing  under  like  circumstances,  had  the  same  issue.  The 
cloud,  as  it  were,  of  light  weapons  that  were  thrown,  over¬ 
whelmed  the  army  of  the  enemy;  and,  as  none  of  them  dared 
to  come  forward,  for  fear  of  exposing  all  parts  of  their  bodies 
open  to  the  blows,  so  while  they  stood  still,  the  closer  they 
were  together  the  more  wounds  they  received,  as  the  assail¬ 
ants  had  the  better  mark  to  aim  at.  The  consul  now  judged, 
that,  as  they  were  already  disordered,  if  he  should  once  let 
them  see  the  standards  of  the  legions,  they  would  all  instantly 
turn  about  and  fi\ ;  receiving,  therefore,  the  light-infantry, 
and  the  rest  of  the  irregulars,  between  the  ranks  he  ordered 
the  line  to  advance. 
XXVII.  The  Gauls,  discouraged  by  reflecting  on  the  dc 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  5  63 

24() 
feat  of  the  Tolistoboians,  and  distressed  by  carryinj^  weapons 
sticking  in  their  flesh,  fatigued  also  by  long  standing,  were 
not  able  to  support  even  the  first  shout  and  onset  of  the  Ro¬ 
mans.  Their  flight  was  directed  towards  their  camp;  but 
few  of  them  entered  within  the  trenches;  the  greater  part, 
passing  by  on  the  right  and  left,  fled  whichever  way  each 
man's  giddy  haste  carried  him.  The  conquerors  followed, 
cutting  off  the  hindmost;  but  then,  through  greediness  for 
booty,  they  stopped  in  the  camp,  and  not  one  of  them  con¬ 
tinued  the  pursuit.  The  Gauls  in  the  wings  stood  some 
time  longer,  because  it  was  later  when  the  Romans  reached 
them;  but  fled  at  the  first  discharge  of  w^eapons.  The  con¬ 
sul,  as  he  could  not  draw  off  the  men  who  had  got  into  the 
camp  for  plunder,  sent  forward  those  who  had  been  in  the 
wdngs  to  pursue  the  enemy.  They,  accordingly,  followed 
them  a  considerable  way;  yet,  in  the  pursuit,  for  there  was 
no  fijjht,  they  killed  not  more  than  eight  thousand  men:  the 
rest  crossed  the  river  Halys.  A  great  part  of  the  Romans 
lodged  that  night  in  the  enemy’s  camp;  the  rest  the  con¬ 
sul  led  back  to  his  own.  Next  day,  he  took  a  review  of  the 
prisoners,  and  of  the  booty,  the  quantity  of  which  was  as 
great  as  might  be  expected  to  have  been  heaped  together  bv 
a  nation  most  greedy  of  rapine,  after  holding  possession  by 
force  of  arms,  of  all  the  country  on  this  side  Mount  Taurus, 
during  a  space  of  many  years.  The  Gauls,  after  this  dis¬ 
persion,  re-assembled  in  one  place,  a  great  part  of  them 
being  wounded  or  unarmed;  and  as  all  were  destitute  of  every 
kind  of  property,  they  sent  deputies  to  the  consul,  to  suppli¬ 
cate  for  peace.  Manlius  ordered  them  to  attend  him  at 
Ephesus;  and,  being  in  haste  to  quit  those  cold  regions,  in 
the  vicinity  of  Mount  Taurus,  it  being  now  the  middle  of 
autumn,  he  led  back  his  victorious  army  into  wdnter-quarters 
on  the  sea  coast. 
XXVIII.  During  the  time  of  those  transactions  in  Asia, 
the  other  provinces  were  in  a  state  of  tranquillity.  At  Rome. 

BOOK  XXXVIIL 

241 

B.  C,  189.] 
the  censors,  Titus  Quintius  Flamininus,  and  Marcus  Clau¬ 
dius  Marcellas,  read  over  the  roll  of  the  senate;  Publius 
Scipio  Africanus  was,  a  third  time,  declared  prince  of  the 
senate,  and  only  four  members  were  struck  out,  none  of 
whom  had  held  any  curule  ofEce.  In  their  review  of  the 
knights,  also,  the  censors  acted  with  great  mildness.  They 
contracted  for  the  erection  of  a  building  in  the  iEquimselium, 
on  the  CapitoliRe  mount,  and  for  paving,  wdth  flint,  a  road 
from  the  Capuan  gate  to  the  temple  of  Mars.  'Ihe  Cam¬ 
panians,  having  requested  the  directions  of  the  senate,  re¬ 
specting  the  place  where  their  census  should  be  held,  an  or¬ 
der  passed,  that  it  should  be  performed  at  Rome.  Extraor¬ 
dinary  quantities  of  rain  fell  this  yearj  twelve  times  the 
Tiber  overflowed  the  field  of  Mars,  and  the  lower  parts  of 
the  city.  The  war  with  the  Gauls  in  Asia,  having  been 
brought  to  a  conclusion  by  the  consul,  Cneius  Manlius,  the 
other  consul,  Marcus  Fulvius,  as  the  .Etolians  were  now 
completely  reduced,  passed  over  to  Cephallenia,  and  sent 
messengers  round  the  states  of  the  island,  to  inquire  whe¬ 
ther  they  chose  to  submit  to  the  Romans,  or  to  try  the  for¬ 
tune  of  war.  Fear  operated  so  strongly  on  them  all,  that 
they  did  not  refuse  to  surrender.  They  gave’ the  number  of 
hostages  demanded,  which  was  proportioned  to  the  abilities 
of  a  weak  people;  the  Nesians,  Cranians,  Palienians,  and 
Samseans,  giving  twenty  each.  Peace  had,  now,  beyond 
what  could  have  been  hoped  for,  begun  to  diffuse  its  benign 
influence  through  Cephallenia,  when  one  state,  the  Samaeans, 
from  what  motive  is  uncertain,  suddenly  broke  out  in  oppo¬ 
sition.  1  hey  said,  that  as  their  city  was  commodiously  situ¬ 
ated,  they  wel'e  afraid  that  the  Romans  would  compel  them 
to  remove  from  it.  But  whether  they  conceived  this  in  their 
own  minds,  and  under  the  impulse  of  a  groundless  fear,  dis¬ 
turbed  the  general  quiet,  or  whether  such  a  project  had  been 
mentioned  in  conversation  among  the  Romans,  and  reported 
to  them,  has  not  been  discovered;  thus  much  is  certain,  that 
voi,.  V. —  I  i 

242 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  563, 
after  having  given  hostages,  they  suddenly  shut  their  gates, 
and  could  not  be  prevailed  upon  to  relinquish  their  design, 
even  by  the  prayers  of  their  friends,  whom  the  consul  sent 
to  the  walls,  to  try  how  far  they  might  be  influenced  by  com¬ 
passion  for  their  parents  and  countrymen.  As  their  answers 
showed  nothing  of  a  pacific  disposition,  siege  was  laid  to  the 
city.  The  consul  had  a  sufficient  store  of  engines  and  ma¬ 
chines,  which  had  been  brought  over  from  Ambracia;  and 
the  works  necessary  to  be  formed  were  executed  by  the  sol¬ 
diers  with  great  diligence.  'I'he  rams  were  therefore  brought 
forward  in  two  places,  and  began  to  batter  the  walls. 
XXIX,  The  townsmen  omitted  nothing  that  could  serve 
to  obstruct  the  v  orks,  or  the  motions  of  the  besiegers-  But 
the  two  methods  of  defence,  which  they  found  most  effectu¬ 
al,  were,  first  the  raising  always,  instead  of  a  part  of  the  wall 
that  was  demolished,  a  new  wall  of  equal  strength  on  the 
insidej  and  the  other,  making  sudden  sallies,  at  one  time, 
against  the  enemy's  works,  at  another,  against  his  advanced 
guards;  and  in  those  attacks,  they  generally  got  the  better. 
The  only  means  of  confining  them,  that  could  be  contrived, 
seems  of  no  great  consequence;  it  was,  however,  this, — the 
bringing  one  hundred  slingers  from  Algium,  Pacrae,  and 
Dymse.  These  men,  according  to  the  customary  practice 
of  that  nation,  were  exercised  from  their  childhood,  in 
throwing  with  a  sling,  into  the  open  sea,  the  round  pebbles 
which,  mixed  with  sand,  generally  cover  the  shores;  and 
by  this  means  they  acquired  such  a  degree  of  dexterity,  as 
to  cast  weapons  of  that  sort  to  a  greater  distance,  with  surer 
aim,  and  more  powerful  eft'ect,  than  even  the  Balearian  sling- 
ers.  Besides,  their  sling  does  not  consist  mereh  of  a  sin¬ 
gle  strap,  like  the  Balearic,  and  that  of  other  nations,  but  the 
receptacle  of  the  bullet  is  three-fold,  and  made  firm  by  sev¬ 
eral  seams,  that  it  may  not,  by  the  yielding  of  the  strap  in 
the  act  of  throwing,  be  let  fly  at  random,  but  that,  lying 
here  steady,  while  whirled  about,  it  may  be  discharged  as 

B.  C.  189.] 

BOOK  XXXVIII. 

243 

if  sent  from  the  string  of  a  bow.  Being  accustomed  to  drive 
their  bullets  through  circular  marks  of  small  circumference, 
placed  at  a  great  distance,  they  not  only  hit  the  enemy's 
heads,  but  any  part  of  their  face  that  they  aimed  at.  These 
slings  checked  the  Samseans  from  sallying  either  so  frequent¬ 
ly,  or  so  boldly;  insomuch  that  they  would,  sometimes,  from 
the  walls,  beseech  the  Achaeans  to  retire  for  a  while,  and  be 
quiet  spectators  of  their  fight  with  the  Roman  guards.  Samse 
supported  a  siege  of  four  months.  At  last,  as  some  of  their 
small  number  were  daily  killed  or  wounded,  and  the  survi¬ 
vors  were,  through  continual  fatigues,  greatly  reduced  both 
in  strength  and  spiiits,  the  Romans,  one  night,  scaling  the 
wall  of  the  citadel,  which  they  call  Cyatides,  made  their  way 
into  the  Forum,  The  Samseans,  on  discovering  that  a  part 
of  the  city  was  taken,  fled,  with  their  wives  and  children  in¬ 
to  the  greater  citadel;  but  submitting  next  day,  they  wert 
all  sold  as  slaves,  and  their  city  was  plundered. 
XXX.  As  soon  as  he  had  settled  the  affairs  of  Cephalle- 
nia,  the  consul,  leaving  a  garrison  in  Samtc,  sailed  over  to 
Peloponnesus,  where  his  presence  had  been  often  solicited 
for  a  long  time  ]>ast,  chiefly  by  the  iKgians  and  Lacedaemo¬ 
nians.  From  the  first  institution  of  the  Achaean  council,  the 
assemblies  of  the  nation  had  been  held  at  iLgium,  whether 
out  of  respect  to  the  dignity  of  the  city,  or  on  account  of  the 
commodiousness  of  its  situation.  This  usage  Phiiopoemen 
first  attempted  to  subvert  in  that  vear,  and  determined  to 
introduce  an  ordinance,  that  these  should  be  held  in  every 
one  of  the  cities,  which  were  members  of  the  Achaean  union, 
in  rotation;  and  a  little  before  the  arrival  of  the  consul,  when 
the  Demiurguses,  who  are  the  chief  magistrates  in  the  states, 
summoned  the  representatives  to  Algium,  Philopcpmen,  then 
praetor,  by  proclamation,  appointed  their  meetuig  at  Argos, 
As  it  was  apparent  that,  in  general,  all  woo’d  repair  to  the 
latter  place,  the  consul  likewise,  though  he  favoured  the  cause 
of  the  Aigians,  went  thither,  but  after  the  matter  had  been 

244 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  563. 

debated,  seeing  that  the  opposite  party  was  likely  to  succeed, 
he  declined  being  farther  concerned.  The  Lacedaemonians, 
then,  drew  his  attention  to  their  disputes.  Their  state  was 
kept  in  constant  uneasiness,  principally  by  the  exiles,  of  whom 
great  numbers  resided  in  the  maritime  forts,  on  the  coast  of 
Laconia,  all  which  had  been  taken  from  the  Lacedaemonians, 
At  this  the  latter  were  deeply  chagrined,  as  they  wished  to 
enjoy  free  access  to  the  sea,  if  they  should  have  occasion  to 
send  ambassadors  to  Rome,  or  any  other  place:  and,  at  the 
same  time,  to  possess  some  mart  and  repository  for  foreign 
merchandise,  for  their  necessary  demands.  They,  therefore, 
attacked  in  the  night,  a  maritime  village,  called  Las,  and 
seized  it  by  surprise.  The  inhabitants,  and  the  exiles  residing 
in  the  place,  were  terrified,  at  first,  by  the  sudden  assault; 
but,  afterwards,  collecting  in  a  body,  before  day,  after  a  slight 
contest,  they  drove  back  the  Lacedatmoniaus.  A  general 
alarm,  nevertheless,  spread  over  the  whole  coast,  and  all  the 
forts  and  villages,  with  the  exiles  resident  there,  united  in 
sending  a  common  embassy  to  the  Acha:ans. 
XXXI.  The  praetor,  Philopcemen, — (who,  from  the  begin¬ 
ning,  had  ever  been  a  friend  to  the  cause  of  the  exiles,  and 
had  always  advised  the  Achaeans  to  reduce  the  power  and 
influence  of  the  Lacedaemonians,) — on  the  request  of  the 
ambassadors,  gave  them  an  audience  of  the  council.  There, 
on  a  motion  made  by  him,  a  decree  was  passed,  that,  where ^ 
as  Titus  Quintius  and  the  Romans  had  committed  their  forts 
and  villages,  on  the  coast  of  Laconia,  to  the  protection  and 
guardianship  of  the  Achseans;  and  whereas,  according  to 
treaty,  the  Lacedsremonians  ought  to  leave  them  unmolested; 
notwithstanding  which,  the  village  of  Las  had  been  attacked 
by  them,  and  bloodshed  committed  therein;  therefore,  uii* 
less  the  authors  and  abettors  of  this  outrage  were  delivered 
up  to  the  Achfetans,  they  would  consider  it  as  a  violation  ol 
the  treaty.”  To  demand  those  persons,  ambassadors  were 
instantly  despatched  to  Lacedeemon.  This  authoritative  in- 

B.  C.  189.] 

BOOK  XXXVIII. 

245 

junction  appeared  to  the  Lacedaemonians  so  haughty  and  in¬ 
solent,  that,  if  their  state  had  been  in  its  ancient  condition, 
they  would  undoubtedly  have  flown  to  arms.  What  dis¬ 
tracted  them  most  of  all  was,  the  fear,  lest,  if  by  obeying 
the  first  mandates  they  once  received  the  yoke,  Philopce- 
men,  pursuant  to  a  scheme  which  he  had  long  had  in  con¬ 
templation,  should  put  the  exiles  in  possession  of  Lacedse- 
mon.  Enraged,  therefore,  to  madness,  they  put  to  death 
thirty  men  of  the  faction  which  had  held  some  correspon¬ 
dence  with  Philopcemen  and  the  exiles,  passed  a  decree, 
renouncing  all  alliance  with  the  Achseans,  ordering  ambas¬ 
sadors  to  be  sent  immediately  to  Cephallenia  to  surrender 
Lacedaemon  to  the  consul,  Marcus  Fulrius,  beseeching  him 
to  come  into  Peloponnesus  and  to  receive  Lacedaemon  under 
the  protection  and  dominion  of  the  Roman  people. 
XXXI I.  When  the  Achaean  ambassadors  returned  with  an 
account  of  these  proceedings,  war  was  declared  against  the 
Lacedaemonians,  by  an  unanimous  vote  of  all  the  states  of 
the  confederacy;  and  nothing,  but  the  winter,  prevented  its 
being  commenced  immediately.  However,  they  detached 
several  small  parties,  not  only  by  land,  but  by  sea,  which, 
making  incursions  more  like  freebooters  than  regular  troops, 
laid  waste  the  Lacedaemonian  frontiers.  This  commotion 
brought  the  consul  into  Peloponnesus,  and,  by  his  order,  a 
council  was  summoned  at  Elis;  the  Lacedamionians  being 
called  on  to  attend,  and  to  plead  their  own  cause.  The  de¬ 
bates  there  were  violent,  and  proceeded  even  to  altercation. 
But  the  consul,  who,  in  other  respects  acted  in  a  very  con¬ 
ciliatory  manner,  and  who  gave  no  explicit  opinion,  put  an 
end  to  the  dispute  by  one  decisive  order,  that  they  should 
desist  from  hostilities,  until  they  sent  ambassadors  to  Rome, 
to  the  senate.  Both  parties  sent  ambassadors  accordingly. 
The  Lacedaemonian  exiles,  also,  authoiised  the  Achaeans  to 
act  in  their  cause,  and  negociate  on  their  behalf.  Diophanes 
and  Lycortas,  both  of  them  IMegalopoIitans,  were  at  the 

246 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R,  563. 

head  of  the  Achaean  embassy;  and,  as  they  were  of  different 
sentiments  with  regard  to  public  affairs  at  home,  so  their 
discourses  on  the  occasion  were  of  quite  different  tendencies. 
Diophanes  proposed  to  leave  the  determination  of  every 
point  entirely  to  the  senate,  who,’'  he  said,  “  would  best 
decide  the  controversies  between  the  Achseans  and  Lacedae¬ 
monians;’’  while  Lycortas,  according  to  the  instructions  of 
Philopcemen,  required,  that  the  senate  should  permit  the 
Achseans  to  execute  their  own  decrees,  made  conformable 
to  treaty,  and  their  own  laws;  and  to  possess,  uninfringed, 
the  liberty  which  themselves  had  bestowed.  The  Acheean 
nation  was,  at  that  time,  in  high  esteem  with  the  Homans; 
yet  it  was  resolved,  that  no  alteration  should  be  made  re¬ 
specting  the  Lacedaemonians;  but  the  answer  given  was  so 
obscure,  that,  while  the  Achseans  understood  that  they  were 
left  at  liberty  to  act  as  they  pleased  toward  Lacedaemon,  the 
Lacedaemonians  construed  it,  as  not  conveying  .any  such 
licence. 
XXXIIL  The  use  which  the  Ach^ans  made  of  this  pow¬ 
er  was  immoderate  and  tyrannical.  They  continued  Philo¬ 
pcemen  in  office,  who,  in  the  beginning  of  spring,  collecting 
an  army^  encamped  in  the  territory  of  the  Lacedaemonians, 
and  thence  sent  ambassadors  to  insist  on  their  delivering  up 
the  authors  of  the  insurrection;  promising,  that  if  they  com¬ 
plied,  their  state  should  remain  in  peace,  and  that  those 
persons  should  not  suffer  any  punishitient,  without  a  previous 
trial.  The  rest  were  held  silent  by  their  fears;  but  the  per¬ 
sons  demanded  by  name,  declared,  that  they  would  volun¬ 
tarily  go,  provided  they  received  assurance  from  the  ambassa¬ 
dors,  that  they  should  be  safe  from  violence  until  their  cause 
were  heard.  Several  other  men,  of  illustrious  characters, 
went  along  with  them;  both  from  a  wish  to  aid  those  private 
individuals,  and  because  they  thought  their  cause  concerned 
the  public  interest.  The  Achaeans  had  never  before  brought 
the  Laceda:monian  exiles  into  the  country,  because  they 

B.  C.  189.J 

BOOK  XXXVIII. 

247 

knew  that  nothing  would  so  much  disgust  the  people:  but 
now,  the  vanguard  of  almost  their  whole  army  was  composed 
of  them.  When  the  Lacedeemoniatis  came  to  the  gate  of  the 
camp,  these  met  them  in  a  body,  and,  first,  began  to  provoke 
them  with  ill  language;  a  wrangle  then  ensuring,  and  their 
passions  being  inflamed,  the  most  furious  of  the  exiles  made 
an  attack  on  the  Lacedsemonians.  While  these  appealed  to 
the  gods,  and  the  faith  of  the  ambassadors;  and  while  the 
ambassadors  and  the  prsetor,  driving  back  the  crowd,  pro¬ 
tected  the  Lacedaemonians,  and  kept  off  some  who  were 
already  binding  them  in  chains,^ — the  multitude,  roused  by 
the  tumult,  gathered  about  them  in  prodigious  numbers.  The 
Achaeans,  at  flrst,  ran  thither  to  see  what  was  doing;  but 
then,  the  exiles,  with  loud  clamours,  complained  of  the  suf¬ 
ferings  that  they  had  undergone,  implored  assistance,  and  at 
the  same  time  insisted,  that  such  another  opportunity,  if 
they  neglected  this,  could  never  he  hoped  for;  that  these 
men  had  been  the  means  of  rendering  useless  the  treaties, 
solemnlv  ratified  in  the  capitol,  at  Olympia;  and  in  the  citadel 
of  Athens;  and  that  before  their  hands  should  be  tied  up  bv 
a  new  treaty,  they  ought  to  punish  the  guilty.’’  By  these 
expressions,  all  were  inflanfed,  so  that  on  one  man  calling 
out,  to  fall  on,  the  whole  crowd  attacked  them  with  stones; 
and  seventeen  persons,  who,  during  the  disturbance,  had  been 
put  in  chains,  were  killed.  I  he  next  day,  sixty* three,  whom 
the  praetor  had  protected  from  violence,  not  because  he 
wished  them  safe,  hut  because  he  was  unwilling  that  they 
should  perish,  before  they  w^ere  tried,  were  taken  into 
custody,  brought  before  an  enraged  multitude,  and  after 
addressing  a  few  words  to  such  prejudiced  ears,  the} 
were  all  condemned  and  executed. 
XXXIV.  After  this  terrible  example  had  been  made,  tc 
humble  the  Laced'cemonians,  orders  were  sent  to  them,  first 
that  they  should  demolish  their  w  alls:  then,  that  all  the  for¬ 
eign  auxiliaries,  who  had  served  for  pay  under  the  tyrants. 

248 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  563. 

should  quit  the  Laconian  territories;  then,  that  the  slaves, 
whom  the  tyrants  had  set  free,  who  amounted  to  a  great 
multitude,  should  depart,  before  a  certain  day,  after  which, 
should  any  remain  in  the  country,  the  Achseans  were  authori' 
sed  to  seize,  sell,  and  carry  them  away.  That  they  should 
abrogate  the  laws  and  institutions  of  Lycurgus,  and  adopt 
those  of  the  Achseans,  by  \vhich,  all  would  become  one  body, 
and  concord  would  be  established  among  them.  They  obey¬ 
ed  none  of  these  injunctions  more  willingly,  than  that  of 
demolishing  the  walls;  nor  suffered  any  with  more  reluc¬ 
tance,  than  the  giving  up  of  the  exiles.  A  decree  for  their 
restoration  was  made  at  Tegea,  in  a  general  council  of  the 
Achaeans;  where,  an  account  being  brought,  that  the  foreign 
auxiliaries  had  been  sent  away,  and  that  the  newly-registered 
Lacedaemonians,  (so  they  called  the  slaves  enfranchised  by 
the  tyrants)  had  left  the  city  and  dispersed  through  the 
country,  it  was  resolved,  that,  before  the  army  was  disband¬ 
ed,  the  prator  should  go  wdth  some  light  troops,  and,  seizing 
that  description  of  people,  sell  them  as  spoil.  Great  num¬ 
bers  were  accordingly  seized,  and  sold;  and  with  the  money, 
arising  from  the  sale,  a  portico  at  Megalopolis,  which  the 
Lacedaemonians  had  demolished,  w’as  rebuilt,  with  the  ap¬ 
probation  of  the  Achseans.  The  lands  of  Belbinis,  of  which 
the  Lacedaemonian  tyrants  had  unjustly  kept  possession, 
were  also  restored  to  that  state,  according  to  an  old  decree 
of  the  Achaeans,  made  in  the  reign  of  Philip,  son  of  Amyn- 
tas.  The  state  of  Lacedaemon  having,  by  these  means,  lost 
the  sinews  of  its  strength,  remained  long  in  subjection  to  the 
Achaeans;  but  nothing  hurt  it  so  materially  as  the  abolition 
of  the  discipline  of  Lycurgus,  in  the  practice  of  which  they 
had  continued  during  seven  hundred  years. 
XXXV.  After  the  sitting  of  the  council,  wherein  the  de¬ 
bate  between  the  Achaeans  and  Laced xmonians  was  held  in 
presence  of  the  consul,  as  the  year  was  near  expiring,  Mar¬ 
cus;  Fulvius  went  home  to  Rome  to  hold  the  elections.  The 

13.  C.  189,] 

BOOK  XXXVIIL 

249 

consuls  elected  were,  Marcus  Valerius  Messala,  and  Caius 
Livius  Salinator,  having,  this  year,  procured  the  rejection  of 
his  enemy,  Marcus  ,^milius  Lepidus.  Then  were  elected 
preetors,  Quintus  Marcius  Philippus,  Marcus  Claudius  Mar- 
celius,  Caius  Stertinius,  Caius  Atinius,  Pubhus  Claudius 
Pulcher,  and  Lucius  Manlius  Acidinus.  When  the  elections 
were  finished,  it  was  resolved  that  the  consul,  Marcus  Fuh 
vius,  should  return  into  his  province  to  the  army,  and  that 
he,  and  his  colleague,  Cneius  Manlius,  should  be  continued 
in  command  for  a  year.  In  this  year,  in  pursuance  of  di¬ 
rections  from  the  decemvirs,  a  statue  of  Hercules  was  set 
up  in  his  temple,  and  a  gilded  chariot  with  six  horses,  in  the 
capilol,  by  Publius  Cornelius,  The  inscription  mentioned, 
that  Publius  Cornelius,  consul,*  made  the  offering,  I  he  cu- 
rule  sediles,  also,  Publius  Claudius  and  Servius  Sulpicius 
Galba,  dedicated  twelve  gilded  shields,  out  of  money  raised 
by  fines  on  corn  merchants,  for  raising  the  market  by  hoard¬ 
ing  the  grain.  And  Quintus  Fulvius  Flaccus,  plebeian  eedile, 
having  prosecuted  to  conviction  one  malefactor,  (for  the 
sediles  prosecuted  separately)  dedicated  two  gilded  statues. 
His  colleague,  Aulus  Caecilius,  did  not  convict  any  one. 
The  Homan  games  were  exhibited  entire,  thrice;  the  plebeian, 
five  times.  Marcus  Valerius  Messala,  and  Caius  Livius  Sa- 
linator,  entering  into  office  on  the  ides  of  March,  proposed 
to  the  senate’s  consideration  the  state  of  the  commonwealth, 
the  provinces,  and  the  armies.  With  respect  to  Altolia  and 
Asia  no  alteration  was  made.  The  provinces  assigned  to  the 
consuls,  were,  to  one,  Pisas,  where  he  was  to  act  against  the 
Ligurians;  to  the  other,  Gaul.  They  were  ordered  to  cast 
lots,  for  these,  or  to  settle  the  matter  between  themselves,  to 
levy  new  armies  two  legions  for  each;  and  to  raise,  of  the 
Latine  allies,  fifteen  thousand  foot,  and  twelve  hundred  horse. 
*  Thih  does  not  prove  that  he  was  in  the  office  of  consul,  at  the  time  oi 
his  making  it;  for  it  was  usual  to  mentioa  m  such  inscriptions  the  highest 
office  that  the  person  had  ever  held. 
VOL.  V. — K  k 

250 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  563. 

Liguria  fell,  by  lot,  to  Messala;  Gaul,  to  Salinator.  The 
praetors  then  cast  lots,  and  the  city  jurisdiction  fell  to  Marcus 
Claudius;  the  foreign  to  Publius  Claudius;  Sicily  to  Q.uin> 
tus  Marcius;  Sardinia,  to  Caius  Stertinius;  hither  Spain,  to 
Lucius  Manlius;  farther  Spain,  to  Caius  Antinius. 
XXXVI-  The  dispositions  made,  respecting  the  armies, 
were  these.  It  was  ordered,  that  the  legions,  which  had 
served  under  Caius  Laelius,  should  be  removed  out  of  Gaul 
into  Bruttium,  and  put  under  the  command  of  Marcus  Tuc- 
cius,  propraetor;  that  the  army,  which  was  in  Sicily,  should 
be  disbanded,  and  the  fleet,  which  was  there,  brought  home 
to  Rome,  by  Marcus  Sempronius,  propraetor.  For  the  Spains, 
were  decreed  the  legions  then  in  those  provinces,  one  for 
each;  with  orders,  that  each  of  the  two  praetors  should  levy, 
from  among  the  allies,  to  recruit  their  numbers,  three  thou¬ 
sand  foot  and  two  hundred  horse,  which  they  were  to  carry 
with  them.  Before  the  new  magistrates  set  out  for  their  pro¬ 
vinces,  a  supplication,  of  three  days’  continuance,  was  or¬ 
dered  by  the  college  of  decemvirs,  to  be  performed  in  every 
street,  on  account  of  a  darkness  having  overspread  the  sky, 
between  the  third  and  fourth  hours  of  the  day;  and  the  nine 
days’  solemnity  was  proclaimed,  on  account  of  a  shower  of 
stones  having  fallen  on  the  Aventine.  As  the  censors  obliged 
the  Campanians,  pursuant  to  the  decree  of  the  senate,  made 
last  year,  to  pass  the  general  survey  at  Rome,  (for,  before 
that,  it  had  not  been  fixed  where  they  should  be  surveyed,) 
they  petitioned,  that  they  might  be  allowed  to  take  in  mar¬ 
riage,  women  who  were  citizens  of  Rome,  and  that  any  who 
had,  heretofore,  married  such,  might  retain  them;  and,  like¬ 
wise,  that  children  born  of  such  marriages,  before  that  day, 
might  be  deemed  legitimate,  and  entitled  to  inherit;  both 
which  requests  were  complied  with.  Caius  Valerius  Tap- 
pus,  a  plebeian  tribune,  proposed  an  order  of  the  people  con¬ 
cerning  the  towns  of  Formiae,  Fundi,  and  Arpinum,  that 
they  should  be  invested  with  the  right  of  voting,  for,  hith- 

B.  C.  189.] 

BOOK  XXXVIII. 

251 

crto,  they  had  been  members  of  the  state  without  that  right. 
Against  this  proposal  four  plebeian  tribunes  entered  a  pro¬ 
test,  because  it  was  not  made  under  the  direction  of  the  se¬ 
nate;  but,  being  informed,  that  the  power  of  imparting  that 
privilege  to  any  persons  belonged  to  the  people,  and  not  to 
the  senate,  they  desisted  from  their  opposition.  An  order 
was  passed,  that  the  Formians  and  Fundans  should  vote  in 
the  A'lmilian  tribe,  and  the  Arpinians  in  the  Cornelian;  and 
in  these  tribes  they  were  then,  for  the  first  time,  rated  in  the 
census,  in  pursuance  of  the  order  of  the  people  proposed  by 
Valerius.  Marcus  Claudius  Marcellas,  censor,  having  got 
the  better  of  Titus  Quintius,  in  the  lots,  closed  the  lustrum. 
The  number  of  citizens  rated,  was  two  hundred  fifty-eight 
thousand,  three  hundred  and  eight.  When  the  survey  was 
finished,  the  consuls  set  out  for  their  provinces. 
XXX VIL  During  the  winter  wherein  this  passed  at 
Rome,  Cneius  Manlius,  at  first,  while  consul,  and  after¬ 
wards,  when  proconsul,  was  attended,  in  his  winter  quarters 
in  Asia,  by  embassies  from  all  the  nations  and  states  on  this 
side  of  mount  Taurus;  and  although  the  conquest  of  Antio- 
chus  was  more  splendid  and  glorious  to  the  Romans,  than 
that  of  the  Gauls,  yet  the  latter  gave  greater  joy  to  the  allies 
than  the  former.  Subjection  to  the  king  had  been  more  tole¬ 
rable  to  them,  than  the  neighbourhood  of  these  fierce  and 
savage  barbarians;  of  whom  they  were  in  daily  apprehen¬ 
sion,  added  to  the  uncertainty,  where  the  storm  of  their  de¬ 
predations  might  fall.  Having,  therefore,  obtained  liberty, 
by  the  expulsion  of  Antiochus,  and  permanent  peace  by  the 
conquest  of  the  Gauls,  they  brought,  not  only,  congratula¬ 
tions,  but  also  golden  crowns,  in  proportion  to  the  ability  of 
each.  Ambassadors,  also,  came  from  Antiochus,  and  from 
the  Gauls  themselves,  to  receive  the  conditions  of  peace;  and 
from  Ariarathes,  king  of  Cappadocia,  to  solicit  pardon,  and 
make  atonement,  by  money,  for  his  crime,  in  assisting  An- 

252 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  56S. 

tiochus  with  troops.  He  was  fined  two  hundred  talents.* 
The  Gauls  were  answered,  that  when  king  Eumenes  arrived, 
he  would  settle  the  conditions.  The  embassies  of  the  several 
states  were  dismissed  with  kind  answers,  and  with  their 
minds  much  more  at  ease  than  when  they  arrived.  The  am¬ 
bassadors  of  Antiochus  were  ordered  to  bring  the  money 
and  the  corn,  due  by  the  treaty  concluded  with  Lucius  Sci- 
pio,  into  Pamphilia,  whither  the  consul  intended  to  go  with 
his  forces.  In  the  beginning  of  the  next  spring,  after  per¬ 
forming  the  ceremony  of  purifying  the  army,  he  began  his 
march,  and  on  the  eighth  day,  arrived  at  Apamea,  There 
he  rested  three  days;  and,  on  the  third  day,  after  his  depar¬ 
ture  from  that  place,  arrived  in  Pamphilia,  whither  he  had 
ordered  the  king’s  ambassadors  to  repair  with  stipulated 
supplies.  Here  he  received  two  thousand  five  hundred  ta- 
ientsf  of  silver,  which  he  sent  to  Apamea,  the  corn  he  dis¬ 
tributed  to  the  army.  Thence  he  marched  to  Perga,  the  on¬ 
ly  place  in  the  country  still  held  by  a  garrison  of  the  king’s 
troops.  On  his  approach,  the  governor  of  the  town  went 
out  to  meet  him,  and  requested  thirty  days  time,  that  he 
might  consult  Antiochus  about  the  surrender  of  the  city. 
The  time  was  granted,  and  on  the  expiration  of  it,  the  city 
was  surrendered.  From  Perga,  he  detached  his  brother,  Lu¬ 
cius  Manlius,  with  four  thousand  men,  to  exact  from  the 
Oroandians  the  remainder  of  the  money  which  they  had 
promised;  and,  ordering  the  ambassadors  of  Antiochus  to 
follow,  he  led  back  his  army  to  Apamea,  having  heard  that 
king  Eumenes,  and  the  ten  ambassadors  from  Rome,  were  ar¬ 
rived  at  Ephesus. 
XXXVIII.  Here,  with  the  concurrence,  of  the  ten  ambas¬ 
sadors,  a  tieaty  was  concluded  with  Antiochus,  and  written 
in  nearly  the  following  words:  There  shall  be  friendship  be- 
*ween  king  Antiochus  and  the  Roman  people,  on  these  terms 

3e.7r>o? 

1 4:i4. 

B.  C.  189.] 

BOOK  XXXVIIL 

25.; 

and  conditions;  He  shall  not  suffer  any  army,  intended  to  act 
against  the  Roman  people,  or  their  allies,  to  pass  through 
his  own  kingdom,  or  the  territory  of  any  state  under  his  do¬ 
minion,  nor  supply  it  with  provisions,  nor  give  any  other 
assistance.  The  Romans  and  their  allies,  are  to  observe  the 
same  conduct  toward  Antiochus,  and  those  under  his  go¬ 
vernment.  It  shall  not  be  lawful  for  Antiochus  to  wage  war 
with  the  inhabitants  of  the  islands,  or  to  pass  over  into  Europe. 
He  shall  evacuate  the  cities,  lands,  villages  and  forts,  on  this 
side  of  mount  Taurus,  as  far  as  the  river  Halvs;  and  from 
the  foot  of  Taurus  to  the  summit,  where  are  the  confines  of 
Lycaonia,  He  shall  not  remove  any  arms  out  of  any  of  the 
evacuated  towns,  lands  or  forts;  and  if  any  have  been  re¬ 
moved,  he  shall  replace  them,  as  before.  He  shall  not  receive 
any  soldier,  or  other  person,  from  king  Eumenes.  If  any 
natives  of  those  cities,  which  are  hereby  separated  from  his 
kingdom,  are  now  with  Antiochus,  or  within  the  bounds  ot 
his  realms,  they  shall  all  return  to  Apamea,  before  a  certain 
day,  hereafter  to  be  appointed.  Such  of  the  natives  of  An¬ 
tioch  us’s  kingdom,  as  are  now  with  the  Romans  and  theii 
allies,  shall  have  liberty  to  depart,  or  to  stay.  All  their  slaves, 
whether  fugitives  or  taken  in  war,  likewise  all  free -bom  per¬ 
sons,  whether  prisoners  or  deserters,  he  shall  redeliver  to 
the  Homans  and  their  allies.  He  shall  give  up  all  his  ele¬ 
phants,  and  not  procure  others.  He  shall  also  surrender  his 
ships  of  war,  and  their  stores;  and  shall  not  keep  more  than 
ten  light  trading  vessels,  none  of  which  are  to  be  worked 
with  more  than  thirty  oars,  nor  a  galley  of  one  tier  of  oars, 
for  the  purpose  of  an  offensive  war;  nor  shall  any  ship  of  his 
come  on  this  side  of  the  promontories,  Calycadnus  and  Sar- 
pedon,  except  it  shall  be  a  ship  carrying  money,  tribute,  am¬ 
bassadors,  or  hostages.  King  Antiochus  shall  not  hire  sol¬ 
diers  out  of  those  nations  which  are  under  the  dominion  of 
the  Roman  people,  nor  even  receive  volunteers.  All  housei> 
and  buildings,  within  the  limits  of  Antioch  us' s  kingdom,  and 

254 

PilSrORY  OF  ROME- 

[Y.  R.  563. 

which  were  belonging  to  the  Rhodians  and  their  allies,  the 
Rhodians  and  their  allies  shall  hold,  on  the  same  footing  as 
they  did  before  the  war.  If  any  sums  of  money  are  due  to 
them,  they  shall  have  a  right  to  enforce  payment;  likewise, 
if  any  of  their  property  has  been  taken  away,  they  shall  have 
a  right  to  search  for,  discover,  and  reclaim  it.  If  any  of  the 
cities,  which  ought  to  be  surrendered,  are  held  by  people  to 
whom  Antiochus  gave  them,  he  shall  remove  the  garrisons, 
and  take  care  that  the  surrender  be  properly  executed.  He 
shall  pay,  within  twelve  years,  by  equal  annual  payments, 
twelve  thousand  talents  of  silver,*  of  the  proper  Attic  stand¬ 
ard,  the  talent  to  weigh  not  less  than  eighty  Roman  pounds; 
and  five  hundred  and  forty  thousand  pecks  of  wheat.  He 
shall  pay  to  king  Eumenes,  within  five  years  three  hundred 
and  fifty  talents;f  and,  for  the  corn  due,  according  to  his  own 
valuation,  one  hundred  and  twenty-seven  talents  f  He  shall 
deliver  to  the  Romans  twenty  hostages,  and  change  them 
every  third  year;  none  of  which  are  to  be  younger  than 
eighteen,  or  older  than  forty-five  years.  If  any  of  the  allies 
of  the  Roman  people  shall  make  war  on  Antiochus,  he  shall 
be  at  liberty  to  repel  force  by  force,  provided  he  does  not 
keep  possession  of  any  city,  either  by  right  of  arms,  or  by 
admitting  it  into  a  treaty  of  amity.  Whatever  controversies 
may  arise  bettveen  him  and  them,  shall  be  decided  by  arbi¬ 
tration,  according  to  the  rules  of  equity;  or,  if  it  shall  be  the 
choice  of  both  parties,  by  arms.”  A  clause  was  added  to 
this  treaty,  about  delivering  up  Hannibal,  the  Carthaginian; 
Thoas,  the  ^Etolian;  Mnasimachus,  the  A  can  an  Ian;  and  the 
Chalcidians,  Eubolls  and  Philo;  and  another,  that  if  the  par¬ 
ties  should,  afterwards,  agree  to  add,  to  expunge,  or  alter 
am’  of  the  above  articles,  it  might  be  done  without  impeach¬ 
ment  to  the  validity  of  the  treaty. 
XXXIX.  The  consul  swore  to  the  observance  of  this  trea¬ 
ty,  and  sent  Quintus  Minucius  Thermus,  and  Lucius  Man- 
‘2.^35.000^  i  67.^12/.  t  24,609/.  i)s^ 

B.  C.  189,] 

BOOK  XXXVIII. 

255 

iius,  who  happened  to  return  just  at  that  time  from  Oroanda, 
to  require  the  oath  of  the  king.  At  the  same  time  he  wrote 
to  Quintus  Fabius  Labeo,  commander  of  the  fleet,  to  sail, 
without  delay,  to  Patara,  to  bum  and  destroy  the  king’s  ships 
that  lay  there.  Sailing,  accordingly,  from  Ephesus,  he  burn¬ 
ed,  or  otherwise  destroyed,  fifty  decked  ships;  and,  in  the 
same  voyage,  took  Telmessus,  the  inhabitants  being  terrified 
by  his  sudden  appearance.  Then,  having  ordered  those  whom 
he  left  at  Ephesus  to  follow^  him,  he  passed  on  from  Lycia, 
through  the  islands,  to  Greece,  At  Athens  he  waited  a  few 
days,  until  the  ships  from  Ephesus  came  to  Pirseus,  and  then 
he  brought  home  the  whole  fleet  to  Italy.  Cneius  Manlius 
having,  among  other  matters  to  be  given  up  by  Antiochus, 
received  his  elephants,  gave  them  all  as  a  present  to  Eu- 
menes.  He  then  admitted  to  a  hearing  the  representations  of 
the  several  states,  many  of  which  were  in  an  unsettled  con 
dition,  in  consequence  of  the  changes  that  had  taken  place. 
King  Ariarathes,  through  the  mediation  of  Eumenes,  to 
whom  he  had  lately  betrothed  his  daughter,  obtained  a  re¬ 
mission  of  half  the  fine  imposed  upon  him,  and  was  received 
into  friendship.  After  hearing  what  the  respective  nations 
had  to  say  in  their  own  behalf,  the  ten  ambassadors  made 
different  arrangements,  with  respect  to  the  difference  of  their 
cases.  Such  as  had  been  tributary  to  king  Antiochus,  and 
had  sided  with  the  Romans,  they  rendered  independent;  and 
such  as  had  taken  part  with  Antiochus,  or  had  been  tributary 
to  king  Attalus,  all  these  they  ordered  to  pay  tribute  to  Eu* 
menes.  To  the  Colophonians,  living  in  Notium,  the  Cym^e- 
ans,  and  Milasenians,  whom  they  specified  bv  name,  they 
granted  independence;  to  the  Clazomenians  the  same,  besides 
bestowing  on  them  the  island  of  Diymiusa.  To  the  Milesians, 
they  restored  what  was  called  the  sacred  lands.  They  added 
to  the  territory  of  the  Trojans,  Rhoeteum  and  Gergithus, 
not  so  much  in  consideration  of  any  recent  merits  of  theirs, 
as  out  of  respect  to  their  own  origin.  The  same  motive  pro- 

256 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  563* 
cured  liberty  to  Dardanus.  To  the  Chians,  also,  the  Smyr- 
naeans  and  Erythrseans,  they  granted  lands,  in  consideration 
of  the  singular  fidelity  which  they  had  shown  during  the 
war,  treating  them,  in  every  instance,  with  particular  dis¬ 
tinction.  To  the  Phocaeans  they  restored  the  territory  which 
they  had  enjoyed  before  the  war,  and  the  privilege  of  being 
governed  by  their  own  ancient  laws.  They  confirmed  to  the 
Rhodians,  the  grants  mentioned  in  the  former  decree.  Lycia 
and  Caria  were  assigned  to  them,  as  far  as  the  river  Msean- 
der,  excepting  Telmissus.  To  king  Eumenes  they  gave,  in 
Europe,  the  Chersonese  and  Lysimachia,  with  the  forts, 
towns,  and  lands  thereof,  bounded  as  when  held  by  Antio- 
chus;  and,  in  Asia,  both  the  Phrygias,  the  one  on  the  Hel¬ 
lespont,  and  the  other  called  the  Greater,  restoring  to  him 
Mysia,  which  had  been  taken  by  king  Prusias,  and  also  Ly- 
caonia,  and  Milyas,  and  Lydia,  and,  by  express  mention,  the 
cities  of  Tralles  and  Ephesus,  and  Telmissus.  A  dispute 
arising  between  Eumenes  and  Antiochus’s  ambassadors,  con¬ 
cerning  Pamphylia,  because  part  of  it  lay  on  the  hither  side, 
and  part  beyond  Taurus,  the  matter  was  referred  wholly  to 
the  senate. 
XL.  When  these  treaties  and  grants  were  concluded, 
Manlius,  with  the  ten  ambassadors,  and  all  his  army,  march¬ 
ed  to  the  Hellespont,  whither  he  had  ordered  the  petty  prin¬ 
ces  of  the  Gauls  to  come;  and,  there  he  prescribed  the  terms 
on  which  they  should  maintain  peace  with  Eumenes,  and 
warned  them  to  put  an  end  to  the  practice  of  rambling  in 
arms,  and  to  confine  themselves  within  the  bounds  of  their 
own  territories.  Then,  having  collected  ships  from  all  parts 
of  the  coast,  and  Eumenes’s  fleet  also  being  brought  thither 
from  Else  by  Athcnaeus,  that  king’s  brother,  he  transported 
all  his  forces  into  Europe.  Proceeding  through  the  Cherso¬ 
nese,  by  short  marches,  the  army  being  heavily  encumbered 
with  booty  of  every  sort,  he  halted  at  Lysimachia,  in  order 
that  he  might  have  the  beasts  of  burthen  as  fresh  and  vigor- 

BOOK  XXXVIIL 

257 

B.  C.  188.] 
ous  as  might  be^  when  he  should  enter  Thrace,  the  march 
through  which  was  generally  considered  with  terror.  On  the 
day  of  his  leaving  Lysimachia,  he  came  to  the  river  called  Me- 
ias,'  and  thence,  next  day,  to  Cypsela,  The  road,  about  ten 
miles  from  Cypsela,  he  found  obstructed  by  woods,  narrow, 
and  broken.  On  account  of  these  difficulties  he  divided  the 
army  into  two  parts;  and,  ordering  one  to  advance  in  front, 
and  the  other  at  a  considerable  distance,  to  cover  the  rear,  he 
placed  between  them  the  baggage,  consisting  of  wagons 
with  the  public  money,  and  other  booty  of  great  value.  As 
they  marched  in  this  order  through  the  defile,  a  body  of 
Thracians,  not  more  in  number  than  ten  thousand,  composed 
of  four  states,  the  Astians,Caenians,  Maduatians,  and  Cceleans, 
posted  themselves  on  both  sides  of  the  road  at  the  narrowest 
part.  Many  were  of  opinion,  that  this  was  done  at  the  treach¬ 
erous  instigation  of  Philip,  king  of  Macedonia,  as  he  knew 
that  the  Romans  were  to  return  through  Thrace,  and  that 
they  carried  with  them  a  large  quantity  of  money.  The  ge¬ 
neral  himself  was  in  the  van,  anxious  about  the  disadvan¬ 
tages  to  which  his  men  were  exposed  from  the  nature  of  the 
place.  The  Thracians  did  not  stir  until  the  troops  passed  by; 
but,  when  they  saw  that  the  foremost  division  had  got  clear 
of  the  narrow  pass,  and  that  the  rear  division  was  not  yet 
drawing  near,  they  rushed  upon  the  baggage,  and,  having 
killed  the  guards,  some  rifled  the  wagons,  while  others  led 
off  the  horses  under  their  loads.  When  the  shout  reached 
those  on  the  rear,  who  just  then  entered  the  pass,  and,  after¬ 
wards,  those  in  the  van,  they  ran  together  from  both  extremi¬ 
ties  to  the  centre,  and  an  irregular  sort  ot  fight  commenced,  in 
many  different  places  at  once.  The  booty  was  the  great  occa¬ 
sion  of  slaughter  to  the  Thracians;  for,  besides,  being  encum¬ 
bered  with  burthens,  most  of  them  had  thrown  away  their 
arms,  that  they  might  be  at  liberty  to  seize  the  prey;  while 
on  the  other  side,  the  Romans  laboured  under  great  disad- 
‘  Black. 
VOL.  V. —  L  1 

258 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  564. 

vantages  from  the  nature  of  the  place,  as  the  barbarians,  ac¬ 
quainted  with  every  path,  made  their  attacks  with  advan¬ 
tage,  and,  sometimes  came,  unperceived  through  the  hollow 
glens.  The  loads  too,  and  the  wagons,  lyitig  incommo¬ 
diously  for  one  party  or  the  other,  as  chance  directed,  were 
great  obstructions  to  their  movements;  and,  here,  the  plun¬ 
derer,  there,  the  defender  of  the  booty,  fell.  T  he  fortune  of 
the  fight  was  variable,  according  as  the  ground  was  favour¬ 
able  to  this  party  or  that,  and  according  to  the  spirit  of  the 
combatants,  and  their  numbers;  on  both  sides,  howev¬ 
er,  great  numbers  fell.  The  night,  at  length  approaching, 
the  rhracians  retired  from  the  fight,  not  for  the  purpose  of 
avoiding  wounds  or  death,  but  because  they  had  gotten 
enough  of  booty. 
XLI,  The  first  division  of  the  Romans  encamped  beyond  the 
pass,  in  open  ground,  round  the  temple  of  Bcndis;*  the  other 
division  remained  in  the  middle  of  the  defile,  to  guard  the 
baggage,  which  they  surrounded  with  a  double  rampart.  Next 
day  having  carefully  examined  the  ground,  they  rejoined  the 
first.  In  that  battle,  although  part  of  the  baggage  was  lost, 
while  a  great  part  of  the  attendants,  and  many  of  the  soldiers 
perished,  (the  fight  having  been  carried  on  through  almost 
the  whole  extent  of  the  defile,  j  yet  the  heaviest  loss  sustain¬ 
ed  was  in  the  death  of  Quintus  Minucius  I'hermus,  a  brave 
and  gallant  officer.  The  army  arrived,  that  day,  at  the  He- 
brus,  and  thence  passed  through  the  country  of  the  iEnians, 
by  the  temple  of  Apollo,  which  the  natives  call  Zerynthium. 
At  a  place  called  Tempyra,  they  came  to  another  defile  as 
rugged  and  uneven,  as  the  former,  but,  as  there  were  no 
woods  near,  it  afforded  no  means  for  an  ambuscade.  Hither 
assembled  another  tribe  of  Thracians,  called  Thrausians, 
with  the  same  hope  of  plunder;  but,  as  the  Romans  were  ena¬ 
bled  by  the  nakedness  of  the  vallies,  to  descry  them  at  a  dis¬ 
tance,  posted  on  each  side  of  the  road,  they  were  less  alarm- 
*  Diana,  so  called  in  the  Thracian  language. 

BOOK  XXXVIII. 

259 

B.  C.  188.] 
ed  and  confused;  for,  although  they  were  obliged  to  fight  on 
disadvantageous  ground,  yet  it  was  in  a  regular  battle,  in  the 
open  field,  and  a  fair  encounter.  Advancing  in  close  order, 
with  the  war  shout,  and  falling  on  the  enemy,  they  soon 
drove  them  off  the  ground,  and  the  sequel  was  flight  and 
slaughter;  for  the  narrow  passes,  in  which  the  enemy  had 
trusted  lor  safety,  actually  impeded  their  escape.  The  Ro¬ 
mans,  after  this  success,  encamped  at  a  village  of  the  Ma- 
ronites,  called  Sare.  Next  day  marching  through  an  open 
country,  they  reached  the  plain  of  Priate,  where  they  halted 
three  days,  to  receive  supplies  of  corn,  partly  from  the  coun¬ 
try  ot  the  Maronitcs,  who  made  a  voluntary  contribution, 
and,  partly,  from  their  own  ships,  which  attended  them  with 
stores  of  every  kind.  From  this  post,  they  had  one  day’s 
march  to  Apollonia,  whence  they  proceeded  through  the 
territory  of  Abdera  to  Neupolis.  This  march  through  the 
Grecian  colonies,  the  troops  performed  in  security.  During 
the  remainder,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  Thracians,  they  were 
all  free  from  attacks,  yet  never  free  from  apprehensions, 
night  or  day,  until  they  arrived  in  Macedonia.  This  same 
army,  when  it  proceeded  by  the  same  route  under  Scipio, 
had  found  the  Thracians  more  peaceable,  for  no  other  rea¬ 
son,  than  because  it  had  not  then  such  a  quantity  of  booty  to 
tempt  them:  although  Claudius  writes,  that,  even  on  that  oc¬ 
casion, a  body  of  fifteen  thousand  Thracians  opposed  Mutines, 
the  Numidian,  who  had  advanced  to  explore  the  country.  He 
had  with  him  four  hundred  Numidian  horsemen,  and  a  few 
elephants.  Mutines'’s  son,  with  one  hundred  and  fifty  cho¬ 
sen  horsemen  broke  through  the  middle  of  the  enemy;  and, 
presently,  w’hen  Mutines,  placing  his  elephants  in  the  centre, 
and  the  horse  on  the  wings,  had  begun  to  engage  the  enemy, 
he  fell  furiously  on  their  rear,  w^hich  attack  of  the  cavalry  so 
disordered  the  Thracians,  that  they  did  not  come  near  the 
main  body  of  infantry.  Cneius  Manlius  conducted  his  army, 
through  Macedonia,  into  Thessaly;  and,  having  proceeded 
through  Epirus  to  Apollonia,  passed  the  winter  there,  for 

260  HISTORY  OF  ROME,  [Y.  R.  565. 
people  had  not  yet  learnedjso  far  to  despise  the  sea  of  that 
season,  as  to  venture  on  the  passage. 
XLll,  The  year  had  almost  expired,  when  the  consul, 
Marcus  Valerius,  came  from  Liguria  to  Rome  to  elect  new 
magistrates;  although  he  had  not  performed  in  his  province 
any  important  business,  that  could  afford  a  reasonable  ex¬ 
cuse  for  coming  later  than  usual  to  the  elections.  The  as¬ 
sembly  for  choosing  consuls  was  held  on  the  twelfth  day  be¬ 
fore  the  calends  of  March,  and  the  two  elected  were,  Marcus 
^millus  Lepidus  and  Caius  Flaminius.  The  following  day, 
were  elected  praetors,  Appius  Claudius  Fulcher,  Servius  Sul- 
picius  Galba,  Quintus  Terentius  Culleo,  Lucius  Terentius 
Massa,  Quintus  Fulvius  Flaccus,  and  Marcus  Furius  Cras' 
sipes.  When  the  elections  were  concluded,  the  consul  pro¬ 
posed  to  the  senate,  the  appointment  of  the  provinces  for  the 
prsetors:  two  were  decreed  to  the  administration  of  justice  in 
Rome;  two  out  of  Italy — ^Sicily  and  Sardinia;  and  two  in 
Italy — Tarentum  and  Gaul;  with  orders  that  the  praetors 
should  immediately  cast  lots,  and  before  their  commence¬ 
ment  in  office.  To  Servius  Sulpicius,  fell  the  city  jurisdiction; 
to  Quintus  Terentius,  the  foreign;  Lucius  Terentius  obtain¬ 
ed  Sicily;  Quintus  Fulvius,  Sardinia;  Appius  Claudius, 
Tarentum;  and  Marcus  Furius,  Gaul.  In  that  year,  Lucius 
Minucius  Myrtilus,  and  Lucius  Manlius,  being  charged  with 
having  beaten  the  Carthaginian  ambassadors,  were,  by  or- 
der  of  Marcus  Claudius,  city  praetor,  delivered  up  by  heralds 
to  the  ambassadors,  and  carried  to  Carthage.  Reports  pre¬ 
vailed  of  great  preparations  for  war  being  made  in  Liguria, 
Y  K  566  their  growing  every  day  more  formidable, 
B.  c.  187.  When  therefore,  the  new  consuls  proposed  to  the 
consideration  of  the  senate,  the  state  of  the  commonwealth, 
and  the  appointing  of  their  provinces,  the  senate  voted  that 
Liguria  should  be  the  province  of  both  the  consuls.  To 
this  vote  the  consul,  Lepidus,  objected,  asserting  that  “  it 
would  be  highly  indecorous  to  shut  up  the  consuls  among  the 
t  allies  of  Liguria,  while  Marcus  Fulvius  and  Cneius  Manli- 

H.  C.  187.] 

BOOK  XXXVIII. 

261 

us  reigned,  a  second  year,  one  in  Europe,  the  other  in  Asia, 
as  if  substituted  in  the  room  of  Philip  and  Antiochus.  If  it 
was  resolved  to  keep  armies  in  those  countries,  it  was  more 
fitting  that  they  should  be  commanded  by  consuls,  than  by 
private  persons,  who  made  their  circuits,  with  all  the  terrors 
of  war,  among  nations  against  whom  war  had  not  been  de¬ 
clared;  trafficking  peace  for  money.  If  armies  were  necessa¬ 
ry  for  the  security  of  those  provinces,  in  the  same  manner  as 
Lucius  Scipio,  consul,  had  succeeded  Marcus  Acilius,  con¬ 
sul;  and  as  Marcus  Fulvius  and  Cneius  Manlius  succeeded 
Lucius  Scipio,  so  ought  Caius  Livius  and  Marcus  Vale¬ 
rius,  consuls,  to  have  succeeded  Fulvius  and  Manlius.  But, 
unquestionably,  at  this  time,  after  the  Jutolian  war  had  been 
concluded,  Asia  taken  from  Antiochus,  and  the  Gauls  sub¬ 
dued, — either  the  consuls  ought  to  be  sent  to  the  consular  ar¬ 
mies,  or  the  legions  ought  to  be  brought  home,  and  restored 
to  the  commonwealth.”  Notwithstanding  these  arguments, 
the  senate  persisted  in  their  vote,  that  Liguria  should  be  the 
province  of  both  the  consuls;  but  they  ordered,  that  Manlius 
and  Fulvius  should  leave  their  provinces,  withdraw  the 
troops,  and  come  home  to  Rome. 
XLIII.  There  subsisted  a  quarrel  between  Marcus  Fulvi¬ 
us  and  the  consul  iEmilius;  the  latter  complaining  particu¬ 
larly,  that,  through  the  intrigues  of  Fulvius,  he  had  been 
kept  back  from  obtaining  the  consulship  two  years.  In  order, 
therefore,  to  exasperate  the  minds  of  the  public  against  him, 
he  introduced  to  the  senate  ambassadors  from  Ambracia, 
whom  he  had  previously  instructed  in  the  charge?,  they  were 
to  make  against  him.  These  complained,  that  when  they 
were  in  a  state  of  peace,  after  they  had  obeyed  the  commands 
of  former  consuls,  and  were  ready  to  show  the  same  obedi¬ 
ence  to  Marcus  Fulvius,  war  had  been  made  on  them.  That, 
first  their  lands  were  ravaged;  and  then,  their  city  terrified 
by  denunciations  of  plundering  and  slaughter,  that  their 
fears  might  compel  them  to  shut  their  gates.  They  W’ert 

262 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

[Y.  R.  565, 

then  besieged  and  assaulted,  while  all  the  severities,  ever 
practised  in  war,  were  inflicted  on  them,  in  murders,  burn¬ 
ings,  the  sacking  and  demolishing  of  their  city.  Their  wives 
and  children  were  dragged  away  into  slavery;  their  gooc^ 
taken  from  them;  and  what  shocked  them  more  than  all,  their 
temples  were  despoiled  of  their  ornaments,  the  images  of 
their  gods,  nay,  the  gods  themselves,  were  torn  from  their 
mansions,  and  carried  away;  so  that  the  Ambracians  had  no 
object  of  worship  left,  nothing  to  which  they  could  address 
their  prayers  and  supplications,  but  naked  walls  and  pillars.” 
While  they  were  making  these  complaints,  the  consul,  as  had 
been  agreed,  by  asking  questions  leading  to  farther  charges, 
drew  them  on  as  if  against  their  inclination,  to  the  mention 
of  other  matters.  Their  representations  moved  the  senators; 
but  the  other  consul,  Caius  Flaminius,  took  up  the  cause  of 
Marcus  Fulvius.  ‘‘The  Ambracians,”  he  said, “had  S€# 
out  in  an  old  course,  now  long  out  of  use.  In  this  manner 
Marcus  Marcellus  had  been  accused  by  the  Syi'acusans;  and 
Quintus  Fulvius  by  the  Campanians.  Why  might  not  the  se¬ 
nate  as  well  allow  accusations  to  be  so  brought,  against  Titus 
Quintius  by  king  Philip;  against  Manius  Acilius  and  Lucius 
Scipio,  bv  Antiochus;  against  Cneius  Manlius,  by  the  Gauls; 
and  against  Fulvius  himself  by  the  iEtolians  and  the  states 
of  Cephallenia?  Do  you  think,  Conscript  fathers,  that  the 
besieging  and  taking  Ambracia,  the  removing  thence  the 
statues  and  ornaments,  and  the  other  proceedings,  usual  on 
the  capture  of  cities  will  be  denied,  either  by  me,  on  behalf 
of  Marcus  Fulvius,  or  by  Marcus  Fulvius  himself,  who  in¬ 
tends  to  demand  a  triumph  from  you  for  those  very  services, 
and  to  carry  before  his  chariot,  those  statues,  the  removal  of 
which  is  charged  as  criminal,  together  with  the  other  spoils 
of  that  city,  at  the  same  time  inscribing  on  the  pillars  of  his 
house,  Ambracia  captured?  There  is  no  kind  of  pretence  for 
their  separating  themselves  from  the  jEtolians;  the  cause  of 
the  Ambracians,  and  of  the  iEtolians  is  the  same.  Let,  there- 

B.  c.isr.] 

BOOK  XXXVIIL 

263 

fore,  my  colleague  either  vent  his  malice  in  some  other  case; 
or,  if  he  is*  determined  to  proceed  in  this,  let  him  detain  his 
Ambracians  until  Fulvius  comes  home.  I  will  not  suffer  any 
determination,  concerning  either  the  Ambracians  or  jEtolians, 
to  pass  in  the  absence  of  Marcus  Fulvius.” 
XLIV.  iEmilius,  inveighing  against  the  artful  malignity 
of  his  adversary  as  being  notorious  to  all,  affirmed,  that  he 
would  spin  out  the  time  by  affected  delays,  so  as  not  to  re¬ 
turn  to  Rome  during  the  present  consulate.  Two  days  were 
wasted  iu  this  dispute,  and  it  was  apparent  that  while  Fla- 
minius  was  present,  no  decision  of  the  cause  could  be  procur¬ 
ed.  iEmilius,  therefore,  laid  hold  of  an  opportunity,  when 
Flaminius  happening  to  fall  sick,  was  absent,  and  on  his  pro¬ 
posing  the  motion,  the  senate  decreed,  that  ‘‘‘  the  Ambracians 
should  have  all  their  effects  restored,  should  enjoy  liberty, 
and  the  benefit  of  their  own  laws,  and  should  levy  what 
duties  they  might  think  proper  on  goods  conveyed  by  land 
or  sea,  provided  that  the  Romans  and  the  Latine  confeder¬ 
ates  should  be  exempted  therefrom.  That  with  respect  to 
the  statues,  and  other  ornaments,  carried  aw'ay  from  their 
sacred  buildings,  as  alleged  in  their  complaint,  their  order 
was,  that  immediately,  on  the  return  of  Marcus  Fulvius  to 
Rome,  the  business  should  be  laid  before  the  college  of  pon¬ 
tiffs,  and  their  directions  obeyed.'’  Nor  was  the  consul  con¬ 
tent  with  this;  but,  afterwards,  in  a  thin  meeting,  he  procur¬ 
ed  a  clause  to  be  added  to  the  decree,  that  it  did  not  ap¬ 
pear  that  Ambracia  was  taken  by  force.”  A  supplication, 
of  three  days’  continuance,  was  then  performed  for  the  health 
of  the  people,  on  account  of  a  grievous  pestilence  which 
desolated  the  city  and  country.  The  Latine  festival  was  af¬ 
terwards  celebrated,  when  the  consuls,  being  acquitted  of 
these  religious  duties,  and  having  finished  their  levies,  (for 
both  of  them  chose  to  employ  new  soldiers,)  set  out  for 
their  provinces,  where  they  disbanded  all  the  old  troops. 
XLV.  Shortly  after  the  departure  of  the  consuls,  Cneius 
Manlius,  proconsul,  arrived  at  Rome.  Servius  Sulpicius,  prae- 

264 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  567. 

tor,  assembled  the  senate  in  the  temple  of  Bellona,  to  give 
him  audience;  when,  after  enumerating  the  services  which  he 
had  performed,  he  demanded  that,  in  consideration  thereof, 
public  thanks  should  be  offered  to  the  immortal  gods,  and 
permission  be  granted  to  himself,  to  ride  through  the  city  in 
triumph.  This  was  opposed  by  the  greater  number  of  the 
ten  ambassadors,  who  had  been  in  the  province  along  with 
him;  and  particularly  by  Lucius  Furius  Purpureo,  and  Lu- 
cius  ^Emilius  Paulus.  They  represented,  that  “  they  had 
been  appointed  plenipotentiaries,  in  conjunction  with  Manli¬ 
us,  to  make  peace  with  Antiochus,  and  to  conclude  a  treaty, 
V  R  567  preliminary  articles  settled  with  Lucius 
B  C  1S5  Scipio.  That  Cneius  Manlius  laboured,  to  the  ut¬ 
most  of  his  power,  to  obstruct  the  conclusion  of  this  peace, 
and  to  draw  Antiochus  into  an  ambuscade:  but  that  he  (An¬ 
tiochus,)  having  discovered  the  treacherous  designs  of  the 
consul,  though  frequently  tempted  by  proposals  of  a  confer¬ 
ence,  was  so  far  from  consenting  to  the  meeting,  that  he 
avoided  even  the  sight  of  him.  So  eager  was  the  wish  of  Man¬ 
lius  to  cross  Taurus,  that  he  was  with  difficulty  restrained  by 
the  ten  ambassadors,  who  besought  him  not  to  expose  him¬ 
self,  voluntarily,  to  the  curse  denounced  in  the  Sibylline  ver¬ 
ses  against  such  as  should  pass  those  fatal  limits.  Neverthe¬ 
less,  he  marched  his  army  thither,  and  encamped  almost  on 
the  very  summit  where  the  waters  take  opposite  directions. 
As  he  could  find  no  sort  of  pretence  for  hostilities,  the  king^s 
subjects  being  perfectly  quiet,  he  led  round  his  army  to  the 
Gallogrecians,  and,  without  any  decree  of  the  senate,  or  or¬ 
der  of  the  people,  commenced  a  war  against  that  nation.  Did 
ever  any  general,  before,  presume  to  act,  in  like  manner,  on 
his  own  judgment?  The  latest  wars  were  those  with  Antio¬ 
chus,  with  Philip,  and  with  Hannibal  and  the  Carthagini¬ 
ans;  concerning  all  these  the  senate  had  passed  its  decrees, 
the  people  their  orders;  several  embassies  were  previously 
sent;  restitution  demanded,  and,  finally,  heralds  were  sent  to 

B.  c.  isr.j 

BOOK  XXXVIIL 

265 

proclaim  war.  Now  Cneius  Manlius, said  they,  has  any 
one  of  these  proceedings  been  observed  in  the  present  case? 
Has  it  been  a  war  of  the  Roman  people,  or  a  predatory  expe¬ 
dition  of  your  own  contrivance?  But,  did  even  thus  much 
content  you?  Did  you  lead  your  army  against  those,  whom 
you  had  chosen  to  consider  as  enemies,  by  the  direct  course;  or 
did  you  ramble  through  every  deflection  of  the  roads;  stop¬ 
ping,  wherever  they  were  divided,  in  order  that,  to  whatever 
side  Eumenes’s  brother.  Attains  should  turn  his  route,  the 
consul,  as  an  auxiliary  in  his  pay,  might  follow  with  a  Ro¬ 
man  army?  In  a  word,  did  you  not  ransack  every  recess  and 
corner  of  Pisidia,  Lycaonia,  and  Phrygia;  levying  contribu¬ 
tions  from  the  tyrants  and  peasants  in  those  remote  regions? 
For  what  had  you  to  do  with  the  Oroandians,  what  with  oth¬ 
er  states  equally  inoffensive? 
XL VI.  “  But  to  consider,  in  itself,  this  war,  on  the  merit 
of  which  you  ask  a  triumph:  in  what  manner  did  you  conduct 
it?  Did  you  fight  on  equal  ground,  and  at  the  time  of  your 
own  choosing"  Indeed  there  is  some  proprietv  in  vour  requir¬ 
ing  that  thanks  be  returned  to  the  immortal  gods;  first,  be¬ 
cause  they  did  not  ordain  that  the  army  should  undergo  the 
penalty  deserved  by  the  temerity  of  its  commander,  in  conj- 
mencing  a  war  unjustifiable  by  any  law  of  nations;  and  next, 
because  they  gave  us,  for  antagonists,  brutes  and  not  men. 
Do  not  suppose  that  the  name  only  of  the  Gallogrecians  is 
corrupted:  their  bodies,  and  their  minds  have  been  long  so. 
Had  they  been  such  Gauls  as  those,  whom  we  have  a  thou¬ 
sand  times  encountered  in  Italy,  with  various  success,  do  \ou 
think  it  probable,  from  the  conduct  of  our  commander,  that 
one  of  us  would  have  returned  to  tell  the  story?  I'wo  bat¬ 
tles  were  fought,  twice  he  advanced  against  them,  by  most 
dangerous  paths,  bringing  his  army  into  a  valley  beneath, 
and  almost  under  the  feet  of  the  enemv;  so  that  if  they  had 
never  discharged  a  weapon,  they  might,  from  the  advantage 
of  the  higher  ground,  have  overwhelmed  us.  What,  then, 
VO)  V. — .M  m 

266 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  56$. 
was  the  consequence?  Great  is  the  fortune  of  the  Roman  peo¬ 
ple;  great  and  terrible  its  name!  the  recent  downfal  of 
Hannibal,  Philip,  and  Antiochus,  the  Gauls  were,  in  a  man¬ 
ner,  thunder-struck.  Bulky  as  their  bodies  were,  they  were 
dismayed,  and  put  to  flight,  by  slings  and  arrows;  not  a  sword 
was  blooded  in  battle  during  the  Gallic  war.  Like  flocks  oi 
birds,  they  flew  away  at  the  very  sound  of  our  missile  wea¬ 
pons.  But,  indeed,  when  we,  the  same  army,  w'erc  on  our  re¬ 
turn,  and  happened  to  fall  in  with  a  party  of  Thracian  rob¬ 
bers,  (as  if  fortune  meant  to  teach  us  what  the  issue  would 
have  been,  had  we  been  opposed  by  men,)  we,  I  say,  were 
beaten,  routed  and  stripped  of  our  baggage.  Among  many 
brave  soldiers  fell  Quintus  Minucius  Thermus,  whose  death 
was  a  much  greater  loss,  than  if  Cneius  Manlius,  to  whose 
rashness  the  misfortune  was  owing,  had  perished.  An  army, 
carrying  home  the  spoils  of  king  Antiochus,  being  scattered 
in  three  places;  the  vanguard  in  one,  the  rear  in  another,  and 
the  baggage  in  a  third,  hid  itself  for  a  night  among  bushes, 
in  the  retirements  of  wild  beasts.  Is  a  triumph  demanded 
for  such  exploits  as  these?  Although  no  disaster  and  disgrace 
had  been  suffered  in  Thrace,  over  what  enemies  would  you 
triumph?  Is  it  over  those  against  whom  the  Roman  senate 
or  people  had  ce  mmissioned  you  to  fight?  On  this  ground, 
indeed,  a  triumph  was  granted  to  Lucius  Scipio;  to  Manius 
\cilius,  over  king  Antiochus;  to  Titus  Quintius,  over  king 
Philip;  and  to  Publius  Africanus,  over  Hannibal,  the  Cartha¬ 
ginians,  and  Syphax.  Now,  after  the  senate  had  voted  a 
declaration  of  war,  the  following  points,  trifling  as  they  ap- 
T)ear,  were  nevertheless  attended  to: — To  whom  the  declara¬ 
tion  ought  to  be  made;  whether,  to  the  kings  in  person;  or, 
%vhether  making  it  at  some  of  their  garrisons,  were  sufficientr 
Do  YOU  wish,  then,  that  all  these  rites  should  be  disregarded 
and  profaned:  That  the  laws  of  the  heralds  be  abrogated?  That 
there  should  be  no  heralds?  Let  religion,  (the  gods  pardon 
':he  expression,)  be  throvrn  aside;  retain  not  a  thought  of  the 

BOOK  XXXVIIL 

26r 

13.  C.  187.3 

gods.  Do  you,  also,  judge  it  fit  that  the  senate  should  not 
be  consulted  concerning  war?  That  the  people  should  not 
be  asked,  whether  they  choose  and  order  war  to  be  made  on 
the  Gauls?  On  a  late  occasion,  the  consuls,  certainly,  wish- 
ed  for  the  provinces  of  Greece  and  Asia;  yet,  when  the  sen¬ 
ate  persisted  in  assigning  Liguria  as  their  province,  they 
obeyed  its  commands.  They  will,  therefore,  if  successful 
in  the  war,  justly  demand  a  triumph  from  you,  Conscript 
Fathers,  under  whose  authority  they  carried  it  on.” 
XL VII.  Such  were  the  arguments  of  Furius  and  ^milius, 
Manlius,  as  vve  are  told,  replied  in  nearly  the  following  man¬ 
ner:  “  Conscript  fathers,  formerly  the  tribunes  of  the  people, 
were  accustomed  to  oppose  generals  demanding  a  triumph. 
I  am  thankful  to  the  present  tribunes  for  paying  so  much  re¬ 
gard  either  to  me,  or  to  the  greatness  of  my  services,  as  not 
only  to  show,  by  their  silence,  their  approbation  of  my  pre¬ 
tensions  to  that  honour,  but  likewise  for  having  declared 
themselves  ready,  if  there  were  occasion,  to  make  a  motion 
to  that  purpose.  It  is  my  lot,  it  seems,  to  be  opposed  by 
some  of  the  ten  ambassadors,  the  actual  council  which  our 
ancestors  assigned  to  generals  for  the  purpose  of  arranging 
their  conquests,  and  proclaiming  their  victories.  They  who 
forbid  me  to  mount  the  triumphal  chariot,  who  would  pluck 
from  my  head  the  crown  of  glors ,  are  Lucius  Furius  and 
Lucius  ^Lmiiius,  tlie  persons  whom,  if  the  tribunes  had  op¬ 
posed  my  triumph,  I  should  have  cited  as  witnesses  to  bear 
testimony  to  m\  services.  Conscript  Fathers,  be  assured,  I 
envy  no  man’s  honours;  but,  on  a  late  occasion,  when  the 
tribunes  of  the  people,  brave  and  active  men,  objected  to  the 
triumph  of  Quintus  Fabius  Labeo,  you  interposed  your  am 
thority,  and  forced  them  to  desist.  Fabius  enjoyed  a  triumph; 
^although,  if  his  adversaries  were  to  be  believed,  he  nevei 
even  saw  an  enemy.  Whereas  I,  who  fought  so  many  pitch¬ 
ed  battles  with  one  hundred  thousand  of  your  fiercest  ene¬ 
mies;  rvho  killed  or  made  prisoners  more  than  forty  thousand 

268 

HISTORY  OF  ROME 

l  Y.  R.  565 

who  stormed  two  of  their  camps;  who  left  all  the  countries  ok 
this  side  of  the  summits  of  Taurus,  in  greater  tranquillity 
than  is  enjoyed  by  the  country  of  Italy,  am  not  only  de¬ 
frauded  of  a  triumph,  but  obliged,  like  a  criminal,  to  plead 
my  cause  before  you,  Conscript  Fathers,  against  charges  ad¬ 
vanced  by  my  own  council  of  ambassadors.  Conscript  Fa¬ 
thers,  their  charge,  as  you  perceive,  is  two-fold:  for  they 
assert,  that  I  ought  not  to  have  waged  war  with  the  Gauls; 
and,  that  my  conduct  in  the  war  was  rash  and  imprudent. 
The  Gauls  were  not  enemies;  but,  though  they  were  peace¬ 
able,  and  obedient  to  orders,  \ou  committed  hostilities  against 
them.  You  are  well  acquainted  with  the  savage  fierceness 
of  the  Gallic  nation  in  general,  and  with  their  most  invete¬ 
rate  hatred  to  the  Roman  name,  but  you  are  not  to  apply  the 
same  character  to  that  part  of  them  who  reside  in  those 
countries.  Exclude  the  infamous  and  odious  character  of 
the  whole  nation,  and  judge  of  these  Gauls,  separately,  and 
by  themselves.  I  wish  king  Eumenes,  I  wish  all  the  states 
of  Asia  were  present,  and  that  you  heard  their  complaints, 
rather  than  mv  charges  against  them.  Send  ambassadors 
round  all  the  cities  of  Asia,  and  ask  whether  they  were  re¬ 
lieved  from  more  grievous  servitude  by  the  removal  of  An- 
tiochus  beyond  the  summits  of  Taurus,  or  by  the  conquest 
of  the  Gauls.  Let  them  tell  you  how  often  their  territories 
were  ravaged,  how  often  their  property,  and  their  people, 
were  carried  off  as  prey;  while,  scarcely  ever  allowed  to  ran¬ 
som  any  prisoners,  they  heard  of  nothing  but  human  vic¬ 
tims  slain,  and  their  children  offered  up  in  sacrifice.  Let  me 
inlorm  you,  that  your  allies  paid  tribute  to  these  Gauls;  and, 
though  delivered  now  by  you,  from  the  yoke  of  Antiochus, 
must  still  have  continued  to  pay  it,  if  I  had  lain  inactive.^ 
The  farther  Antiochus  was  removed,  the  more  licentiouslj 
would  the  Gauls  have  domineered  in  Asia;  and  all  the  coun¬ 
tries  on  this  siue  of  Taurus  you  would  have  annexed  to  their 
empire,  not  to  your  own. 

BOOK  XXXVIIL 

269 

B.  C.  187.] 

XLVIII.  ‘‘  But,  allowing  all  this  to  be  true,  say  they, 
the  Gauls  formerly  sacked  Delphos,  the  common  ox:acle,  to 
which  all  mankind  resort,  and  the  central  point  of  the  globe 
of  the  earth;  yet  the  Roman  people  did  not,  on  that  account, 
make  war  against  them.  I  really  thought,  that  there  was 
some  distinction  to  be  made  between  that  period  tvhen  Greece 
and  Asia  were  not  yet  under  your  jurisdiction  and  dominion, 
and  the  present,  when  you  have  made  Mount  Taurus  the 
boundary  of  the  Roman  empire;  when  you  grant  liberty  and 
independence  to  the  states  of  that  country;  when  you  aug¬ 
ment  the  territories  of  some;  amerce  others  in  a  part  of  their 
lands;  impose  tribute,  add  too,  diminish,  give,  and  take  away, 
kingdoms,  and  deem  it  your  business  to  take  care  that  they 
enjoy  peace  both  on  land  and  sea.  You  thought  the  liberty 
of  Asia  incomplete,  unless  Antiochus  withdrew  his  garri¬ 
sons,  which  lay  quiet  in  their  citadels;  and  can  you  think, 
that,  if  the  armies  of  the  Gauls  roamed  about  without  con¬ 
trol,  the  grants  which  you  made  to  king  Eumenes  would 
be  secure,  or  the  liberty  of  the  states  entire?  But  why  do  I 
reason  thus?  as  if  I  had  not  found  the  Gauls  enemies,  but 
made  them  such!  I  appeal  to  you,  Lucius  Scipio,  whose 
bravery  and  good  fortune,  I  prayed  to  the  immortal  gods  to 
grant  me,  when  I  succeeded  you  in  the  command;  and  I 
prayed  not  in  vain:  and  to  you,  Publius  Scipio,  who  held, 
both  with  your  brother,  the  consul,  and  with  the  army,  the 
commission  of  a  lieutenant-general,  and  the  dignity  of  a  col¬ 
league;  were  the  legions  of  the  Gauls,  to  your  knowledge,  in 
the  army  of  Antiochus?  Did  you  see  them  in  his  line  of 
battle,  posted  in  both  wings;  for  there  was  his  main  strength? 
Did  you  fight  them  as  declared  enemies?  Did  you  kill  them? 
Did  you  carry  off  their  spoils?  Yet  the  senate  had  decreed, 
and  the  people  ordered,  war  against  Antiochus,  not  against 
the  Gauls.  But  I  take  for  granted,  that  their  decree  and 
order,  included,  at  the  same  time,  all  those  who  should  fight 
under  his  banner;  so  that,  excepting  Antiochus.  with  whom 

270 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  565 

Scipio  had  negociated  a  peace,  and  with  whona,  specifying 
him  by  name,  you  had  directed  a  treaty  to  be  concluded, 
every  one  who  had  borne  arms,  on  the  side  of  Antiochus, 
against  us,  were  our  enemies.  In  this  light  I  was  to  con¬ 
sider  all  the  (iauls,  as  well  as  several  petty  princes  and  ty¬ 
rants;  nevertheless,  I  made  peace  with  the  rest,  after  com¬ 
pelling  them  to  atone  for  their  transgressions,  as  the  dignity 
of  your  empire  required.  I  made  trial,  at  the  same  time, 
of  the  temper  of  the  Gauls,  whether  they  could  be  reclaim¬ 
ed  from  their  natural  ferocity;  but,  perceiving  them  untract- 
able  and  implacable,  I  then  judged  it  necessary  to  chastise 
them  by  force  of  arms. 
XLIX.  ‘‘  Having  fully  refuted  the  charge  respecting  the 
undertaking  of  the  war,  I  am  now  to  account  for  my  conduct 
in  the  prosecution  of  it.  On  this  head,  indeed,  I  should 
perfectly  confide  in  the  merits  of  my  cause,  though  I  were 
pleading,  not  before  a  Roman,  but  before  a  Carthaginian 
senate,  who  are  said  to  crucify  their  commanders,  if  they 
act,  even  with  success,  on  wrong  plans.  But  in  such  a  state 
as  this,  which,  in  the  commencement  and  progress  of  every 
undertaking,  makes  application  to  the  gods  to  prompt  thenj 
rightly,  so  that  malicious  calumnies  may  not  prevail;  and 
which,  in  the  established  form,  when  it  decrees  a  supplication 
or  triumph,  uses  these  words: — '  For  having  conducted  the 
business  of  the  public  successfully  and  fortunately;’.  If  I 
should  be  unwdliing,  if  I  should  think  it  presumptuous  and 
arrogant  to  boast  of  my  own  bravery,  and  if  I  should  de¬ 
mand,  in  consideration  of  my  own  good  fortune,  and  that  of 
my  army,  in  having  vanquished  so  great  a  nation,  w  ithoui 
any  loss  of  men,  that  thanks  should  be  given  to  the  immortal 
gods,  and  that  I  should  ascend  the  capitol  in  triumph,  from 
whence  I  took  my  departure,  with  vows  duly  offered;— 
would  you  refuse  this  to  me,  would  you  refuse  acknow" 
ledgments  to  the  immortal  gods?  Yes;  for  I  fought  on  unfa¬ 
vourable  ground.  Tell  me,  then,  on  what  more  favourable 

BOOK  XXXVIIL 

271 

B.  C.  187.] 

ground  could  I  have  fought,  when  the  enemy  had  seized  on 
a  mountain,  and  kept  themselves  in  a  strong  post.  Surely, 
if  I  wished  to  conquer  them,  I  must  go  where  they  w’ere. 
What  if  they  had  a  town  on  the  same  spot,  and  kept  within 
the  walls:  surely  they  must  be  attacked.  Did  Manlius 
Acilius  fight  Antiochus,  at  Thermopylse,  on  favourable 
ground?  Did  not  Titus  Quintius  dislodge  Philip  when  he 
was  posted  in  the  same  manner,  on  the  tops  of  mountains, 
over  the  river  Aous?  Truly  I  cannot  )et  discover  what  idea 
they  have  formed  to  themselves,  or  wish  you  to  form,  oi  the 
enemy.  If  thev  are  considered  as  being  degenerate  and 
softened  by  the  pleasures  of  Asia,  what  danger  was  there  in 
advancing  against  them,  even  on  unfavourable  ground?  11 
formidable,  both  for  fierceness  of  courage,  and  strength  of 
body,  do  you  refuse  a  triumph  to  victories  so  honourable? 
Conscript  Fathers,  such  is  the  perverted  vision  of  envy,  that 
it  is  only  capable  of  depreciating  merit,  and  poisoning  its 
honours  and  rewards.  Pardon  me,  I  beseech  you,  Conscript 
Fathers,  for  detaining  you  wdth  too  long  a  discourse,  forced 
from  me,  not  by  any  desire  of  blazoning  my  own  merits,  but 
by  the  necessity  of  exculpating  myself  l^rom  the  imputations 
brought  against  me.  Was  it,  let  me  ask,  in  my  power  to 
alter  the  face  of  the  country  throughout  Thrace,  to  turn 
narrow  defiles  into  open  ground,  steej>  precipices  into  level 
plains,  woods  into  fields;  to  pretent  a  band  of  Tliracian  rob¬ 
bers  from  lurking  in  those  concealments  tvhich  they  were 
acquainted  with;  that  none  of  our  packages  should  be  snatch¬ 
ed  away,  none  of  our  loaded  horses,  out  of  so  large  a  train, 
led  off,  that  not  one  should  be  wounded;  and  that  the  brave 
and  active  Lucius  Minucius  should  not  die  of  his  tvound? 
On  this  mischance,  by  which  we  unfortunately  lost  so  valu¬ 
able  a  citizen,  those  men  declaim  profusely.  That  the  enemy 
attacked  us  in  a  dangerous  pass,  %vhere  every  advantage  of 
ground  was  against  us;  that  our  two  divisions,  the  front  ancL 
"he  rear,  w^ere.  at  once,  sui  rounding  the  annv  of  the  barbari- 

'Xl% 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

LY,  R.  -65. 

ans,  while  they  were  employed  about  our  baggage;  that  we 
killed  and  took  prisoners  many  thousands  on  that  day;  and, 
in  a  few  days  after,  many  more: — Do  they  imagine  that 
these  facts  can  be  kept  from  your  knowledge,  by  their  pass¬ 
ing  them  over  in  silence,  although  the  whole  army  can  testify 
the  truth  of  what  I  assert?  If  I  had  never  drawn  a  sword  in 
Asia,  if  I  had  never  seen  an  enemy  there,  yet,  by  the  two 
battles  fought  in  Thrace,  I  had  merited  a  triumph.  But  I 
shall  say  no  more  on  the  subject;  and  shall  only  request,  and, 
I  trust,  obtain,  your  pardon,  Conscript  Fathers,  for  having 
trespassed  longer  upon  your  patience  than  I  could  have 
wished  to  do,” 
L.  I'he  charges  w^ould  have  been  judged  valid,  notwith¬ 
standing  this  defence,  had  not  the  dispute  been  drawn  out 
to  a  late  hour;  for  the  senate,  when  it  adjourned,  appeared  in 
a  disposition  to  refuse  the  triumph.  Next  day  the  relations 
and  friends  of  Cneius  Manlius  exerted  their  utmost  efforts 
in  his  behalf.  The  votes  were  led  by  the  opinion  of  the 
elder  senators,  who  asserted,  that  there  was  no  instance  on 
record  of  a  commander  w^ho  had  subdued  the  enemy,  com¬ 
pleted  the  business  of  his  province,  and  brought  home  his 
army,  entering  the  city  as  a  private  citizen,  w'ithout  honours, 
and  without  the  chaiiot  and  lauiel.  The  sense  of  this  im¬ 
propriety  got  the  better  of  their  prejudice&  against  him,  and 
a  great  majority  voted  for  his  triumph^TAil  mention  and 
thought  of  this  matter  was  soon  banished  by  a  greater  con¬ 
test,  which  was  set  on  foot  against  a  more  illustrious  per¬ 
sonage,  The  two  Petillii,  as  Valerius  Antias  W’rites,  institu¬ 
ted  a  prosecution  against  Publius  Scipio  Africanus.  This 
proceeding  w^as  variously  construed,  according  to  people’s 
different  dispositions;  some  blamed  not  the  plebeian  tribunes, 
but  the  public  in  general,  that  could  suffer  such  a  process  to 
be  carried  on.  They  observed,  that  “  the  two  greatest  states 
in  the  world  proved,  nearly  at  the  same  time,  ungrateful  to 
their  chief  commanders:  but  Rome  the  more  ungrateful  of 

B.  C.  187.] 

BOOK  XXXVIIL 

275 
the  two,  because  Carthage  was  subdued  when  she  sent  the 
vanquished  Hannibal  into  exile;  whereas  Rome,  when  vic¬ 
torious,  was  for  banishing  AfricanVis,  who  procured  her  the 
victory.”/ ^Others  asserted,  that  no  one  citizen  ought  to 
stand  so  high  above  the  rest,  as  not  to  be  made  answerable 
to  the  laws  for  his  conduct;  for  nothing  contributed  so  much 
towards  maintaining  the  equipoise  of  liberty,  as  that  the  most 
powerful  might  be  brought  to  trial.  For  how  could  any 
charge,  especially  the  administration  of  government,  be 
safely  intrusted  to  any  man,  if  he  were  not  liable  to  be  called 
to  an  account?  If  there  were  any  who  could  not  endure  an 
equality  of  rights,  against  such,  force  might  justly  be  em¬ 
ployed.”  Such  were  the  common  topics  of  conversation, 
until  the  day  of  trial  came.  Never  was  either  any  other  per- 
soVi,  or  Scipio  himself,  when  consul  or  censor,  escorted  to 
the  Forum  by  more  numerous  multitudes  of  all  kinds,  than 
he  was  on  that  day,  when  he  appeared  to  answer  to  the  charge 
against  him.  When  ordered  to  make  his  defence,  without 
taking  any  notice  of  the  facts  laid  to  his  charge,  he  delivered 
a  speech,  in  which  he  set  forth  his  own  exploits  in  such 
splendid  terms,  that  it  was  universally  agreed,  that  no  man’s 
praises  had  been  ever  represented  either  to  more  advantage, 
or  with  more  truth.  For  he  spoke  with  the  same  ardent  spirit, 
and  powerful  genius,  which  had  ever  animated  his  conduct 
in  discharging  the  duties  of  his  office:  nor  did  his  speech  ex¬ 
cite  any  disgust  in  the  hearers;  as  it  arose  from  the  peril  of 
his  situation,  not  from  motives  of  ostentation. 
LI.  The  plebeian  tribunes,  in  order  to  procure  credit  to 
thfeir  present  accusations,  introduced  the  old  imputations  of 
his  luxurious  style  of  living  in  his  winter-quarters  at  Syra¬ 
cuse,  and  the  tumult  raised  by  Pleminius  at  Locri.  They 
then  brought  forward  against  him  the  charge  of  receiving 
money;  which  they  grounded  on  suspicions,  not  on  proofs. 
They  alleged,  that  his  son,  being  taken  prisoner,  was  re¬ 
stored  without  ransom;  and  that,  in  every  other  instance 
VOL.  V. — N  n 

274 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  565. 

Antiochus  paid  his  court  to  him,  as  if  peace  and  war  with 
Rome  were  at  his  sole  disposal.  He  had  acted  towards  the 
consul,  in  his  province,  as  dictator,  not  as  lieutenant-gen¬ 
eral;  nor  had  he  gone  thither  with  any  other  view  than  to 
propagate  in  Greece  and  Asia,  and  among  all  the  kings  and 
nations  eastward,  the  same  opinion  whicli,  at  the  same  time, 
prevailed  in  Spain,  Gaul,  Sicily,  and  Africa,  that  he  alone 
was  the  head  and  pillar  of  the  Roman  empire;  that  a 
state,  which  was  mistress  of  the  world,  lay  sheltered  under 
the  shade  of  Scipio;  and  that  his  nods  were  equivalent  to 
decrees  of  the  senate,  and  orders  of  the  people. ’’JTPinding 
him  invulnerable  against  all  attacks  upon  his  honour,  they 
assailed  him  with  the  shafts  of  envy.  The  pleading  having 
lasted  till  night,  the  trial  was  adjourned  to  another  day. 
When  that  came,  the  tribunes  took  their  seat  in  the  rostrum 
at  the  dawn  of  day,  I'he  accused  being  summoned,  came, 
with  a  numerous  train  of  friends  and  dependants,  through 
the  middle  of  the  assembly,  to  the  rostrum,  and  silence  being 
made,  he  said, — “  Tribunes  of  the  people,  and  you,  Romans: 
This  day  is  the  anniversary,  on  which  I  fought  a  pitched 
battle,  in  Africa,  with  Hannibal  and  the  Carthaginians,  and 
found  good  fortune  and  success.  As  therefore,  it  is  but 
decent  that  a  stop  be  put,  for  this  day,  to  litigation  and 
wrangling,  I  will  immediately  go  to  the  capitol,  there  to 
return  my  acknowledgments  to  Jupiter  supremely  good  and 
great;  to  Juno,  Minerva,  and  the  other  deities  presiding 
over  the  capitol  and  citadel,  and  will  give  them  thanks,  for 
having,  on  this  day,  and  at  many  other  times,  endowed  me 
both  with  the  will  and  ability  to  perform  extraordinary  servi¬ 
ces  to  the  commonwealth.  Such  of  you,  also,  Romans,  as 
can  conveniently  come  with  me,  and  beseech  the  gods  that 
vou  may  have  commanders  like  myself;  since,  from  my 
seventeenth  year  to  old  age,  you  have  always  anticipated  my 
years  with  honours,  and  I,  your  honours,  with  services.” 
Accordingly,  he  went  up  from  the  rostrum  to  the  capitol; 

BOOK  XXXVIII. 

274 

B.  c.iar.] 
and,  at  the  same  time,  the  whole  assembly  turaed  about  and 
followed  him,  insomuch,  that  at  last  even  the  clerks  and  mes¬ 
sengers  left  the  tribunes,  not  one  remaining,  except  the  slaves 
who  attended  them,  and  the  crier,  whose  office  it  was  to 
summon  those  who  were  under  prosecution.  Scipio,  attend¬ 
ed  by  the  whole  body  of  the  Roman  people,  went  around  all 
the  temples  of  the  gods,  not  only  in  the  capitol,  but  through¬ 
out  the  whole  city.  This  day  afforded  more  ample  testi¬ 
mony  of  the  favour  of  the  public,  and  a  clearer  estimate  of 
his  real  greatness,  than  that  on  which  he  rode  through  Rome 
in  triumph  over  king  Syphax  and  the  Carthaginians. 
Lll.  It  was;  however,  the  last  day  that  shone  with  lustre 
on  Publius  Scipio.  For,  as  he  could  foresee  nothing  but  the 
prosecutions  of  envy,  and  continual  disputes  with  the  tri¬ 
bunes,  before  the  time  to  which  the  hearing  of  the  cause  was 
adjourned,  he  retired  to  Liternum,  with  a  fixed  determina¬ 
tion  not  to  attend  the  trial.  His  natural  temper  and  spirit 
were  so  lofty,  and  he  had  been  habituated  to  such  an  ele¬ 
vated  course  of  fortune,  that  he  did  not  know  how  to  act  the 
part  of  an  accused  person,  or  stoop  to  the  humble  deport¬ 
ment  of  such  a  state.  \Vhen  the  day  came,  on  his  not  ap¬ 
pearing,  he  was  called  by  the  crier,  and  Lucius  Scipio  offered 
as  an  excuse,  that  his  absence  was  caused  by  sickness^/^TThis 
excuse,  the  tribunes,  who  were  the  prosec utorb,  would  not 
admit,  but  insisted,  that  his  not  coming  to  answer  the 
charges  against  him,  was  owing  to  the  same  arrogance  with 
which  he  had  left  the  trial,  the  tribunes  of  the  people,  and 
the  general  assembly;  and,  dragging  after  him,  like  prisoners^ 
the  ver)  men  whom  he  had  robbed  of  the  right  of  passing 
sentence  on  him,  together  with  their  freedom  of  suffrage, 
had  exhibited  a  triumph  over  the  Roman  people,  and  made 
a  secession,  the  same  day,  from  the  tribunes  to  the  capitol. 
“  You  have,  therefore,”  said  they,  “  the  due  reward  of  that 
thoughtless  conduct.  You  are,  yourselves,  forsaken  by  him, 
under  whose  lead  and  direction  y^ou  forsook  us.  And  so 

2  re 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  565. 

much  is  the  Roman  spirit  daily  on  the  decline,  that  although, 
seventeen  years  ago,  when  he  was  at  the  head  of  an  army 
and  fleet,  we  had  resolution  enough  to  send  plebeian  tri¬ 
bunes  and  an  sedile  into  Sicily  to  take  him  into  custody,  and 
bring  him  home  to  Rome;  yet  we  dare  not  now,  when  he  is 
a  private  citizen,  send  to  compel  him  to  come  from  his 
country-seat  to  stand  his  trial.”  Lucius  Scipio  appealing  to 
the  tribunes  of  the  commons,  they  came  to  this  determina¬ 
tion,  that,  “  as  sickness  had  been  pleaded  in  his  excuse,  it 
was  their  judgment  that  this  excuse  should  be  admitted,  and 
that  their  colleagues  should  adjourn  the  hearing  of  the 
cause,”. 
Tiberius  Sempronius  Gracchus  was,  at  that  time,  a 
pl^eian  tribune,  and  between  him  and  Publius  Scipio  there 
an  enmity  subsisting.  He  had  forbidden  his  name  to  be 
subscribed  to  the  determination  of  his  colleague,  and  every 
one  expected  from  him  a  sentence  more  severe,  when  he 
pronounced  his  judgment  thus:  that,  “  Inasmuch  as  Lucius 
Scipio  had  pleaded  sickness  in  excuse  for  his  brother,  that 
plea  appeared  to  him  to  be  sufficient;  that  he  w^ould  not  suf¬ 
fer  any  farther  proceeding  against  Publius  Scipio  until  he 
should  return  to  Rome;  and  even  then,  if  he  appealed  to 
him,  he  would  support  him  in  refusing  to  abide  a  trial:  that 
Publius  Scipio,  by  his  great  achievements,  by  the  honours 
received  from  the  Roman  people,  by  the  joint  consent  of 
gods  and  men,  had  risen  to  such  a  height  of  dignity,  that 
were  he  to  stand  as  a  criminal,  under  the  rostrum,  and  be 
obliged  to  listen  to  the  opprobrious  language  of  youthful 
petulence,  it  would  reflect  more  disgrace  on  the  Romans  than 
on  him.”  He  added,  with  much  indignation,  “  Shall  Scipio, 
the  celebrated  conqueror  of  Africa,  stand  at  the  feet  of  you, 
tribunes?  Was  it  for  this  he  defeated  and  routed,  in  Spain, 
four  of  the  most  distinguished  generals  of  the  Carthaginians, 
and  their  four  armies?  Was  it  for  this  he  took  Syphax  pri* 
^ner,  conquered  Hannibal,  made  Carthage  tributary  to  you. 

BOOK  XXXVIIL 

277 

B.  C.  187.J 

and  removed  Antiochus  beyond  mount  Taurus;  (in.the  glory 
of  which,  by  the  way,  Lucius  Scipio  was  associated  with  his 
brother  as  partner,)  that  he  should  crouch  under  two  Petillii? 
that  they  should  gain  the  palm  of  victory  over  Publius  Afri- 
canus?  Will  men  of  illustrious  characters,  never,  through 
their  own  merits,  or  through  public  honours,  arrive  at  a  safe 
and  inviolable  sanctuary,  where  their  old  age  may  repose,  if 
not  revered,  at  least  secure  from  injury?”  Both  his  deter¬ 
mination,  and  his  subsequent  discourse,  made  a  deep  im¬ 
pression,  not  only  on  the  rest  of  the  assembly  but  even  on 
the  prosecutors;  who  said,  that  they  would  consider  further 
what  might  be  consistent  with  their  rights  and  duties.  As  soon 
as  the  assembly  of  the  people  broke  up,  the  senate 
there  the  warmest  thanks  were  bestowed  by  the  whole  body, 
especially  by  the  consular  and  elder  members,  on  Tiberius 
Gracchus,  for  having  consulted  the  public  good  in  preference 
to  private  animosity;  while  the  severest  reproaches  were 
thrown  on  the  Petillii,  for  having  attempted  to  bring  them¬ 
selves  into  notice  by  exciting  the  displeasure  of  the  public 
against  Africanus,  and  for  seeking  to  gather  spoils  from  a 
triumph  over  him.  After  that,  Africanus  was  no  more  men¬ 
tioned.  He  passed  the  remainder  of  his  life  at  Liternum, 
without  a  wish  to  revisit  the  city;  and  it  is  said,  that  when 
he  was  dying,  he  ordered  his  body  to  be  buried  at  his  own 
country-seat,  and  his  monument  to  be  erected  there,  that 
even  his  funeral  should  not  be  performed  in  his  ungrateful 
country.  He  was  a  man  of  eminent  merit;  but  that  merit 
was  more  conspicuous  in  affairs  of  war,  than  in  those  of 
peace.  The  former  part  of  his  life  w^as  more  illustrious  than 
the  latter;  because,  in  his  early  years,  he  was  continually 
emploved  in  military  commands;  as  he  advanced  to  old  age, 
the  lustre  of  his  conduct  was  somewhat  faded,  as  occasions 
did  not  occur  to  call  forth  the  exercise  of  his  talents.  His 
second  consulship,  even  if  we  add  to  it  the  censorship,  w*as 
far  from  being  equally  brilliant  with  the  first.  Nor  can  yvt 

278 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  565. 

compare  with  it  his  commission  in  Asia,  rendered  useless 
by  want  of  health,  and  clouded  by  the  misfortune  of  his  son, 
and  the  necessity  which  it  brought  him  under,  after  his  re¬ 
turn,  of  either  undergoing  a  trial,  or  withdrawing  himself 
from  that  and  his  country  together.  However,  he  enjoyed, 
alone,  the  distinguished  honour  of  putting  an  end  to  the  Car¬ 
thaginian  war,  by  far  the  most  difficult  and  dangerous  one 
which  the  Roman  state  was  ever  engaged  in, 
LIV.  The  death  of  Africanus  increased  the  courage  of 
his  enemies,  the  chief  of  whom  was  Marcus  Porcius  Cato, 
who,  even  during  his  life,  allowed  himself  to  sneer  at  his 
splendid  character.  It  was  thought,  that  it  was  he  who  in¬ 
stigated  the  Petiliii  both  to  commence  the  action  against 
Africanus,  and  to  propose  an  order  respecting  him  after  his 
death.  The  motion  for  the  order  was  made  in  these  words: 
Homans,  is  it  your  will  to  order,  with  respect  to  the  money 
taken,  carried  off,  and  collected  from  king  Antiochus,  and 
those  under  his  government,  and  with  respect  to  such  part 
thereof  as  has  not  been  accounted  for  to  the  public,  that  Ser- 
vius  Sulpicius,  the  city  praetor,  shall  ask  the  senate,  w^hichof 
the  present  praetors  they  will  appoint  to  hold  an  inquiry  con¬ 
cerning  those  matters?”  This  motion  was,  at  first,  objected 
to  by  Quintus  and  Lucius  Mummius,  who  declared,  as  their 
opinion,  that  according  to  the  practice  always  hitherto  ob- 
bcrved,  the  senate  should  make  the  inquiry  concerning  money 
unaccounted  for  to  the  public.  The  Petiliii,  in  opposition, 
represented  the  great  influence,  the  sovereign  power,  which 
the  Scipios  possessed  in  the  senate.  Lucius  P'urius  Purpureo, 
u  senator  of  consular  rank,  who  had  been  one  of  the  ten  am¬ 
bassadors  in  Asia,  was  of  opinion  that  the  inquiry  ought  to  be 
carried  to  a  wider  extent;  not  only  as  to  the  money  taken 
from  Antiochus,  but  to  what  had  been  taken  from  other 
kings  and  nations.  This  blow^he  aimed  at  his  enemy,  Cneius 
Manlius.  Lucius  Scipio,  who,  as  every  one  knew,  was  ar¬ 
guing  rather  in  favour  of  himself,  than  against  the  order, 

BOOK  XXXVIII. 

279 

B.  C.  187.j 
stood  forward  to  oppose  it.  He  complained  heavily  of  such 
a  motion  being  brought  on  after  the  death  of  his  brother, 
Publius  Africanus,  the  Bravest  and  most  illustrious  of  men. 
For,  it  had  not  been  deemed  sufficient  that  no  panegyric 
was  pronounced  *from  the  rostrum,  on  Africanus  after  his 
death,  but  accusations  of  misconduct  were  also  exhibited 
against  him.  The  Carthaginians  had  been  content  with  the 
banishment  of  Hannibal,  but  the  Roman  people  would  not  be 
satisfied  even  with  the  death  of  Publius  Scipio,  unless,  after 
he  was  laid  in  his  grave,  his  character  were  mangled,  and 
his  brother  also  sacrificed,  another  victim  to  envy.”  Marcus 
Cato  supported  the  motion  in  a  speech  on  the  money  of  king 
Antiochus,  which  is  still  extant;  and,  by  his  influence,  pre¬ 
vailed  on  the  Mummii,  the  two  tribunes,  to  drop  their  oppo* 
sition  to  the  order.  On  their  withdrawing  their  intended 
protest,  ever>'  one  of  the  tribes  voted  in  favour  of  the  motion. 
LV.  Servius  Sulpicius  then  put  the  question  to  the  senate, 
whom  they  would  appoint,  according  to  the  Petillian  order 
of  the  people,  to  hold  the  inquiry;  and  they  appointed  Quin¬ 
tus  Terentius  Culleo.  This  prsetor  was  so  warmly  attached 
to  the  Cornelian  family,  that  according  to  the  account  of 
those  writers  who  say  that  Publius  Scipio  died  and  was  bu¬ 
ried  at  Rome,  (for  that  too  is  asserted,)  he  had  walked  at  his 
funeral  before  the  bier  with  a  cap  of  liberty  on  his  head,  as 
he  had  done  before  at  his  triumph;  and  that,  at  the  Capuan 
gate,  he  gave  wine  and  honey  to  those  who  attended  the  ob¬ 
sequies,  to  show  his  gratitude  fur  having  been  recovered  bv 
Scipio,  among  other  captives,  out  of  the  hands  of  the  enemy 
in  Africa;  while  others  say,  he  was  so  great  an  enemy  to  that 
family,  that,  on  account  of  his  known  animosity,  the  faction 
that  supported  the  proceedings  against  the  Scipios,  singled 
out  him,  particularly,  to  hold  the  inquiry.  However  that  may 
be,  whetheir  he  was  too  favourable,  or  too  much  the  contrary, 
before  him,  Lucius  Scipio  was  immediately  arraigned.  At 
the  same  time,  charges  were  presented  and  received,  against 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  565 

28<> 
his  lieutenants-general,  the  two  Hostilius  Catos,  Aulus,  and 
Lucius;  and  his  quaestor,  Caius  Furius  Aculeo:  and,  that  it 
might  seem  as  if  every  one  had  been  infected’  with  the  con¬ 
tagion  of  peculation,  against  his  two  secretaries  and  crier, 
Lucius  Hostilius.  The  secretaries  and  the  crier  were  acquit¬ 
ted  before  Scipio  was  tried.  Scipio,  and  Auius  Hostilius, 
lieutenant-general,  and  Caius  Furius,  were  convicted,  and 
judgment  was  pronounced,  that,  as  bribes,  for  granting 
more  favourable  terms  of  peace  to  Antiochus,  Scipio  had 
received,  over  and  above  what  he  brought  into  the  treasury, 
six  thousand  pounds  weight  of  gold,  and  four  hundred  and 
eighty  of  silver;  Auius  Hostilius,  eighty  pounds  of  gold,  and 
four  hundred  and  three  of  silver;  and  Furius,  the  quaestor, 
one  hundred  and  thirty  of  gold,  and  two  hundred  of  silver/' 
These  sums  of  gold  and  silver  I  find  mentioned  by  Antias. 
As  to  what  regards  Lucius  Scipio,  I  suspect  some  mistake 
of  the  transcriber,  rather  than  a  falsehood  of  the  historian, 
respecting  the  amount  of  the  gold  and  silver.  For  it  is  more 
probable  that  the  weight  of  silver  was  greater  than  that  of 
gold,  and  that  the  fine  was  laid  at  four  millions,'  than  at 
twenty-four  millions  of  sesterces. f  And  this  I  am  the  more 
inclined  to  believe,  as  it  is  recorded,  that  particulars  of  that 
sum  being  demanded  from  Publius  Scipio  himself,  in  the 
senate,  he  desired  his  brother  Lucius  to  bring  the  book  which 
contained  them,  and  which  he  took  and  tore  to  pieces  before 
their  eyes,  at  the  same  time  expressing  indignation  at  being 
called  to  an  account  for  four  millions,  after  he  had  brought 
two  hundred  millionsi  into  the  treasury.  From  the  same 
magnanimity  of  spirit,  when  the  quaestors  would  not  venture 
to  bring  money  out  of  the  coffers  contrary  to  law,  he  de¬ 
manded  the  keys  of  the  treasury,  declaring  that  he  would 
open  it,  as  he  had  caused  it  to  be  shut. 
LVI.  There  were  so  many  contradictory  accounts  res- 

U.229/.  13y.  4f/. 

f  193,750/. 

t  1,614,533/.  6s.  Cc/. 

B.  C.  187.] 

BOOK  XXXVIIL 

281 

peeling  the  latter  part,  particularly,  of  Scipio’s  life;  of  his 
trial,  death,  funeral,  and  sepulchre,  that  I  cannot  determine 
which  tradition  or  which  writings  I  ought  to  credit.  Writers 
do  not  agree  as  to  his  accuser;  some  affirming  that  Marcus 
Nasvius,  others,  that  the  Petillii  instituted  the  prosecution; 
neither  are  they  agreed  as  to  the  time  when  it  was  carried  on, 
nor  the  year  in  which  he  died,  nor  the  place,  nor  where  he 
was  buried.  Some  assert,  that  he  died  and  was  buried  at 
Rome;  others,  at  Liturnum;  and  in  both  places  memorials  of 
him  are  shown.  For  at  Liternum,  there  was  a  monument, 
and  on  it  stood  his  statue,  which  was  lately  seen  lying  on  the 
ground,  where  it  had  been  thrown  down  by  a  storm.  At 
Rome  is  likewise  a  monument  of  the  Scipios,  and  outside  the 
Capuan  gate,  are  three  statues,  two  of  which  are  said  to  be 
those  of  Publius  and  Lucius  Scipio,  and  the  third  that  of  the 
poet  Quintus  Ennius.  Nor  do  these  differences  subsist  be¬ 
tween  historians  only;  the  speeches  attributed  to  Publius 
Scipio  and  Tiberius  Gracchus,  if  they  really  are  theirs,  differ 
widely  from  one  another.  In  the  title  of  Publius  Scipio’s 
speech  is  the  name  of  Marcus  Nsevius,  plebeian  tribune:  but 
in  the  speech  itself,  the  prosecutor  is  not  named,  it  only  calls 
him  sometimes  a  knave,  sometimes  a  trifler.  Even  the 
speech  of  Gracchus  makes  no  mention  of  the  Petilliuses  ac¬ 
cusing  Africanus,  or  of  the  prosecution  carried  on  against 
him.  The  whole  story  must  be  framed  after  another  model, 
to  make  it  consistent  with  the  speech  of  Gracchus;  and  those 
writers  must  be  followed  who  affirm,  that,  at  the  time  when 
Lucius  Scipio  was  impeached,  and  convicted  of  having  taken 
money  from  the  king,  Africanus  was  a  lieutenant  general  in 
Etruria;  whence,  on  hearing  of  this  misfortune,  throwing  up 
his  commission,  he  hastened  to  Rome,  proceeding  straight 
from  the  gate  to  the  forum.  Being  told  that  Lucius  had  been 
ordered  into  confinement,  he  drove  away  the  officer  from  his 
person;  and,  on  the  tribunes  attempting  to  detain  him,  laid 
violent  hands  on  them,  showing  more  affection  towards  his 
'  01. .  V.—- O  o 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

lY,  R.  565. 

brother  than  regard  for  the  laws.  Of  these  acts,  Gracchus 
himself  complained,  saying,  that  the  tribunitian  power  was 
illegally  annulled;  and  at  last,  when  he  promises  support  to 
Lucius  Scipio,  he  adds,  that  the  precedent  would  be  the 
more  tolerable,  if  both  the  tribunitian  authority  and  the  state 
appeared  to  be  overpowered  by  a  tribune  of  the  commons, 
than  if  by  a  private  citizen.  But  while  he  loaded  him 
with  reproaches  for  this  single  instance  of  intemperate  vio¬ 
lence,  while  he  charged  him  with  having  degenerated  so 
far  from  himself,  he  displayed  his  long-established  praises 
for  moderation,  and  government  of  his  passions,  in  such 
strong  terms,  as  to  make  ample  amends  for  the  present 
reprehension.  For  he  said,  that  Scipio  formerly  rebuked 
the  people  severely  for  their  intention  of  making  him  per¬ 
petual  consul  and  dictator;  that  he  hindered  statues  to  be 
erected  to  him  in  the  comitium,  in  the  rostrum,  in  the  se¬ 
nate-house,  in  the  capitol,  in  the  chapel  of  Jupiter^s  temple; 
and  that  he  prevented  a  decree  being  passed,  ordering  his 
image,  in  a  triumphal  habit,  to  be  brought  in  procession  out 
of  the  temple  of  Jupiter  supremely  good  and  great.  Such 
particulars  as  these,  even  if  inserted  in  a  professed  panegyric, 
would  demonstrate  an  uncommon  greatness  of  mind,  in  re¬ 
straining  honours  conformably  to  the  temper  of  a  constitu¬ 
tion  founded  on  an  equality  of  rights;  but,  here,  they  are  ac¬ 
knowledged  by  an  enemy,  and  at  the  very  time  that  he  was 
employed  in  censuring  him. 
LVIL  It  is  universally  agreed,  that  the  younger  of  Sci- 
pio’s  two  daughters  was  married  to  this  Gracchus;  for  the 
elder  was,  undoubtedly,  disposed  of,  by  her  father,  to  Pub¬ 
lius  Cornelius  Nasica.  But  it  is  not  so  certain,  whether  she 
was  both  betrothed  and  married  after  her  father’s  death,  or 
whether  we  are  to  credit  those  accounts  which  say,  that  when 
the  officers  were  taking  Scipio  to  prison,  and  no  other  of  the 
tribunes  interfered  to  protect  him,  Gracchus  swore,  that  “  the 
same  enmity,  which  he  had  entertained  against  the  Scipios, 

B.  C,  187.] 

BOOK  XXXVIIL 

285 

still  subsisted;  and  that  he  did  not,  by  any  act  of  his,  seek  to 
gain  their  favour.  But  that  having  seen  Publius  Africanus 
leading  the  kings  and  generals  of  enemies  to  prison,  he  would 
never  suffer  his  brother  to  be  led  to  the  same  place.”  They 
add,  that  the  senators,  happening  to  sup  that  day  in  the  ca* 
pitol,  rose  up  together,  and  requested  of  Africanus,  before 
the  company  departed,  to  contract  his  daughter  to  Gracchus: 
that  the  contract  was  accordingly  executed  in  due  form,  in 
the  presence  of  this  assembly;  and  that  Scipio,  on  his  return 
home,  told  his  wife  ^Emilia,  that  he  had  concluded  a  match 
for  her  vounger  daughter.  That  she,  feeling  her  female  pride 
hurt,  expressed  some  resentment  on  not  having  been  consult¬ 
ed  in  the  disposal  of  their  common  child,  and  added,  that, 
even  were  he  giving  her  to  Tiberius  Gracchus,  her  mother 
ought  not  to  be  kept  in  ignorance  of  his  intention;  to  which 
Scipio,  rejoiced  at  her  judgment  concurring  so  entirely  with 
his  own,  replied,  that  Gracchus  was  the  man  he  had  betroth¬ 
ed  her  to.  These  circumstances  respecting  so  great  a  cap¬ 
tain,  though  variously  represented  both  in  traditionary  and 
WTitten  relation,  1  thought  not  fit  to  be  passed  over  in  silence 
LVIII.  On  the  proceedings  being  finished  by  the  praetoi 
Quintus  Terentlus,  Hostilius  and  Furius  were  condemned, 
and  gave  securities  the  same  day  to  the  cit}  queestors.  Sci¬ 
pio  insisted,  that  all  the  money  received  by  him,  was  in  the 
treasury,  and  that  he  had  not  in  his  possession  any  thing  what¬ 
soever  belonging  to  the  public;  on  which  he  was  ordered  to 
prison.  Publius  Scipio  Nasica  then  appealed  to  the  tribunes, 
and  made  a  speech  fraught  with  just  encomiums,  not  only  on 
the  Cornelian  family  in  general,  but  on  his  own  branch  of  it 
in  particular.  His  father,”  he  said,  and  the  father  of 
Publius  Africanus,  and  Lucius  Scipio  who  was  now  order¬ 
ed  to*  prison,  were  Cneius  and  Publius  Scipio,  men  ol  the 
most  illustrious  characters;  who  by  their  conduct  in  war 
through  a  long  course  of  years,  against  many  commanders 
and  many  armies  of  the  Carthaginians  and  Spaniards,  highly 

284 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  K.  565, 

enhanced  the  reputation  of  the  Roman  name  in  the  land  of 
Spain;  and  that,  not  only  by  their  military  exploits,  but  also 
by  exhibiting  to  the  nations  of  that  country  shining  exam¬ 
ples  of  Roman  moderation  and  fidelity;  both,  at  last,  meet¬ 
ing  their  death  in  the  service  of  the  Roman  people.  Al¬ 
though  their  descendants  might  have  contented  themselves 
with  supporting  the  glory  derived  from  them,  yet  Publius 
Africanus  so  far  surpassed  his  father’s  renown,  as  to  occasion 
a  belief  that  he  was  not  born  of  the  human  race,  but  was  of 
divine  extraction.  As  to  Lucius  Scipio,  the  person  then  con¬ 
cerned,  (to  pass  over  his  exploits  in  Spain  and  in  Africa, 
while  he  acted  as  lieutenant-general  to  his  brother,)  on  his 
being  elected  consul,  so  high  did  he  stand  in  the  estimation 
of  the  seriate,  that  they  thought  proper  to  assign  to  him  the 
province  of  Asia,  and  the  war  with  Antiochus,  by  a  special 
order,  without  leaving  it  to  the  decision  of  the  lots;  while, 
in  that  of  his  brother,  after  having  been  honoured  with  two 
consulships,  the  censorship,  and  a  triumph,  he  thought  fit  to 
attend  him  into  Asia  in  quality  of  lieutenant-general.  There, 
that  the  great  and  splendid  character  of  the  lieutenant  might 
not  eclipse  the  fame  of  the  consul,  it  so  happened,  that,  on 
the  day  when  Lucius  Scipio  conquered  Antiochus  in  a  pitch¬ 
ed  battle  at  Magnesia,  Publius  Scipio  was  absent,  at  the  dis¬ 
tance  of  several  days’ journey,  being  detained  by  sickness  at 
Elaea.  The  army  of  the  enemy,  on  that  occasion,  was  not 
inferior  to  that  of  Hannibal,  when  the  battle  was  fought  with 
him  in  Africa;  and  the  same  Hannibal,  who  was  command¬ 
er-in-chief  in  the  Carthaginian  war,  was  one,  among  many 
other  generals  then  present,  on  the  king’s  side.  The  \var  in¬ 
deed  was  so  conducted,  that  no  one  could  throw  blame  even 
on  fortune.  A  ground  of  accusation  is  sought  for  in  the 
peace,  and  people  say  that  it  was  sold.  This  charge  is  as 
applicable  to  the  ten  ambassadors,  in  pursuance  of  whose 
counsel  the  peace  was  concluded.  Some  of  the  ten  ambassa¬ 
dors  had  even  stood  forth  as  accusers  of  Cneius  Manlius. 

BOOK  XXXVIIL 

285 

B.  C.  187.] 
yet  their  charges  were  so  far  from  gaining  credit,  that  they 
did  not  produce  even  a  delay  of  his  triumph. 
LIX.  ‘‘But,  truly,  the  very  articles  of  the  peace  afford 
grounds  of  suspicion  respecting  Scipio,  as  being  too  favour¬ 
able  to  Antiochus,  For  his  entire  kingdom  has  been  left 
to  him j  although  conquered,  he  retains  possession  of  every 
thing  that  belonged  to  him  before  the  war;  and  though  he 
had  an  immense  quantity  of  gold  and  silver,  none  of  it  has 
been  applied  to  the  use  of  the  public:  all  has  been  converted 
to  private  purposes*  Now,  was  there  not  a  larger  quantity 
ot  gold  and  silver  carried  before  the  eyes  of  the  public  in 
the  triumph  of  Lucius  Scipio,  then  in  ten  other  triumphs 
taken  together?  Why  need  I  speak  of  the  extent  of  the  king¬ 
dom  of  Antiochus,  or  mention  his  having  been  in  possession 
of  all  Asia,  and  the  adjoining  parts  of  Europe?  Every  body 
knows  what  a  large  portion  of  the  surlace  of  the  earth  that 
is,  which  stretches  from  Mount  Taurus  quite  to  the  /Egean 
sea;  what  a  number,  not  onlv  of  cities,  but  of  nations,  it  com¬ 
prehends,  and  that  this  tract,  as  far  as  the  summit  of  the 
said  mount,  more  than  thirty  days' journey  in  length,  and  ten 
in  breadth,  from  one  sea  to  the  other, — has  been  taken  from 
Antiochus,  and  who  is  thereby  removed  to  the  most  distant 
corner  of  the  world?  Now,  if  peace  had  been  granted  him 
without  any  pecuniary  consideration,  could  more  have  been 
taken  from  him?  INlacedouia  was  left  to  Philip,  after  he  was 
conquered;  Lacedaemon  to  Nabis;  yet  Quintius  was  nevei 
accused  on  that  account.  The  reason  was,  that  he  had  not 
Africanus  for  a  brother,  whose  high  renown  ought  to  have 
been  serviceable  to  Lucius  Scipio:  but  instead  of  that,  envy 
of  his  merit  had  done  him  injury.  The  sentence  mentioned 
a  quantity  of  gold  and  silver  being  conveyed  to  the  house  ol 
Lucius  Scipio,  greater  than  could  be  raised  from  the  sale  of 
his  whole  property,  \Micre,  then,  was  all  this  royal  trea¬ 
sure;  where  the  value  of  so  many  estates  received?  SureU 
in  a  house,  not  exhaustc^d  by  extravagance,  this  new  accu 

280 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  565. 

mulation  of  wealth  ought  to  appear.  But  what  cannot  be  le¬ 
vied  out  of  his  effects,  the  enemies  of  Lucius  Scipio  will 
exact  from  his  person,  and  from  his  very  flesh,  by  vexatious 
persecution  and  insult;  by  shutting  up  a  man  of  his  illus- 
trous  character  in  a  prison,  among  thieves  and  robbers;  fore- 
ing  him  to  breathe  his  last  in  a  dungeon  and  in  darkness, 
and  then  throwing  his  naked  corpse  before  the  prison-door. 
Such  proceedings  will  reflect  more  disgrace  on  the  city  of 
Rome,  than  they  will  on  the  Cornelian  family.” 
LX.  In  answer  to  this,  the  praetor,  Terentius,  read  the 
Petiliian  order  of  the  people,  the  decree  of  the  senate,  and 
the  judgment  pronounced  against  Lucius  Scipio;  and  de* 
dared,  that  unless  the  money  adjudged  were  paid  into  the 
public  treasury,  he  had  no  other  step  to  take,  than  to  ordet 
the  person  convicted,  to  be  taken  into  custody,  and  carried 
to  prison.  The  tribunes  retired  to  confer  together,  and,  in 
a  short  time  after,  Caius  Fannius,  in  behalf  of  himself  and 
all  his  colleagues,  except  Gracchus,  declared,  that  tlie  tri- 
})unes  would  not  Interfere  with  the  praetor,  to  hinder  his  ma¬ 
king  use  of  his  power.  Tiberius  Gracchus  pronounced  his 
determination  thus:  that  “  he  would  not  protest  against  the 
praetor’s  levying  the  sum  adjudged  out  of  the  effects  of  Lu- 
f'ius  Scipio:  but  that  Lucius  Scipio,  who  had  subdued  the 
most  powerful  king  in  the  world,  had  extended  the  empire 
of  the  Roman  people  to  the  utmost  limits  of  the  earth,  had 
oound  under  obligations  to  the  Roman  people  king  Eumenes. 
the  Rhodians,  and  so  many  other  states  of  Asia,  and  had 
led  in  triumph  so  many  generals  of  the  enemies,  should  lit 
in  prison,  among  the  enemies  of  the  Roman  people,  and 
in  chains,  he  never  would  suffer;  and  therefore  he  ordered 
him  to  be  discharged.’*  This  decision  was  heard  with  such 
approbation,  so  happy  were  the  people  at  seeing  Lucius  Sci¬ 
pio  at  liberty,  that  it  could  hardly  be  supposed  that  the  sen¬ 
tence  had  been  passed  in  the  same  community.  The  praetor 
then  sent  the  quaestors  to  take  possession  of  Lucius  Scipio’^* 

B.  C.  187.J 

BOOK  XXXVIIL 

^87 

property,  for  the  use  of  the  public.  But  so  far  from  any 
trace  appearing  of  money  received  from  the  king,  the  sale 
did  not  produce  near  as  much  as  the  sum  in  which  he  was 
fined.  So  large  a  contribution  was  made  for  Lucius  Scipio 
by  his  relations,  friends  and  dependants,  that,  if  he  had  ac¬ 
cepted  it,  he  would  have  been  much  richer  than  before  this 
misfortune;  but  he  would  receive  nothing.  Such  things  as 
were  necessary  for  his  family  occasions,  were  purchased  for 
him  at  the  sale  by  his  nearest  relations,  and  the  public  ha¬ 
tred,  which  had  been  pointed  against  the  Scipios,  reverted 
on  the  prsetor,  his  assessors,  and  the  accusers. 

THK 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

BOOK  XXXIX. 
MarLli^  consul,  having^  subdued  the  Ligurians,  makes  a  uew"  road 
from  Piacentia  to  Arraiojum.  where  it  loin-  the  FJamiuian  wb\.  Luxu* 
ry  introduced  b\  the  troops  wdio  had  served  in  Asia.  Aii  the  Ijig-uri' 
ans.  on  thr  hither  side  of  the  Apenninc,  completely  subdued.  The  Bac¬ 
chanalian  rites,  borrowed  from  the  Greeks,  and  celebrated  by  night, 
cau>p  great  alarm;  are  investigated  by  the  consul:  &uppre^sed,  and 
main  of  tbost  concerned  in  them  punished.  Lucius  Quintius  Flaminius 
<^'Xpelled  the  senate,  b_v  the  censors,  for  flagitious  conduct.  Scipio  dies 
at  Liternum.  Haunibal  poisons  himself,  to  avoid  being  given  up  to  the 
Romans  b\  Prusias,  king  of  Buhvnia.  Philopcemen,  Uie  famous 
Acha:an  general,  put  to  death  bv  the  IMessenian'-.  Successful  operations 
against  the  Celtibenans.  Another  Macedonian  war,  c:au^es  and  origin 
of  It 

Y  R  oBh  While  these  transactions  passed  at  Rome,  (if 
B.  C.  1S7.  they’  are  to  be  dated  in  this  year,)  both  the  consuls 
were  employed  in  the  war  with  the  Ligurians.  This  people, 
seemed  in  some  measure, intended  by  nature  for  the  purpose  of 
preserving  military  discipline  among  the  Romans, by  its  opposi¬ 
tion  to  their  arms  during  the  intervals  between  important  wars; 
nor  was  any^  province  better  calculated  to  form  a  soldier  to  ac¬ 
tive  valour.  For  as  to  Asia,  from  the  enticing  pleasures  of  its 
cities,  the  abundance  of  every  production,  both  of  land  and  sea, 
the  unwarlike  temper  of  its  inhabitants,  and  the  wealth  of  its 
nrinces,  how  much  soever  it  might  enrich  the  Roman  armies, 

B.  c.isr.j 

BOOK  XXXIX. 

289 

It  contributed  nothing  towards  the  improvement  of  their  cou¬ 
rage.  Under  the  command  of  Cneius  Manlius,  particularly^ 
the  troops  were  suffered  to  run  into  idleness  and  licentious¬ 
ness.  The  consequence  of  which  was,  that,  meeting  in  Thrace 
a  passage  somewhat  more  difficult,  and  an  enemy  of  rather 
more  vigour  than  they  had  been  accustomed  to,  they  suffer¬ 
ed  a  repulse  with  severe  loss.  Whereas  in  Liguria,  there 
was  every  circumstance  that  could  invigorate  the  courage  of 
soldiers;  the  face  of  the  country  mountainous  and  rugged, 
so  that  even  the  taking  possession  of  unoccupied  posts,  and 
much  more  the  dislodging  of  an  enemy  already  in  possession, 
was  attended  with  much  labour;  the  roads  hilly,  narrow,  and 
exposed  to  danj^er  from  ambuscades;  the  enemy  light,  active, 
and  brisk  in  their  motions,  so  as  to  allow  no  rest  or  remiss¬ 
ness,  at  anv  season,  or  in  any  place;  a  number  of  strong  forts, 
necessarily  to  be  attacked,  with  much  toil  and  danger;  and 
the  country  so  poor,  as  to  constrain  the  soldier  to  a  sparing 
mode  of  living,  while  it  afforded  but  a  small  share  of  booty. 
Accordingly,  no  suttler  followed  the  army,  no  long  train  of 
baggage  horses  extended  its  line  of  march,  nothing  was  to 
be  seen  but  arms,  and  men  w^ho  had  no  other  hope  but  in  their 
arms.  Nor  did  those  people  ever  cease  to  afford  either  sub¬ 
ject,  or  cause,  for  hostilities;  for,  their  own  country  being  in¬ 
fertile,  they  made  frequent  incursions  on  the  territories  of 
their  neighbours;  ever  avoiding,  however,  an  engagement 
that  might  effectually  disable  them. 
II.  The  consul,  Caius  Flaminius,  after  frequently  defeat* 
ing  the  Frinian  Ligurians  in  their  own  country,  received  the 
submission  of  that  tribe,  and  ordered  them  to  deliver  up  their 
arms;  but,  having  acted  dishonestly  in  the  delivery  of  them, 
and  being  reproved  for  their  behaviour,  they  abandoned  their 
villages,  and  fled  to  the  mountain  called  Auginus,  whither  the 
consul  immediately  followed  them.  At  his  approach  a  part  of 
the  enemy  again  betook  themselves  to  flight;  and,  running  with 
precipitate  haste,  the  greatest  part  without  arms,  over  pathless 
VOL.  V. — P  p 

290 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  K.  565, 

tracts  and  rocky  precipices,  they  ^ot  away,  beyond  the  Ap- 
ennine;  the  rest,  who  remained  in  the  camp,  were  surround¬ 
ed  and  reduced  by  assault.  The  legions  were  then  led  over 
the  Apennine,  where  the  enemy,  assisted  by  the  height  of 
the  mountain,  where  they  had  posted  themselves,  at  first, 
stood  on  their  defence,  but,  in  a  little  time  submitted.  A 
more  careful  search  was  now  made  for  their  arms,  which 
were  all  taken  from  them.  The  army,  next,  marched  against 
the  Apuan  tribe  of  Ligurians,  who,  by  their  inroads,  had  in* 
fested  the  territories  oi  Pisa  and  Bononia  to  such  a  degree, 
that  the  inhabitants  could  not  till  their  grounds*  These  the 
consul  entirely  subdued,  and  thereby  restored  peace  to  the 
neighbourhood.  Having  now  secured  the  province  against 
any  disturbance  from  an  enemy,  that  he  might  not  keep  the 
soldiers  in  a  state  of  idleness,  he  made  a  road  from  Bononia 
to  Anetium.  The  other  consul,  Marcus  iEmilius,  ravaged 
with  fire  and  sword  the  lands  of  the  Ligurians,  together 
with  their  villages  that  stood  in  the  plains,  while  the  inhabi¬ 
tants  remained  posted  on  two  mountains,  Ballista  and  Suis- 
montius.  He  then  attacked  these,  harassed  them  for  some 
time,  and,  at  last,  compelled  them  to  come  to  a  regular  en¬ 
gagement,  in  which  he  utterly  defeated  them.  During  the 
fight  he  vowed  a  temple  to  Diana.  Having  now  reduced  all 
on  the  hither  side  of  the  Apennine,  he  marched  against  those 
on  the  other  side  of  that  mountain;  among  whom  were  the 
Brinian  tribe;  which  had  not  been  attacked  by  Flaminius- 
iEmilius  subdued  them  all,  stripped  them  of  their  arms,  and 
obliged  the  multitude  to  come  down  from  the  mountains  into 
the  plains.  Peace  being  thus  established  in  Liguria,  he  led 
his  army  into  the  Gallic  territory,  and  drew  a  road  from 
Placentia  to  Ariminum,  to  meet  that  made  by  Flaminius. 
During  the  last  engagement,  when  he  fought  a  pitched  battle 
with  the  Ligurians,  he  vowed  a  temple  to  imperial  Juno. 
Such  were  the  transactions  of  this  year  in  Liguria. 
IIL  In  Gaul,  the  prsetor,  Marcus  Furius,  seeking  a  pre- 

BOOK  XXXIX. 

291 

B.  C.  187.J 
text  for  war  in  the  midst  of  peace,  deprived  the  Csenomanians 
of  their  arms,  although  no  charge  of  guilt  had  been  proved 
against  them.  Of  this  they  complained  to  the  senate  at  Rome, 
and  were  by  them  referred  to  the  consul  iEmilius,  whom  the 
senate  authorised  to  examine  into  and  determine  the  cause. 
After  a  strong  contest  with  the  praetor  it  was  decided  in  fa¬ 
vour  of  the  Caenonianians;  their  arms  were  restored,  and  the 
praetor  was  ordered  to  quit  the  province.  The  senate  after¬ 
wards  gave  audience  to  envoys  of  the  Latine  confederates, 
who  had  come,  in  great  numbers,  from  all  parts  of  Latium. 
They  complained,  that  a  great  multitude  of  their  citizens  had 
removed  to  Rome,  and  had  been  assessed  there  in  the  sur¬ 
vey;  on  which  a  commission  was  given  to  Quintus  Teren- 
tius  Culleo,  the  praetor,  to  make  inquiry  after  such  persons, 
and  on  the  allies  proving  that  those  persons,  themselves,  or 
their  fathers,  had  been  rated  in  the  surveys  of  their  states  in 
the  censorship  of  Caius  Claudius  and  Marcus  Livius,  or  at 
some  time  subsequent  to  their  censorship,  he  was  ordered  to 
compel  all  such  to  return  to  the  several  states  wherein  they 
had  been  so  rated.  In  consequence  of  this  inquiry,  twelve 
thousand  Latines  returned  home;  so  much  w^as  the  city,«ven 
at  that  early  period,  burdened  by  an  influx  of  foreigners. 
IV,  Before  the  consuls  came  home  to  Rome,  Marcus  Ful- 
vius,  proconsul,  returned  from  ^Ttolia.  -He,  as  usual,  recited 
to  the  senate,  in  the  temple  of  Apollo,  the  services  which  he 
had  performed  in  iEtoiia  and  Cephallenia,  and  then  request- 
ed  of  the  Fathers,  that,  in  consideration  of  his  having  con¬ 
ducted  the  business  of  the  public  with  good  fortune  and  suc¬ 
cess,  they  would  be  pleased  to  order  public  thanks  to  be  of¬ 
fered  to  the  immortal  gods,  and  to  decree  a  triumph  to  him. 
Marcus  Abutius,  a  plebeian  tribune,  gave  notice,  that,  if  any 
thing  were  determined  on  that  subject,  before  the  arrival  of 
Marcus  Ailmilius,  he  would  enter  his  protest:  for  the  consul 
intended  to  oppose  that  measure;  and,  at  his  setting  out  for 
his  province,  had  given  him  a  charge  to  keep  the  discussion 

292 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  565. 

of  it  open  untii  he  should  come  home.  Fulvius,”  he  said, 
would  lose  nothing  by  this,  but  time;  for,  notwithstanding 
the  presence  of  his  consul,  the  senate  would  determine  ac¬ 
cording  to  its  own  Judgment.”  Fulvius  replied,  that,  '^even  if 
people  did  not  know  that  there  was  a  quarrel  subsisting  be¬ 
tween  him  and  Marcus  ^milius,  or  with  what  overbearing, 
and  in  some  measure,  tyrannical  rancour,  that  man  prosecuted 
his  enmity;  yet  it  would  be  insufferable,  that  the  absence  of 
the  consul  should  both  obstruct  the  worship  of  the  immortal 
gods,  and  delay  a  triumph  due  to  merit;  that  a  commander, 
after  performing  signal  services,  and  his  victorious  army 
with  its  booty  and  prisoners,  should  remain  outside  the  gates, 
until  a  consul,  who  purposely  delayed  abroad,  should  be 
pleased  to  return  to  Rome.  But,  in  the  present  case,  when 
the  animosity  between  him  and  the  consul  was  most  noto¬ 
rious,  what  fair  dealing  could  be  expected  from  a  man  who 
procured  clandestinely,  in  a  thin  house,  and  lodged  in  the 
treasury,  a  decree  of  senate,  that  ^  it  did  not  appear  that 
Ambracia  was  taken  by  force:’  a  tovrn  which  was  attacked 
w  ith  mounds  and  engines;  w'here,  after  the  w’orks  were  burn¬ 
ed,  others  w^ere  constructed  anew;  where  a  fight  w^as  carried 
on  lor  fifteen  days,  both  above  and  under  ground;  where, 
Irom  the  first  dawn,  when  the  soldiers  mounted  the  walls,  the 
battle  lasted  until  night,  and  was  for  a  great  part  of  the  time, 
doubtful;  and  where  more  than  three  thousand  of  the  enemy 
were  killed?  Then  again^  what  a  malicious  misrepresentation 
did  he  make  to  the  pontiffs,  of  the  temples  of  the  immortal 
gods  being  plundered  in  a  captured  city?  If  it  were  allowa¬ 
ble  that  Rome  should  be  decorated  with  the  ornaments  of 
Syracuse,  and  other  conquered  places,  then  must  Ambracia 
be  the  single  instance,  of  a  captured  city  exempted  from  the 
laws  of  w^ar.  For  his  part,  he  besought  the  Conscript  Fathers, 
and  requested  the  tribunes,  not  to  suffer  him  to  become  a 
subject  of  derision  to  an  enemy  who  had  acted,  all  along, 
with  the  most  overbearing  arrogance.” 

BOOK  XXXIX. 

293 

B,  C.  187.] 

V.  Every  one  present  felt  the  force  of  what  he  urged,  and 
some  intreated  the  tribune  to  desist,  while  others  sharply 
reproved  his  conduct.  But  what  affected  him'  most,  was  a 
speech  of  his  colleague,  Tiberius  Gracchus,  who  said,  that 
for  a  man  in  office  to  prosecute  even  his  own  quarrels,  was 
an  example  of  no  good  tendency;  but,  that  a  tribune  of  the 
people  should  take  upon  himself  to  be  a  solicitor  in  the  quar¬ 
rel  of  another,  was  infamous,  and  highly  unworthy  of  the 
power  and  sacred  laws  of  the  order  to  which  he  belonged 
It  was  right,  that  every  one  should  love  or  hate  others,  ap- 
prove  or  disapprove  of  measures,  according  to  the  dictates 
of  their  own  judgment;  but  not  that  a  tribune  should  de¬ 
pend  on  the  look  or  nod  of  another  man,  veer  about  at  the 
movements  of  another’s  will,  and  make  himself  a  tool  to  his 
displeasure;  remember  a  private  charge,  committed  to  him 
by  Marcus  iEmilius,  and  forget  that  the  tribuneship  was  a 
public  charge,  committed  to  him  by  the  Roman  people,  for 
the  aiding  and  maintaining  the  liberty  of  private  citizens,  not 
to  aggrandize  the  arbitrary  power  of  a  consul.  His  colleague 
did  not  seem  to  consider,  that  this  circumstance  would  be 
recorded  and  handed  down  to  posterity;  that,  of  two  plebeian 
tribunes  of  the  same  college,  one  sacrificed  his  own  resent¬ 
ment  to  the  public  good,  the  other  accepted  the  employment 
of  prosecuting  the  resentment  of  another  man.”  Overcome 
b)’  these  severe  rebukes  the  tribune  withdrew  from  the  meet¬ 
ing,  and  Servius  Sulpicius,  the  praetor,  having  put  the  ques¬ 
tion,  a  triumph  was  voted  to  ^Marcus  Fulvius.  He  returned 
thanks  to  the  Conscript  Fathers;  and  then  mentioned,  tliat. 
‘‘  on  the  day  of  his  taking  Ambracia,  he  had  vowed  V'  cele¬ 
brate  the  great  games  in  honour  of  Jupiter  supremch  good 
and  great;  that  a  contribution  for  that  purpose  had  bet  n  made 
to  him  by  the  several  states,  amounting  to  one  hundred  and 
ten  pounds  weight  of  gold;  and  he  requested  them  to  ordei 
that  sum  to  be  set  apart, .out  of  the  money  which  he  was  to 
deposit  in  the  treasury,  after  his  triumph.”  The  senate  ordered 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  566. 

2^J4 
the  college  of  pontiffs  to  be  consulted,  whether  it  were  ne¬ 
cessary  that  the  whole  of  that  sum  should  be  expended  on  the 
games;  an’&  the  pontiffs  having  answered,  that  the  amount  of 
the  expense  was  a  point  in  which  religion  was  no  wise  concern¬ 
ed,  the  senate  gave  permission  to  Fulvius  to  expend  as  much 
as  he  thought  proper,  provided  it  did  not  exceed  eighty  thou¬ 
sand  sesterces.*  He,  at  first,  intended  to  celebrate  his  tri¬ 
umph  in  the  month  of  January;  but,  hearing  that  the  consul 
iEmilius, — in  consequence  of  a  letter  from  the  tribune  Abu- 
tius,  acquainting  him  with  his  declining  to  protest,  was  com¬ 
ing  in  person  to  Rome,  to  hinder  his  triumph,  but  had  been 
obliged  by  sickness  to  halt  on  the  road,  he  hastened  the  time 
of  the  celebration,  lest  he  should  have  more  contests  about 
it  than  he  had  met  in  the  war.  He  triumphed  over  the  iEto- 
lians  and  Cephallenia  on  the  tenth  day  before  the  calends  of 
January.  There  were  carried,  before  his  chariot,  golden 
crowns  to  the  amount  of  one  hundred  and  twelve  pounds 
weight;  of  silver,  eighty-three  thousand  pounds;  of  gold,  two 
hundred  and  forty-three  thousand;  of  Attic  tetradrachms,  one 
hundred  and  eighteen  thousand;!  of  the  coin  called  Philip¬ 
pics,  twelve  thousand  four  hundred  and  twenty-two;!  brazen 
statues,  two  hundred  and  eighty-five;  marble  statues,  two 
hundred  and  thirty;  arms,  weapons,  and  other  spoils  in  great 
quantities:  besides  these,  catapuitas,  ballistas,  and  engines  of 
every  kind;  and  in  the  procession  were  led  twenty-seven 
commanders,  some  iEtollan,  some  Cephallenian,  with  others 
]:selonging  to  king  Antiochus.  Before  he  rode  into  the  city, 
in  the  Flaminian  circus,  he  honoured  great  numbers  of  tri¬ 
bunes,  praefects,  horsemen,  centurions,  both  Romans  and  al¬ 
lies,  with  military  presents;  to  each  of  the  soldiers  he  dis¬ 
tributed  out  of  the  booty  twenty-five  denariuses,§  double  to  a 
centurion,  triple  to  a  horseman. 
VI.  The  time  of  the  election  of  consuls  now  ap- 
1  €  K.  uuO * 
n.  c.  186.  preached;  and  as  Marcus  iEmilius,  to  whose  lot  that 
17.9.  2d^  i  129.  4c/.  t  iiO\L  Oj.  3e/.  ^  16^.  I  l-4(f 

B.  C.  186.] 

BOOK  XXXIX. 

295 

bastness  had  fallen,  could  not  attend,  Caius  Flaminius  came 
home  to  Rome.  He  elected  consuls,  Spurius  Postumius  Albi¬ 
nos,  and  Quintius  Marcus  Philippus.  Then  were  chosen  prae¬ 
tors, — Titus  Msenius,  Publius  Cornelius  Sulla,  Caius  Cal- 
purnius  Piso,  Marcus  Licinius  Lucullus,  Caius  Aurelius 
Scaurus,  and  Lucius  Quintius  Crispinus.  At  the  close  of 
the  year,  after  the  magistrates  were  appointed,  on  the  third 
day  before  the  nones  of  March,  Cneius  Manlius  Vulso  tri¬ 
umphed  over  the  Gauls  inhabiting  Asia.  The  reason  of  his 
deferring  iiis  triumph  so  long  was,  to  avoid  standing  a  trial 
under  the  Petillian  law,  during  the  praetorship  of  Quintus 
Terentius  Culleo;  and  the  being  involved  in  the  ill  conse. 
quences  of  the  sentence  passed  on  Lucius  Scipio,  especially, 
as  the  judges  would  be  more  disposed  to  severity  against  him 
than  against  Scipio;  because  the  latter  had  strictly  maintain¬ 
ed  military  discipline,  whereas  he,  his  successor,  had  ruined  itj 
by  tolerating  licentiousness  of  every  kind.  Nor  were  the 
facts,  which  were  reported  to  have  happened  in  the  province, 
the  only  things  that  disgraced  bis  character.  The  circum¬ 
stances  which  his  soldiers  every  day  exhibited  to  the  eyes  of 
the  public  were  even  more  scandalous:  for  by  this  army  re¬ 
turning  from  Asia  was  the  origin  of  foreign  luxury  imported 
into  the  city.  These  men  first  brought  to  Rome  gilded 
couches,  rich  tapestry,  with  hangings  and  other  works  of  the 
loom;  and,  what  were  then  deemed  magnificent  furniture, 
single  Tooted  tables  and  buffets.  At  entertainments,  likewise^ 
were  introduced  players  on  the  harp  and  timbrel,  with  buf¬ 
foons  for  the  diversion  of  the  guests.  Their  meats  also  be¬ 
gan  to  be  prepared  with  greater  care  and  cost;  while  the 
cook,  whom  the  ancients  considered  as  the  meanest  of  theii 
slaves  both  in  estimation  and  use,  became  highly  valuable. 
Nevertheless,  these  instances  of  extravagance,  as  they  were 
then  deemed,  were  no  more  than  the  seeds  of  that  luxur\' 
which  was  afterwards  to  spring  up. 
VII.  Cneius  Manlius  carried  in  the  triumph  two  hundred 

296 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  566. 

golden  crowns  of  twelve  pounds  weight;  two  hundred  and 
twenty  thousand  pounds  weight  of  silver;  two  thousand  two 
hundred  and  three  of  gold;  one  hundred  and  twenty-seven 
thousand  Attic  tetra-drachms;*  two  hundred  and  fifty  thou¬ 
sand  cistophoruses;-j  sixteen  thousand  three  hundred  and 
twenty  golden  Philippics;!  together  with  abundance  of  Gal¬ 
lic  arms  and  spoils  in  chariots.  Fifty-two  generals  of  the 
enemy  were  led  before  his  car.  He  distributed  to  each  ot 
his  soldiers  forty-two  denariuses,^  and  double  to  a  centurion; 
to  the  foot  soldiers  double  pay,  the  horsemen  triple.  Great 
numbers  of  all  ranks,  whom  he  had  distinguished  by  gifts? 
accompanied  him.  The  verses  thrown  out  by  the  soldiers 
were  of  such  a  kind,  as  plainly  indicated,  that  their  command¬ 
er  had  been  indulgent  to  them,  and  courted  their  affections* 
It  was  indeed  evident  chat  the  triumph  was  beheld  with  a 
greater  degree  of  favour  by  the  troops  than  by  the  citizens. 
The  friends  of  Manlius,  however,  were  able  to  acquire  for 
him  the  regard  of  the  people  also;  for  they  procured  the  pas¬ 
sing  of  a  decree  of  the  senate,  ordering,  that  such  part  ol 
the  money  contributed  to  the  public  funds  by  the  people,  for 
the  pay  of  the  forces,  as  was  not  yet  repaid,  should  be  dis¬ 
charged  out  of  that  which  had  been  carried  in  the  procession 
to  the  treasury.’'  Accordingly  the  city  praetors,  with  care 
and  fidelity,  paid  twenty-five  denariuses  and  a  half'i  for  each 
thousand  asses. ^  About  this  time  two  military  tribunes 
arrived  from  the  two  Spains,  with  letters  from  Caius  Atini- 
us,  and  Lucius  Manlius,  \vho  governed  those  provinces. 
These  letters  contained  information,  that  the  Ceitiberians  and 
Lusitanians  were  in  arms,  and  ravaging  the  territories  ol  the 
allies;  the  senate,  however,  deferred  all  consideration  of  that 
business  until  the  new  magistrates  should  come  into  office 
This  year,  during  the  celebration  of  the  Roman  games  ex- 
♦  16,4041.  3.S’  4dl.  i  4301^/.  I4«.  Ud.  I  i004/. 

B.  C.  186. 

BOOK  XXXIX. 

297 

hibited  by  Publius  Cornelius  Cethegus  and  Aulus  Postumi- 
us  Albinus,  a  pole  in  the  circus,  being  loosely  set  in  the 
ground,  fell  on  the  statue  of  Pollentia,  and  threw  it  down 
The  senate  moved  by  such  an  incident,  as  it  respected  reli« 
gion,  voted  that  one  day  should  be  added  to  the  celebration 
of  the  games,  that  two  new  statues  should  be  set  up  instead 
of  the  one,  and  that  one  of  tl^em  should  be  gilded.  The  ple¬ 
beian  games  were  likewise  repeated  for  one  day,  by  the 
a:diles  Caius  Sempronius  Bla^sus  and  INI  arcus  Furius  Luscus. 
VI 11.  The  consuls  of  the  following  year,  Spurius  Postu- 
mius  Albinus  and  Quintus  Marcias  Phiiippus,  were  divert¬ 
ed  from  the  care  of  armies  and  wars,  and  provinces,  to  the 
punishing  of  an  intestine  conspiracy.  On  the  pr  tors  cast¬ 
ing  lots  for  their  provinces,  Titus  Ma*nius  obtained  the  city 
jurisdiction;  Marcus  Licinius  Lucullus,  that  between  citizens 
and  foreigners;  Caius  Aurelius  Scaurus,  Sardinia;  Publius 
Cornelius  Sulla,  Sicily;  Lucius  Quintius  Crispinus,  hither 
Spain;  Caius  Calpurnius  Piso,  farther  Spain;  the  employ¬ 
ment  decreed  to  both  the  consuls  was  the  making  inquisition 
concerning  clandestine  meetings.  A  Greek  of  mean  condi¬ 
tion,  came,  first,  into  Etruria,  not  with  one  of  the  mans 
trades  which  his  nation,  of  all  others  the  most  skilful  in  em¬ 
bellishing  the  mind  and  body,  has  introduced  among  us,  but 
a  low  operator  in  sacrifices,  and  a  soothsayer:  nor  was  he  to 
be  ranked  with  those  who,  publicly  professing  to  give  in¬ 
struction  for  hire,  make  use  of  open  rites  and  ceremonies,  to 
imbue  men's  minds  with  religious  terrors,  but  a  teacher  of  se¬ 
cret  my  steries.  These  m}’bteriuus  rites  were,  at  first  im- 
parted  to  a  iew\  but  afterwuirds  communicated  to  great  num¬ 
bers,  both  men  and  women,  l  o  their  religious  performances 
were  added  the  pleasures  of  wine  and  feasting,  to  allure  the 
greater  number  of  proselytes.  When  W’ine,  lascivious  dis¬ 
course,  night,  and  the  mingling  of  sexes  had  extinguished 
every  sentiment  oi  modesty,  then  debaucheries  of  every  kind 
began  to  be  practised,  as  everv  person  found  at  hand  that 
\  oi.,  V  — Q  (I 

298  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  566. 
sort  of  enjoyment  to  which  he  was  disposed  by  the  passion 
most  prevalent  in  his  nature.  Nor  were  they  confined  to  one 
species  of  vice,  the  promiscuous  intercourse  of  free-bom  men 
and  of  women;  but  from  this  store-house  of  villiany  proceed- 
ed  false  witnesses,  counterfeit  seals,  false  evidences,  and  pre¬ 
tended  discoveries.  In  the  same  place,  too,  were  perpetrated 
secret  murders;  so  that,  in  some  cases,  even  the  bodies  could 
not  even  be  found  for  burial.  Many  of  their  audacious  deeds 
were  brought  about  by  treachery,  but  most  of  them  by  force, 
and  this  force  was  concealed  bv  loud  shouting,  and  the  noise 
of  drums  and  cymbals,  so  that  none  of  the  cries  uttered  by 
the  persons  suffering  violation  or  murder  could  be  heard 
abroad. 
IX.  The  infection  of  this  mischief,  like  that  of  a  pesti¬ 
lence,  spread  from  Etruria  to  Rome;  where,  the  size  of  the 
city  affording  greater  room  for  such  evils,  and  more  means 
of  concealment,  it  remained  some  time  undiscovered;  but  in¬ 
formation  of  it  was  at  length  brought  to  the  consul,  Postu- 
mius,  in  the  following  manner.  One  Publius  ^Ebutius,  whose 
father  had  held  equestrian  rank  in  the  army,  was  left  an  or¬ 
phan,  and,  his  guardians  dying,  he  w^as  educated  under  the 
eye  of  his  mother  Duronia,  and  his  stepfather  Titus  Sem- 
pronius  Rutilus.  Duronia  was  entirely  devoted  to  her  hus¬ 
band;  and  Sempronius  having  managed  the  guardianship  in 
such  a  manner  that  he  could  not  give  an  account  of  the  pro¬ 
perty,  wished  that  his  ward  should  be  either  made  away 
with,  or  bound  to  compliance  with  his  will  by  some  strong 
tie.  The  Bacchanalian  rites  presented  themselves  to  his 
view,  as  the  surest  way  to  effect  the  ruin  of  the  youth.  His 
mother  told  him,  that,  during  his  sickness,  she  had  made 
a  vow  for  him,  that  if  he  should  recover,  she  would  initiate 
him  among  the  Bacchanalians;  that  being,  through  the  kind¬ 
ness  of  the  gods,  bound  by  this  v^ow,  she  wished  now  to 
fulfil  it;  that  it  was  necessary  he  should  preserve  chastity  for 
ten  days,  and  on  the  tenth,  after  he  should  have  supped  and 

BOOK  mix. 

299 

B.  C.  186.] 
washed  himself,  she  would  conduct  him  into  the  place  of 
worship.’’  There  was  a  freedwoman  called  Hispala  Facenia 
a  noted  courtezan,  but  deserving  of  a  better  lot  than  that  of 
the  occupation  to  which  she  had  been  accustomed  when  very 
young,  and  a  slave,  and  by  which  she  had  maintained  herself 
since  her  manumission.  As  they  lived  in  the  same  neigh¬ 
bourhood,  an  intimacy  subsisted  between  her  and  iEbutius, 
which  was  far  from  being  injurious  either  to  the  young  man’s 
character  or  property;  for  she  had  conceived  a  passion  for 
him,  and  had  voluntarily  sought  his  acquaintance;  and  as 
his  supplies  from  his  friends  were  scanty,  he  was  supported 
by  the  generosity  of  this  woman.  Nay,  to  such  a  length  did 
her  affection  carry  her,  that  on  the  death  of  her  patron,  being 
without  a  protector,  she  petitioned  the  tribunes  and  praetor 
for  a  guardian,  and,  making  her  will,  constituted  JEbutius 
her  sole  heir. 
X.  As  such  pledges  of  mutual  love  subsisted,  and  as  nei- 
ther  kept  any  thing  secret  from  the  other,  the  young  man, 
jokingly,  bid  her  not  be  surprised  if  he  separated  himself 
from  her  for  a  few  nights;  as,  “  on  account  of  a  religious  duty, 
to  discharge  a  vow  made  for  his  health,  he  intended  to  be 
initiated  among  the  Bacchanalians.”  On  hearing  this,  the 
woman,  greatly  alarmed,  cried  out,  May  the  gods  forbid!” 
affirming  that  it  would  be  better,  both  for  him  and  her,  to 
lose  their  lives,  than  that  he  should  do  such  a  thing:”  she 
then  imprecated  curses,  vengeance,  and  destruction,  on  the 
head  of  those  that  had  advised  him  to  such  a  step.  iEbu« 
tius,  surprised  both  at  her  expressions,  and  at  the  violence 
of  her  alarm,  bid  her  refrain  from  curses,  for  “  it  was  his 
mother  who  ordered  him  to  do  so,  with  the  approbation  of 
his  stepfather.”  Then,”  said  she,  your  stepfather  {Jot 
perhaps  it  is  not  allowable  to  censure  your  mother)  is  in  haste 
to  destroy,  by  that  act,  your  chastity,  vour  character,  your 
hopes,  and  your  life.”  This  increasing  his  surprise,  he 
begged  of  her  to  explain  herself.  On  which,  after  imploring 

300 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

LY.  R.  566, 

the  favour  and  pardon  of  the  gods  and  goddesses,  if,  com¬ 
pelled  by  her  regard  for  him,  she  disclosed  what  ought  not 
to  be  revealed,  she  told  him,  that  when  in  service,  she  had 
gone  into  that  place  of  worship  as  an  attendant  on  her  mis¬ 
tress;  but  that,  since  she  had  obtained  her  liberty,  she  had 
never  once  gone  near  it:  that  she  knew  it  to  be  the  receptacle 
of  all  kinds  of  debaucheries;  that  it  was  well  known,  that, 
for  two  \ears  past,  no  one  older  than  twenty  had  been  ini¬ 
tiated  there.  \\'hen  anv  person  was  introduced,  he  was  de¬ 
livered  as  a  victim  to  the  priests,  who  led  him  away  to  a 
place  resounding  wdth  shouts,  the  sound  of  music,  and  the 
beating  of  cymbals  and  drums,  lest  his  cries,  while  suffering 
forcible  violation,  should  be  heard  abroad.”  She  then  in- 
treated  and  besought  him  to  put  an  end  to  that  matter  in 
some  W'ay  or  other;  and  not  to  plunge  himself  into  a  situa¬ 
tion,  w'hcre  he  must  first  suffer,  and  afterwards  commit,  every 
thing  that  was  abominable.  Nor  did  she  quit  him  until  the 
young  man  gave  her  his  promise  to  keep  himself  clear  ol 
those  rites. 
XI.  \\  hen  he  came  home,  on  his  mother’s  mention  of  the 
ceremonies  which  were  to  be  performed  on  that  day,  and  on 
the  several  following  days,  he  told  her,  that  he  would  not 
perform  any  of  them,  nor  did  he  intend  to  be  initiated.  His 
stepfather  was  present  at  this  discourse.  Immediately  the 
woman,  with  great  heat,  observed,  that  he  could  not  debar 
himself  of  the  company  of  Hispala  for  ten  nights;  that  he 
tvas  so  fascinated  by  the  caresses  of  that  serpent,  as  to  retain 
no  respect  for  his  relatives,  or  even  the  gods  themselves.” 
Loading  him  with  reproaches,  they  drove  him  out  of  the 
huuse,  assisted  by  four  slaves.  The  y  outh  on  this  repaired 
to  his  aunt  iEbutia,  told  her  the  reason  of  his  being  turned 
out  by  his  mother,  and  next  day,  by  her  advice,  gave  infor¬ 
mation  of  the  affair  to  the  consul  Postumius,  in  private.  The 
consul  dismissed  him,  with  an  order  to  come  again  on  the 
third  day  following.  In  the  mean  time,  he  inquired  of  his 

B.  C.  186.J 

BOOK  XXXIX. 

30i 
mother-in-law,  Sulpicia,  a  woman  of  respectable  character, 
whether  she  knew  an  old  matron  called  /Ebutia,  who  lived 
on  the  Aventine  hillf”  Sulpicia  said,  ‘‘  she  knew  her  well, 
and  that  ^butia  was  a  woman  of  virtue;  one  whose  charac¬ 
ter  was  marked  with  the  modesty  and  simplicity  of  ancient 
times,”  He  then  requested  she  might  be  summoned  thither, 
as  he  had  a  particular  reason  for  desiring  some  conversation 
whh  her.  Aubutia,  on  receiving  the  message,  came  to  Sul- 
picia’s  house,  and  the  consul,  soon  after,  coming  in,  as  if  by 
accident,  introduced  a  conversation  about  diibutius,  her  bro¬ 
ther’s  son.  On  this  she  burst  into  tears,  and  lamented  the 
unhappy  lot  of  the  youth;  ‘‘  who,  after  being  defrauded  by 
persons  who  should  the  rather  have  been  his  protectors,  was, 
at  that  time,  obliged  to  take  up  his  residence  with  her,  being 
driven  out  of  doors  by  his  mother,  for  no  other  reason  but 
because  he  had  refused  to  be  initiated  in  certain  mvsteries  of 
iewdness,  as  the\  were  said  to  be.” 
XIL  The  consul,  on  receiving  this  information  respecting 
jEbutius,  was  of  opinion  that  no  suspicion  could  be  enter¬ 
tained  of  his  testimony.  'I’aking  leave,  therefore,  of  .^butia, 
he  requested  his  mother-in-law  to  send  again  to  the  Aventine. 
ior  Hispala,  a  freedw^oman,  not  unknown  in  that  neighbour¬ 
hood;  for  that  he  wanted  to  question  her  also.  When  Hispala 
received  Sulpicia’s  message,  she  was  not  a  little  alarmed  at 
being  sent  for  by  a  woman  of  such  high  rank  and  respectable 
character,  and  could  not  conjecture  the  cause;  but,  after¬ 
wards,  when  she  saw  the  lictors  in  the  porch,  the  multitude 
of  Posthumia's  attendants,  and  afterwards  himself,  she  was 
very  near  fainting.  The  consul  led  her  into  a  retired  part  of 
the  house,  and,  in  the  presence  of  his  mother-in  law,  told  her, 
that  ‘‘  she  need  not  be  uneasy,  if  she  could  resolve  to  speak 
the  truth;  and  of  this,  either  Sulpicia,  a  matron  whose  cha¬ 
racter  she  must  know,  or  himself,  would  give  her  full  as¬ 
surance.”  He  then  desired  her  to  give  him  an  account  of  all 
that  was  done  bv  the  Bacchanalians,  in  their  nocturnal  orgies, 

302 

HISTORY  OF  ROME,  [Y.  R.  566. 

ill  the  grove  of  Simila-  The  woman,  on  hearing  this,  was 
seized  with  such  terror,  and  trembling  of  all  her  limbs,  that, 
for  a  long  time,  she  was  unable  to  speak;  but  recovering,  at 
length,  she  said,  that  “  when  she  was  very  young,  and  a  slave, 
she  had  been  initiated,  together  with  her  mistress;  but  for  se¬ 
veral  years  past,  since  she  had  obtained  her  liberty,  she  knew 
nothing  of  what  was  done  there/'  The  consul  commended 
her,  so  far,  as  not  having  denied  that  she  was  initiated,  but 
charged  her  to  explain  all  the  rest  with  the  same  sincerity; 
and  on  her  persisting  to  affirm,  that  she  knew  nothing  far¬ 
ther,  he  told  her,  that  she  must  not  expect  to  meet  the  same 
tenderness,  or  pardon,  if  she  should  he  convicted  by  another 
person,  and  one  who  had  made  a  voluntary  confession;  that 
there  was  such  a  person,  who  had  heard  the  whole  from  her, 
and  had  given  him  a  full  account  of  it/'  The  woman,  now 
convinced  that  it  must  certainly  he  iEbutius  who  had  dis¬ 
covered  the  secret,  threw  herself  at  Sulpicia's  feet,  and,  at 
first,  began  to  beseech  her,  not  to  let  the  private  conversa¬ 
tion  of  a  frecdwoman  wfith  her  lover  be  made  not  only  a  se- 
rious  business,  hut  even  capital  charge;"  declaring  that,  she 
had  spoken  of  such  things  merely  to  frighten  him,  and  not  be¬ 
cause  she  knew  any  thing  of  the  kind/'  On  this,  Posthumius 
growing  angry,  said,  she  seemed  to  imagine  that  she  was 
wTangllng  with  her  gallant  -£butius,  and  not  that  she  was 
speaking  in  the  house  of  a  most  respectable  matron,  and  tu  a 
consul/’  Sulpicia  endeavoured  to  dispel  he‘r  terrors,  and 
while  she  encouraged  her  to  speak  out,  at  the  same  time 
pacified  her  son-in-law's  anger.  At  length  she  took  courage, 
and,  after  severe  remarks  on  the  perfidy  of  ^butius,  in  mak¬ 
ing  such  a  return  for  the  extraordinary  kindness  shown  to 
him  in  that  very  instance,  she  declared,  that  she  stood  in 
great  dread  of  the  gods,  whose  secret  mysteries  she  was  to 
divulge;  and  also  of  men,  who,  should  sh^  be  seized  as  an 
informer,  would  certainly  put  her  to  death.  Therefore,  she 
entreated  this  favour  of  Sulpicia,  and  likewise  of  the  consul. 

BOOK  XXXIX. 

301 

B.  C.  186.] 

that  they  would  send  her  out  of  Italy,  so  that  she  might  pass 
the  remainder  of  her  life  in  safety/’  The  consul  desired  she 
would  fear  nothing;  assuring  her,  it  should  be  his  care  that 
she  might  live  securely  in  Rome. 
XIII.  Hispala  then  gave  a  full  account  of  the  origin  of  the 
mysteries.  At  first,’'  she  said,  "'the  rites  were  performed 
by  women.  No  man  used  to  be  admitted.  They  had  thr^^e 
stated  days  in  the  year  on  which  persons  were  initiated 
among  the  Bacchanalians,  in  the  day  time.  The  matrons 
used  to  be  appointed  priestesses,  successively  in  their  turn. 
Paculla  Minia,  a  Campanian,  when  priestess,  made  an  alter¬ 
ation  in  every  particular,  under  pretence  of  having  been  so 
directed  by  the  gods.  For  she  first  introduced  men,  who 
were  her  own  sons,  Minucius  and  Herennius,  both  surname d 
Cerrinius;  changed  the  time  of  celebration,  from  day  to 
night;  and,  instead  of  three  days  in  the  year,  appointed  five 
days  of  initiation,  in  each  month.  When  the  rites  were  thus 
made  common,  and^men  were  intermixed  with  women,  the 
night  encouraging  licentious  freedom,  there  w^as  nothing 
wdeked,  nothing  flagitious,  that  had  not  been  practised  among 
them.  There  were  more  frequent  pollutions  of  men,  with 
each  other,  than  with  women.  If  any  showed  an  uncommon 
degree  of  reluctance,  in  submitting  to  dishonour,  or  of  dis¬ 
inclination  to  the  commission  of  vice,  they  were  held  as  vic¬ 
tims,  and  sacrificed.  To  think  nothing  unlawful,  was  the 
grand  maxim  of  their  religion.  The  men,  as  if  bereft  of  rea¬ 
son,  uttered  predictions,  w^ith  frantic  contortions  of  their  bo- 
dies;  the  women,  in  the  habit  of  Bacchantes,  with  their  hart 
dishevelled,  and  carrying  blazing  torches,  ran  down  to  the 
Tiber;  where,  dipping  their  torches  in  the  w^ater,  they  drew^ 
them  up  again  w  ith  the  flame  unextinguished,  being  com¬ 
posed  of  native  sulphur  and  charcoal.  Fhey  said,  that  men 
w'ere  carried  off  by  the  gods,  when,  after  being  fettered,  they 
w'ere  dragged  into  secret  caves.  These  were  such  as  refused 
to  take  the  oath  of  the  societ\%  or  to  associate  in  their  crimes. 

304 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

[Y.  R.  566, 

or  to  submit  to  defilement.  Their  number  was  exceedinglv 
great,  enough  almost  to  compose  a  state  in  themselves,  and 
among  them  were  many  men  and  women  of  noble  families* 
During  the  last  two  years,  it  had  been  a  rule,  that  no  person 
above  the  age  of  twenty  should  be  initiated;  for  they  sought 
for  people  of  such  age  as  made  them  more  liable  to  suffer 
deception  and  pt  rsonal  abused'*  \Mten  she  had  finished  this 
recitui,  she  again  fell  at  the  consurs  knees,  and  repeated  the 
same  entreaties,  that  she  might  be  sent  out  of  the  countr}'. 
Posthuinius  requested  Sulpicia  to  clear  some  part  of  the 
hou^e,  into  which  Hispala  might  remove;  accordingly,  an 
apartment  was  assigned  her  in  the  upper  part  of  it,  of  which 
the  stairs,  opening  into  ilie  street,  tvere  stopped  up,  and  the 
entrance  nKide  iron,  the  inner  court,  f'hiiher  all  Fecenia's 
effects  were  immediately  removed,  and  her  dcmiesiics  sent 
for.  ^hiutius,  also,  was  ordered  to  remove  to  the  house  ol 
one  of  the  dependents. 
XIV.  Having  thus  secured  the  informers,  Posthumius 
represented  the  affair  to  the  senate.  When  ht  laid  before 
them  the  whole,  in  order,  the  information  offered  to  liim  at 
fir-t,  and  the  discoveries  gained  bv  his  inquiries  afterwards, 
the  senators  were  struck  with  great  consternation;  not  onh  uii 
the  public  account,  lest  such  conspiracies,  and  nighth*  meet¬ 
ings,  might  be  productive  of  secret  treacherv  and  mi-^chief. 
but,  likewise,  on  account  of  their  own  particular  families,  lest 
some  of  their  relations  might  be  involved  in  this  infamous 
affair.  They  voted,  however,  that  thanks  should  be  given  to 
the  consul,  fem  having  investigated  the  matter,  with  singulai 
diligence,  and  without  exciting  any  alarm.  They  then  passed 
an  order,  out  ol  the  common  course,  that  the  consuls  should 
hold  an  inquisition  extraordinary,  concerning  the  Bacchanals 
and  their  nocturnal  orgies;  should  take  care  that  the  in¬ 
formers,  AihuMus  and  Fecenia,  might  suffer  no  in  jury  on  that 
account;  and  that  they  should  in\  ile  other  informers  in  the 
?riatter,  by  offering  rewards.  They  ordered,  that  the  officials 

B,  C.  186,j 

BOOK  XXXIX. 

305 

in  those  rites,  whether  men  or  women,  should,  wherever 
found,  be  delivered  over  to  the  power  of  the  consuls;  and 
also  that  proclamation  should  be  made,  in  the  city  of  Rome, 
and  published  through  all  Italy,  that  “no  persons  initiated 
in  the  Bacchanalian  rites  should  presume  to  come  together 
or  assemble  on  account  of  those  rites,  or  to  perform  any 
such  kind  of  worship;’’  and,  above  all,  that  search  should  be 
made  for  those  who  had  assembled,  or  conspired,  for  the 
above  named  purpose,  or  for  any  other  flagitious  practices. 
These  were  the  decrees  of  the  senate.  The  consuls  directed 
the  curule  aediles  to  make  strict  inquiry  after  all  the  priests 
of  those  mysteries,  and  to  keep  such  as  they  could  apprehend 
in  custody  until  their  trial;  they  at  the  same  time  charged 
the  plebeian  a;diles  to  take  care  that  no  religious  ceremonies 
should  be  performed  in  private.  The  capital  triumvirs  were 
ordered  to  post  watches  in  proper  places  of  the  city,  and  to 
use  vigilance  to  prevent  any  meetings  by  night.  In  order 
likewise  to  guard  against  fires,  five  assistants  were  joined  to 
the  triumvirs,  so  that  each  might  have  the  charge  of  the 
buildings  in  his  own  separate  district,  on  both  sides  the 
Tiber. 
XV.  After  despatching  these  ofiicers  to  their  several  em* 
plovments,  the  consuls  mounted  the  rostrum;  and,  having 
summoned  an  assembly  of  the  people,  one  of  the  consuls, 
when  he  had  finished  the  solemn  form  of  prayer  usually  pro¬ 
nounced  by  the  magistrates,  before  they  address  the  people, 
proceeded  thus:  Romans,  in  no  former  assembly  was  this 
solemn  supplication  to  the  gods  more  proper  or  even  more 
necessary;  as  it  serves  to  remind  you,  that  these  are  the  deities 
whom  the  wisdom  of  your  forefathers  pointed  out  as  the  ob¬ 
jects  of  your  worship,  veneration,  and  prayers;  and  not  those 
which,  after  infatuating  men’s  minds  with  corrupt  and  foreign 
modes  of  religion,  drive  them,  as  if  goaded  by  the  furies, 
to  the  indulgence  of  every  lust,  and  the  commission  of  every 
vice.  I  am  in  doubt  as  to  what  I  should  conceal,  or  how  fat 
voi.  V. — R  r 

306 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  566. 

I  ought  to  speak  out;  for  I  dread,  lest,  if  I  leave  you  igno¬ 
rant  of  any  particular,  I  should  give  room  for  carelessness, 
or,  if  I  disclose  the  whole,  that  1  should  too  much  awaken 
your  fears.*  Whatever  I  shall  say,  be  assured,  that  it  is  less 
than  the  magnitude  and  atrociousness  of  the  affair  would  justi¬ 
fy;  though  it  may  be  sufficient  to  set  us  properly  on  our  guard. 
That  the  Bacchanalian  rites  have  subsisted,  for  some  time 
past,  in  every  country  in  Italy,  and  are,  at  present,  perform¬ 
ed  in  many  parts  of  this  city  also,  I  am  sure  you  must  have 
been  informed,  not  only  by  report,  but  by  the  nightly  noises, 
and  horrid  yells,  that  resound  from  every  part;  but  still  you 
are  ignorant  of  the  nature  of  that  business.  Part  of  you  think 
it  is  some  kind  of  worship  of  the  gods;  others,  some  allowable 
sport  and  amusement,  and  that  whatever  it  may  be,  it  con¬ 
cerns  but  a  few.  As  to  what  regards  the  number,  if  I  tell  you 
that  there  are  many  thousands,  and  without  order,  you  must 
necessarily  be  terrified  to  excess,  unless  I  farther  acquaint 
you  who  and  what  sort  of  persons  they  are.  First,  then,  a 
great  part  of  them  are  women,  and  this  was  the  souice  of  the 
evil;  the  rest  are  males,  but  nearly  resemblinj?  women,  actors 
and  pathicks,  in  the  vilest  lewdness;  night  revellers,  hurried 
on,  by  wine,  noise  of  instruments,  and  clamours,  to  a  degree 
of  mad  enthusiasm.  The  conspiracy,  as  yet,  has  no  strength; 
but  it  has  abundant  means  of  acquiring  strength,  for  its  num¬ 
bers  increase  daily.  Your  ancestors  would  not  allow  that 
you  should  ever  assemble,  without  some  good  reason;  that  is, 
either  when  the  standard  was  erected  on  the  Janiculum,  and 
the  army  led  out  on  occasion  of  elections;  or  when  the  tribunes 
proclaimed  a  meeting  of  the  commons,  or  some  of  the  magis¬ 
trates  summoned  you  to  it.  And  they  judged  it  necessary, 
that,  wherever  a  multitude  was,  there  should  be  a  lawful 
governor  of  that  multitude  present.  Of  what  kind,  do  you 
suppose,  are  the  meetings  of  these  people?  In  the  first  place, 
being  held  in  the  night,  and,  in  the  next,  being  composed  pro¬ 
miscuously  of  men  and  women?  If  you  knew  at  what  ages  the 

B.  C.  186.] 

BOOK  XXXIX* 

307 

males  are  initiated,  not  only  your  compassionate  feelings,  but 
your  modesty,  would  be  shocked.  Romans,  can  you  think 
youths  initiated,  under  such  oaths  as  theirs,  arc  fit  to  be  made 
soldiers?  That  wretches,  brought  out  of  that  temple  of  obsce¬ 
nity,  should  be  trusted  with  arms?  Shall  these,  contaminated 
with  their  own  foul  debaucheries,  and  those  of  others,  be  the 
champions  for  the  chastity  of  your  wives  and  children? 
XVL  But  the  mischief  were  less,  if  they  were  only  ef¬ 
feminated  by  their  practices;  of  that  the  disgrace  would  chief¬ 
ly  affect  themselves;  if  they  refrained  their  hands  from  out¬ 
rage,  and  their  thoughts  from  fraud.  But  never  was  there 
in  the  state  an  evil  of  so  great  magnitude,  or  one  that  ex¬ 
tended  to  so  many  persons,  and  comprehended  so  many  acts 
of  wickedness.  Whatever  deeds  of  villainy  have,  of  late, 
been  committed,  through  lust;  whatever,  through  fraud; 
whatever,  through  violence;  they  have,  all,  be  assured,  pro¬ 
ceeded  from  that  association  alone.  They  have  not  yet  per¬ 
petrated  all  the  crimed  for  which  they  combined.  The  im¬ 
pious  assembly,  at  present,  confines  itself  to  outrages  on  pri¬ 
vate  citizens;  because  it  has  not  yet  acquired  force  sufficient 
to  crush  the  commonwealth:  but  the  evil  increases  and  spreads 
daily;  it  is  already  too  great  to  find  employment  among  the 
private  ranks  of  life,  and  aims  its  views  at  the  body  of  the 
state.  Unless  you  take  timely  precautions,  Romans,  their 
nightly  assembly  may  become  as  large  as  this,  held  in  open 
day,  and  legally  summoned  by  a  consul.  At  this  present 
moment,  they  dread  your  collected  body;  but,  in  a  short  time, 
when  you  shall  have  separated,  and  retired  to  your  several 
dwellings,  they  will  again  come  together.  They  will  hold  a 
consultation  on  the  means  of  their  own  safety,  and,  at  the 
same  time,  of  your  destruction.  Thus  united,  they  will  cause 
terror  to  every  one.  You,  therefore,  ought  to  pray,  that  all 
your  kindred  may  have  behaved  with  wisdom  and  prudence; 
and  if  lust,  if  madness,  has  dragged  any  of  them  into 
that  abyss,  to  consider  such  a  person  as  the  relation  of  those 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  I Y.  R.  566, 
with  whom  he  conspired  for  the  perpetration  of  every  wick- 
ednessy  and  not  as  one  of  your  own,  I  am  not  quite  free 
from  anxiety,  lest  some,  even  of  yourselves,  may  have  erred 
through  mist^e;  for  nothing  is  more  apt  to  deceive,  by  spe¬ 
cious  appearances,  than  false  religion.  When  the  authority 
of  the  gods  is  held  out,  as  a  pretext,  .to  cover  vice,  we  be¬ 
come  fearful,  lest,  in  punishing  the  crimes  of  men,  we  may 
violate  some  divine  right  connected  therewith.  But  from 
any  scruple  of  that  sort,  you  are  entirely  freed,  by  number¬ 
less  decisions  of  the  pontiffs,  decrees  of  the  senate,  and  an¬ 
swers  of  the  Aruspices,  How  often,  in  the  ages  of  our  fa- 
thers,  was  it  given  in  charge  to  the  magistrates,  to  prohibit 
the  nerformance  of  any  foreign  religious  rites;  to  banish 
strolling  sacrificers  and  soothsayers  from  the  forum,  the  cir¬ 
cus,  and  the  city;  to  search  for,  and  burn,  books  of  divination; 
and  to  abolish  every  mode  of  sacrificing  that  was  not  con- 
formable  to  the  Roman  practice?  For  they,  who  had  a  tho¬ 
rough  knowledge  of  every  divine  and  human  law,  maintained 
that  nothing  tended  so  strongly  to  the  subversion  of  religion, 
as  foreign  sacrifices.  Thus  much  I  thought  necessary  to  men 
tion  to  you  beforehand,  that  no  vain  scruple  might  disturb 
vour  minds  when  you  should  see  us  demolishing  the  places, 
resorted  toby  the  Bacchanalians,  and  dispersing  their  impious 
assemblies.  In  doing  this,  we  shall  be  favoured  and  approv¬ 
ed  by  the  gods;  who,  being  incensed  at  the  profanations  of¬ 
fered  to  their  majesty,  by  those  people’s  lusts  and  crimes, 
have  drawn  forth  their  proceedings  from  hidden  darkness, 
into  the  open  light;  and  who  have  directed  them  to  be  expos¬ 
ed,  not  that  they  may  escape  with  impunity,  but  in  order  that 
they  may  be  punished  and  suppressed.  The  senate  have  com¬ 
missioned  me  and  my  colleague,  to  hold  an  inquisition  extra¬ 
ordinary,  concerning  that  affair.  What  is  requisite  to  be  done 
by  ourselves,  in  person,  we  will  do  with  energy.  I’he  charge 
of  posting  watches  through  the  city,  during  the  night,  we 
have  committed  to  the  inferior  magistrates;  and,  for  your 

BOOK  XXXIX. 

309 

B.  C.  186.] 

parts,  it  is  incumbent  on  you,  according  to  the  several  duties 
assigned  you,  and  in  the  several  places  where  you  will  be 
placed,  to  execute  vigorously  whatever  orders  you  shall  re¬ 
ceive;  and  to  use  your  best  endeavours,  that  no  danger  or 
tumult  may  arise,  from  the  treachery  of  the  party  involved 
in  the  guilt.” 
XVIL  They  then  ordered  the  decrees  of  the  senate  to 
be  read,  and  published  a  reward  for  any  discoverer,  who 
should  bring  any  of  the  guilty  before  them,  or  give  informa¬ 
tion  against  any  of  the  absent,  adding  that  if  any  person 
accused  should  jfly,  they  would  limit  a  certain  day,  upon 
which,  if  he  did  not  obey  their  summons,  and  appear  to  an¬ 
swer,  they  would  condemn  him  without  waiting  for  his  re¬ 
turn;  and  if  any  one  should  be  charged,  who  was  out  of 
Italy,  they  would  allow  him  a  longer  time  to  come  and  make 
his  defence.”  They  then  issued  an  edict,  that  “  no  person 
whatever  should  presume  to  buy  or  sell  any  thing,  for  the 
purpose  of  leaving  the  country  or  to  receive  or  conceal  any 
such;  nor,  by  any  means,  aid  or  abet  any  persons  about  to 
migrate.”  On  the  assembly  being  dismissed,  great  terror 
spread  throughout  the  city;  nor  w’as  it  confined  merely  with¬ 
in  the  walls  or  to  the  Roman  territory,  lor  in  every  quarter 
of  Italy,  the  people,  on  being  informed  by  letters  from  their 
friends  of  the  decree  of  the  senate,  of  what  passed  in  the 
assembly,  and  of  the  edict  of  the  consuls,  began  to  be  much 
alarmed-  During  the  night,  which  succeeded  the  day  in 
which  the  affair  was  made  public,  great  numbers,  attempting 
to  fly,  were  seized  and  brought  back,  by  the  triumvirs,  who 
had  posted  guards  at  all  the  gates;  and  informations  w'cre 
lodged  against  many,  some  of  whom,  both  men  and  women, 
put  themselves  to  death.  It  was  said,  that  above  seven  thou¬ 
sand  of  both  sexes  had  been  sworn  into  the  association;  but 
it  appeared,  that  the  heads  of  the  conspiracy,  were  two  Ca- 
tinii,  Marcus  and  Lucius,  citizens  of  Rome;  Lucius  Opitur- 
nius,  a  Faliscian;  and  Minius  Cerrinius,  a  Campanian:  that 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R,  566. 

3I0 
from  these  proceeded  all  their  criminal  practices,  and  that 
these  were  the  chief  priests  and  founders  of  the  sect.  Care 
was  taken  that  they  should  be  apprehended,  as  soon  as  pos¬ 
sible.  They  were  brought  before  the  consuls,  and,  confes¬ 
sing  their  guilt,  saved  them  the  trouble  of  a  long  and  formal 
trial. 
XVIII.  But  so  great  were  the  numbers  that  fled  that  many 
people  suffered  severely  thereby,  in  their  lawsuits  and  their 
substance;  insomuch  that  the  praetors,  Titus  Msenius  and 
Marcus  Licinius  were  obliged,  under  the  direction  of  the 
senate,  to  adjourn  their  courts  for  thirty  days,  until  the  in¬ 
quiries  should  be  finished  by  the  consuls.  As  the  persons, 
against  whom  charges  were  brought,  did  not  appear  to  an¬ 
swer,  nor  could  be  found  in  Rome,  it  became  necessary  for 
the  consuls  to  make  a  circuit  of  the  country  towns,  and  there 
to  make  their  inquisitions,  and  hold  the  trials.  Those  who, 
as  it  appeared,  had  been  only  initialed,  repeating  after  the 
priest,  and  in  the  most  solemn  form,  the  prescribed  impre¬ 
cations,  but  who  had  not,  themselves  committed,  or  compel¬ 
led  others  to  commit,  any  of  those  acts,  to  which  they  were 
bound  by  the  oath, — all  such  they  left  in  prison.  But  those 
who  had  forcibly  committed  personal  defilements,  or  mur¬ 
ders,  or  were  stained  with  the  guilt  of  false  evidence,  coun¬ 
terfeit  seals,  forged  wills,  or  other  frauds,  all  these  they  pu¬ 
nished  with  death.  A  greater  number  were  executed  than 
thrown  into  prison;  indeed,  the  multitude  of  men  and  women 
who  suffered  in  both  ways,  was  very  considerable.  The  con¬ 
suls  delivered  the  women,  who  were  condemned,  to  their  re¬ 
lations,  or  to  those  in  whose  direction  they  were,  that  they 
might  inflict  the  punishment  in  private;  but  if  there  did  not 
appear  any  proper  person  of  the  kind,  to  execute  the  sentence, 
they  were  punished  in  public.  A  charge  was  then  given  to 
demolish  all  the  places  where  the  Bacchanalians  had  held 
their  meetings;  first,  in  Rome,  and  then  throughout  all  Italy; 
excepting  those,  wherein  should  be  found  some  ancient  al- 

B.  C,  1864 

BOOK  XXXIX. 

311 

tar,  or  consecrated  statue.  With  regard  to  the  future,  the 
senate  passed  a  decree,  prohibiting  the  performance  of  any 
the  like  rites  in  Rome,  or  in  Italy:”  and  ordering  that,  ^  in 
case  any  person  should  believe  some  such  kind  of  worship 
incumbent  on  him,  and  necessary;  and  that  he  could  not, 
without  offence  to  religion,  and  incurring  guilt,  omit  it,  he 
should  represent  this  to  the  city  preetor,  and  the  praetor 
should  lay  the  business  before  the  senate.  If  permission 
were  granted  by  the  senate,  when  not  less  than  one  hundred 
members  were  present,  then  those  rites  might  be  performed, 
provided  that  no  more  than  five  persons  should  be  present, 
at  the  sacrifice,  and  that  they  should  have  no  common  stock 
of  money,  nor  any  president  of  the  ceremonies,  nor  priest,” 
XIX.  Another  decree,  connected  with  this,  was  then 
made,  on  a  motion  ot  the  consul,  Quintus  Marcius,  that 
the  business  respecting  the  persons  who  had  served  the 
consuls  as  informers  should  be  proposed  to  the  senate,  when 
Spurius  Postumius  should  have  finished  his  inquiries,  and 
returned  to  Rome.”  They  voted,  that  Minius  Cerrinius,  the 
Campanian,  should  be  sent  to  Ardea,  to  be  kept  in  custodv 
there;  and  that  a  caution  should  be  given  to  the  magistrates 
of  that  city,  to  guard  him  with  more  than  ordinary  care,  so 
as  to  prevent  not  only  his  escaping,  but  "his  laying  violent 
hands  on  himself.  Spurius  Postumius  soon  came  to  Rome, 
and,  on  his  proposing  the  (question,  concerning  the  reward 
to  be  given  to  Publius  iEbutius  and  Hispala  Fecenia,  for  theii 
services  in  discovering  the  proceedings  of  the  Bacchanalians, 
the  senate  passed  a  vote,  that the  city  quaestors  should  give 
to  each  of  them,  out  of  the  public  treasury,  one  hundred 
thousand  asses;"*^  and  that  the  consuls  should  desire  the  ple¬ 
beian  tribunes  to  propose  to  the  commons,  as  soon  as  con¬ 
venient,  that  Publius  Aiibutius  should  be  deemed  to  have 
served  out  his  time  in  the  army,  that  he  should  not  be  com¬ 
pelled  to  military  duty,  nor  should  any  censor  assign  him  a 

*2221  \ds.  Ail 

312 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  566. 

horse"*^  at  the  public  charge.’'  They  voted  also,  that  “  Hispa- 
la  Fecenia  should  enjoy  the  privileges  of  alienating  her  pro¬ 
perty  by  gift,  or  deed;  of  marrying  out  of  her  rank,  and  of 
choosing  a  guardian,  as  if  a  husband  had  conferred  them  by 
will;  that  she  should  be  at  liberty  to  wed  a  man  of  honoura¬ 
ble  birth,  and  that  such  person,  marrying  her,  should  not 
thereby  incur  any  disgrace  or  disparagement;  and  that  the 
consuls,  then  in  office,  and  their  successors,  should  take  care 
that  no  injury  should  be  oflFered  to  Hispala,  but  that  she 
might  live  in  safety.  That  it  was  the  opinion,  and  desire,  of 
the  senate,  that  all  these  things  should  be  so  ordered.” — All 
these  particulars  were  proposed  to  tlie  commons,  and  execu¬ 
ted,  according  to  the  vote  of  the  senate;  the  consuls  at  the 
same  time  being  authorised  to  determine  respecting  the  im¬ 
punity,  and  rewards  of  the  other  informers. 
XX.  Quintus  Marcius,  having  completed  the  inquiries  in 
his  district,  prepared,  at  length,  to  proceed  into  the  province 
of  Liguria,  for  the  service  of  which  he  received  a  supply  of 
three  thousand  Roman  foot  and  one  hundred  and  fifty  horse, 
with  five  thousand  Latine  foot,  and  two  hundred  horse.  The 
same  province,  and  the  same  numbers  of  horse  and  foot,  had 
been  voted  to  his  colleague,  and  they  received  the  armies, 
which,  during  the  preceding  year,  the  consuls,  Caius  Fla- 
minius  and  Marcus  ^milius,  had  commanded.  They  were, 
also,  ordered  by  a  decree  of  the  senate,  to  raise  two  new 
legions,  and  they  demanded  from  the  allies  and  Latines 
twenty  thousand  foot,  and  one  thousand  three  hundred  horse; 
besides  all  which,  they  levied  three  thousand  Roman  foot, 
and  two  hundred  horse,  all  which  troops,  except  the  legions, 
were  ordered  to  march  into  Spain,  to  re-inforce  the  army 
employed  there.  The  consuls,  therefore,  while  themselves 
Tho'^e  to  whom  the  cen»or  a'S};,^ned  a  horse,  were  bound  to  serve. 
But  as  liberty  was  granted  to  *Tlbuiius,  to  serve  or  not,  as  he  chose,  it  be- 
came  necessary  that  the  censor  should  be  tlms  restrained  by  a  vote  of  the 
.senate,  from  assigning  Inm  a  horse;  otheiv^ise,  if  one  bad  been  assigned 
him,  whether  willing  or  not.  he  must  have  served 

BOOK  XXXIX. 

JB.  C,  186.  j 

were  kept  busy,  in  holding  the  inquisitions,  had  delegated  to 
Titus  Msenius  the  charge  of  enlisting  the  troops.  When 
the  trials  were  finished,  Quintas  Marcius,  first  marched 
against  the  Apuan  Ligurians.  While  he  pursued  these  into 
very  remote  fastnesses,  which  had  always  served  them  as 
lurking  places  and  receptacles,  he  was  surrounded  in  a 
dangerous  defile,  inclosed  by  eminences,  which  were  occu¬ 
pied  by  the  enemy.  Here  four  thousand  soldiers  fell,  and 
three  standards  of  the  second  legion,  with  eleven  ensigns  of 
the  Latine  allies,  were  taken;  abundance  of  arms  were 
likewise  lost,  being  thrown  away  by  the  men,  because  they 
impeded  their  flight  through  the  woody  patns.  The  Liguri¬ 
ans  ceased  to  pursue,  sooner  than  the  Romans  to  fly.  As 
soon  as  the  consul  had  effected  his  escape  out  of  the  enemy’s 
territories,  he  disbanded  the  troops,  in  the  country  of  their 
friends,  in  order  to  conceal  the  greatness  of  the  loss  sustain¬ 
ed.  But  he  could  not  obliterate  all  memorial  of  his  miscon¬ 
duct;  for  the  pass,  where  the  Ligurians  put  him  to  flight,  has 
gotten  the  name  of  the  Marcian  pass. 
XXI,  Before  the  public  received  an  account  of  this  affair 
from  Liguria,  a  letter  from  Spain  was  read  to  them,  which 
produced  a  mixture  of  joy  and  grief.  Caius  Atinius,  who, 
two  years  before,  had  gone  to  that  province,  in  quality  of 
prfftor,  fought,  in  the  territory  of  Asta,  a  pitched  battle  with 
the  Lusitanians,  in  which  six  thousand  of  the  enemv  were 
killed,  the  rest  routed,  driven  from  the  field,  and  their  camp 
taken.  He  then  marched,  at  the  head  of  the  legions  to  at¬ 
tack  the  town  of  Asta,  which  he  took,  with  little  more  trou¬ 
ble  than  he  met  at  the  camp;  but,  approaching  the  w  all  too 
carelessly,  he  received  a  wound,  of  which  he  died  a  few  davs 
after.  On  reading  a  letter,  acquainting  them  w  ith  the  pro¬ 
prietor’s  death,  the  senate  voted,  that  a  courier  should  be 
sent  to  overtake  the  praetor,  Caius  Calpurnius,  at  the  jxjrt  ot 
Lu^a,  and  inform  him,  that  it  was  the  wdli  of  the  senate,  that 
he  should  hasten  his  Journey,  lest  the  province  should 
VQI  .  V. — S  s 

314  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  566, 
without  a  governor.  The  courier  reached  Luna,  on  the 
fourth  day,  but  Calpurnius  had  set  out  some  days  before*  In 
hither  Spain,  Lucius  Manlius  Acidipus,  who  had  come 
into  that  province  at  the  same  time  when  Caius  Atinius 
came  into  his,  fought  a  battle  with  the  Celtiberians,  in  which 
neither  party  could  claim  the  victory,  farther  than  this,  that 
the  Celtiberians  retreated,  during  the  following  night,  and 
left  the  Romans  at  liberty  to  bury  their  dead,  and  collect  the 
spoils.  In  a  few'  days  after,  the  Celtiberians,  with  a  more 
numerous  force,  attacked  the  Romans,  near  the  town  of 
Calaguris.  Writers  have  not  mentioned  the  cause  that 
rendered  them  weaker  after  their  numbers  were  increased, 
but  they  were  defeated  in  the  battle;  twelve  thousand  of 
their  men  were  killed,  more  than  two  thousand  taken,  their 
camp  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  Romans;  and  it  is  pro¬ 
bable,  if  the  conqueror’s  career  had  not  been  stopped,  by  the 
arrival  of  his  successor,  he  would  have  reduced  Celtiberia 
to  entire  subjection.  Both  the  new  praetors  drew  off  their 
armies  into  winter  quarters. 
XXI 1.  About  the  time  when  the  news  of  these  transactions 
in  Spain  arrived  at  Rome,  the  games  called  Taurilia*  were 
celebiated,  during  two  days,  on  a  religious  account.  Then 
Marcus  Fulvius  exhibited  games,  which  he  had  vowed  in 
the  iEtolian  war,  and  which  lasted  ten  days.  Many  artists, 
out  of  respect  to  him,  came  from  Greece  on  the  occasion; 
and  now,  for  the  first  time,  the  Romans  were  entertained 
with  contests  of  wrestlers;  they  were  also  presented  with  a 
hunt  of  lume  and  panthers;  the  shows  being  exhibited  in  a 
manner,  that  fell  but  little  short  of  the  abundance  and  variety 
of  the  present  age.  The  nine  days’  solemnity  was  then  per¬ 
formed,  showers  of  stones  having  fallen,  for  three  days,  in 
*  Games  iq  honour  of  the  mfernal  dcitiCa.  iaslitutcd  in  the  reig-n  ol 
Tarquin  the  Proud,  on  oc'-asioii  of  a  rnahirnant  disorder  that  had  attacked 
pregnant  \Tomen.  Black  bulk  were  ‘lacnficod.  whence  Iho  inu«r 

BOOK  XXXIX. 

315 

B.  C.  186.] 
Picenum;  and  fires  from  heaven,  had,  as  was  said,  in  various 
places,  slightly  burned  the  clothes  of  many  persons.  By 
order  of  the  pontiffs,  a  supplication,  of  one  day’s  continu¬ 
ance,  was  added  on  account  of  the  temple  of  Ops,  in  the 
capitol,  being  struck  by  lightning.  The  consul  sacrificed 
victims,  of  the  larger  kinds,  and  purified  the  city.  At  the 
same  time,  an  account  was  brought  from  Umbria,  of  an 
hermaphrodite,  twelve  years  old,  being  found  there.  This 
was  deemed  a  prodigy  of  direful  import,  and  orders  were 
given,  that  it  should  be  removed  instantly  out  of  the  Romavi 
territories,  and  put  to  death.  During  this  year,  a  body  of 
transalpine  Gauls  came  into  Venetia,  without  committing 
depredation  or  hostility,  and  pitched  on  a  spot,  for  building 
a  town,  not  tar  from  that  where  Aquileia  now  stands.  Am¬ 
bassadors  were  sent  from  Rome,  over  the  Alps,  on  this  busi¬ 
ness,  who  were  told,  that  “  the  state  had  given  those  people 
no  authority  to  quit  it,  nor  did  their  countrymen  know  what 
they  were  doing  in  Italy.”  About  this  time  Lucius  Scipio 
celebrated  games,  which,  he  said,  he  had  vowed  during  the 
war  with  Antioch  us;  they  lasted  ten  days,  and  the  expense  was 
defrayed  by  a  contribution  made  to  him,  for  the  purpose,  by 
the  kings  and  states  of  Asia.  V'alerius  Aniias  asserts,  that, 
after  his  condemnation,  and  the  sale  of  ins  effects,  he  was 
sent  into  Asia,  to  adjust  disputes  between  the  kings  Antio- 
chus  and  Eumenes;  where  he  received  these  contributions 
for  those  games,  and  collected  artists.  Although  he  had 
made  no  mention  of  them,  on  the  conclusion  of  the  war,  in 
which  he  said  they  had  been  vowed.  On  his  return  from 
this  embassy,  however,  he  introduced  the  subject  in  the 
senate. 
XXII 1.  As  the  year  was,  now,  drawing  to  a  conclusion, 
Quintus  Marcius,  then  abroad,  was  soon  to  go  out  of  office 
Spurius  Postumius,  alter  having  conducted  the  inquisitions, 
with  the  utmost  care  and  propriety,  held  the  elec-  y  ^  gg- 
tions.  Appius  Claudius  Fulcher  and  Marcus  Sem-  ^ 

J16  HISTORY  OF  ROME  [Y.  R,  567, 
pronius  T udUanus  were  chosen  consuls.  Next  day  were  elect¬ 
ed  praetors,  Publius  Cornelius  Cethegus,  Aulus  Postumius 
Aibinus,  Caius  Afranius  Stellio,  Caius  Atilius  Serranus,  Lu¬ 
cius  Postumius  I'empsanus,  and  Marcus  Claudius  Marcellus. 
Towards  the  close  of  the  year,  the  consul,  Spurius  Postumius, 
reported,  that  in  travelling  along  the  coasts  of  Italy,  for  the 
purpose  of  holding  the  inquisitions,  he  found  two  colonies 
deserted,  Sipontum,  on  the  upper  sea,  and  Buxentum  on  the 
lower;  on  which,  in  pursuance  of  a  decree  of  the  senate,  Titus 
Maenius,city  praetor,  constituted  Lucius  Scribonus  Libo,  Mar¬ 
cus  Tuccius,  and  Cneius  Bebius  Tamphilus,  commissioners 
for  conducting  colonists  thither.  The  war,  at  this  time  appre¬ 
hended,  with  king  Perseus  and  the  Macedonians,  owed  not 
its  origin  either  to  Perseus  himself,  nor  to  the  causes  to  which 
it  has  been  generally  attributed.  The  original  idea  of  it  \vas 
conceived  by  Philip,  and,  if  he  had  lived  some  time  longer, 
he  would  himself  have  entered  on  the  prosecution  of  it.  In 
the  conditions  imposed  on  him,  when  he  was  vanquished, 
there  wsls  one  particular  that  chagrined  him  more  than  all  the 
rest:  this  was,  his  being  deprived,  by  the  senate,  of  the  liber- 
ty  of  wreaking  his  vengeance  on  such  ol  the  Macedonians 
as  had  revolted  from  him,  in  the^eourse  of  the  war;  although, 
from  Quintius  having  left  that  point  undetermined,  when  he 
was  adjusting  the  articles  of  pacification,  he  had  entertained 
some  hopes  of  being  indulged  in  it.  Afterwards,  on  the  de¬ 
feat  of  Antiochus,  at  Thermopylie,  the  armies  separated, 
and  the  consul  Acilius  carried  on  the  siege  of  Heraclea, 
while  Philip  besieged  Lamia.  As  soon  as  Heraclea  was 
taken,  however,  Philip  was  ordered  to  retire  from  the  walls 
of  Lamia,  and  the  town  was  surrendered  to  the  Romans; 
this  also  gave  him  great  offence.  The  consul,  indeed,  in 
some  measure,  soothed  his  resentment;  for,  when  he  was 
hastening  to  Naupactum,  where  the  iEtolians  had  re*assem- 
hie  i,  liter  their  flight,  he  gave  Philip  permission  to  make 
war  on  Amynander  and  Athamania;  and  to  annex  to  his  do- 

B.  C.  185.]  BOOK  XXXIX.  air 
minions  the  cities  which  the  iEtolians  had  taken  from  the 
Thessalians.  Without  much  difficulty,  he  expelled  Amy- 
nander  from  Athamania,  and  got  possession  of  several  cities. 
He  also  reduced  under  his  dominion,  the  city  of  Demetrias, 
a  place  of  great  strength,  and  convenient  in  every  respect; 
with  the  whole  of  the  Magnesian  state.  Afterwards,  finding 
that  several  cities  in  'I  hrace,  through  an  abuse  of  the  liberty 
which  they  had  lately  acquired,  and  to  which  they  had  not 
been  accustomed,  were  distracted  by  dissensions  among  their 
leading  men,  he,  by  uniting  himself  to  the  parties  that  were 
worsted  in  their  disputes  with  their  countr)men,  made  him¬ 
self  master  of  them  all. 
XXIV.  By  these  means  the  king’s  displeasure  was  silenced 
for  the  present:  but  he  never  abandoned  the  project  of  col¬ 
lecting  such  a  force  during  peace,  as  would  enable  him  to 
maintain  a  war,  whenever  fortune  should  offer  an  occasior.. 
He  augmented  the  revenues  of  his  kingdom,  not  qniv  out  of 
the  produce  of  the  lands,  and  the  port  duties,  but,  also,  bv 
setting  men  to  work  again  in  old  mines,  which  had  been  ne¬ 
glected,  and  opening  new  ones  in  many  places.  Then,  (in 
order  to  restore  the  country  to  its  former  degree  of  popula¬ 
tion,  which  had  been  diminished  bv  the  calamities  of  war,'^ 
besides  compelling  every  one  to  marry  and  educate  children, 
he  transplanted  a  great  multitude  of  Thracians  into  Mace¬ 
donia,  and,  during  a  long  suspension  of  arms,  he  employed 
the  utmost  assiduity  in  augmenting,  by  every  possible  means, 
the  strength  of  his  kingdom.  Causes  afterwards  occurred, 
which  served  to  revive  his  resentment  against  the  Romans. 
Complaints  were  made  by  the  lliessalians  and  Perrhaebians, 
of  his  holding  possession  of  their  towns,  and,  by  ambassa¬ 
dors  from  king  Eumenes,  of  his  having  forcibly  seized  the 
cities  of  Thrace,  and  transplanted  great  numbers  of  their 
people  into  Macedonia.  These  had  been  received  in  such  a 
manner  as  plainly  evinced  that  they  were  not  thought  un¬ 
worthy  of  attention.  What  made  the  greatest  impression 

318 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  56f. 

on  the  senate,  was,  their  having  been  informed,  that  Philip 
aimed  at  the  possession  of  iEnus  and  Maronea;  as  to  the 
Thessalians,  they  regarded  them  less.  Ambassadors  came, 
likewise,  from  the  Athamanians,  informing, — not  that  their 
frontiers  were  encroached  on,  or  part  of  their  territory  taken, 
— but  that  all  Athamania  had  been  brought  under  the  do¬ 
minion  and  jurisdiction  of  the  king.  Exiles  from  Maronea 
also  appeared,  who  had  been  expelled  by  the  king’s  troops, 
for  having  supported  the  cause  of  liberty;  who  reported,  that 
not  only  Maronea,  but  iEnus  too,  was  held  in  subjection  by 
him.  Ambassadors  came  from  Philip  to  defend  his  conduct, 
asserting,  that,  in  all  these  cases,  nothing  had  been  dont 
without  permission  from  the  Roman  commanders.  That 
the  states  of  the  Thessalians,  Perrhiebians,  and  Magne- 
siars,  and  the  nation  of  the  Athamanians,  with  Amynander, 
had  all  been  engaged  in  the  same  cause  with  the  iEtolians. 
T'hat  aftet*  the  expulsion  of  king  Antiochus,  the  consul,  be¬ 
ing  himself  busy  in  reducing  the  towns  of  A.tolia,  had  named 
Philip  to  subdue  those  states,  and  they  remained  subject  to 
him  in  consequence  of  their  being  conquered  by  his  arms.’^ 
The  senate,  unwilling  to  come  to  any  decision  in  the  king’s 
absence,  sent  Quintus  Csecilius  Metcllus,  ]M arcus  Bdtbius 
Tamphilus,  and  Tiberius  Sempronius,  ambassadors  to  adjust 
those  disputes.  Previous  to  their  arrival,  a  convention  of 
all  those  states,  w'ho  had  disputes  with  the  king,  was  sum¬ 
moned  to  meet  at  Teinpe  in  Thessaly. 
XXV.  There,  when  all  were  seated,  (the  Roman  ambassa¬ 
dors,  in  the  character  of  arbitrators,  the  Thessalians,  Pen*- 
haebians,  and  Athamanians,  professedly  as  accusers,  and 
Philip  as  defendant,)  the  heads  of  the  embassies,  according 
to  their  several  tempers,  their  favour,  or  their  hatred  towards 
the  king,  spoke,  some  with  acrimony,  others  with  mildness. 
There  was  a  dispute  concerning  Philippopolis,  Trica,  Pha- 
loria,  Eurymenae,and  the  other  towns  in  their  neighbourhood. 
The  point  in  controversy  was,  whether  these  towns  were  the 

B.  C,  185. 1 

BOOK  XXXIX. 

319 
property  of  the  Thessalians,  forcibly  taken  from  them,  and 
held  by  the  iEtolians,  (for  from  these  it  was  acknowledged 
that  Philip  had  received  them,)  or  whether  they  were  origi¬ 
nally  belonging  to  the  iEtolians;  Acilius  having  granted  them 
to  the  king,  on  the  condition  that  they  had  been  the  pro¬ 
perty  of  the  ^tolians;  and  that  their  siding  with  the  iEto- 
lians  had  been  voluntary,  and  not  the  effect  of  compulsion 
and  force.”  The  question  in  regard  to  the  towns  of  the 
Perrhaebians  and  Magnesians,  turned  on  the  same  points;  for 
the  .£tolians,  by  holding  possession  of  them  occasionally, 
had  introduced  confusion  with  respect  to  the  real  proprie¬ 
tors  of  them  all.  To  these  particulars,  which  were  matter 
of  discussion,  the  Thessalians  added  complaints,  that,  if 
these  towns  were  now  restored  to  them,  they  would  come 
into  their  hands  in  a  state  of  desolation,  and  depopulated; 
for  besides  the  loss  of  inhabitants,  through  the  casualties  of 
war,  Philip  had  carried  away  five  hundred  of  their  young 
men  of  the  first  rank  into  Macedonia,  where  he  employed 
them  in  servile  offices,  unbecoming  their  birth;  and  had  taken 
pains  to  render  useless  whatever  he  should  be  compelled  to 
restore  to  the  Thessalians.  That  Thebes  in  Phthiotis  was 
the  only  sea- port  they  had,  which,  formerly,  produced  much 
profit  and  advantage  to  the  inhabitants  of  Thessalt ;  but,  that 
Philip,  having  collected  there  a  number  of  ships  of  burthen, 
made  them  steer  their  course  past  Thebes  to  Demetrius;  by 
which  means,  he  turned  thither  the  whole  commerce  by  sea. 
That  he  did  not  now  scruple  to  offer  violence,  even  to  am¬ 
bassadors,  who,  by  the  law  of  nations,  are  every  where  held 
inviolable,  but  had  laid  an  ambush  for  theirs  who  were  going 
to  Titus  Quint! us.  In  consequence  of  these  proceedings, 
the  Thessalians  were  all  seized  with  such  dread,  that  notone 
of  them,  even  in  their  own  states,  or  in  the  general  assem¬ 
blies  of  the  nation,  ventured  to  open  his  lips.  For  the  Ho¬ 
mans,  the  defenders  of  their  liberty,  were  far  distant;  and  a 
severe  master  close  at  their  side,  debarring  them  from  the 

320 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  56r. 

kindness  of  those  their  allies.  If  speech  were  not  free,  what 
else  could  be  said  to  be  so;  at  present,  they  confided,  so  far, 
in  the  protection  of  the  ambassadors,  as  to  utter  their  groans, 
rather  than  words;  but, unless  the  Romans  would  apply  some 
remed}'  to  abate  both  the  fears  of  the  Greeks  bordering  on 
Macedonia,  and  the  arrogance  of  Philip,  his  having  been 
conquered,  and  their  being  set  at  liberty,  would  prove  utterly 
fruitless.  Like  a  stubborn,  unmanageable  horse,  he  required 
to  be  checked  with  a  strong  bridle.”  These  bitter  expres¬ 
sions  were  used  by  the  last  speakers  among  them;  those  who 
spoke  before  having  endeavoured,  by  mildness,  to  mitigate 
his  resentment;  requesting  him,  to  make  allowances  for 
people  pleading  in  defence  of  their  liberty;  to  lay  aside  the 
harshness  of  a  master,  and  in  the  course  of  his  conduct, 
show  himself  a  friend  and  ally;  to  imitate  the  Roman  people, 
who  wished  to  unite  their  allies  to  them  by  the  ties  of  affec¬ 
tion,  rather  than  of  fear.”  When  the  Thessalians  had  finish¬ 
ed,  the  Perrhsebians  pleaded  that  Gonnocondylos,  to  which 
Philip  had  given  the  name  of  Olympias,  belonged  to  Perr- 
hcebia,  and  ought  to  be  restored  to  them;  and  the  same  de¬ 
mand  was  made  w  ith  respect  to  Mal(£a,and  Ericiniuni.  The 
Athamanians  claimed  a  restoration  of  liberU ,  with  the  forts 
Atheneeus  and  Pcetueus. 
XXVI.  Philip,  that  he  might  maintain  the  appearance  of 
an  accuser,  rather  than  of  a  defendant,  began  his  discourse 
also  with  complaints.  He  alleged,  that  the  'J'hessalians  had 
taken  bv  force  of  arms,  Meiielais  in  Dolopia,  a  town  belong¬ 
ing  to  his  dominions;  likewise  Petra  in  Pieria,  by  the  same 
Thessalians,  and  the  Perrhsebians;  that  they  had  reduced, 
under  their  government,  Xyniae,  which  unquestionably  be¬ 
longed  to  --Etolia,  and  had,  without  any  colour  of  justice, 
subjected  to  the  jurisdiction  of  the  d'hessaiians,  Parachelois, 
in  the  territory  of  Athamania.  As  to  the  charges  brought 
against  him,  concerning  an  ambush  laid  for  ambassadors, 
and  of  sea-ports  being  frequented  or  deserted,  the  one  was 

B.  C,  185.J 

BOOK  mix. 

321 

quite  ridiculous,  (as  if  he  were  to  account  for  what  harbours 
merchants  or  sailors  should  frequent;)  and  the  other,  the 
constant  tenor  of  his  conduct  refuted.  During  a  nun.ber 
of  years,  ambassadt)rs  had  never  ceased  carr)ing  complaints 
against  him,  sometimes  to  the  Roman  generals,  at  others  to 
Rome  to  the  senate,  though  none  of  them  had  ever  been  in¬ 
jured,  even  in  words.  They  said,  indeed,  that  an  ambush 
was  once  laid  for  some  who  were  going  to  Quintius,  but  they 
are  silent  in  regard  to  consequences.  It  wa^  evident,  that 
the  authors  sought  for  groundless  imputations,  because  they 
had  none  to  offer  that  were  founded  in  truth.'’  He  said, 
that  the  Thessalians,  insolently  and  wantonly,  abused  the 
indulgence  of  the  Roman  people,  too  greedily  drinking  as  it 
were,  strong  draughts  of  liberty  after  a  long  thirst;  and  thus, 
in  the  manner  of  slaves  lately  set  free,  made  trial  of  their 
voices  and  tongues,  and  prided  themselves  in  invectives  and 
railings  against  their  masters.”  Then,  hurried  on  by  pas¬ 
sion,  he  added,  that  ‘‘  his  sun  had  not  set  yet;”  which  ex¬ 
pression,  not  only  the  Thessalians,  but  the  Romans  also, 
took  as  a  menace  to  themselves,  and  a  murmur  of  displea¬ 
sure  followed  his  words.  When  this  at  length  ceased,  he 
proceeded  to  answer  the  anibassadors  of  the  Perrhaebians 
and  Athamanians,  He  observed,  the  cases  of  the  cities  of 
which  they  had  spoken  were  the  same.  The  consul  Acilius 
and  the  Romans  gave  them  to  him,  when  they  were  the  pro¬ 
perly  of  enemies*  If  the  donors  chose  to  resume  what  they 
had  given,  he  knew  he  must  submit,  but  in  that  case  they 
would,  for  the  gratification  of  inconstant  and  unprofitable 
allies,  do  injury  to  a  more  useful  and  more  faithful  friend* 
For  no  favour  produced  less  permanent  gratitude  than  the 
gift  of  liberi) ,  especially  among  people  who  were  ready  to 
make  a  bad  use  of  it.”  After  hearing  all  parties,  the  am¬ 
bassadors  pronounced  their  judgment,  that  the  Macedoni¬ 
an  garrisons  should  be  withdrawn  from  the  cities  in  ques¬ 
tion,  and  that  the  kingdom  of  Macedonia  should  be  limitec 
VOL.  V,— T  t 

322 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  567. 

within  its  ancient  boundaries.  That,  with  regard  to  the  in¬ 
juries  complained  of  by  th^  several  parties,  in  order  to  de¬ 
cide  the  controversies  between  those  states  and  the  Mace¬ 
donians,  it  would  be  requisite  to  institute  a  regular  judicial 
inquiry  into  their  several  rights,” 
XXVII.  This  determination  gave  grievous  offence  to  the 
king,  and  the  ambassadors  proceeded  thence  to  Thessalonice, 
to  give  a  hearing  to  the  business  concerning  the  cities  of 
Thrace.  Here  the  ambassadors  of  Eumenes  said,  that  “  if 
the  Romans  wished  that  iEnus  and  Maronea,  should  be  in¬ 
dependent,  the  king  had  nothing  more  to  say,  than  to  recom¬ 
mend  it  to  them  to  leave  those  people  free  in  fact,  though 
not  in  words;  nor  to  suffer  their  kindness  to  be  intercepted 
by  another.  But,  if  they  had  not  so  much  concern  for  the 
cities  in  Thrace,  it  was  much  more  reasonable,  that  places 
which  had  been  under  the  dominion  of  Antiochus,  and  were 
become  the  prize  of  victor}',  should  be  granted  to  Eumenes, 
than  to  Philip;  and  that,  either  an  account  of  his  father  At- 
talus’s  deserts  in  the  war,  waged  by  the  Roman  people 
against  Philip  himself,  or  on  account  of  his  own,  in  sharing 
all  the  toils  and  dangers  on  land  and  sea,  during  the  war 
with  Antiochus.  Besides,  he  ha\l  the  previous  judgment  of 
the  ten  ambassadors  to  that  purpose;  who,  when  they  grant¬ 
ed  the  Chersonesus  and  Lysimachia,  surely  yielded,  at  the 
same  time,  JEuns  and  Maronea;  wliich  even  from  the  prox¬ 
imity  of  situation  were  but  a  sort  of  appendages  to  the  lar¬ 
ger  gift.  For,  as  to  Philip,  what  merits  towards  the  Ro¬ 
man  people,  or  what  right  of  dominion  could  he  plead  for 
having  put  garrisons  into  those  places,  which  were  at  so 
great  a  distance  from  the  borders  of  Macedonia?  They  then 
desired,  that  the  Romans  would  order  the  Maronites  to  be 
called,  from  whom  they  would  receive  more  positive  in¬ 
formation  of  the  ccmdition  of  those  cities.”  The  Maronite 
ambassadors,  being  called  in,  declared,  that  not  in  one 
spot  of  the  city,  as  was  usually  the  case,  but  in  every  quar- 

B.  C  185.] 

BOOK  XXXIX. 

323 

ter  of  it,  there  was  a  party  of  the  king’s  troops,  so  that 
Maronea  was  full  of  Macedonians;  in  consequence  of  which, 
the  party  that  showed  themselves  disposed  to  humour  the 
king,  domineered  over  the  rest;  they  alone  had  liberty  of 
speaking  either  in  the  senate,  or  assemblies  of  the  people. 
All  posts  of  eminence  they  assumed  to  themselves,  or  confer* 
i*ed  on  whom  they  thought  proper^  Persons  of  the  best 
characters^  and  who  had  a  regard  for  liberty  and  for  the 
laws,  were  either  expelled  their  country;  or  obliged  to  sit 
down  in  silence,  deprived  of  all  share  in  the  public  honours, 
and  exposed  to  insolence.”  They  added  also  a  few  words 
respecting  their  right  to  the  frontier  places,  affirming,  that 
Quintus  Fabius  Labeo,  when  he  was  in  that  country,  had 
fixed  as  a  boundary  line  to  Philip,  the  old  royal  road  leading 
to  Paroreia,  in  Thrace,  which  in  no  place  leads  towards  the 
sea;  and  that  Philip  afterwards  drew  a  new  one  in  another 
direction,  in  order  to  comprehend  the  cities  and  lands  of  the 
Maronites.” 
XXVI 11.  Philip,  in  his  reply,  took  quite  another  course 
than  when  answering  the  Thessalians  and  Perrhaebians,  and 
spoke  to  the  following  effect: — “  I  dispute  not  now  with  the 
Maronites,  or  with  Eumenes,  but  with  you  yourselves,  Ro¬ 
mans,  from  whom,  as  it  would  seem,  I  am  not  to  expect  any 
justice.  The  cities  of  Macedonia,  which  had  revolted  from 
me  during  a  suspension  of  arms,  I  wished  to  have  been  restor¬ 
ed  to  me;  not  that  they  would  h^ve  made  any  great  accession 
%o  my  dominions,  because  the  towns  are  small  in  themselves, 
and,  besides,  are  situated  on  the  extremities  of  the  frontiers; 
but  because  the  example  was  of  consequence  towards  retain¬ 
ing  the  rest  of  the  Macedonians,  in  their  allegiance.  This 
was  refused  me.  In  the  -Etolian  war,  1  was  ordered,  by  the 
consul  Manius  Acilius  to  lay  seige  to  Lamia,  and  when  I  had 
there  undergone  a  long  course  of  fatigue  in  fighting  and  con¬ 
structing  works,  and  was  on  the  point  of  mounting  the  walls, 
the  consul  recalled  me  when  the  city  was  almost  in  my  pos> 

324 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

LY.  R.  567 

session,  forcing  me  to  draw  off  my  troops.  As  some  con« 
solation  for  his  hard  treatment,  I  received  permission  to 
seize  on  some  forts  rather  than  cities,  of  Thessaly,  Perrhse- 
bia,  and  Athamania.  Of  these  also,  Quintus  Caecilius  has 
deprived  me.  The  ambassadors  of  Eumenes,  just  now, 
took  for  granted,  it  seems,  that  whatever  belonged  to  Antio^ 
chus  would  more  properly  be  given  to  Eumenes  than  to  me. 
My  judgment  of  the  matter  is  widely  different.  For,  not 
on  the  Romans  proving  victorious,  but  on  their  engaging  in 
the  war,  Eumenes'  continuance  on  his  throne  depended. 
The  obligation,  therefore,  lies  on  his  side,  not  on  yours, 
whereas,  so  far  were  any  part  of  my  dominions  from  being 
in  danger,  that,  when  Antiochus  voluntarily  offered  to  pur¬ 
chase  my  alliance,  with  three  thousand  talents  and  fifty  deck¬ 
ed  ships,  guaranteeing  to  me  all  the  cities  of  Greece,  of  which 
I  had  heretofore  been  in  possession,  I  rejected  that  offer.  I 
avowed  myself  his  enemy,  even  before  Manius  Acilius 
brought  over  an  army  into  Greece.  In  conjunction  with 
that  consul,  I  supported  whatever  share  of  the  w’ar  he  gave 
me  in  charge.  To  serve  the  succeeding  consul,  Lucius  Sci- 
pio,  when  he  proposed  leading  his  army  by  land,  to  the  Hel¬ 
lespont,  besides  giving  him  a  passage  through  my  dominions, 
I  also  made  roads  for  him,  built  bridges,  supplied  him  with 
provisions,  and  convoying  him,  not  only  through  Macedo¬ 
nia,  but  likewise  through  1  hrace;  where,  besides  other  bu¬ 
siness,  I  had  the  task  of  keeping  the  barbarians  quiet.  In 
requital  of  this  zealous,  not  to  call  it  meritorious,  conduct 
tow’ards  you,  whether  would  it  be  proper  in  you,  Romans,  to 
grant  me  some  addition  to  my  dominions  by  acts  of  generosi¬ 
ty,  or  to  ravish  from  me  what  I  possessed,  either  in  my  own 
right,  or  through  your  kindness?  The  cities  of  Macedonia, 
which  you  acknowledge  to  have  belonged  to  my  kingdom, 
are  not  restored.  Eumenes  comes  to  plunder  me  as  he 
would  Antiochus,  and  covers  his  most  shameless  and  ground* 
chicanerjs  under  the  decree  of  the  ten  ambassadors,  the 

BOOK  XXXIX. 

B.  C.  185.] 

very  circumstance  that  completely  refutes  arfB  convicts  him. 
For  is  it  not  expressly  and  plainly  set  down  in  that  writing, 
that  the  Chersonese  and  Lysimachia  are  granted  to  Eu- 
menes;  and  is  there  any  mention  therein  of  iEnus,  Maronea, 
and  the  cities  of  Thrace?  That  which  he  did  not  dare  ever 
to  ask  from  them,  shall  he  obtain  from  you,  as  if  under  their 
grant?  Much  depends  on  the  character  in  which  you  choose 
to  consider  me.  If  you  are  resolved  to  persecute  me  as  a 
foe,  proceed  to  act  as  you  have  begun;  but,  if  you  have  any 
consideration  of  me,  as  a  king  in  friendship  and  alliance  with 
vou,  I  must  intreat  you  not  to  judge  me  deserving  of  such 
injurious  treatment.” 
XXXIX.  The  king’s  discourse  made  a  considerable  im¬ 
pression  on  the  ambassadors;  they  therefore  left  the  matter 
in  suspense  by  this  indecisive  resolution,  that  if  the  cities 
in  question  were  granted  to  Eumenes  by  the  decree  of  the 
ten  ambassadors,  they  would  make  no  alteration.  If  Philip 
subdued  them  in  war,  he  should  by  the  laws  of  war,  hold 
them  as  the  prize  of  victory.  If  neither  were  the  case,  then 
their  judgment  was,  that  the  decision  should  be  referred  to 
the  senate;  and  in  order  that  every  particular  might  he  open 
for  deliberation,  the  garrisons  in  those  cities  should  be  \vith- 
drawn.”  These  causes,  among  others  of  less  weight,  alenia- 
^ed  the  regard  of  Philip  from  the  Romans,  so  that  in  all  ap- 
pearance  the  war  was  not  set  on  foot  by  his  son  Perseus  for 
any  fresh  causes,  but  rather  was,  for  these  causes,  bequeath¬ 
ed  by  the  father  to  the  son.  At  Rome  there  was  hitherto  no 
suspicion  of  a  war  with  Macedonia.  I.ucius  Manlius,  pro- 
consul,  had  by  this  time  come  home  from  Spain*  He  de¬ 
manded  a  triumph  from  the  senate  assembled  in  the  temple 
of  Bellona,  and  his  demand  was  justified  by  the  greatness  oi 
his  exploits,  but  contradicted  by  precedent;  for  it  was  a  rule 
established  by  ancient  practice,  that  no  commander,  who  had 
not  brought  home  his  troops,  should  triumph,  unless  he  had 
delivered  up  the  province  to  his  successor,  in  a  state  of  th^- 

326 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  567. 

rough  subjectie^k  and  tranquillity.  However,  the  senate  took 
a  middle  course,  and  ordered  that  Manlius  should  enter  the 
city  in  ovation.  He  carried  in  the  procession  fifty-two  gold¬ 
en  crowns,  one  hundred  and  twenty-two  pounds  weight  of 
gold,  with  sixteen  thousand  three  hundred  pounds  of  silver; 
giving  public  notice,  in  the  senate,  that  his  quaestor,  Quintus 
Fabius,  was  bringing  ten  thousand  pounds  weight  of  silver, 
and  eighty  of  gold,  which  he  intended  to  carry  likewise  to 
the  treasury.  During  that  year  there  was  a  formidable  in¬ 
surrection  of  the  slaves  in  Apulia.  Lucius  Postumius,  prae¬ 
tor,  governed  the  province  of  Tarentum,  who  conducted 
with  much  severity,  inquiries  into  a  conspiracy  of  peasants, 
who  had  infested  the  roads  and  public  pastures  with  robbe¬ 
ries.  Of  these,  he  passed  sentence  on  no  less  than  seven 
thousand;  many  of  whom  made  their  escape,  and  many  were 
punished.  The  consuls,  after  being  long  detained  in  the  city 
by  the  levies,  set  out  at  length  for  their  provinces. 
XXX.  7’his  year  Caius  Caipurnius  and  Lucius  Qulntius, 
the  two  praetors  in  Spain,  drew  their  troops  out  of  w'inter 
quarters,  early  in  spring,  and  making  a  junction  of  them  in 
Baeturia,  for  they  were  resolved  to  proceed  in  the  operations 
of  the  campaign  with  united  zeal  and  harmony,  advanced 
into  Carpetania,  where  the  enemy’s  camp  lay.  At  a  small 
distance  from  the  towns  of  Hippo  and  Toietum,  a  fight  began 
between  the  foraging  parties;  and  as  reinforcements  came  up 
on  both  sides,  from  the  camps,  the  entire  armies  were,  by 
degrees  drawn  out  into  the  field.  In  this  irregular  kind  of 
battle,  the  advantage  of  the  ground  and  the  manner  of  fight¬ 
ing  were  in  favour  of  the  enemy.  The  two  Roman  armies 
were  routed,  and  driven  into  their  camp;  but  the  enemy  did 
not  pursue  the  advantage,  which  the  others  fears  afforded 
them.  The  Roman  praetors,  lest  their  camp  should  be  at¬ 
tacked  next  day,  gave  orders,  without  noise  for  decamping, 
and  led  away  their  army  in  the  dead  of  the  following  night- 
At  the  first  dawn,  the  Spaniards  came  up  to  the  rampart  in 

BOOK  XXXIX. 

o27 

B.  C.  185.J 

battle  array,  and  finding,  beyond  their  expectation,  that  the 
camp  was  deserted,  marched  in,  and  made  prey  of  whatever 
had  in  the  hurry  and  confusion  been  first  left  behind ;  and 
then,  returning  to  their  own  station,  remained  quiet  for  se¬ 
veral  days.  Of  the  Romans  and  allies,  there  were  killed  in 
the  battle  and  the  pursuit,  five  thousand  men,  out  of  whose 
spoils  the  enemy  furnished  themselves  with  arms.  They 
then  advanced  to  the  river  Tagus.  All  the  intermediate 
time,  the  Roman  praetors  employed  in  collecting  aid  from  the 
allied  Spanish  states,  and  recovering  the  spirits  of  their  men 
from  the  dismay  occasioned  by  their  defeat.  When  they 
judged  their  strength  sufficient,  and  found  themselves  called 
on  by  the  soldiers,  to  lead  them  against  the  enemy,  that  they 
might  blot  out  their  former  disgrace,  they  took  post  at  the 
distance  of  twelve  miles  from  the  river  Tagus;  but  decamp¬ 
ing  thence  at  the  third  watch,  and  marching  in  order  of  bat¬ 
tle,  reached  the  bank  of  the  river  at  the  break  of  day. 
The  enemy’s  camp  was  on  a  hill  at  the  other  side  of  the  riv¬ 
er.  Having  discovered  two  fords,  Calpurnius  immediately 
led  his  army  across  through  that  on  the  left.  All  this  time, 
the  enemy  continued  motionless,  surprised  at  the  sudden  ar¬ 
rival  of  the  Romans,  and  busy  in  consultations,  when  they 
might  have  greatly  distressed  the  troops  during  their  hurry 
and  confusion  in  passing  the  river.  The  Romans  brought 
all  over  even  to  their  baggage,  which  they  threw  together  in 
a  heap.  Seeing  the  enemy,  at  length,  begin  to  move,  and 
having  no  time  for  fortifying  a  camp,  they  formed  their  line 
of  battle,  placing  in  the  centre,  the  fifth  legion,  ser\  ing  under 
Calpurnius,  and  the  eighth  under  Quintius,  which  composed 
the  principal  strength  of  their  army.  From  hence,  all  the 
way  to  the  enemy’s  camp,  they  had  an  open  plain,  where 
there  could  be  no  danger  of  ambush. 
XXXL  When  the  Spaniards  saw  the  two  bodies  of  Ro¬ 
mans,  on  their  side  of  the  river,  they  resolved  to  fall  upon 
them  before  they  should  unite  and  put  themselves  in  order; 

32S 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

[Y.  R*  567. 

rushing  therefore  suddenly  out  of  the  camp,  they  advanced 
to  battle  at  full  speed.  The  fight  in  the  beginning,  was  urged 
with  great  fury;  the  Spaniards  being  elated  by  their  late  sue- 
cess,  and  the  Roman  soldiery  inflamed  to  rage  by  a  discom¬ 
fiture  to  which  they  were  unaccustomed.  The  centre,  con¬ 
sisting  of  two  legions  of  the  greatest  braverv',  fought  with  the 
utmost  vigour.  The  enemy,  seeing  that  they  could  not  be 
forced  from  their  ground  by  any  other  means,  resolved  to 
make  their  attack  in  form  of  a  wedge;  and  this  body,  becom¬ 
ing  continual!}  more  numerous  and  more  compact,  pressed 
hard  on  them.  When  the  prsetor,  Calpurnius,  perceived  the 
distress  of  this  part  of  his  line,  he  hastily  despatched  two 
lieutenants- general,  Titus  Quiniilius  Varus  and  Lucius  Ju- 
ventius  Thalna,  to  anin<ate  the  courage  of  the  two  legions, 
who  were  ordered  to  say,  that  all  hopes  of  victory,  and  of 
retaining  possession  of  Spain  depended  entirely  on  them.  If 
they  should  give  ground,  not  a  man  in  that  whole  army 
would  ever  Italy,  no,  nor  even  the  farther  bank  of  the 
Tagus,”  He  himself  at  the  head  of  the  cavalry  of  the  two 
legions,  making  a  small  circuit  charged  the  flank  of  the  wedge, 
which  was  pressing  upon  his  centre.  Quintius,  likewise, 
with  his  cavalry,  charged  the  enemy  on  the  other  flank;  but 
the  horsemen  of  Calpurnius  fought  with  far  greater  spirit, 
while  the  preetor  himself  exceeded  ail  others.  He  was  the 
first  that  struck  down  one  of  the  enemy,  and  he  pushed  in 
among  the  troops,  in  the  centre,  in  such  a  manner,  that  it 
was  hard  to  distinguish  to  which  side  he  belonged.  Thus 
»he  horse  wert  animated  by  the  extraordinary  valour  of  the 
praetor,  and  the  infantry  by  that  of  the  horse.  The  foremost 
'•enturions,  seeing  the  praetor  in  the  midst  of  the  enemy’s 
weapons,  were  struck  with  shame.  They  all,  therefore, 
earnestly  pressed  the  standard  bearers,  urging  them  to  carry 
forward  the  ensigns,  and  the  soldiers  to  follow  with  speed. 
All  set  up  the  shout  a-new,  and  made  an  attack  as  violent  as 
if  they  were  rushing  down  a  hill.  Like  a  flood,  therefore. 

B.  C.  185.] 

BOOK  XXXIX. 

329 

they  broke  and  bore  down  the  enemy  in  dismay,  nor  was  it 
possible  to  withstand  them,  pouring  in  one  after  another. 
The  Spaniards,  flying  to  their  camp,  were  pursued  by  the 
cavalry,  who,  mixing  in  the  crowd  of  the  runaways,  penetra¬ 
ted  into  it.  Here  the  fight  was  renewed,  by  the  troops  left 
to  guard  the  same,  and  the  Roman  horsemen  were  obliged 
to  dismount  While  they  were  engaged,  the  fifth  legion  came 
up,  with  the  rest  of  the  troops.  The  Spaniards  were  cut  to 
pieces,  in  all  parts  of  the  camp;  not  more  than  four  thousand 
men  making  their  escape.  Of  these,  about  three  thousand, 
who  kept  their  arms,  took  post  on  a  mountain,  at  a  small  dis¬ 
tance,  and  one  thousand,  who  were  in  general  but  half  armed, 
dispersed  through  the  country.  This  army  of  the  enemy 
had  contained  thirty-five  thousand  men,  of  whom  that  very 
small  number  survived  the  battle.  One  hundred  and  thirty- 
•three  standards  were  taken.  Of  the  Romans  and  allies,  a 
few  more  than  six  hundred  fell;  and,  of  the  provincial  auxil¬ 
iaries,  about  one  hundred  and  fifty.  The  loss  of  five  milita¬ 
ry  tribunes,  and  a  few  Roman  horsemen,  was  the  only  cir¬ 
cumstance  that  made  the  victory  appear  to  have  been  dearly 
earned.  The  army  lodged  in  the  enemy’s  camp,  as  they  had 
not  had  time  to  fortify  one  of  their  own.  Next  dav.  Cal- 
purnius,  in  an  assembly,  commended  the  behaviour  of  the 
cavalry,  making  them  presents  of  horse  tumiture,  and  declar¬ 
ing  publicly,  that  through  their  bravery  principally',  the  ene¬ 
my  had  been  defeated,  and  their  camp  stormed  and  taken, 
Quintius,  likewise  gave  chains  and  clasps  to  his  men.  A 
great  many  centurions  also,  oY  both  the  armies,  received 
gratuities,  especially  those  who  were  in  the  centre. 
XXXII.  The  consuls,  as  soon  as  they  had  finished  the 
levies,  and  other  business  necessary  to  be  done  at  Rome,  led 
the  army  into  their  province,  Liguria.  Sempronius,  march¬ 
ing  from  Pisae  against  the  Apuan  Ligurians,  ravaged  their 
lands,  and  burned  their  villages  and  forts,  until  he  opened 
that  difficult  country,  as  far  as  the  river  Macra,  and  the 
voi.  v.—lJ  u 

336 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  568. 

harbour  of  Luna.  The  enemy  posted  themselves  on  a  moun¬ 
tain,  which  had,  from  old  times,  served  their  forefathers  as 
a  retreat;  but  the  difficulty  of  access,  here  also,  was  over¬ 
come,  and  they  were  dislodged  by  force.  The  good  conduct 
and  success  of  Appius  Claudius  against  the  Ingaunian  tribe, 
was  not  inferior  to  that  of  his  colleague,  for  he  defeated 
them  in  several  battles.  He  also  stormed  six  of  their  towns, 
in  which  he  made  a  vast  number  of  prisoners,  beheading  for¬ 
ty-three  of  the  chief  promoters  of  the  war.  The  time  of  the 
elections  now  drew  near;  but  Claudius  came  home  to  Rome 
sooner  than  Sempronius,  to  whom  the  business  of  presiding 
at  the  elections  had  been  allotted,  because  his  brother,  Pub¬ 
lius  Claudius,  stood  candidate  for  the  consulship.  His  com¬ 
petitors,  of  patrician  rank,  were  Lucius  iEmilius,  Quintus 
Fabius  Labeo,  and  Servius  Sulpicius  Galba,  who  h.id  been 
candidates  before,  and  now  renewed  their  suit,  for  the  ho¬ 
nour  of  which  they  had  been  disappointed,  and  which  was 
the  more  justly  due  to  them,  as  it  had  been  refused  before. 
Besides,  as  it  was  not  lawful  that  more  than  one  patrician 
should  be  appointed,  this  made  the  competition,  being  four, 
still  more  obstinate,  Claudius  was  the  only  new  one.  The 
plebeian  candidates  likewise  were  men  in  high  esteem.  Lu¬ 
cius  Porcius,  Quintus  Terentius  Culleo,  and  Cneius  Baebius 
Tamphilus;  these  top  had  been  disappointed,  but  had  che¬ 
rished  hopes  of  attaining  the  honour  at  some  future  time. 
The  general  opinion  was,  that  Quintus  Fabius  Labeo  and 
Lucius  Porcius  Licinus  would  be  the  successful  persons;  but 
Claudius,  the  consul,  unattended  by  his  iictors,  canvassed 
with  his  brother,  through  all  parts  of  the  Forum,  notwith¬ 
standing  the  loud  remonstrances  of  his  opponents,  and  the 
greater  part  of  the  senate,  who  insisted  that,  he  ought  to 
remember  the  duty  of  a  consul  of  the  Roman  people,  in  pre¬ 
ference  to  that  of  the  brother  of  Publius  Claudius.  To  sit 
on  his  tribunal,  content  himself  with  presiding,  and  remain 
a  silent  spectator  of  the  business.’’  Yet  nothing  could  re- 

B.  C.  184.] 

BOOK  XXXIX. 

331 

strain  his  immoderate  zeal.  The  election  was,  also,  several 
times,  interrupted  by  contentions  between  the  plebeian  tri¬ 
bunes,  some  of  whom  struggled  hard  in  opposition  to  the 
consul,  and  others  in  support  of  the  cause  which  he  favour¬ 
ed.  At  last,  Appius  conquered  all  opposition,  so  as  to  set 
aside  Fabius,.  and  bring  in  his  brother.  Thus  was  Publius 
Claudius  Pulcher  elected  consul,  beyond  his  own,  and  in¬ 
deed  the  general  expectation.  Lucius  Porcius  Licinus  car¬ 
ried  his  election  also.  The  contest,  among  the  plebeian  can¬ 
didates,  was  decently  conducted  and  not  with  intemperate 
violence,  like  that  of  Claudius.  Then  was  held  the  election 
of  praetors,  in  which  were  chosen,  Caius  Decimius  Flavus, 
Publius  Sempronius  Longus,  Publius  Cornelias  Cethegus, 
Quintus  Naevius  Matho,  Caius  Sempronius  Blsesus,and  Au- 
lus  Terentius  Varro.  Such  were  the  occurrences  at  home  and 
abroad,  of  this  year,  during  the  consulate  of  Appius  Clau¬ 
dius  and  Marcus  Sempronius. 
XXXIII.  In  the  beginning  of  the  following  year,  y 
(Publius  Claudius  and  Lucius  Porcius  being  con-  B.  C.  184. 
suls,)  Quintus  Caecilius,  Marcus  Baebius,  and  Tiberius  Sem¬ 
pronius,  who  had  been  sent  to  adjust  the  matters  in  dispute 
between  the  kings,  Philip  and  Eumenes,  and  the  states  of  the 
Thessalians,  came  home,  and  gave  an  account  of  the  execu¬ 
tion  of  their  commission.  They  also  introduced  to  the  senate 
ambassadors  from  those  kings  and  states.  On  this  occasion, 
the  same  arguments  were  repeated  by  all  parties,  which  had 
been  urged  before  the  ambassadors  in  Greece.  The  senate 
then  decreed,  that  a  new  embassy,  with  Appius  Claudius  at 
its  head,  should  be  sent  into  Macedonia  and  Greece,  to  know 
whether  the  several  states  had  been  restored  to  the  Rhodians, 
Thessalians,  and  Perrhsebians.  They  were,  farther,  instructed 
to  take  care,  that  the  garrisons  should  be  withdrawn  fiom 
A1.UUS  and  Maronea,  and  that  all  the  sea-coast  of  1  hrace 
should  be  made  free  and  independent  of  Philip  and  the  Ma¬ 
cedonians.  They  were  ordered,  also,  to  go  to  Peloponnesus, 

HISTORY  OF  ROME 

[Y.  R.  568, 

where  the  former  ambassadors  had,  at  their  departure,  left 
affairs  in  a  more  unsettled  state,  than  they  would  have  been, 
if  they  had  not  come  thither.  For,  besides  other  matters, 
they  were  even  sent  away  without  an  answer  by  the  Achsean 
council,  nor  were  they  allowed  an  audience.  On  this  sub¬ 
ject,  Quintus  Ceecilius  made  a  heavy  complaint.  At  the  same 
time  the  Lacedaemonians  deplored  the  demolition  of  their 
walls,  the  carrying  off  their  poor  people  into  Achaia,  the 
selling  of  them  there  and  the  depriving  them  of  the  laws  of 
Lycurgus,  by  which  the  nation  had  been  supported  unto  that 
time.  On  this  the  Achaians,  endeavouring  chiefly  to  apolor 
gize  for  having  refused  a  meeting  of  the  council,  recited  a 
law  which  enacted,  that  a  council  should  not  be  summoned, 
except  on  business  of  peace  or  war,  or  when  ambassadors 
should  come  from  the  senate  with  letters  or  written  instruc¬ 
tions.  That  this  kind  of  excuse  should  not  be  made  in  future, 
the  senate  observed  to  them,  that  they  ought  in  prosperity, 
to  take  care  that  Roman  ambassadors  should  at  all  times 
have  an  opportunity  of  applying  to  their  council;  in  like  man¬ 
ner  as  the  senate  always  gave  them  audience,  at  any  time 
when  they  wished  it. 
XXXVI.  After  those  ambassadors  had  received  their  an¬ 
swers,  Philip,  being  informed  that  he  must  yield  up  the 
states,  and  evacuate  the  towns  in  question,  was  highly  en¬ 
raged  against  all,  yet  vented  his  fury  on  the  Maronites  in 
particular.  He  gave  a  charge  to  Onomastus,  who  had  the 
command  of  the  sea-coast,  to  put  to  death  the  leaders  of  the 
opposite  party.  This  man  employed  a  person  called  Cassan- 
der,  a  partizan  of  the  king’s  who  had  resided  a  long  time  in 
Maronea,  and  he,  introducing  a  body  of  Thracians  by  night, 
put  the  inhabitants  to  the  sword,  as  if  the  city  had  been  taken 
by  storm.  When  the  Roman  ambassadors  complained  of  his 
acting  with  such  cruelty  towards  the  innocent  Maronites, 
and  with  such  presumption  towards  the  Roman  people,  in 
killing,  as  enemies, those  very  persons  to  whom  the  senate  had 

BOOK  XXXIX. 

333 

B,  C.  1S4.] 
adjudged  the  restoration  of  liberty,  he  averred  that  “  none 
of  those  matters  concerned  him,  or  any  one  belonging  to 
him;  that  they  had  quarrelled  among  themselves,  and  fought, 
because  some  wished  to  bring  over  their  state  to  his  side, 
others  to  that  of  Eumenes,  That  the  truth  of  this  might  be 
readily  ascertained;  and  they  had  only  to  ask  the  Maronites 
themselves/’  For  he  was  confident,  that,  while  they  were  all 
under  the  impression  of  terror,  since  the  late  massacre,  not 
one  of  them  would  dare  to  utter  a  word  against  him.  Ap- 
pius  said,  that  this  would  be  looking  for  obscurity  in  a  case 
alreadv  clear.  But  if  he  wished  to  remove  the  guilt  from 
himself,  let  him  send  Onomastus  and  Cassander,  the  actors 
in  that  business,  to  Rome,  that  the  senate  might  examine 
them.”  At  first,  these  words  so  entirely  disconcerted  the 
king,  that  neither  his  colour,  nor  his  looks,  remained  un¬ 
changed;  then,  after  some  time,  having  collected  his  thoughts, 
he  replied,  that  he  would  send  Cassander,  who  had  been 
in  Maronea,  if  it  was  their  desire:  but,  as  to  Onomastus, 
how  could  that  matter  affect  him,  who  so  far  from  being  in 
Maronea,  was  not  even  near  it?”  He  was  more  careful  of 
Onomastus,  as  a  more  valued  friend,  yet  he  dreaded  him 
much  more  lest  he  might  make  discoveries.  He  had,  in  per¬ 
son,  however,  conversed  with  him  on  the  subject,  and  he 
had  confided  in  him  as  an  agent  in  many  similar  transac- 
tionSv  Cassander  is  supposed  to  have  been  taken  off,  that  the 
truth  might  not  be  divulged, — being  poisoned  by  persons 
sent  to  escort  him  through  Epirus  to  the  sea-coast. 
XXXV.  The  ambassadors  quitted  the  conference  in  a  man¬ 
ner  which  plainly  showed  that  they  were  not  at  all  pleased 
with  any  thing  that  had  passed;  and  Philip,  with  a  full  reso¬ 
lution  to  have  recourse  again  to  arms.  But  his  strength  be¬ 
ing,  as  yet,  insufficient  for  that  purpose,  he  resolved,  in  order 
to  procure  delay,  to  send  his  younger  son  Demetrius  to 
Rome,  to  clear  him  from  the  above-named  charges;  and,  at 
the  same  time,  to  deprecate  the  wrath  of  the  senate.  Philip 

334 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  56B 

had  strong  expectations  that  the  young  man  himself,  having, 
while  an  hostage  at  Rome,  exhibited  proofs  of  a  princely 
disposition,  would  have  a  good  deal  of  influence  now.  Mean¬ 
while,  under  the  pretence  of  carrying  succour  to  the  Byzan- 
tians,  but,  in  reality,  with  design  to  strike  terror  into  the 
chieftains  of  the  Thracians,  he  marched  into  their  country, 
utterly  defeated  them  in  an  engagement,  in  which  he  took 
their  commander,  Amadocus,  prisoner,  and  then  returned  to 
Macedonia,  having  first  despatched  emissaries  to  persuade 
the  barbarians,  living  near  the  Danube,  to  make  an  irruption 
into  Italy.  The  Roman  ambassadors,  who  had  been  ordered 
to  go  from  Macedonia  into  Achaia,  were  expected  daily  in 
Peloponnesus:  and,  in  order  that  the  Achaeans  might  settle 
their  plans  of  conduct  towards  them  beforehand,  their  prae¬ 
tor,  Lycortas,  summoned  a  general  council.  Here  the  affair 
of  the  Lacedaemonians  was  taken  into  consideration.  It  was 
observed,  that  “  from  enemies  they  were  turned  accusers; 
and  there  was  reason  to  fear,  lest  they  should  prove  more 
formidable,  after  having  been  conquered,  than  when  they  had 
arms  in  their  hands:  for,  in  the  war,  the  Achaeans  had  the 
Romans  as  allies  in  their  cause;  now,  the  same  Romans  were 
more  favourable  to  the  Lacedemonians  than  to  the  Achaeans. 
Even  Areus  and  Alcibiades,  both  restored  from  exile, 
through  the  kindness  of  the  Achaeans,  had  undertaken  an 
embassy  to  Rome,  in  prejudice  to  a  nation  to  which  they 
were  so  much  obliged;  and  had  spoken  against  it,  with  so 
much  animosity,  that  people  might  suppose  they  had  been 
banished  from  their  country,  instead  of  being  restored  to  itJ' 
A  general  clamour  arose,  requiring  him  to  put  the  question 
on  each  of  them  by  name;  and  as  every  thing  was  directed 
by  passion,  not  by  reason,  they  were  condemned  to  die.  In 
a  few  days  after  this,  the  Roman  ambassadors  arrived,  and 
a  council  was  summoned  to  meet  them  at  Clitor,  in  Arcadia. 
XXXVI.  Before  any  business  was  entered  on,  the  Achae- 
ans  received  an  alarming  proof,  how  little  impartiality  they 

B.  C.  184.] 

BOOK  XXXIX. 

335 

were  likely  to  experience  in  the  proceedings  on  this  cause, 
when  they  saw  in  company  with  the  and^assadors.  Areas 
and  Alcibiades,  whom,  in  their  last  council,  they  had  con¬ 
demned  to  death;  yet  none  of  them  dared  to  utter  a  word. 
Appius  acquainted  them,  that  the  senate  was  much  dis¬ 
pleased  at  those  matters,  of  which  the  Lacedaemonians  made 
complaint  before  them;  “  first,  the  massacre  at  Compasium  of 
those  who,  in  obedience  to  the  summons  of  Philopcemen, 
came  to  stand  a  trial;  then,  after  such  barbarity,  the  having 
demolished  the  walls  of  that  famous  city,  having  abrogated 
its  laws,  of  the  greatest  antiquity,  and  abolished  the  discip¬ 
line  of  Lycurgus,  so  famed  throughout  the  world.’’  After 
Appius  had  spoken  to  this  effect,  Lycortas,  both  because  he 
was  praetor,  and  because  he  was  of  the  faction  of  Philopce¬ 
men,  the  adviser  of  all  that  was  done  at  Lacedaemon,  an¬ 
swered  him  thus:  “  Appius  Claudius,  it  is  a  harder  task  on 
us  to  plead  before  you,  than  we  had  lately,  before  the  sen¬ 
ate  at  Rome;  for  then  we  had  to  answer  the  accusations  of 
the  Lacedaemonians,  but  now,  we  stand  accused  by  your¬ 
selves,  before  whom  our  cause  is  to  be  heard.  But  to  this 
disadvantage  of  situation  we  submit  with  this  hope,  that  you 
will  hear  us  with  the  temper  of  a  judge,  laying  aside  the 
character  of  an  advocate,  in  which  you,  just  now,  appeared. 
For  my  part,  at  least,  though  the  matters  of  which  the 
Lacedaemonians  complained  formerly,  in  this  place,  before 
Quintus  Cjecilius,  and  afterwards  at  Rome,  have  been  just 
recapitulated  by  you,  yet  I  shall  consider  myself  as  answer¬ 
ing  not  to  you,  but  before  you,  to  them.  You  charge  us 
with  the  murder  of  those  men,  who,  being  called  out  by  the 
praetor  Philopcemen,  to  trial,  were  put  to  death.  This  I 
think  a  charge  of  such  a  nature,  that  it  ought  not  to  be  ad¬ 
vanced  against  us,  either  by  you,  Romans,  or  by  any  in  your 
presence;  and  I  will  tell  you  why.  One  of  the  articles  in 
the  treaty  which  you  signed  is,  that  the  Lacedaemonians 
should  not  intermeddle  with  the  cities  on  the  coast.  At  the 

J36 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

fV*  R.  568. 

time^  when  they  took  arms,  assaulted,  in  the  ni^t,  and 
seized  on  those  t^ns,  with  which  they  had  been  forbidden 
to  interfere;  if,  I  say,  Titus  Quin  tins,  if  a  Roman  army  had 
been  in  Peloponnesus,  as  formerly  the  captured  and  oppres* 
sed  inhabitants  would  surely  have  fled  to  them  for  relief. 
As  you  were  at  a  great  distance,  to  whom  else  would  they 
fly,  but  to  us,  your  allies,  whom  they  hud  seen  at  a  former 
time  bringing  aid  to  Gythium;  whom  they  had  seen,  in  con« 
junction  with  you,  besieging  Lacedaemon  on  their  account? 
In  your  stead,  therefore,  wc  undertook  a  just  and  rightful 
war.  Other  men  approve  this  step,  and  even  the  Lacedae¬ 
monians  cannot  censure  it;  the  gods  themselves,  also,  by 
giving  us  the  victory,  have  shown  their  approbation  of  it; 
how  then,  can  acts,  done  under  the  laws  of  war,  be,  by  any 
means,  made  matter  of  civil  disquisition?  Of  these  acts, 
however,  the  greatest  part  nowise  effect  us.  The  summon¬ 
ing  to  trial,  men,  who  had  excited  the  populace  to  arms,  who 
had  stormed  and  plundered  the  towns  on  the  coast,  who  had 
murdered  the  principal  inhabitants,  was  our  act;  but,  the 
putting  them  to  death,  when  they  were  coming  into  the  camp, 
was  yours,  Areus  and  Aicibiades,  who  now  arraign  us,  and 
not  ours.  The  Lacedaemonian  exiles,  and,  among  the  rest, 
these  two  men,  who  were  then  in  our  camp,  thinking  the  at¬ 
tack  meant  against  them,  as  they  had  chosen  the  maritime 
towns  for  their  residence,  made  an  assault  on  those  by  whose 
means  they  had  been  banished,  and  who,  they  perceived  with 
indignation,  would  not  suffer  them  even  to  grow  old  in  exile 
with  safety.  Lacedfcmonians  therefore,  not  Achseans,  slew 
Lacedeemonians;  nor  is  it  of  any  consequence  to  dispute, 
whether  they  were  slain  justly  or  unjustly. 
XXXVI L  But  then,  Achseans,  the  abolition  of  the  laws 
and  ancient  discipline  of  Lycurgus,  with  the  demolition  of  the 
walls, — these  acts  were  unquestionably  yours:  now,  how  can 
both  these  charges  be  brought  forward  by  the  same  persons, 
since  the  walls  of  Lacedaemon  were  built,  not  by  Lycurgus, 

B.  C.  184.] 

BOOK  XXXIX. 

337 

but  a  few  years  ago,  for  the  purpose  of  subverting  the  dis¬ 
cipline  of  that  very  man?  The  tyrants  erected  them  lately, 
as  a  fortress  and  defence  for  themselves,  not  for  the  state; 
and,  if  Lycurgus  should  rise  this  day  from  the  dead,  he 
would  rejoice  at  seeing  them  in  ruins,  and  would  say,  that  he 
now  acknowledged  his  country^  and  ancient  Sparta.  You 
ought  not  to  have  waited  for  Philopoemen,  or  the  Achseans; 
you  should  have  removed  and  razed,  with  your  own.  hands, 
every  vestige  of  tyranny;  for  these  were  the  foul  scars,  left 
on  you  by  slavery.  And  as,  during  almost  eight  hundred 
years,  while  ye  were  without  walls,  ye  were  free,  and,  for 
some  time,  even  chiefs  of  Greece;  so,  after  being  bound  with 
walls,  as  with  fetters,  you  were  slaves  for  one  hundred  years. 
As  to  what  concerns  the  abrogating  their  laws,  *I  conceive 
that  the  tyrants  took  away  the  ancient  laws  of  Lacedaemon, 
and  that  we  did  not  deprive  them  of  their  own  laws,  which 
they  did  not  possess,  but  gave  them  ours;  nor  did  we  neglect 
the  interests  of  their  state,  when  we  made  it  a  member  of  our 
council,  and  incorporated  it  with  ourselves,  so  that  the  whole 
Peloponnesus  should  form  one  body,  and  one  council.  If, 
indeed,  we  had  im|K)sed  on  them  laws,  different  from  those 
under  which  we  lived  ourselves,  in  that  case,  I  think  they’^ 
might  complain  of  being  treated  unfairly,  and  consequently^ 
be  displeased.  I  know,  Appius  Claudius,  that  the  kind  of 
discourse,  which  I  have  hitherto  used,  is  not  proper  either 
for  allies,  addressing  their  allies,  or  for  an  independent  na¬ 
tion;  but,  in  truth,  for  slaves  pleading  before  their  masters. 
For,  if  the  herald’s  proclamation,  in  which  you  ordered  the 
Achaeans,  in  the  first  place,  to  be  free,  was  any  thing  more 
than  empty  sound;  if  the  treaty  is  valid,  if  the  alliance  and 
friendship  is  maintained  on  equal  terms,  why  do  not  I  in* 
quire  what  you,  Romans,  did,  on  the  taking  of  Capua,  as 
well  as  that  you  demand  an  account  of  our  conduct  towards 
the  Lacedsemonians,  when  we  conquered  them  in  war?  Some 
persons  were  killed,  suppose  by  us.  What!  did  not  you 
voi .  V, — X  X 

J38 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  568. 

behead  the  Campanian  senators?  We  demolished  their  walls: 
you  not  only  destroyed  the  walls,  but  you  took  the  city,  and 
the  lands.  But  you  say,  the  Achgeans  enjoy,  in  appearance, 
a  league  on  equal  terms,  but,  in  reality,  a  precarious  state  of 
freedom,  while  the  Romans  enjoy  supreme  power.  I  am 
sensible  of  it,  Appius;  and  if  I  ought  not,  I  do  not  remon¬ 
strate:  but,  I  beseech  you,  let  the  difference  between  the 
Romans  and  Achaeans  be  as  great  as  it  may,  not  to  place 
people,  who  arc  foes  to  both,  on  an  equal  footing  with  us, 
your  allies,  or  even  on  a  better.  For,  as  to  setting  them  on 
an  equality,  that  we  ourselves  have  done,  when  we  gave 
them  our  own  laws,  when  we  made  them  members  of  the 
Achaean  counciL  Vanquished, — they  are  not  content  with 
w  hat  satisfies  their  conquerors;  foes, — they  demand  more 
than  allies  enjoy.  What  we  have  ratified,  by  our  oaths, 
what  we  have  consecrated  as  inviolable,  to  eternal  remem¬ 
brance,  by  records  engraved  in  stone,  they  want  to  abolish, 
and  to  load  us  with  perjury.  Romans,  for  you  we  have  high 
respect;  and,  if  such  is  your  wish,  dread  also;  but  we  more 
respect  and  dread  the  immortal  gods.’'  He  was  heard  with 
general  approbation,  and  all  declared,  that  he  had  spoken  as 
became  the  dignity  of  his  office;  so  that  it  was  easily  seen, 
that  the  Romans  could  not  support  their  ascendancy,  by 
gentle  methods.  Appius  then  said,  that  he  earnestly  re¬ 
commended  it  to  the  Achaeans,  to  show^  a  compliant  temper^ 
while  it  was  in  their  power  to  act  voluntarily,  lest  they  might, 
presently,  be  obliged,  by  compulsion,  to  act  against  their 
wills.*’  These  words  inspired  universal  affliction,  and 
effectually  deterred  them  from  refusing  compliance.  They 
only  requested  the  Romans  to  make  such  alterations,  re¬ 
specting  the  Lacedaemonians,  as  they  should  judge  proper; 
and  not  involve  the  Acheeans  in  the  guilt  of  annulling  what 
they  had  sanctioned  with  their  oaths.”  And  then,  nothing 
more  was  done  than  to  reverse  the  sentence  lately  passed  on 
Arcus  and  Alcibiades. 

BOOK  XXXIX. 

339 

B.  C.  184.] 

XXXVIII.  In  the  beginning  of  this  year,  when  the  bu¬ 
siness  of  assigning  the  provinces  to  the  consuls  and  praetors 
was  taken  under  consideration,  at  Home,  Liguria  was  de¬ 
creed  to  the  consuls,  there  being  no  war  any  where  else.  As 
to  the  praetors,^ — Caius  Decimius  Flavus  obtained,  by  lot, 
the  city  jurisdiction;  Publius  Cornelius  Cethegus,  that  be¬ 
tween  citizens  and  foreigners;  Caius  Sempronius  Blsesus, 
Sicily;  Quintus  Nffvius  Matho,  Sardinia,  he  had  also  the 
charge  of  making  inquisition  concerning  poisons;  Aulus  Te- 
rentius  Varro,  hither  Spain,  and  Publius  Sempronius  Lon- 
gus,  farther  Spain.  From  the  two  latter  provinces  deputies 
arrived,  about  this  time. — Lucius  Juvencius  Thalna,  and 
Titus  Quintilius  Varus.  These  represented  to  the  senate, 
that  the  formidable  war  of  Spain  had  been  brought  to  a  for¬ 
tunate  conclusion:  they  therelore  requested,  that  in  consi¬ 
deration  of  such  happy  success,  a  thanksgiving  should  be 
performed  to  the  immortal  gods,  and  permission  granted 
to  the  praetors  to  bring  home  the  armies.  The  senate  decreed 
a  thanksgiving  for  two  days,  and  ordered  that  the  question, 
respecting  the  armies,  should  lie  over,  and  be  proposed  when 
those,  for  the  consuls  and  praetors,  should  be  under  consi¬ 
deration,  A  few  days  after  this,  they  voted  to  the  consuls, 
for  Liguria,  two  legions  each,  which  had  been  commanded 
bv  Appius  Claudius  and  Marcus  Sempronius.  With  regard 
to  the  armies  in  Spain,  there  was  a  warm  contention  between 
the  new'  praetors  and  the  friends  of  the  absent  ones,  Calpur- 
nius  and  Quintius.  On  each  side  were  plebeian  tribunes, 
and,  on  each,  a  consul.  The  former  threatened,  if  the  senate 
voted  for  bringing  home  the  armies,  to  protest  against  their 
decree;  the  latter,  that,  if  such  a  protest  were  made,  they 
would  not  suffer  any  other  business  to  proceed.  At  last  the 
interest  of  the  absent  praetors  was  overpo%vered,  and  a  de¬ 
cree  of  the  senate  passed,  that  the  pi  :etors  should  enlist 
four  thousand  Roman  foot,  and  four  hundred  horse;  with 
five  thousand  foot,  and  five  hundred  horse  of  the  Latine 

340 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y,  R.  568. 
confederates;  whom  they  should  carry  with  them  into  Spain. 
That,  when  they  should  have  divided  these,  between  the 
legions,  whatever  number  should  then  be  in  each  legion, 
above  five  thousand  foot  and  three  hundred  horse,  should  be 
discharged,  beginning  with  those  who  had  served  out  their 
number  of  campaigns,  and  proceeding  to  the  rest,  according 
to  their  respective  merits,  in  the  service  under  Calpurnius 
and  Quintius.’’  . 
XXXIX.  No  sooner  was  this  dispute  ended,  than  ano¬ 
ther  arose,  in  consequence  of  the  death  of  a  prsetor,  Caius 
Decimius.  There  stood  candidates  for  his  place,  Cneius 
Sicinius  and  Lucius  Pupius,  who  had  been  adiles  the  year 
before;  Caius  Valerius,  the  flamen  of  Jupiter;  and  Quintus 
Fulvius  Flaccus,  who,  though  he  did  not  appear  in  the 
white  gown,  because  he  was  curule  gedile  elect,  yet  pressed 
his  suit  with  more  warmth  than  any  of  them.  The  contest 
lay  between  the  latter  two,  Fulvius  at  the  beginning  seemed 
to  have  an  equal  chance  with  the  flamen,  and  afterwards  sur¬ 
passed  him;  on  which,  some  of  the  plebeian  tribunes  insisted, 
that  he  ought  not  to  be  admitted  a  candidate,  because  one 
person  could  neither  hold,  nor  administer,  two  offices,  espe¬ 
cially  curule  ones,  at  the  same  time;  while  others  of  them 
gave  their  opinion,  that  he  ought  to  be  exempted  from  the 
laws,  in  order  that  the  people  might  have  the  power  of  elect¬ 
ing  prgetor  the  person  whom  they  wished.  The  consul,  Lu¬ 
cius  Porcius,  was,  from  the  beginning,  inclined  to  refuse  ad¬ 
mitting  him  a  candidate;  and,  afterwards,  wishing  to  have 
the  countenance  of  the  senate  in  so  doing,  he  called  the  mem¬ 
bers  together,  and  nold  them,  that  he  desired  their  judg¬ 
ment  in  the  case,  where  a  curule  aedile  elect,  without  any  co¬ 
lour  of  law,  and  setting  a  precedent  insufferable  in  a  free 
state,  stood  candidate  for  the  prsetorship;  for  his  part,  unless 
they  determined  otherwise,  he  intended  to  hold  the  election 
according  to  law.”  The  senate  voted,  that  the  consul,  Lu¬ 
cius  Porcius,  should  recommend  to  Quintus  Fulvius,  not  to 

B.  C.  184.] 

BOOK  mix. 

341 

obstruct  the  assembly  (soon  to  be  held  for  substituting  a 
prsetor,  in  the  room  of  Caius  Decimius)  from  proceeding 
according  to  law.  When  the  consul,  in  pursuance  of  this 
decree,  applied  to  him  on  the  subject,  he  answered,  that  “  he 
would  do  nothing  unworthy  of  himself,’’  by  which  indeter¬ 
minate  answer,  he  left  room  for  people  to  interpret  his  in¬ 
tention,  agreeably  to  their  wish,  and  that  he  meant  to  sub¬ 
mit  to  the  direction  of  the  senate.  But,  in  the  assembly,  he 
urged  his  pretensions  with  more  eagerness  than  ever;  re¬ 
monstrating,  that  the  consul  and  the  senate  were  forcibly 
depriving  him  of  the  kindness  intended  for  him  by  the  Ro¬ 
man  people;  exciting  a  clamour  against  a  second  post  of  ho¬ 
nour  being  conferred  on  him;  as  if  it  were  not  manifest,  that, 
when  elected  praetor,  he  must  instantly  abdicate  the  aedile- 
ship.  The  consul,  seeing  the  candidate’s  obstinacy  increase, 
and  the  public  favour  incline  to  him  more  and  more,  dis¬ 
solved  the  assembly,  and  summoned  a  meeting  of  the  senate; 
where,  in  a  full  house,  a  vote  was  passed,  that  inasmuch 
as  the  directions  of  the  senate  had  produced  no  effect  on 
Flaccus,  the  affair  concerning  him  should  be  laid  before  the 
people.”  A  general  assembly  was,  accordingly,  summoned, 
and  the  consul  made  a  full  representation  of  the  matter. 
Fulvius  still  remained  inflexible.  He  returned  thanks  to  the 
Roman  people  “  for  the  great  zeal  which  they  had  shown  in 
their  desire  to  make  him  praetor,  as  often  as  opportunity  had 
been  given  them  of  declaring  their  sentiments;”  and  assured 
them,  that  it  was  his  resolution  not  to  disappoint  such  in¬ 
stances  of  the  attachment  of  his  countrymen  ”  This  deter¬ 
mined  declaration  increased  the  ardour  of  the  people  for  his 
cause,  to  such  a  degree,  that  he  would  undoubtedly  have 
been  chosen  praetor,  if  the  consul  had  admitted  him  to  stand. 
The  tribunes  maintained  a  violent  altercation,  both  with 
their  colleagues,  and  with  the  consul,  until,  at  length,  the 
senate  passed  a  decree,  that  ‘‘  whereas  the  obstinacy  of 
Quintus  Flaccus,  and  the  ill-judged  party  zeal  of  many 

342 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

fY.  R.  568. 

among  the  people,  had  prevented  the  assembly  for  filling  the 
place  of  a  praitor,  from  being  held  according  to  law.  The 
senate  therefore  gave  their  judgment,  that  the  present  num¬ 
ber  of  praetors  was  sufficient,  that  Publius  Cornelius  should 
hold  both  jurisdictions  in  the  city,  and  celebrate  the  games 
of  Apollo.” 
XL.  No  sooner  was  this  election  stopped  by  the  prudence 
and  firmness  of  the  senate,  than  another  ensued,  with  greater 
heat  of  contest;  both  because  the  subject  was  of  greater  im¬ 
portance,  and  the  competitors  more  numerous,  and  more 
powerful.  The  censorship  was  contended  for  by  the  follow¬ 
ing  candidates,  Lucius  Valerius  Flaccus,  Publius  Scipio, 
Lucius  Scipio,  Cneius  Manlius  Vulso,  and  Lucius  J^'urius 
Purpureo,  patricians;  Marcus  Porcius  Cato,  Marcus  Fulvius 
Nobilior,  Tiberius  Sempronius  Longus,  Marcus  Semproniub 
Tuditanus,  plebeians  But  all  of  them,  both  plebeians  and 
patricians,  of  the  highest  ranks,  were  left  far  behind  by  Mar¬ 
cus  Porcius.  So  great  were  the  powers  of  this  man’s  mind, 
that  he  seemed  able  to  attain  to  any  situation  he  aimed  at. 
No  one  qualification  for  the  management  of  business,  either 
public  or  private,  was  wanting  to  him:  being  equally  know¬ 
ing  in  ordinary  matters  as  in  those  of  the  state^f^ome  have 
been  advanced  to  the  highest  honours  by  their  knowledge  of 
the  law,  others  by  their  eloquence,  some  by  military  renown; 
but  this  man’s  genius  was  so  versatile,  and  so  well  adapted 
to  all  things,  that  in  whatever  way  engaged,  it  might  be  said, 
that  nature  formed  him  for  that  alone.  In  war,  he  was  the 
most  courageous,  distinguishing  himself  highly  in  many  re¬ 
markable  battles;  and,  when  he  arrived  at  the  highest  posts, 
was  likewise  the  most  consummate  commander.  Then,  in 
peace,  if  information  were  wanted  in  a  case  of  law,  he  was 
the  wisest  counsellor;  if  a  cause  was  to  be  pleaded,  the  most 
eloquent  advocate.  Nor  was  he  one  of  those  whose  oratory 
was  striking  only  during  their  own  lives,  without  leaving  af¬ 
ter  them  any  monument  of  it.  On  the  contrary,  his  elo- 

BOOK  XXXIX. 

343 

B.  C.  184.] 

quence  still  lives,  and  will  long  live,  consecrated  to  memory 
by  writings  of  every  kind.  His  orations  are  many,  spoken 
for  himself,  for  others,  and  against  others,  for  lie  harassed 
his  enemies,  not  only  by  supporting  prosecutions  against 
them,  but  by  maintaining  causes  in  opposition  to  them.  En¬ 
mities  in  abundance  gave  him  plenty  oi  employment;  nor 
was  it  easy  to  tell  whether  the  nobility  laboured  harder  to 
keep  him  down,  or  he  to  oppress  the  nobility.  His  temper, 
no  doubt,  was  austere,  his  language  bitter,  and  unboundedly 
free,  but  he  was  never  ruled  by  his  passions;  his  integrity 
was  inflexible,  and  he  looked  with  contempt  on  popularity 
and  riches.  In  spare  diet,  in  enduring  toil  and  danger,  his 
body  and  mind  were  like  steel;  so  that  even  old  age,  whicli 
brings  all  things  to  dissolution,  did  not  break  his  vigour.  In 
his  eighty  sixth  year  he  stood  a  trial,  pleaded  his  own  cause, 
and  published  his  speech;  and,  in  his  ninetieth  year,  he 
brought  Servius  Galba  to  trial,  before  the  people. 
XLL  On  this  occasion,  of  standing  for  the  censorship, 
the  nobility,  as  they  had  done  through  the  whole  course  of 
his  life,  endeavoured  to  obstruct  his  promotion.  All  the  can¬ 
didates,  likewise,  except  Lucius  Flaccus,  who  had  been  his 
colleague  in  the  consulship,  combined  to  disappoint  him  ot 
the  office,  not  merely  with  a  view  to  their  own  success,  in 
preference  to  him,  or  because  it  would  grieve  them  to  see  a 
new  man  in  it,  but  because  from  one  who  had  received  of¬ 
fence  from  most  of  them,  and  who  wished  to  retaliate,  they 
apprehended  a  harsh  severity  in  his  administration,  that 
would  endanger  the  reputations  of  many.  For,  even,  'while 
soliciting,  he  uttered  frequent  menaces,  and  upbraided  them 
with  endeavouring  to  exclude  him,  because  they  dreaded 
an  impartial  and  courageous  execution  of  the  duty  of  cen¬ 
sor;  at  the  same  time,  giving  his  interest  to  Lucius  Valerius. 
He  said,  that  “  he  was  the  only  colleague,  in  conjunction 
with  whom  he  could  correct  modem  profligacy,  and  re-es- 

344 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R,  568. 

tahlish  the  ancient  morals.”  People  were  so  inflamed  by  such 
discourses,  that,  in  spite  of  the  opposition  made  by  the  no¬ 
bility,  they  not  only  made  Marcus  Porcius  censor,  but  gave 
him,  for  his  colleague,  Lucius  Valerius  Flaccus.  Immediate¬ 
ly  after  the  election  of  censors,  the  consuls  and  praetors 
went  abroad  to  their  provinces,  except  Quintus  Naevius,  who 
was  detained  from  going  to  Sardinia,  for  no  less  than  four 
months,  by  inquisitions  concerning  poisonings,  a  great  part 
of  which  he  held  out  of  the  city,  in  the  corporate  towns  and 
villages;  for  that  method  was  judged  the  more  eligible.  If  we 
are  to  credit  Valerius  Antias,  he  condemned  two  thousand 
men.  Lucius  Postumius,  the  praetor,  to  whose  lot  the  pro¬ 
vince  of  Tarentunt  had  fallen,  made  discovery  of  numerous 
conspiracies  of  the  peasants,  and,  with  great  care,  finished 
the  remainder  of  the  inquiries  concerning  the  Bacchanalians. 
Many  of  these,  who  had  not  appeared  on  being  summoned, 
or  had  deserted  their  bail,  were  then  lurking  in  that  part  of 
Italy;  some  of  them  he  sentenced  to  punishment,  and  others, 
he  sent  under  a  guard  to  the  senate  to  Rome,  where  they 
were  all  committed  to  prison  by  Publius  Cornelius. 
XLII.  In  farther  Spain,  the  Lusitanians  being  weakened 
by  their  losses  in  the  late  war,  matters  remained  quiet.  In 
hither  Spain,  A  ulus  Terentius  took  the  town  of  Corbia, 
in  Suessetania,  after  a  regular  siege,  and  sold  the  prisoners; 
after  which,  the  troops  had  rest  in  their  winter  quarters,  in 
that  province  also.  The  former  praetors,  Caius  Calpurnius 
Piso,  and  Lucius  Quintius  came  home  to  Rome,  and  the 
senate,  with  great  cheerfulness,  voted  a  triumph  to  both. 
Caius  Calpurnius  triumphed,  first,  over  the  Lusitanians 
and  Celtiberians.  He  carried  in  procession  eighty- three 
golden  crowns,  and  twelve  thousand  pounds  weight  of  sil¬ 
ver.  In  a  few  days  after,  Lucius  Quintius  Crispinus  tri¬ 
umphed  over  the  same  Lusitanians  and  Celtiberians,  bear¬ 
ing  in  his  triumph  the  same  quantity  of  gold  and  silver. 

BOOK  XXXIX. 

345 

B.  C.  184.] 
The  censors,  Marcus  Porcius  and  Lucius  Valerius,  while  the 
public  were  full  of  anxious  curiosity  blended  with  fear,  made 
their  survey  of  the  senate;  out  of  which  they  displaced  seven 
members,  one  of  them  a  man  of  consular  rank,  highly  dis- 
tinguished  by  nobility  of  birth  and  honourable  employments, 
— Lucius  Quintius  Flamininus.  It  is  mentioned,  as  a  practice 
instituted  in  early  times,  that  the  censors  should  annex  marks 
of  censure  to  the  names  of  such  as  thev  degraded  from  the 
senate.  There  are  severe  speeches  of  Cato,  against  those 
whom  he  either  expelled  the  senate,  or  degraded  from  the 
equestrian  rank,  but  by  far  the  most  so  is  that  against  Lu¬ 
cius  Quintius.  Had  he  spoken,  in  the  character  of  prose¬ 
cutor,  previous  to  the  censure,  and  not  in  that  of  censor  af¬ 
ter  it,  not  even  his  brother  Titus,  if  he  were  his  colleague, 
could  have  suffered  Quintius  to  remain  in  the  senate. 
Among  other  charges,  he  objected  to  him,  that  he  had,  by 
hopes  of  extraordinary  presents,  prevailed  on  Philip,  a  Car¬ 
thaginian  and  a  catamite,  to  accompany  him  into  his  province 
of  Gaul;  that  this  youth,  in  order  to  enhance  the  merit  of 
his  complaisance  to  the  consul,  used  frequently,  in  wanton 
squabbling,  to  upbraid  him  for  having  quitted  Rome  just 
before  the  show  of  gladiators.  It  happened,  that  while 
thev  were  at  a  feast,  and  heated  with  wine,  a  message  was 
brought  into  the  place  of  entertainment,  that  a  Boian,  of 
high  rank,  had  come  as  a  deserter  with  his  children,  and 
wished  to  see  the  consul,  that  he  might,  in  person,  receive 
his  assurance  of  protection.  He  was  accordinglv  introduced 
into  the  tent,  and  began  to  address  him  through  an  interpre¬ 
ter:  but  while  he  was  speaking,  Quintius  said  to  ills  cata¬ 
mite,  “  since  you  were  deprived  of  the  show  of  gladiators, 
have  you  a  mind  to  see  this  Gaul  tlvingr’  The  bov  giving 
a  sort  of  assent,  between  jest  and  earnest,  the  consul,  draw¬ 
ing  a  sword  that  hung  over  his  head,  first  struck  the  Gaul 
as  he  was  speaking,  and  then,  when  he  was  running  our,  and 
VOT,,  V. - Y  V 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

346 

[¥•  R.  565, 

imploring  ihc  faith  of  the  Roman  people,  and  of  those  pre¬ 
sent,  ran  him  through  the  side, 
XLIII.  Valerius  Antias,  who  never  read  Cato’s  speech, 
and  only  gave  credit  to  a  tale  published  without  authority, 
tells  the  story  in  another  manner,  but  similar  to  this  in  lust 
and  cruelty-  He  vrrites,  that,  at  Placentia,  the  consul  in¬ 
vited  to  an  entertainment  a  woman  of  ill  fame,  with  whom 
he  was  desperately  enamoured.  There,  displaying  his  im¬ 
portance  to  this  courtezan,  he  told  her,  among  other  mat¬ 
ters,  with  what  severity  he  had  conducted  the  inquisitions, 
and  how  many  he  had  then  in  prison,  under  sentence  of 
death,  ’whom  he  intended  to  behead.  Then  she,  being  next 
him  on  the  couch,  said,  that  having  never  seen  any  one  be¬ 
headed,  she  was  very  desirous  of  seeing  an  execution;  on 
which  the  indulgent  lover  ordered  one  of  those  wretches  to 
be  dragged  to  the  spot,  and  there  cut  off  his  head.  The 
deed  of  death,  whether  committed  as  the  censor  or  as  Va¬ 
lerius  reports  it,  was  barbarous  and  inhuman;  that  in  the 
midst  of  feasting  and  cups,  when  it  is  customary  to  offer  liba¬ 
tions  to  the  g<>ds,  and  to  pray  for  happiness,  a  human  vic¬ 
tim  should  be  butchered,  and  the  table  stained  with  his 
blood,  and  this  for  the  entertainment  of  an  acknowledged 
wanton.  In  the  latter  part  of  Cato’s  speech,  he  proposes  to 
Quintius,  that  if  he  denied  this  fact,  and  the  others  of  which 
he  accused  him,  he  should  give  security  to  abide  a  legal 
trial;  but  if  he  confessed  them,  could  he  suppose,  he  asked 
him,  that  any  one  would  be  sorry  for  his  disgrace;  the  dis¬ 
grace  of  him  who,  in  the  midst  of  a  feast,  being  intoxicated 
with  wine  and  lust,  had  sported  with  the  blood  of  a  human 
being. 
XLIV.  In  the  review  of  the  knights,  Lucius  Scipio  Asia- 
ticus  was  destraded.  In  fixing  the  rates  of  taxation,  also,  the 
censor’s  conduct  w'as  harsh  and  severe  to  all  ranks  of  men. 
He  ordered,  that  people  should  give  account,  upon  oath,  of 
’^vomen’s  dress,  and  ornaments,  and  carriages,  exceeding  in 

B.  C.  184.J 

BOOK  XXXIX. 

347 
value  fifteen  thousand  asses;*  and  that  slaves,  younger  than 
twenty  years,  which,  since  the  last  survey,  had  been  bought 
for  ten  thousand  assesf  or  more,  should  be  estimated  at  ten 
times  their  value;  and  that,  on  all  these  articles,  a  tax  should 
be  laid  of  three  denariuses:j;  for  each  thousand  asses, §  Water, 
running  or  carried  into  any  piivate  building  or  field,  the 
censors  took  away;  and  all  buildings  or  sheds,  in  possession 
of  private  persons  that  projected  into  public  ground,  they 
demolished  within  thirty  days.  They  then  engaged  contrac¬ 
tors  for  executing  national  works,  with  the  money  decreed 
for  that  purpose, — for  paving  cisterns  with  stone,  for  cleans¬ 
ing  the  sewers  and  forming  new  ones  on  the  Aventine,  and 
in  other  quarters  where  hitherto  there  had  been  none.  Then, 
dividing  their  tasks,  Flaccus  built  a  mole  at  Nepthunia,  on 
the  coast,  and  made  a  road  through  the  Formian  mountains. 
Cato  purchased  for  the  use  of  people  two  halls,  the  Alsenian, 
and  Titian,  in  the  street  Lauturniae,  and  four  shops,  erecting 
on  that  ground  a  court  of  justice,  which  was  called  the  Por- 
cian.  They  farmed  out  the  several  branches  of  the  revenue, 
at  the  highest  prices;  v;hile  they  allowed  very  small  profits 
for  the  services,  on  which  the  money  was  to  be  expended. 
But  the  senate,  overcome  by  the  prayers  and  lamentations 
of  the  publicans,  ordered  those  bargains  to  be  revoked,  and 
new  agreements  to  be  made;  on  which  the  censors,  by  an 
edict,  prohibited  the  persons,  who  had  eluded  the  former 
contracts,  from  being  concerned  in  the  new  ones,  and  farmed 
out  all  the  same  branches  at  prices  very  little  reduced.  This 
censorship  was  very  remarkable,  producing  abundance  of 
animosities;  and  drawing  on  Marcus  Porcius,  to  whom  all 
the  harshness  was  attributed,  much  uneasiness  during  the 
remainder  of  his  life.  This  year,  two  colonies  were  estab¬ 
lished,  Potentia  in  ^Picenum,  and  Pisaurum  in  the  Gallic 
territory.  Six  acres  were  given  to  each  settler.  The  same 
"  48i.  8*.  9d,  -j  32i.  5s  lOd  t  3^  Is.  '  li  11  l-4d 

348 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  569. 

commissioners  had  the  ordering  of  both  colonies,  and  the 
division  of  the  lands*  Quintus  Fabius  Labeo,  Marcus  Ful- 
y.  R.  569.  vius  Flaccus,  and  Quintus  Fulvius  Nobilior^^^fhe 
B.  C.  163.  consuls  of  that  year,  performed  nothing  memora¬ 
ble,  at  home  or  abroad, 
XLV.  The  consuls,  elected  for  the  ensuing  year,  were 
Marcus  Claudius  Marcellus,  and  Quintus  Fabius  Labeo. 
These,  on  the  ides  of  March,  the  first  day  of  their  assuming 
the  administration,  proposed  to  the  senate  to  determine  their 
provinces,  and  those  of  the  prjetors.  The  praetors  appointed, 
were  Caius  Valerius,  damen  of  Jupiter,  who  had  been  a 
candidate  the  year  before,  Spurius  Posthumius  Albinus, 
Publius  Cornelius  Sisenna,  Lucius  Pupius,  Lucius  Julius* 
and  Cneius  Sic  ini  us.  I..iguna  was  ordered  to  be  the  pro¬ 
vince  of  the  consuls,  and  the  armies  were  assigned  to  them, 
which  had  been  commanded  by  Publius  Claudius  and  Mar¬ 
cus  Porcius.  The  two  Spains,  without  being  put  to  the  lot, 
were  reserved  for  the  praetors  who  held  them  the  year  be¬ 
fore,  and  also  their  own  armies.  The  praetors  were  ordered 
to  regulate  their  casting  lots,  in  such  a  manner,  that  the  fla- 
men  of  Jupiter  should  have  one  or  other  of  the  judicial 
emplovments  in  the  city.  The  foreign  jurisdiction  fell  to 
his  lot,  that  between  citizens  to  Cornelius  Sisenna.  Sicily 
was  assigned  to  Spurius  Posthumius,  Apulia  to  Lucius 
Pupius,  Gaul  to  Lucius  Julius,  Sardinia  to  Cneius  Sicinius. 
Lucius  Julius  was  ordered  to  hasten  to  his  province,  be¬ 
cause  some  transalpine  Gauls,  as  was  mentioned  before, 
having  made  their  way  through  the  forests  into  Italy,  by 
an  unknown  road,  were  building  a  town  in  the  country,  now 
the  district  of  Aquileia.  The  praetor  received  a  charge  to 
interrupt  their  proceedings,  as  far  as  possible,  v/ithout  hav¬ 
ing  recourse  to  arms;  and,  if  it  should  be  necessary  to  stop 
them  by  force,  to  give  information  to  the  consuls,  one  of 
whom  was,  in  that  case,  directed  to  march  his  legions  against 
those  Gauls.  Towards  the  close  of  the  preceding  year,  an 
assembly  had  been  held  for  the  purpose  of  electing  an  au~ 

B.  C.  1830 

BOOK  XXXIX. 

349 

gur,  in  the  room  of  Cneius  Cornelius  deceased,  when  Spu- 
rius  Posthumius  Albinus  was  chosen. 
XL  VI.  In  the  beginning  of  this  year,  Publius  Licinius 
Crassus,  chief  pontiff,  died,  in  whose  room  was  appointed 
Marcus  Sempronms  Tuditanus,  and  Caius  Servilius  Gemi- 
nus  was  raised  to  the  place  of  chief  pontiff.  On  occasion  of 
the  funeral  of  Publius  Licinius,  a  largess  of  flesh  was  dis¬ 
tributed  to  the  people,  and  one  hundred  and  twenty  pair  of 
Radiators  fought.  The  funeral  games  lasted  three  days,  and, 
after  the  games,  a  public  feast  was  given.  During  the  feast, 
and  while  the  couches  were  spread  over  the  Forum,  a  storm 
came  on  with  violent  gusts  of  wind,  which  compelled  most 
of  the  people  to  pitch  tents  in  that  place,  which,  on  the  wea¬ 
ther  clearing  up,  in  a  short  time  after,  were  removed.  This 
occasioned  a  general  remark,  that  they  had  fulfilled  a  prophe¬ 
cy,  which  soothsayers  had  pronounced,  among  the  decrees 
of  the  fates,  that,  inevitably,  tents  would  be  pitched  in  the 
Forum.  No  sooner  were  they  eased  of  the  apprehensions, 
caused  by  this  prophecy,  than  they  were  struck  with  new 
ones,  by  showers  of  blood  falling  for  two  days,  in  the  area  of 
Vulcan’s  temple.  The  decemvirs,  ordered  a  supplication 
for  the  expiation  of  the  prodigy.  Before  the  consuls  set  out 
for  their  provinces,  they  introduced  the  foreign  embassies  to 
an  audience  of  the  senate;  and  at  no  time  was  there  in  Rome 
such  a  number  of  people  from  countries  beyond  sea.  For,  as 
soon  as  it  became  generally  known,  through  the  nations  bor¬ 
dering  on  Macedonia,  that  accusations  and  complaints  against 
Philip  were  listened  to  by  the  Romans,  with  some  degree  of 
attention,  and  that  many  had  profited  by  having  complained; 
all  those  states,  nations,  and  even  individuals,  on  their  own 
accounts,  (for  he  was  a  troublesome  neighbour  to  every'  one,J 
flocked  to  Rome,  with  hopes  of  obtaining  either  redress  of 
their  injuries,  or,  at  least,  the  consolation  of  expressing  their 
griefs.  An  embassy  came,  also,  from  king  Eumenes  with 
his  brother  Athenseus,  to  complain  of  the  Macedonian  in  not 

350 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y,  R.  569. 

■withdrawing  his  garrisons  out  of  Thrace;  and,  likewise  on 
his  sending  succours  into  Bithynia,  to  Prusias,  who  was  at 
war  with  Eumenes. 
XLVIl.  To  Demetrius,  who  was  then  very  young,  was 
assigned  the  task  of  speaking  to  their  representations;  and  it 
was  no  easy  matter  to  retain  in  memory,  either  all  the  parti¬ 
culars  set  forth,  or  what  was  proper  to  be  said  in  reply.  For 
the  charges  were  not  only  numerous,  but  most  of  them  ex¬ 
ceedingly  frivolous:  of  disputes  about  boundaries,  of  men 
forced  aw^ay,  and  cattle  driv  en  off;  of  justice,  either  partially 
administered  or  refused;  of  sentences  respecting  property, 
founded  either  on  force  or  influence.  The  senate  ]'erceived 
that  Demetrius  could  not  explain  any  of  those  matters  dis¬ 
tinctly,  and  that  the  information  which  they  could  obtain  from 
him  was  not  sufficiently  clear;  >at  the  same  time,  the  youth, 
through  inexperience  and  bashfulness,  v\  as  much  embarrass¬ 
ed.  They  therefore  ordered  that  he  should  be  asked,  wheth¬ 
er  he  had  received  from  his  father  any  vvritten  instructions 
on  those  points;  and  on  his  answering  that  he  had,  they 
thought  it  the  best  and  properest  way  to  receive  the  answers 
of  the  king  himself,  on  each  particular  head,  and  immediately 
called  for  the  writing;  but  afterwards  they  gave  him  leave  to 
read  it  to  them  himself.  Here  were  his  apologies  on  each  se< 
veral  subject,  concisely  stated  in  a  narrow  compass,  in  some 
cases,  that  he  had  acted  in  conformity  to  the  determinations 
of  the  ambassadors;  in  others,  that  the  fault  of  not  conform¬ 
ing  to  them,  lay  not  in  him,  but  actually  in  the  persons  them¬ 
selves  who  accused  him.  He  had  interspersed,  also,  remon¬ 
strances  on  the  injustice  of  those  determinations,  and  the  par¬ 
tiality  that  appeared  when  those  matters  were  discussed  be¬ 
fore  Quintus  Caecilius;  as  well  as  the  indecent  and  unmerited 
insults  thrown  on  him  by  all.  The  senate  remarked  on  these 
tokens  of  his  temper;  nevertheless,  on  the  young  man  apolo¬ 
gizing  for  some  things,  and  undertaking  that  others  should 
be  performed  in  the  manner  most  agreeable  to  the  senate. 

B.  C.  1830 

BOOK  XXXIX, 

351 

they  ordered  this  answer  to  be  given  him,  that  “  in  no  in¬ 
stance,  was  his  father’s  conduct  either  more  proper,  or  more 
pleasing  to  the  senate,  than  in  his  choosing,  whatever  the  na¬ 
ture  of  those  transactions  might  be^  to  send  his  excuses  for 
them  to  the  Romans,  by  his  son  Demetrius.  That  the  senate 
could  leave  unnoticed,  forget  and  put  up  with,  many  past 
matters,  and  believed  also  that  they  might  place  confidence 
in  Demetrius;  for,  though  they  restored  his  person  to  his  fa¬ 
ther,  they  still  had  his  mind  as  an  hostage,  and  were  con¬ 
vinced  that,  as  far  as  was  compatible  with  his  duty  as  a  son, 
he  was  a  friend  to  the  Roman  people.  I'hat,  out  of  regard 
to  him,  they  would  send  ambassadors  into  Macedonia,  in 
order  that  if  anv  thing  w'hich  ought  to  have  been  done,  v/as 
left  undone,  it  might  then  be  effected,  !  ut  still  without  any 
vindictive  retrospect  to  former  omissions.  That  they  would 
be  glad  if  Philip  also  w^ere  sensible  that  he  was  indebted  to 
his  son  Demetrius  for  the  continuance  of  the  good  under¬ 
standing  het\veen  him  and  the  Romans. 
XLVIII.  These  honourable  d('clarations,  intended  to  add 
to  the  dignity  of  his  character,  proved  to  the  young  man  the 
cause  of  immediate  envy,  and  not  of  far  distant  ruin.  The  La¬ 
cedaemonians  were  next  introduced,  when  many  insignificant 
disputes  were  agitated.  Those  which  might  he  deemed  im¬ 
portant  were — whether  the  persons  condemned  by  the  Achae- 
ans,  should  be  reinstated  or  not;  whether  others  were  just¬ 
ly  put  to  death;  and  >vh ether  the  Lacedaemonians  should  con¬ 
tinue  in  the  Achaean  council,  or  as  had  formerly  been  the 
case,  that  a  single  state  in  Peloponnesus,  should  have  sepa¬ 
rate  independence.  It  was  determined,  that  the  condemned 
should  be  reinstated,  and  the  sentences  passed  reversed; 
that  Lacedaemon  should  continue  in  the  Achaean  council;  and 
that  this  decree  should  be  committed  to  w  riting,  and  signed 
bv  the  Lacedemonians  and  Acheans.  Quintus  Marciuswas 
sent  ambassador  into  Macedonia,  with  orders,  likewise  to 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y*  R.  569. 

take  a  view  of  the  affairs  of  the  allies  in  Peloponnesus;  for 
there  also  disturbances  still  subsisted^  in  consequence  of  the 
old  quarrels,  and  Messene  had  revolted  from  the  Achaean 
confederacy.  But  if  I  were  to  trace  out  the  cause  and  pro¬ 
gress  of  this  war,  I  should  deviate  from  the  resolution 
which  1  laid  down,  of  not  meddling  with  foreign  transactions, 
farther  than  they  are  connected  with  the  affairs  of  Rome- 
XLIX.  One  event  deserves  to  be  mentioned:  that,  not¬ 
withstanding  the  Acheeans  had  a  superiority  in  the  war,  Phi- 
lopoemen,  their  praetor,  was  taken  prisoner,  on  his  march  to 
secure  Corone,  which  the  enemy  meant  to  attack,  being, 
with  a  small  party  of  horse,  surprised  and  overpowered  in  a 
dangerous  defile.  It  is  said,  that  he  might  have  effected  his 
own  escape,  by  the  aid  of  some  Thracians  and  Cretans,  who 
were  with  him,  but  was  hindered  by  the  shame  of  deserting 
his  horsemen,  the  most  distinguished  youths  in  the  nation, 
selected  by  himself,  a  short  time  before.  In  procuring  these, 
an  opportunity  of  getting  clear  of  the  narrow  defile,  while 
closing  the  rear,  in  person,  and  sustaining  the  assaults  of  the 
enemy, — his  horse  fell.  By  the  shock  of  his  fall,  and  the 
weight  of  his  horse,  which  fell  upon  him,  he  was  nearly  kill¬ 
ed  on  the  spot;  for  he  was  now  seventy  years  old,  and  his 
strength  had  been  greatly  impaired  by  a  tedious  illness,  from 
which  he  had  been  just  recovered.  Lying  thus  on  the  ground, 
the  enemy  pouring  on,  secured  him.  Out  of  respect  to  his 
character,  however,  and  from  regard  to  his  merit,  they  rais¬ 
ed  him  up  with  as  much  care,  as  if  it  had  been  their  own  com¬ 
mander,  took  every  pains  to  revive  him,  and  carried  him  out 
of  that  remote  valley  into  the  road.  I'heir  joy  was  so  great, 
and  so  unexpected,  that  they  scarcely  believed  their  own  sen¬ 
ses;  however,  some  of  them  sent  on  messages  to  Messene, 
that  the  war  was  at  end,  for  they  were  bringing  Philopoeraen 
prisoner.  At  first  this  seemed  so  incredible,  that  the  mes¬ 
senger  was  deemed  either  a  liar  or  a  madman.  Aftertvards, 
when  numbers  came,  one  after  another,  all  asserting  the  same, 

B.  C,  183.] 

BOOK  XXXIX. 

353 

the  matter  was  at  length  believed;  and,  before  they  well 
knew  whether  he  was  come  near  the  city,  evety  human  being , 
freemen  and  slaves,  with  even  women  and  children,  poured 
out  to  enjoy  the  sight;  insomuch  that  the  multitude  quite 
closed  up  the  gate,  all  pushing  eagerly  forward,  and  seem¬ 
ing  as  if  nothing  but  the  testimony  of  their  own  eyes  could 
convince  them  of  so  momentous  an  event.  Those  who  con- 
*  ducted  Philoposmen,  made  their  way  with  difficulty  through 
the  crowd,  so  as  to  pass  into  the  gate;  but  the  rest  of  the 
way  was  quite  shut  up  by  the  thick  press  of  people;  and, 
as  the  greatest  part  of  these  were  excluded  from  the  sight, 
they  suddenly  rushed  into  a  theatre  which  was  contiguous 
to  the  street,  and  all  with  one  voice  insisted,  that  he  should 
be  brought  thither  into  the  public  view.  The  magistrates 
and  leading  men  were  afraid,  that  compassion  for  so  great  a 
man,  on  his  being  brought  before  them,  would  cause  some  dis¬ 
turbance;  as  many  would  be  moved  by  respect  for  his  former 
dignity,  when  they  compared  it  with  his  present  condition, 
and  many,  by  the  recollection  of  his  transcendant  merits; 
they  therefore  placed  him,  where  he  could  be  seen  at  a  dis¬ 
tance,  and  quickly  after  hurried  him  away  out  of  the  sight  of 
the  people,  who  were  told  by  the  prsetor,  Dinocrates,  that 
the  magistrates  wanted  to  ask  him  some  questions,  on  points 
that  were  material  to  the  success  of  the  war.  Having  car¬ 
ried  him  thence  to  the  senate  house,  and  called  the  senate 
together,  they  began  a  consultation  on  the  measures  to  be 
pursued. 
L.  The  evening  came  on  while  they  were  still  at  a  loss, 
not  only  about  other  matters,  but  even  about  the  place  where 
he  might  be  kept,  with  proper  security,  during  the  following 
night.  They  were  quite  confounded  when  thev*^  reflected  on 
the  greatness  of  his  former  fortune  and  merit;  and  they  nei¬ 
ther  dared  to  undertake  the  guarding  of  him  at  their  houses, 
nor  thought  it  safe  to  trust  the  custody  of  him  to  any  indi¬ 
vidual.  At  last,  some  persons  reminded  them  of  a  public 
VOL,  V. —  Z  7 

354 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  569. 

treasury,  under  ground,  inclosed  with  hewn  stone;  into  this 
place  he  was  put  down,  in  chains,  and  a  huge  stone  was 
placed  over  k,  with  the  help  ot  a  machine.  After  having 
thus  determined  to  trust  to  the  place  rather  than  to  any  man, 
for  his  safe  keeping,  they  waited  with  impatience  for  the  fol¬ 
lowing  day,  when  the  whole  populace  to  a  man,  mindful  of 
his  former  services  to  the  state,  declared  their  opinion,  that 
they  ought  to  spare  him,  and  to  seek  through  his  means,  some 
remedies  for  their  present  misfortunes.  But  the  authors  of 
the  revolt,  in  whose  hands  was  the  management  of  affairs, 
held  a  secret  consultation,  in  which  it  was  unanimously  re¬ 
solved  to  put  him  tc)  death;  but  whether  they  should  do  it 
speedily,  or  defer  it,  was  for  some  time  a  matter  of  doubt. 
The  party  that  wished  his  immediate  execution  at  length 
prevailed,  and  a  person  was  sent  to  him  with  poison.  We 
are  told,  that  on  receiving  the  cup,  he  only  asked  if  Lycor- 
tas,the  other  commander  of  the  Achaeans,  and  the  horsemen, 
had  escaped;  and  being  told  that  they  were  safe,  he  said. 
It  is  well,’'  and  then,  intrepidly  drinking  the  contents  of 
the  cup,  expired  shortly  after.  The  actors  of  this  piece  of 
cruelty,  however,  did  not  long  rejoice  at  his  death;  for  the 
Messenians  were  vanquished  in  the  war,  and  compelled,  by 
the  positive  demands  of  the  Achaeans,  to  deliver  up  the 
guilty  into  their  hands.  The  bones  of  Philopoemen  were  re¬ 
stored,  and  his  funeral  was  attended  by  the  whole  Achaean 
council,  who  heaped  on  him,  not  only  every  human,  but  even 
several  divine  honours.  Historians,  both  Greek  and  Latine, 
entertain  so  high  an  idea  of  this  man,  that  several  of  them 
have  recorded,  as  a  circumstance  remarkably  distinguishing 
this  year,  that  three  illustrious  commanders  died  in  it,  Phi¬ 
lopoemen,  Hannibal,  and  Publius  Scipio,  placing  him  on  an 
equal  footing  with  the  most  consummate  generals  of  the  two 
most  powerful  nations. 
LI.  Titus  Quintius  Flamininus  came  ambassador  to  king 
Prusias,  who  had  incurred  the  jealousy  of  the  Ramans,  by 

B.  C.  183.] 

BOOK  mix. 

355 

entertaimng  Hannibal  after  the  flight  of  Antiochus,  and  by 
making  war  on  Eumenes.  Soon  after  his  arrival,  among 
other  discourse,  he  remonstrated  with  Prusias,  on  his  giving 
protection  to  a  person,  who,  of  all  men  living,  was  the  most 
inveterate  enemy  to  the  Roman  nation;  who  had  incited, 
first,  his  own  countr}^  and,  afterwards,  when  its  power  was 
reduced,  king  Antiochus,  to  make  war  on  Rome.  In  conse¬ 
quence  of  this,  or  of  Prusias  having  himself  a  desire  of  gra¬ 
tifying  Flamininus,  and  the  Roman  people,  he  conceived  the 
design  of  killing  Hannibal,  or  delivering  him  into  their  hands. 
Immediately  after  the  first  conference  therefore  with  Flami¬ 
ninus  a  party  of  soldiers  was  sent  to  guard  Hannibars  house. 
The  Carthaginian  had  always  foreseen  some  such  end  of  his 
life;  for  he  knew  the  implacable  hatred  which  the  Romans 
bore  him,  and  placed  little  confidence  in  the  faith  of  kings. 
Besides,  he  had  experienced  the  fickle  temper  of  Prusias, 
and  had,  for  some  time,  dreaded  the  arrival  of  Flamininus, 
as  an  event  fatal  to  hin^^urrounded,  as  he  was,  by  dangers, 
on  all  sides,  in  order  tt/  have  always  some  passage  open  for 
flight,  he  had  made  seven  doors  to  his  house,  of  which  some 
were  concealed,  lest  they  might  be  invested  by  a  guard.  But 
the  iftp^rfious  government  of  kings  suffers  nothing  to  remain 
secret,  which  they  choose  to  discover.  The  troops  formed  a 
circle  of  guards  round  the  house  in  such  a  manner,  that  it 
was  impossible  to  slip  out.  Hannibal,  on  being  told,  that 
some  of  the  king’s  soldiers  were  in  the  porch,  endeavoured 
to  escape  through  a  back  door,  which  was  the  most  private, 
and  whence  the  passage  was  least  likely  to  be  observed;  but, 
perceiving  that  to  be  guarded,  and  every  avenue  round  to  be 
shut  by  a  body  of  soldil^rs,  he  called  for  poison,  which  he 
had  long  kept  in  readiness  against  such  an  event;  and  said, 
Let  us  release  the  Romans  from  their  long  anxiety,  since 
they  have  not  patience  to  wait  for  the  death  of  an  old  man. 
Flamininus  will  gain  no  very  great  or  memorable  victory,  over 
one  unarmed  and  betrayed.  What  an  alteration  has  taken 

356 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  569. 

place  in  the  behaviour  of  the  Roman  people,  this  day  affords 
abundant  proof.  Their  fathers  gave  warning  to  Pyrrhus, 
their  armed  foe,  then  heading  an  army  against  them  in  Italy, 
to  beware  of  poison.  The  present  generation  have  sent  an 
ambassador,  of  consular  rank,  to  persuade  Prusias  villain¬ 
ously  to  murder  his  guest.”  Then  imprecating  curses  on 
the  head  of  Prusias,  and  on  his  kingdom,  and  calling  on  the 
gods,  the  avengers  of  violated  hospitality,  to  witness  his 
breach  of  faith,  he  drank  off  the  contents  of  the  cup.  In 
this  manner  did  Hannibal  end  his  life. 
LIl.  Both  Polybius  and  Rutilius  say,  that  Scipio  died  in 
this  year;  but  I  do  not  agree  either  with  them,  or  Valerius. 
Not  with  them,  because  I  find  that,  in  the  censorship  of 
Marcus  Porcius  and  Lucius  Valerius,  the  censor  himself, 
Lucius  Valerius,  was  chosen  prince  of  the  senate,  which 
place  had  for  the  three  preceding  lustrums  been  held  by 
Africanus;  and,  if  he  were  alive,  unless  he  had  been  dis¬ 
placed  from  the  senate,  which  disgrace  no  one  has  recorded, 
another  prince  would  not  have  been  chosen  in  his  room.  The 
authority  of  Antias  is  refuted  by  the  plebeian  tribunate  of 
Marcus  Naevius,  against  whom  there  is  extant  a  speech, 
signed  by  Publius  Africanus.  Now,  this  Marcus  N^vius, 
in  the  register  of  the  magistrates,  appears  to  have  been  ple¬ 
beian  tribune,  in  the  consulate  of  Publius  Claudius  and  Lu¬ 
cius  Porcius;  but  he  entered  on  the  tribuneship  in  the  con¬ 
sulate  of  Appius  Claudius  and  Marcus  Sempronius,  on  the 
fourth  day  before  the  ides  of  December,  from  which  time, 
to  the  ides  of  March,  when  Publius  Claudius  and  Lucius 
Porcius  become  on  the  consuls,  there  are  three  months.  Thus 
it  appears  that  he  was  living  in  the  tribunate  of  Marcus 
Nsevius,  and  might  have  been  prosecuted  by  him;  but  that 
he  died,  before  the  censorship  of  Lucius  Valerius  and  Mar¬ 
cus  Porcius.  The  deaths  of  the  three  most  illustrious  men 
of  their  respective  nations  have  a  similarity,  not  only  in  re¬ 
spect  to  the  concurrence  of  the  times,  but  in  this  circum- 

BOOK  XXXIX. 

35r 

B.  C.  183.] 
stance  also,  that  no  one  of  them  met  a  death,  suitable  to  the 
splendour  of  his  life.  In  the  first  place,  neither  of  them 
died  or  was  buried  in  his  native  soil.  Hannibal  and  Philo- 
pee  men  were  taken  off  by  poison;  Hannibal  breathed  his  last 
in  exile,  betrayed  by  his  host;  Philoposmen  in  captivity,  in  a 
prison,  and  in  chains.  Scipio,  though  neither  banished,  nor 
condemned,  yet,  under  prosecution,  and  summoned  as  an 
absent  criminal  to  a  trial,  at  which  he  did  not  appear,  passed 
sentence  of  voluntary  exile,  not  only  on  himself,  while  alive, 
but,  likewise,  on  his  body,  after  death. 
LI II.  During  these  transactions  in  Peloponnesus,  whence 
I  digressed,  the  return  of  Demetrius,  with  the  ambassadors, 
into  Macedonia,  affected  people’s  minds  in  various  manners. 
I'he  generality  of  the  Macedonians,  terrified  by  the  appre¬ 
hension  of  an  impending  war  with  the  Romans,  looked  with 
the  highest  esteem  on  Demetrius,  to  whom  they  owed  the 
contitmance  of  peace;  and,  at  the  same  time,  destined  him  to 
the  throne,  after  the  demise  of  his  father.  They  argued, 
that,  ‘‘  although  he  was  younger  than  Perseus,  yet  he  was 
born  of  a  wife,  and  the  other  of  a  concubine;  that  the  latter, 
born  of  a  mother,  who  did  not  confine  her  favours  to  one 
man,  had  no  likeness  to  any  particular  father,  whereas  the 
former  had  a  striking  resemblance  of  Philip.  Besides  it 
was  probable,  that  the  Romans  would  place  him  on  the  throne 
of  his  father,  as  Perseus  had  no  pretensions  to  their  favour.’’ 
Such  was  the  conversation  of  people  in  general.  As  to  Per¬ 
seus,  he  was  tortured  with  fear,  lest  his  age  alone  might  not 
sufficiently  secure  his  interest,  his  brother  having  the  advantage 
of  him  in  every  other  particular;  while  Philip,  himself,  doubt¬ 
ing  his  own  ability  of  choosing  which  of  them  he  should  leave 
heir  to  his  dominions,  began  to  think  that  his  vounger  son, 
encroached  on  him,  more  than  he  could  wish.  He  was  some¬ 
times  displeased  at  the  numerous  attendance  of  the  Macedo¬ 
nians,  round  Demetrius,  and  chagrined  at  perceiving  that 
there  was  a  second  court,  during  his  own  lifetime.  The 

358 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  569, 
young  prince,  no  doubt,  came  home  with  more  lofty  notions 
of  himself,  elated  with  the  honours  paid  him  by  the  senate, 
and  their  having  conceded  to  him  what  they  had  refused  to 
his  father;  insomuch  that  every  mention  of  the  Romans, 
whatever  degree  of  respect  it  procured  him  from  the  rest  of 
the  Macedonians,  created  an  equal  degree  of  envy,  not  only 
in  the  breast  of  his  brother,  but  also  in  that  of  his  father; 
especially  after  the  Roman  ambassadors  arrived,  and  the 
king  was  obliged  to  evacuate  Thrace,  to  withdraw  his  gar¬ 
risons,  and  to  perform  the  other  articles,  either  according  to 
the  decisions  of  the  former  ambassadors,  or  the  late  regula¬ 
tions  made  by  the  senate.  But  all  this  he  did  with  great  re¬ 
luctance,  and  even  with  anguish  of  mind.  His  feelings  of 
this  sort  were  aggravated,  by  seeing  his  son  more  frequentlv 
in  company  with  them,  than  with  himself;  nevertheless,  to 
avoid  giving  any  pretence  for  an  immediate  commencement 
of  hostilities,  he  paid  submissive  attention  to  the  Romans,  in 
every  thing;  and,  in  order  to  turn  away  their  thoughts,  from 
a  suspicion  of  any  such  designs,  he  led  an  army  into  the 
heart  of  Thrace,  against  the  Odrysians,  Dantheietians,  and 
Bessians.  He  took  the  city  of  Philippopolis,  after  it  was  desert¬ 
ed  by  the  inhabitants,  who  fled  with  their  families  to  the 
tops  of  the  nearest  mountains;  and,  by  wasting  the  country, 
reduced  the  barbarians  living  in  the  plains,  to  submission. 
Then,  leaving  a  garrison  in  Philippopolis,  which  was  soon 
after  expelled  by  the  Odrysians,  he  set  about  building  a  town 
in  Deuriopus.  This  is  a  district  of  Paeonia,  near  the  river 
Erigonus,  which,  flowing  from  Illyricum,  through  Paeonia 
falls  into  the  river  Axius.  Not  far  from  the  old  city  of 
Stobae  he  built  his  new  one,  which  he  ordered  to  be  called 
Perseis,  in  honour  of  his  elder  son. 
LIV-  While  these  things  passed  in  Macedonia,  the  con¬ 
suls  went  to  their  provinces.  Marcellus  sent  forward  an 
express  to  Lucius  Porcius,  the  proconsul,  to  lead  up  the  le¬ 
gions,  to  the  new  town  of  the  Gauls;  which  people,  on  th^ 

BOOK  XXXIX. 

359 

B.  C.  183,] 

arrival  of  the  consul,  surrendered  themselves.  There  were 
of  these  twelve  thousand  fighting  men,  must  of  whom  had 
arms,  which  they  had  forced  from  the  inhabitants:  all  which, 
to  their  great  mortification,  were  taken  from  them,  as  was 
every  thing  else  which  they  had  either  acquired  by  plunder¬ 
ing  in  the  country,  or  had  brought  along  with  them*  On 
this,  they  sent  ambassadors  to  Rome  to  complain  of  those 
proceedings,  who  being  introduced  to  audience  of  the  senate, 
by  the  praetor  Caius  Valerius,  represented,  that  “  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  a  redundancy  of  people  in  Gaul,  they  had  been 
compelled,  by  the  want  of  land,  and  indeed  of  every  thing, 
to  cross  the  Alps,  in  quest  of  a  settlement.  That,  finding 
lands  h  ing  uncultivated,  they  had  settled  in  the  country 
without  doing  injury  to  any.  They  had,  likewise,  begun  to 
build  a  town,  which  was  a  proof  that  they  did  not  come  with 
ill  intentions.  That  some  time  ago,  Marcus  Claudius  sent 
them  a  message,  that  unless  they  surrendered  to  him,  he 
would  march  against  them,  and  that  preferring  a  certain 
though  not  very  honourable,  peace,  to  the  uncertainties  of 
war,  they  had  thrown  themselves  on  the  protection  of  Rome, 
before  they  submitted  to  its  power.  That,  in  a  short  time 
after,  being  ordered  to  quit  the  country,  they  had  intended  to 
remove,  without  murmuring,  to  whatever  part  of  the  world 
they  were  able,  and  that,  notwithstanding,  their  arms,  and 
finally  all  the  property  which  they  had  brought  with  them, 
were  taken  from  them.  The\  therefore  besought  the  senate 
and  people  of  Rome,  not  to  treat  harmless  people,  who  had 
surrendered  themselves,  with  greater  severity,  than  they 
would  enemies.’’  To  this  discourse  the  senate  ordered  the 
following  answer  to  be  given:  That  on  one  hand,  they  had 
not  acted  properly  in  coming  into  Italy,  and  attempting  to 
build  a  town,  in  the  territory  of  others,  without  permission 
from  any  Roman  magistrate  commanding  in  that  province; 
yet  on  the  other  hand,  the  senate  did  not  approve  of  people 
who  had  surrendered,  being  stripped  of  their  property.  They 

360 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y,  R.  569, 

would  therefore  appoint  ambassadors,  who  should  go  with 
them  to  the  consuls,  and  order  all  their  effects  to  be  restor¬ 
ed,  provided  they  returned  to  the  place  whence  they  came;  and 
who  should  also  proceed  to  the  other  side  of  the  Alps,  and 
give  warning  to  the  Gallic  states,  to  keep  their  people  at 
home.  That  the  two  countries  were  separated  by  those 
mountains,  to  be  an  almost  insuperable  barrier,  which,  who¬ 
ever  should  pass  in  future,  should  meet  no  better  fate  than 
those  who  first  showed  them  passable.'’  The  ambassadors 
sent  were,  Lucius  Furius  Purpeureo,  Quintus  Minucius, 
Publius  Manlius  Acidinus.  The  Gauls  on  receiving  restitu¬ 
tion  of  all  the  effects,  which  had  been  justly  their  own,  with¬ 
drew  out  of  Italy. 
LV.  The  transalpine  states  answered  the  Roman  ambas¬ 
sadors,  in  terms  of  friendship  and  kindness.  Their  elders 
even  found  fault  with  the  excessive  lenity  of  the  Roman 
people,  in  “  suffering  men  to  depart  with  impunitv,  who, 
without  an  order  of  their  nation,  left  their  home,  attempted 
to  seize  on  lands  belonging  to  the  Roman  empire,  and  to 
build  a  town  on  them.  They  ought,”  they  said,  to  have 
suffered  severely  for  their  inconsiderate  conduct;  and,  as  to 
the  restoration  of  their  effects,  they  expressed  a  fear,  lest,  in 
consequence  of  this  too  great  tenderness,  others  might  be 
encouraged  to  attempts  of  a  like  nature.”  They  not  only 
entertained  the  ambassadors,  but  conferred  considerable 
presents  on  them.  The  consul  Marcus  Claudius,  when  he 
had  sent  the  Gauls  out  of  his  province,  began  to  prepare  for 
u  war  with  the  Istrians,  and  wrote  to  the  senate,  for  per¬ 
mission  to  lead  the  legions  into  their  country.  The  senate 
approved  of  the  measure.  They  formed  an  intention  of 
establishing  a  colony  at  Aquileia;  but  were  some  time  divi¬ 
ded  in  opinion,  whether  it  should  consist  of  Latines,  or  Ro¬ 
man  citizens;  at  last  however  they  passed  a  vote,  in  favour 
of  a  Latinc  settlement.  The  commissioners  appointed  for 
the  purpose,  were  Publius  Scipio  Nasica,  Caius  Flaminius, 

B.  C.  183,] 

BOOK  XXXIX. 

3bl 
and  Lucius  Manlius  Acidinus,  In  the  same  year,  colonies 
of  Roman  citizens  were  led  out  to  Mutina,  and  Parma. 
Two  thousand  men  were  settled  in  each  colony,  on  lands 
which  lately  belonged  to  the  Boians,  and  formerly  to  the 
Tuscans;  they  received  at  Parma  eight  acres,  at  Mutina  five 
each.  These  colonists  were  conducted  by  Marcus  Aimilius 
Lepidus,  Titus  .dibutius  Carus,  and  Lucius  Quintius  Cris- 
pinus.  The  colony  of  Saturnia,  also,  consisting  of  Roman 
citizens,  was  settled  on  the  lands  of  Caletra,  by  Quintus 
Fabius  Labeo,  Caius  Afranius  Stellio,  and  Tiberius  Serapro- 
nius  Gracchus,  who  assigned  to  each  man  ten  acres. 
LVL  This  year  Aulus  Terentius  Varro,  propra^tor,  fought 
some  successful  battles  with  the  Celtiberians,  near  the  rivei 
Iberus,  in  the  territory  of  Auseta,  reducing  several  towns, 
which  they  had  fortified  in  that  quarter.  The  farther  Spain 
was  quiet  during  the  whole  vear,  Publius  Sempronius,  the 
propartor,  being  seized  with  a  lingering  disorder.  In  Li¬ 
guria  nothing  extraordinary  was  performed  by  Quintas  Fabius 
the  consul.  Marcus  Marcellus  being  recalled  out  of  Istria,  to 
attend  the  elections,  disbanded  his  army,  and  came  home 
to  Rome.  He  elected  consuls  Cneius  Biebius  Tam-  y.  570 
philus,  and  Lucius  ^Lmilius  Paulus.  This  latter  C. 
had  been  curule  icdile,  along  with  Marcus  ^Lmiiius  Lepidus, 
who,  after  two  disappointments,  was  chosen  consul,  and  from 
the  time  of  whose  consulate,  this  wa:>  the  fifth  year.  Then 
were  elected  preetors,  Quintus  Fulvius  Flaccus,  Marcus 
Valerius  Lccvinus,  Publius  Manlius  a  second  time,  Marcus 
Ogulnius  Gallus,  I^ucius  C^ecilius  Denter,  and  Caius  Te¬ 
rentius  Istra.  Towards  the  close  of  the  year,  a  supplication 
was  performed,  on  occasion  of  prodigies,  for  people  were 
persuaded  that  it  had  rained  blood  for  two  days  in  the  court 
of  the  temple  of  Concord;  and  an  account  was  received,  that, 
near  the  coast  of  Sicil)',  a  new  island  rose  out  of  the  sea. 
V^alerius  Antias  fixes  the  death  of  Hannibal  in  this 
VOL.  V. — 3  A 

year. 

362 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  570. 

and  says,  that  besides  Titus  Quintius  Flamininus,  whose 
name  is  mentioned  in  this  business,  by  all  writers,  Lucius 
Scipio  Asiaticus,  and  Publius  Scipio  Nasica,  were  sent 
ambassadors  to  Prusias  on  that  occasion. 

THE 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

BOOK  XL. 
Violent  contests  between  Demetrius  and  Perseus,  the  sons  of  Philip,  king 
of  Macedonia  In  consequence  of  the  intrigues  and  calumnies  of 
Perseus,  and  the  jealousy  excited  by  Demetrius's  attachment  to  the 
Romans,  the  latter  is  put  to  death,  by  poison'  b}  which  means,  after  the 
death  of  Philip,  Perseus  obtains  the  crown.  Successes  of  the  Romans, 
under  different  commanders,  against  the  Ligurians;  and,  in  Spain, 
against  tlie  Celtibenans.  The  books  of  Numa  Pompilius  discorered, 
buried  in  a  stone  chest,  under  the  Jauiculum;  burned  by  the  praetor, 
by  order  of  the  senate.  Philip  discoyers  the  villainous  machinations 
of  Perseus,  determiDe‘'  to  bring  him  to  punishment,  and  to  settle  the 
crown  upon  Antigonus;  dies,  and  is  succeeded  by  Perseus. 
I.  At  the  commencement  of  the  next  year,  the  y.  R.  570. 
consuls  and  praetors  settled  the  distribution  of  their 
provinces.  For  the  consuls,  there  was  no  province  to  be  de¬ 
creed,  except  Liguria.  The  city  jurisdiction  fell  to  Marcus 
Ogulnius  Gallos;  the  foreign,  to  Marcus  Valerius;  the  hither 
Spain,  to  Marcus  Fulvius  Flaccus;  the  farther,  to  Publius 
Manlius;  Sicily,  to  Lucius  Csecilrus  Denter;  and  Sardinia, 
to  Caius  Terentius  Istra.  The  consuls  were  ordered  to  levy 
troops,  for  Quintus  Fabius  had  writen  from  Liguria,  that 
the  Apuans  seemed  inclined  to  renew  hostilities,  and  that 
there  was  reason  to  apprehend  their  making  an  irruption 
into  the  district  of  Pisae.  From  Spain,  also,  intelligence  was 
received,  that  the  hither  province  was  in  arms;  that  the  war 

364  HISTORY  OF  ROxML.  [Y.  R.  570. 
• 
Still  continued  with  the  Celtiberians;  and  that,  in  the  farthei 
province,  in  consequence  of  the  long  sickness  of  the  praetor, 
the  discipline  of  the  army  was  greatly  relaxed,  through  in¬ 
activity  and  intemperance.  For  these  reasons,  it  was  decreed, 
that  new  armies  should  be  raised j  four  legions  for  Liguria, 
each  containing  five  thousand  two  hundred  foot,  and  three 
hundred  horse,  and  to  these  were  added,  of  the  Latines, 
fifteen  thousand  foot,  and  eight  hundred  horse.  These  were 
to  complete  the  two  consular  armies.  They  were  ordered, 
also,  to  enrol  seven  thousand  foot  and  six  hundred  horse,  of 
the  allies  and  Latines,  and  to  send  them  into  Gaul  to  Marcus 
Marcellus.  who,  on  the  expiration  of  his  consulship,  was  con¬ 
tinued  in  command.  For  the  Spains,  also,  there  were  raised 
to  be  sent  into  both  provinces,  four  thousand  foot  and  two 
hundred  horse,  of  Roman  citizens;  and,  of  the  allies,  seven 
thousand  foot,  and  three  hundred  horse.  Quintus  Fabius 
Labeo  was  continued  in  command,  for  the  year,  with  the 
army  that  he  then  had  in  Liguria. 
11.  The  spring  of  this  year  was  remarkable  for  storms. 
On  the  day  before  the  feast  of  Pales,  a  tremendous  hurri¬ 
cane  arose,  and  made  shocking  havoc  in  many  places,  both 
sacred  and  common.  It  threw  down  brazen  statues  in  the 
capitol;  tore  away  a  gate  from  the  temple  of  Luna,  on  the 
Aventine,  and  dashed  it  against  the  w^all  of  the  temple  of 
Ceres:  overturned  other  statues  in  the  great  circus,  together 
with  the  pillars  on  which  they  stood;  tore  off  several  cupolas 
from  the  tops  of  temples,  which  it  shattered  to  pieces,  and 
scattered  about.  This  storm  was  deemed  a  prodigy,  and  the 
aruspices  ordered  it  to  be  expiated.  At  the  same  time,  ex¬ 
piation  was  made  for  a  mule,  w'ith  three  feet,  being  said  to 
be  foaled  at  Reaie;  and  for  a  temple  of  Apollo  at  Formiee, 
and  another  at  Caieta,  which  were  said  to  be  struck  by  light¬ 
ning.  On  account  of  these  prodigies,  twenty  of  the  larger 
victims  w'ere  sacrificed,  and  a  supplication,  of  one  day’s  con¬ 
tinuance  was  performed.  About  the  same  time  information 

15.  C.  182.] 

BOOK  XL. 

365 

was  brought,  by  a  letter  from  Aulus  Terentius,  proprietor, 
that  Publius  Sempronius,  after  struggling  with  his  disorder, 
for  more  than  a  year,  died  in  the  farther  province:  for  which 
reason  the  praetors  were  ordered  to  make  the  more  haste  in¬ 
to  Spain.  The  foreign  embassies  then  had  audience  of  the 
senate;  and,  first,  those  of  the  kings  Eumenes  and  Pharnaces, 
and  of  the  Rhodians,  complaining  of  the  sufferings  of  the 
inhabitants  of  Sinope.  There  came,  also,  at  this  time,  am¬ 
bassadors  from  Philip,  and  the  Achajans^  and  Lacedaemo¬ 
nians,  to  whom  the  senate  gave  answers,  after  having,  first, 
heard  the  report  of  Marcius,  who  had  been  sent  to  inspect 
the  affairs  of  Greece  and  Macedonia.  To  the  Asiatic  kings, 
and  the  Rhodians,  they  anstvered,  that  they  would  send  am¬ 
bassadors  to  examine  into  those  matters. 
Ill,  Marcius  had  increased  their  anxiety  respecting  Phi¬ 
lip;  for,  though  he  acknowledged  that  the  king  had  complied 
with  the  injunctions  of  the  senate,  he  had  yet  done  it  in  such 
a  manner,  as  demonstrated  that  his  compliance  would  last 
no  longer  than  necessit}^-  required;  nor  was  it  difficult  to  see, 
that  ho  intended  to  make  another  trial  of  the  fortune  of  w^ar. 
all  his  actions  and  words  at  the  present  having  a  tendency 
that  way.  In  the  first  place,  he  removed  almost  the  whok 
body  of  horsemen,  with  their  families,  from  the  maritime 
cities,  into  Emathia,  as  it  is  now  called,  formerly  Pa^onia, 
giving  up  those  cities  to  be  inhabited  by  Thracians  and  other 
barbarians;  thinking  that  such  kind  of  people  would  prove 
more  faithful  to  him,  in  case  of  a  war  with  Rome.  This  pro¬ 
ceeding  caused  great  discontent  all  over  Macedonia;  and  ol 
those,  who,  wdth  their  wives  and  children  were  obliged  to 
leave  their  dw^cllings,  few  concealed  their  grief  in  silence; 
most  of  them,  as  they  marched  in  bodies  along  the  roads, 
letting  their  hatred  get  the  better  of  their  fears,  uttered  curses 
against  the  king.  This  disturbed  his  mind  to  such  a  degree, 
that  he  conceived  suspicions  of  danger  from  every  man,  and 
from  every  place  and  season;  and,  at  last,  went  so  far  as  tc 

366 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.570. 

declare  openly,  that  he  could  not  think  himself  safe,  in  any 
respect,  without  seizing  and  confining  the  sons  of  those  whom 
he  had  destroyed,  and  sending  them  out  of  the  world  at  dif¬ 
ferent  times. 
IV.  The  cruelty  of  these  proceedings,  horrible  in  itself, 
was  rendered  still  more  so  by  the  calamities  of  one  particular 
family.  Philip  had,  many  years  before,  put  to  death  Herodi- 
cus,  a  Thessalian  of  distinction;  and  afterwards  his  sons-in- 
law.  His  daughters,  who  were  thus  left  widows,  had  each 
one  son.  The  names  of  the  women  were  Theoxena,  and 
Archo.  Theoxena,  though  courted  by  many,  rejected  every 
offer  of  marriage.  Archo  married  a  person  called  Poris,  the 
first  in  dignity  of  the  iEnean  nation;  and,  after  bearing  him 
many  children,  died,  leaving  them  all  young.  Theoxena  then, 
in  order  that  her  sister’s  children  might  be  educated  under 
her  own  inspection,  married  Poris,  and,  as  if  she  herself  had 
borne  them  all,  treated  her  sister’s  sons,  and  her  own,  with 
the  same  affectionate  care.  When  she  heard  of  the  king’s 
order  for  seizing  the  children  of  the  persons  who  had  fallen 
by  his  tyranny,  supposing  that  they  would  be  subjected  not 
only  to  the  king’s  lust,  but  to  that  of  his  guards,  she  formed 
a  horrid  project,  and  had  the  hardiness  to  declare,  that  she 
would  kill  them  all  with  her  own  hand,  rather  than  they 
should  come  into  the  power  of  Philip.  Poris,  shocked  at  the 
mention  of  such  a  dreadful  deed,  told  her  that  he  would  carry 
them  away  to  Athens,  to  some  faithful  friends,  and-  would 
himself  accompany  them  in  their  flight.  They  all  went  from 
Thessalonica  to  j£neas,  to  a  stated  sacrifice,  which  is  per¬ 
formed  there,  yearly,  with  great  solemnity,  in  honour  of 
Aeneas,  the  founder  of  the  nation.  After  passing  the  day 
there,  in  the  anniversary  feast,  about  the  third  watch,  when 
all  were  asleep,  they  embarked  in  a  vessel  ready  prepared  by 
Poris,  as  if  intending  to  return  to  Thessalonica;  but  their 
design  was  to  cross  over  to  Eubaea,  However,  day -light 
overtook  them,  at  a  small  distance  from  the  land,  where  they 

BOOK  XL. 

367 

B.  C.  182.] 

were  struggling  in  vain  against  a  contrary  wind,  when  the 
king’s  officers,  who  commanded  the  garrison  of  the  port, 
despatched  an  armed  bark  to  bring  back  their  ship,  with  a 
strict  injunction  not  to  return  without  it.  When  this  vessel 
came  near  the  other,  Poris  exerted  every  effort  to  animate 
the  rowers  and  sailors,  and,  raising  his  hands  towards  hea¬ 
ven,  supplicated  the  gods  for  succour.  Meanwhile,  the  wo¬ 
man,  with  desperate  fury  recurring  to  the  shocking  design, 
which  she  had  long  premeditated,  dissolved  some  poison,  and 
produced  swords;  then,  placing  the  cup  before  their  eyes, 
and  unsheathing  the  swords,  said,  These  are  the  ways  to 
death, — our  only  refuge.  Of  these,  let  each  take  whichever 
he  prefers;  so  shall  you  escape  the  tyranny  of  the  king.  Come, 
then,  dear  youths,  let  those  of  you  who  are  the  elder,  first 
take  the  sword;  or,  if  a  slower  death  is  your  choice,  the  cup.” 
On  one  hand,  the  enemy  were  approaching  fast;  on  the  other, 
she,  who  urged  them  to  despatch  themselves,  was  instant; 
whereupon  the  young  men,  putting  an  end  to  their  lives, 
some  by  the  sword  and  some  by  the  poison,  were  thrown, 
expiring,  into  the  sea.  Then,  embracing  her  husband  and 
companion  in  death,  she  plunged  into  the  deep.*  The  king’s 
people  then  took  possession  of  the  ship,  in  which  thev  found 
not  one  of  its  owners, 
V,  The  shocking  circumstances  of  this  transaction  added 
fresh  fuel  to  the  flame  of  public  resentment  against  the  king, 
insomuch  that  most  people  imprecated  curses  on  him  and 
his  children;  which  curses  were  heard  by  the  gods,  who 
soon  after  caused  him  to  vent  his  cruelty  on  those  of  his  own 
blood.  For  Perseus,  perceiving  that  the  popularity  and  high 
reputation  of  his  brother  Demetrius  increased  daily  among 
the  Macedonians;  and  also  his  interest  with  the  Romans, 
saw  no  hope  left  to  himself  of  obtaining  the  crown,  except 
by  some  wicked  device:  he  therefore  bent  all  his  thoughts 
to  that  one  point.  But,  not  thinking  himself,  alone,  strong 
enough  even  for  the  dastardly  project,  which  he  meditat- 

368 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  570. 

ed  in  his  effeminate  mind,  he  began  to  tamper  with  each  of 
his  father’s  friends  by  dark  hints  and  suggestions.  At  first, 
several  of  these  showed  an  appearance  of  rejecting  with 
aversion  any  such  overtures,  because  they  entertained  higher 
expectations  from  Demetrius,  Philip’s  animosity  to  the 
Romans,  however,  increased  every  day, — an  animosity  which 
Perseus  fomented;  but  which  Demetrius  laboured,  with  all 
his  might,  to  assuage.  They  foresaw  therefore  the  fatal  end 
of  the  youth,  w  ho  used  no  precaution  against  the  base  de¬ 
signs  of  his  brother;  and  thinking  it  prudent  not  to  oppose 
what  they  judged  must  happen,  and  to  support  the  preten¬ 
sions  of  the  more  powerful,  they  united  themselves  to  Per¬ 
seus.  Other  measures  they  deferred  to  be  executed  each 
in  its  season;  for  the  present,  they  determined  to  use  every 
means  to  inflame  the  king’s  anger  towards  the  Romans,  and 
to  urge  him  to  resolve  on  Avar,  to  which  he  was  of  himself 
very  much  inclined.  At  the  same  time,  in  order  to  aggra¬ 
vate  his  suspicions  of  Demetrius,  they  made  it  a  practice  in 
conversation  to  speak  contemptuously  of  the  Romans;  some 
depreciating  their  manners  and  institutions,  some  their  mili¬ 
tary  achievements,  some  the  appearance  of  the  city  itself 
unadorned,  without  either  public  or  private  structures;  and 
others,  some  particular  individuals  among  their  principal 
men.  On  these  occasions,  the  unwary  \oung  prince,  out 
of  affection  to  the  Roman  nation,  and  warmth  of  opposition 
to  his  brother,  strongly  maintained  their  cause,  and  by  this 
means  rendered  himself  more  suspected  by  his  father,  and 
more  obnoxious  to  injurious  insinuations.  Philip,  therefore, 
kept  him  a  stranger  to  all  his  designs  respecting  the  Ro¬ 
mans;  and  bestowing  his  entire  confidence  on  Perseus,  held 
with  him,  daily  and  nightly,  deliberations  on  that  subject. 
It  happened,  that  some  persons,  whom  he  had  sent  to  the 
Bastarnians,  to  solicit  aid,  came  home  at  this  time,  and 
brought  with  them  several  young  men  of  distinction,  and 
some  of  the  royal  family;  one  of  whom  promised  his  sister 

BOOK  XL. 

B.  C.  182.J 

369 

in  marriage  to  Philip’s  son,  and  the  close  connection  with 
that  nation  greatly  raised  the  king’s  spirits.  Hereupon,  Per¬ 
seus  said,  “  What  does  that  avail?  Foreign  aids  do  not  give 
us  security,  proportioned  to  the  danger  that  threatens  us 
from  domestic  treachery.  I  am  unwilling  to  call  him  trai¬ 
tor,  but  a  spy  we  certainly  have  in  our  bosom,  and  who, 
since  he  was  a  hostage  at  Rome,  though  the  people  return¬ 
ed  us  his  person,  has  left  his  heart  in  their  possession.  Al¬ 
most  every  Macedonian  looks  up  to  him,  supposing  that  they 
are  to  have  ho  other  king  than  one  given  by  the  Romans.’"* 
By  such  discourses,  the  old  man’s  mind,  distempered  in 
itself,  was  stimulated  to  passion,  and  these  imputations  sunk 
deeper  in  his  mind,  than  appeared  from  his  countenance. 
VI.  The  time  of  the  purification  of  the  army  now  arrived. 
The  ceremony  is  thus  performed; — A  dog  being  cut  asunder 
in  the  middle,  the  head,  with  the  fore  part  and  the  entrails, 
is  laid  on  the  right  side  of  the  road,  and  the  hind  part  on 
the  left.  Between  the  pans  of  the  victim,  thus  divided,  the 
forces  march  under  arms.  In  the  front  of  the  van,  are 
carried  the  remarkable  suits  of  armour  of  all  the  kings  of 
Macedonia,  from  the  remotest  origin;  next  follows  the  king 
himself,  with  his  children;  then  the  roval  cohort  and  body 
guards,  and  the  rest  of  the  national  troops  close  the  rear. 
On  this  occasion,  the  king  was  accompanied  by  his  two  sons, 
one  on  each  side  of  him;  Perseus  being  now  in  his  thirtieth 
year,  Demetrius  five  years  younger;  the  former  in  the  full 
strength  of  manhood,  the  latter  in  its  bloom;  a  ripe  progeny, 
capable  of  rendering  their  father  happy,  if  sound  wisdom 
had  regulated  their  conduct.  The  custom  was,  that  when 
the  purification  was  finished,  the  troops  performed  their  ex¬ 
ercise;  and  then,  being  divided  into  two  equal  parties,  en¬ 
gaged  in  representation  of  a  battle.  The  young  princes 
were  appointed  commanders  in  this  mock  engagement;  not 
indeed  mock  engagement,  as  it  should  have  been;  for  the 
encounter  was,  as  if  they  were  fighting  for  the  throne:  mnnv 
.  nr.  — 3B 

HISTORY  OF  ROML. 

[Y.  R.  570. 

o7u 
wounds  were  given  with  the  foils,  nor  was  any  thing  but 
sharp  weapons  wanting  to  render  it  a  regular  battle.  The 
party  under  Demetrius  had  a  great  superiority;  and,  while 
Perseus  was  vexed  thereat,  his  judicious  friends  rejoiced; 
and  said,  that  that  very  cirsumstance  would  afford  grounds 
for  the  heavier  charges  against  his  brother. 
VII*  Each  of  the  princes  gave  an  entertainment  that  da> 
to  the  party,  who  had  exercised  under  his  command.  Per¬ 
seus  was  invited  to  supper  by  Demetrius,  but  refused;  how¬ 
ever,  cheerful  hospitality,  on  such* a  festival  day;  and  youth¬ 
ful  mirth,  led  both  to  drink  freely  of  wine.  The  conversa¬ 
tion  of  either  party  turned  on  the  incidents  of  the  mock 
engagement,  and  jocular  remarks  were  thrown  on  their  an¬ 
tagonists,  without  sparing  even  the  commanders  themselves. 
To  listen  and  catch  such  expressions,  a  spy  was  sent  from 
among  the  guests  of  Perseus;  but  not  conducting  himseli 
with  sufficient  caution,  he  was  detected  by  some  young  men 
who  happened  to  come  out  of  the  banqueting- room,  and  se¬ 
verely  beaten.  Demetrius,  knowing  nothing  of  this  matter, 
said,  Why  don’t  we  go  and  join  in  merriment  with  my 
brother,  assuaging,  by  our  openness  and  candour,  any  re¬ 
mains  of  his  anger  that  may  subsist  since  the  fight?”  Ai! 
cried  out  at  once,  that  they  would  attend  him,  except  those 
who  were  afraid  of  immediate  vengeance  for  having  beaten 
the  spy.  f hese,  however,  being  pressed  by  Demetrius  to 
go  with  the  rest,  concealed  swords  under  their  clothes,  with 
which  they  might  defend  themselves  if  any  violence  should 
be  offered.  In  the  case  of  domestic  discord,  nothing  can  be 
kept  secret.  Both  houses  were  full  of  spies  and  traitors. 
An  informer  ran  on  before  to  Perseus  and  told  hhn,  that 
four  armed  young  men  were  coming  with  Demetrius. 
Though  he  well  knew  the  reason  of  their  fears,  (for  he  had 
heard  of  the  beaten  given  to  his  guest,)  yet,  for  the  purpose 
(;f  giving  the  matter  a  bad  colour,  he  ordered  his  gate  to  be 
locked,  and  from  the  windows  facing  the  street  he  called 

BOOK  XL, 

37: 

B.  C.  182.] 
aloud  to  the  revellers,  and  as  if  they  were  come  to  murdei" 
him,  not  to  approach  the  house.  Demetrius,  flushed  with 
wine,  exclaimed  loudly  on  being  shut  out.  He  then  went 
home  to  his  own  feast,  entirely  ignorant  of  the  meaning  of 
this  proceeding. 
VIII.  Next  day,  Perseus,  as  soon  as  he  could  be  admit¬ 
ted  to  his  father’s  presence,  went  into  the  palace;  and  with  a 
countenance  expressive  of  great  perturbation,  stood  silent, 
at  a  distance.  Philip  asked  him,  if  all  was  well,  and  what 
was  the  cause  of  that  sadness?”  He  answered,  I  must  tell 
you,  that  it  is  but  by  mere  accident,  that  I  am  now  alive. 
My  brother  attacks  us,  not  with  secret  treachery ;  he  came 
last  night  to  my  house,  with  men  in  arms,  to  take  away  my 
life;  and  it  was  by  shutting  the  doors,  and  keeping  the  wails 
between  me  and  him,  that  I  saved  myself  from  his  fury.” 
As  these  words  flUed  his  father  with  horror,  mixed  with 
wonder,  he  added,  if  you  can  prevail  on  yourself  to  listen  to 
me,  I  will  give  you  the  clearest  proof  of  the  matter.”  Philip 
replied  that  he  would  certainly  listen  to  him,  and  ordered 
Demetrius  to  be  instantly  summoned.  He  then  sent  tor  two 
friends  of  advanced  age,  Lysimachus  and  Onomastus,  (who 
never  interfered  in  the  disputes  of  the  brothers,  and  who  of 
late  had  but  seldom  appeared  in  the  palace,)  that  he  might 
have  the  assistance  of  their  advice.  In  the  interim,  he  walk¬ 
ed  about,  by  himself,  revolving  many  things  in  his  mind. 
On  being  told  that  his  friends  were  arrived,  he  retiied  with 
them  into  an  inner  apartment,  attended  by  two  of  his  life¬ 
guards;  at  the  same  time  permitting  .each  of  his  sons  to 
bring  in  three  persons  unarmed.  Here,  having  taken  his 
seat,  he  said,  Surely  I  am  the  naost  unhappy  of  fathers, 
sitting  here  as  judge,  between  my  two  sons,  on  a  charge  of 
fratricide,  made  by  *one  of  them  against  the  other;  so  that 
I  must  find  in  my  nearest  relations,  the  foul  stam  either  of 
falsehood,  or  of  wicked  violence.  This  long  time,  indeed,  I 
have  apprehended  an  impending  storm,  not  only  from  your 

37: 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  570 

countenances,  which  showed  no  sign  of  brotherly  affection, 
but  from  some  expressions  which  I  have  overheard.  But 
I  sometimes  cherished  the  hope,  that  the  heat  of  your  re¬ 
sentments  would  cool,  and  that  your  mutual  suspicions  might 
be  cleared  up;  for  I  considered,  that  even  enemies  lay  down 
their  arms  and  become  friends;  and  I  trusted  that  you  would 
some  time  or  other  recal  the  memory  of  your  fraternal  rela¬ 
tion  to  each  other,  of  the  open  freedom  and  intimacy  that 
subsisted  between  you  in  your  boyish  days;  and  finally,  of 
my  instructions,  which,  I  fear,  1  have  fruitlessly  poured  into 
deaf  ears.  How  often  have  I,  in  your  hearing,  mentioned, 
with  abhorrence,  examples  of  discord  between  brothers,  and 
recounted  the  dreadful  consequences  of  them,  by  which 
themselves,  their  offspring,  their  houses,  and  their  kingdoms, 
have  been  utterly  ruined.  Thave  represented,  on  the  other 
hand,  more  laudable  examples;  the  social  intercourse  be¬ 
tween  the  two  kings  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  beneficial  to 
themselves  and  to  their  country  for  many  ages;  and  where 
the  custom  of  every  one  arbitrarily  seizing  on  power,  was 
quite  overturned.  Then,  the  brothers,  Eumenes  and  Atta¬ 
ins,  having  raised  their  dominions  (once  so  low,  that  they 
were  almost  ashamed  of  the  title  of  king,)  to  an  equality 
with  mine,  or  with  those  of  Antiochus,  or  indeed  of  any 
monarch  of  this  age,  and  principally  by  brotherly  concord. 
Nor  did  I  decline  showing  you  examples  even  from  among 
the  Romans;  some  that  had  fallen  under  my  own  observa¬ 
tion,  others  that  I  had  heard:  as  Titus  and  Lucius  Quin- 
tius,  who  carried  on  the  war  with  me;  the  two  Scipios,  Pub¬ 
lius  and  Lucius,  who  vanquished  Antiochus,  and  their  fa¬ 
ther  and  uncle,  whose  sociality,  maintained  through  life,  was 
not  broken  even  by  death.  But  neither  could  the  wicked¬ 
ness  of  the  former,  attended  by  a  suitable  issue,  deter  you 
from  your  foolish  quarrels;  nor  could  the  sound  judgment 
and  good  fortune  of  the  latter,  bend  you  to  wisdom.  While 
I  am  alive,  and  in  health,  you  have  both  of  you,  in  your 

BOOK  XL. 

B.  C.  182.J 

hopes  and  wishes,  laid  hold  on  the  succession.  You  wish 
me  to  live  just  so  long  as  that,  surviving  one,  I  should,  by 
my  death,  make  the  other  king  without  a  competitor.  You 
cannot  endure  to  have  either  brother  or  father.  You  have 
no  sense  of  affection,  or  duty;  your  insatiable  passion  for 
rule,  alone,  has  taken  up  the  place  of  all  other  feelings. 
Come,  then,  contaminate  your  father’s  ears,  contend  with 
mutual  accusations,  as  you  sooa  will  with  the  sword;  speak 
out  whatever  you  can  with  truth,  or  whatever  you  may 
choose  to  invent.  My  ears  are  now  open;  but,  hencefor* 
ward,  will  be  shut  against  all  secret  charges  of  one  against 
the  other.”  On  his  uttering  these  words,  with  furious  pas¬ 
sion,  every  one  present  burst  into  tears,  and  for  a  long  time 
kept  a  sorrowful  silence. 
IX.  At  length  Perseus  spoke  to  this  effect: I  ought  then, 
it  seems,  to  have  opened  my  gate  in  the  night,  to  have  ad¬ 
mitted  those  armed  revellers,  and  held  out  mv  throat  to  theit 
swords;  since  nothing  less  than  the  perpetration  of  the  deed 
can  gain  belief,  and  since  I,  against  whom  a  murderous  plot 
was  levelled,  am  accosted  in  the  same  language  as  if  I  were 
a  robber  and  an  assassin.  It  is  not  without  reason,  that  peo¬ 
ple  say  that  you  have  but  one  son,  Demetrius;  and  that  I  am 
suppositious,  and  born  of  a, concubine;  for  if  I  held  in  your 
breast  the  rank  of  a  son,  or  the  affection  due  to  one,  you 
would  wreak  your  anger  not  on  me,  who,  on  detecting  a  plot 
against  my  life,  make  my  complaint,  but  on  him  who  was  the 
author  of  it:  nor  would  myself  be.  so  cheap  in  your  eyes,  as 
that  you  should  neither  be  moved  by  the  danger  which  I 
have  already  undergone,  nor  by  that  to  which  I  must  be  ex¬ 
posed  in  future,  if  the  assassins  are  permitted  to  go  unpun¬ 
ished.  If  therefore  it  be  our  doom  to  die  in  silence,  let  us 
only  pray  the  gods,  that  the  wicked  design  aimed  at  me  may 
end  with  me;  and  that  you  be  not  wounded  through  my  sides 
But  if,  as  nature  itself  dictates  to  people,  encompassed  with 
perils  in  a  desert  place,  to  implore  aid  from  men  whom  thdv 

3^4 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  570 

had  never  seen,  so  I,  on  finding  a  sword  drawn  against  me, 
may  be  allowed  to  raise  my  voice,  I  beseech  you  then,  by 
your  own  person,  by  the  name  of  father,  (and  you  long  know 
which  of  us  reveres  that  title  most,)  that  you  may  hear  me 
jn  the  same  manner,  as  you  would  if  roused  by  calls  and  out¬ 
cries,  you  had  come  up,  when  I  was  crying  for  help,  and  in 
the  dead  of  night  had  found  Demetrius,  with  armed  men,  in 
the  porch  of  my  house.  What  I  should  at  that  time,  and  in 
.  that  case,  have  exclaimed  against  with  terror,  I  now  next 
day,  lay  before  you  in  form  of  a  complaint.  Brother,  it  is 
long  since  you  and  I  lived  together  on  the  terms  of  mutual 
hospitality;  your  chief  wish  is  to  be  king;  your  hopes  on  that 
head  meet  obstacles  in  my  age,  in  the  law  of  nations,  in  the 
ancient  practice  of  Macedonia,  as  well  as  in  my  father’s  judg¬ 
ment.  These  you  can  surmount  by  no  other  means  than  by 
shedding  my  blood.  To  this  end,  you  leav^e  no  scheme  or 
effort  untried.  Hitherto,  either  my  care  or  fortune  has  kept  me 
from  destruction.  Yesterday,  on  occasion  of  the  purification 
the  military  exercise  and  mock  representation  of  a  fight,  you 
brought  on  almost  a  bloody  battle;  nor  was  I  sayed  from 
death  by  anv  other  means  than  by  suffering  myself  and  my 
party  to  be  overcome.  After  this  pretending  brotherly  sporti 
you  wanted  to  drag  me  to  your  Jboiise  to  supper.  Father,  can 
you  suppose  I  should  have  met  there  unarmed  guests,  when 
they  came,  in  arms,  to  my  house  to  drink  with  me?  Do  you 
think  there  would  have  been  no  danger  in  the  night  from 
their  swords,  when,  before.,  they  were  near  killing  me  with 
foils?  W  hy,  Demetrius  did  you  come  at  that  time  of  night; 
why,  an  enemy  come  to  a  person  provoked;  why  with  young 
men  in  arms?  I  did  not  dare  to  trust  myself  with  you  as  a 
guest,  and  shall  I  admit  you  to  drink  with  me,  when  you 
come  surrounded  with  armed  men.^  Father,  if  the  gate  had 
been  open,  you  would  at  this  moment  bepreparing  my  fune¬ 
ral,  instead  of  hearing  my  complaint,  I  do  not  as  an  accu¬ 
ser  urge  any  thing  for  the  purpose  of  aggravation;  neither  do 

BOOK  XL, 

375 

B.  C.182.3 

I  put  together  doubtful  circumstances,  in  a  train  of  artful  ar¬ 
guments.  For  what  can  he  say?  Does  he  deny  that  he 
came  to  my  gate  with  a  large  party,  or  that  there  were  arm¬ 
ed  men  with  him?  Send  for  the  persons;  I  will  name  them. 
I  know  that  they  who  dared  to  make  this  attempt,  dare  to  do 
any  thing;  nevertheless,  they  will  not  dare  to  contradict 
what  I  say.  If  1  brought  before  you  any  who  had  been 
caught  within  my  doors,  in  arms,  you  would  consider  this  as 
full  proof;  and  you  ought  to  consider  those  who  make  con¬ 
fession  of  what  I  have  charged  them  with,  in  the  same  light, 
as  if  actually  caught  in  the  fact. 
X.  “  Father!  your  curses  should  fall  on  the  ambition  for 
rule.  Call  up  the  furies,  the  avengers  of  the  wrongs  of  bro 
thers;  but  let  not  your  curses  be  undiscriminating.  Examine 
and  distinguish  between  the  plotter  and  the  person  plotted 
against,  and  pour  them  on  the  guilty  head.  Let  him,  who 
intended  to  kill  a  brother,  feel  the  wrath  of  the  gods,  and  of 
his  father  also;  and  let  him,  who  was  to  have  perished  by  a 
brother’s  wickedness,  find  refuge  an  his  father’s  compassion 
and  justice.  For  where  else  shall  I  seek  refuge,  who  can*^ 
not  find  safety  in  the  solemn  purification  of  your  army,  in 
the  exercise  of  the  troops,  in  my  own  house,  in  a  feast,  nor 
in  the  night,  which  nature’s  bounty  granted  to  mankind  for  a 
season  of  repose.  If  I  go  to  my  brother,  according  to  his 
invitation,  I  must  die.  If  I  admit  my  brother  to  a  party  of 
pleasure  within  my  own  gates,  I  must  die.  Neither  by  go¬ 
ing,  nor  by  staying,  can  I  escape  treacherous  plots.  Whith¬ 
er  then  shall  I  betake  me?  Father,  your  favour  only  have  I 
ever  courted,  and  that  of  the  gods.  I  have  not  the  Romans 
to  fly  to.  They  wish  my  destruction,  because  I  grieve  at 
the  injuries  which  they  have  done  to  you;  because  I  resent 
TOur  being  deprived  of  so  many  cities,  so  many  nations,  and 
but  the  other  day,  of  the  coast  of  Thrace,  I'hey  have  no 
hope  that  Macedonia  will  ever  be  their  property,  while 
either  you  or  I  are  safe.  But,  if  I  should  be  taken  off  hv 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

[Y.  R.  570 

370 
the  wickedness  of  my  brother,  and  you  by  old  age;  or  if  even 
this  should  not  be  waited  for,  they  know  that  both  the  king 
and  kingdom  of  Macedonia  will  become  theirs.  If  the  Ro¬ 
mans  had  left  you  any  thing  beyond  the  limits  of  Macedonia, 
I  would  suppose  that  I  might  there  find  shelter.  But  I  have 
protection  enough  in  the  Macedonians.  You  were  an  eye¬ 
witness  yesterday  of  the  attack  made  on  me  by  the  soldiers. 
What  did  they  want  but  pointed  weapons,  to  complete  the 
business.  And  what  they  wanted,  in  the  day,  my  brother’s 
guests  took  to  themselves  in  the  night.  Why  need  I  men* 
tion  the  greater  part  of  the  nobles,  who  have  placed  all  their 
hopes  of  wealth  and  preferment  in  the  Romans,  and  in  him, 
who  can  do  every  thing  with  the  Romans?  Nor,  in  truth^ 
do  they  prefer  him  merely  to  me,  his  elder  brother,  but,  in 
some  measure,  to  yourself,  his  king  and  father.  For  he  is 
the  person,  out  of  regard  to  whom  the  senate  remitted  to  you 
the  intended  punishment,  who  now  screens  you  from  the  Ro¬ 
man  arms;  who  thinks  it  fit  that  your  advanced  age  should 
be  under  obligation  to,  and  under  control  of  his  youth.  He 
is  supported  by  the  Rotnans,  by  all  the  cities  liberated  from 
your  jurisdiction,  by  the  Macedonians  who  are  pleased  at  the 
peace  with  Rome.  For  me,  where  is  there  either  hope  or 
support  of  any  kind,  except  inyou,  my  father. 
XI.  ^WhaNd^j^ou  suppose  to  be  the  intention  of  the  let* 
ter?^nOi&- your^fetely  by  Titus  Quintius,  in  which  he  not 
only  says,  that  you  acted  wisely  for  your  own  interest  in 
sending  Demetrius  to  Rome,  but  also  advises  you  to  send 
him  back  again,  with  a  greater  number  of  ambassadors,  and 
even  the  first  men  of  Macedonia?  Titus  Quintius  is  now 
his  counsellor,  and  master,  in  every  thing.  You,  his  father, 
he  has  renounced,  and  has  substituted  Quintius  in  your  place. 
Rome  is  the  principal  place,  where  their  secret  plans  are  di¬ 
gested.  When  he  desires  you  to  send  greater  numbers,  and 
the  chief  men  of  Macedonia,  he  is  seeking  assistance  in  their 
schemes.  For  those,  who  go  thither,  pure  and  uncorrupt,  and 

B.  C,  182r» 

BOOK  XL. 

srr 

satisfied  that  you  are  really  their  king,  return  tainted  and  in¬ 
fected  by  Roman  poisons.  Demetrius  alone  is  every  thing 
with  them.  They  give  him  the  title  of  king,  even  in  his  fa¬ 
ther’s  lifetime.  If  I  express  my  indignation  at  these  things, 
♦  I  am  charged  with  being  ambitious  for  rule;  not  only  by 
others,  but,  father,  even  by  you.  But  this  charge,  if  made 
against  both,  I  do  not  admit;  for  whom  do  I  disturb  from 
his  place,  that  I  may  succeed  in  his  room?  My  father  alone 
is  before  me;  and  that  he  may  long  beso^  I  beseech  the  gods. 
If  I  survive  him,  (and  so  may  I  survive  him,  as  I  shall  de¬ 
serve  that  himself  may  wish  it,)  I  shall  receive  the  crown, 
if  my  father  devises  it  to  me.  He  covets  rule,  and  covets 
it  with  a  criminal  passion,  'who  hastily  over- leaps  the  order 
of  age,  of  nature,  of  the  Macedonian  customs,  and  of  the 
laws  of  nations.  An  elder  brother  stands  in  his  way;  to  whom 
by  right,  and  by  the  choice  of  his  father,  the  succession  be¬ 
longs.  Let  us,  he  cries,  pul  him  out  of  the  way.  I  shall 
not  be  the  first  that  acquired  a  kingdom  by  killing  a  brother. 
My  father  being  old,  and  left  alone  by  his  son’s  death,  will 
rather  fear  for  himself,  than  revenge  the  death  of  his  son. 
The  Romans  will  rejoice,  they  will  approve,  they  will  sup¬ 
port  the  act.  Father,  these  prospects  are  uncertain,  but 
they  are  not  without  grounds.  For  the  matter  stands  thus: 
it  is  in  >our  power  to  ward  off  danger  ,by  punishing  thost 
who  took  arms  to  kill  me;  but  should  their  villainy  succeed, 
it  will  not  then  be  in  your  power  to  take  vengeance  for 
death.” 
XIL  When  Perseus  ceased  speaking,  the  eves  of  nil  pre¬ 
sent  were  turned  on  Demetrius,  as  they  expected  from  him 
an  immediate  reply:  but  he  kept  silence  for  a  long  time.  It 
was  evident  that,  drowned  as  he  was  in  tears,  he  had  not 
power  to  utter  a  word;  but,  at  last,  the  necessity  that  called 
on  him  to  speak,  overcame  his  grief,  and  he  expressed  him¬ 
self  thus:  Father,  all  the  aids  of  which  persons  accused 
could  heretofore  have  availed  themselves,  my  brother  ha*' 
VOL.  v. — 3  C 

.378 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  57u. 

taken  from  me,  and  converted  to  his  own  purpose.  By  his 
tears,  counterfeited  for  the  purpose  of  working  another’s  ruin, 
he  has  caused  my  real  tears  to  be  suspected  by  you-  Al¬ 
though,  ever  since  my  return  from  Rome,  he  has  employed 
himself  night  and  day  in  plotting  my  destruction,  and  hold¬ 
ing,  for  that  end,  secret  consultations  with  his  confederates, 
yet  he  now  represents  me  in  the  character,  not  only  of  a 
conspirator,  but  of  an  open  assassin  and  murderer.  He  ter¬ 
rifies  you  with  his  danger,  in  order  to  hasten  through  your 
means  the  ruin  of  an  innocent  brother.  He  asserts,  that  he 
has  no  place  of  refuge  in  the  world,  in  order  to  cut  off  any 
remains  of  hope,  which  I  might  have,  even  in  you.  Cir¬ 
cumvented,  unsupported,  and  helpless  as  I  am,  he  loads  me 
with  injurious  imputations,  respecting  interest  with  foreign¬ 
ers,  which,  instead  of  proving  useful,  is  detrimental  to  me. 
Then,  with  what  unfair  artifice  does  he  act,  in  blending  the 
charge  of  last  night  wdth  invectives  against  the  rest  of  my 
conduct;  with  design,  on  the  one  hand,  by  his  representation 
of  the  tenor  of  my  behaviour,  in  other  particulars,  to  throw 
a  colour  of  guilt  on  the  former,  the  true  nature  of  which  you 
shall  soon  understand;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  to  support  the 
other  groundless  insinuations  respecting  my  views,  wishes, 
and  designs  by  this  latter,  fictitious,  fabricated  story.  He 
had,  at  the  same  time,  a  farther  design;  that  his  accusation 
might  appear  to  be  sudden  and  unpremeditated,  as  if  occa¬ 
sioned  by  sudden  fright  and  disturbance  in  the  night.  But, 
Perseus,  if  I  were  a  traitor  against  my  father  and  his  gov¬ 
ernment;  if  I  had  formed  connections  with  the  Romans,  or 
with  others,  enemies  of  my  father,  the  tale  of  last  night  ought 
not  to  have  been  waited  for;  I  ought  to  have  been  long  ago 
brought  to  answer  for  my  treason.  And  if  the  other  charge 
were  unfounded,  and  tended  to  discover  your  ill  will  towards 
me,  rather  than  my  guilt,  it  ought  on  the  present  day  also,  to 
be  either  omitted  or  postponed;  in  order  that  it  might  clearly 
appear,  whether  I  plotted  against  you;  or  you,  with  indeed  a 

B.  C.  182.] 

BOOK  XL. 

379 

strange  and  singular  kind  of  hatred^  against  me.  However, 
I  will,  as  well  as  I  am  able,  in  my  present  unforeseen  pertur¬ 
bation  of  mind,  distinguish  those  matters,  which  you  have 
confounded;  and  I  will  unveil  the  plot  of  the  preceding 
evening,  whether  mine  or  yours.  Perseus  wishes  it  to  be 
believed,  that  I  had  formed  a  design  to  take  his  life,  with 
the  view,  it  seems,  that  having  removed  the  elder  brother, 
to  whom  by  the  law  of  nations,  by  the  custom  of  Macedonia, 
and  likewise  by  your  judgment,  as  he  says  the  kingdom  was 
to  devolve,  I  the  younger,  should  succeed  in  the  room  of  him 
whom  I  had  slain.  What,  then,  can  be  the  meaning  of  that 
other  part  of  his  speech,  where  he  says,  that  I  courted  the 
favour  of  the  Romans,  and  from  my  reliance  on  them,  con¬ 
ceived  hopes  of  the  crown?  For,  if  I  believed  that  the  Ro¬ 
mans  possessed  such  influence,  that  they  could  impose  on 
Macedonia  whatever  king  they  pleased,  and  if  I  had  such 
confidence  in  my  interest  with  them,  what  need  was  there 
of  fratricide?  Could  it  be  my  wish  to  wear  a  diadem  stain¬ 
ed  with  a  brother's  blood,  or  to  become  odious  and  execra¬ 
ble,  in  the  eyes  of  those  very  people,  with  whom,  whatever 
share  of  interest  I  might  happen  to  have,  was  procured  by 
either  real,  or  at  least,  affected  integrity  of  conduct?  Can 
this  be  possible,  I  sav,  unless  you  believe  that  Titus  Quin- 
tius,  by  whose  counsels  and  advice  you  allege  I  am  at 
present  governed,  though  he  lives  on  a -footing  of  such  cor¬ 
dial  affection  with  his  own  brother,  would  recommend  to  me 
to  murder  miner  He  has  assembled  together  for  me,  not 
only  the  favour  of  the  Romans,  but  the  opinions  of  the  Ma¬ 
cedonians,  and  the  concurring  sentiments  almost  of  all  the 
gods,  and  of  all  mankind,  by  reason  of  all  which  he  cannot 
believe  that  he  would  prove  equal  to  me  in  the  competition. 
Yet  the  same  man  accuses  me  of  having,  (while  sensible  of 
my  inferiority  to  him  in  every  mode  of  proceeding,)  had  re¬ 
course  to  an  act  of  wickedness  as  my  only  resource.  Arc 
von  satisfied,  that  the  decision  between  us  shall  be  made  on 

380 

HISTORY  OF  ROML. 

[Y.  R.  sro 

this  principle,  that  whichever  feared  lest  the  other  should 
seem  more  worthy  of  the  throne,  shall  be  deemed  guilty  ot 
designing  his  brother’s  destruction? 
XIlL  But  let  us  examine  the  process  of  this  accusation, 
in  whatever  manner  it  has  been  fabricated.  He  has  arraign¬ 
ed  me  of  attempting  his  life,  in  several  different  methods; 
and  all  these  modes  of  attack  he  has  brought  within  the  com¬ 
pass  of  one  day.  I  intended  to  kill  him  in  the  middle  of  the 
day;  in  the  course  of  the  exercises;  and,  in  preference  of  all 
other  days,  on  that  of  the  purification.  I  intended,  when 
I  invited  him  to  supper,  to  take  him  off  by  poison,  I  intend¬ 
ed,  when  some  armed  persons  followed  me  to  join  his  part)* 
in  their  conviviality,  to  kill  him  with  the  sword.  You  see 
what  sort  of  opportunities  were  chosen  for  this  murder;  those 
of  sport,  feasting,  and  revelling,  and  on  what  days,  or  on 
what  sort  of  a  day!  On  the  day,  in  which  the  army  was  pu¬ 
rified;  in  which,  after  the  royal  armour  of  all  the  former 
kings  in  Macedonia  was  carried  in  procession  between  the 
divided  parts  of  the  victim, 'when  he  and  I,  only,  rode  along 
with  you,  father,  at  your  sides,  and  the  body  of  the  Mace¬ 
donian  troops  followed.  Now,  even  supposing  that  I  had 
formerly  been  guilty  of  some  crime,  could  I,  after  being  pu¬ 
rified  and  expiated  in  this  sacred  solemnity,  at  the  very 
time  when  I  was  looking  at  the  victim  laid  on  each  side  of 
our  road,  revolve  in  my  mind  fratricide;  could  I  have  poi¬ 
sons  and  swords  prepared  against  the  feastr  With  what  other 
sacred  rights  could  I  afterwards  atone  for  the  guilt  of  a  mind 
thus  contaminated  with  every  kind  of  villainy?  But  his  un¬ 
derstanding  is  so  blinded  by  eagerness  to  turn  every  thing 
into  a  crime,  that  he  confounds  one  thing  with  another.  For 
if,  Perseus,  I  intended  to  take  you  off  by  poison,  what  could 
be  more  incongruous  with  my  design,  than  to  provoke  you  to 
rage  by  an  obstinate  contest  and  fight?  Ought  I  to  have  given 
vou  reason  to  refuse,  as  you  did,  my  invitation  to  supper?  But 

B.  C.  182.] 

BOOK  XL. 

381 

when,  in  your  anger,  you  had  refused,  whether  ought  I  to 
have  taken  pains  to  pacify  you,  that  I  might  find  another  op¬ 
portunity,  since  I  had  got  the  poison  ready,  or  to  fly  off  at 
once  to  another  plan  of  killing  you  with  the  sword,  and  on 
that  same  day,  under  pretence  of  feasting  with  you?  If  I 
thought  that  you  declined  supping  with  me,  through  fear  for 
your  life,  how  could  I  suppose  that  you  would  not,  through 
the  same  fear,  have  declined  admitting  me  to  drink  with  you. 
*  XIV.  Father,  I  have  no  cause  to  blush,  that  on  a  festi¬ 
val  day,  among  companions  of  my  own  age,  I  should  have 
indulged  too  freely  in  wine;  and  I  wish  you  would  inquire 
what  cheerfulness  and  mirth  prevailed,  in  yesterday’s  enter¬ 
tainment,  at  my  house,  heightened  too  by  our  joy,  perhaps 
a  blameable  one,  for  our  party  not  having  been  worsted  in 
the  fight.  My  present  misfortune,  and  my  fears,  have  effec¬ 
tually  dissipated  the  fumes  of  the  liquor;  but,  if  these  had 
not  intervened,  we,  the  conspirators,  would  have  been  now 
lying  fast  asleep.  If,  Perseus,  I  designed  to  storm  your 
house,  and  after  taking  it,  to  kill  the  owner,  ought  I  not  to 
have  refrained  from  wine  for  that  one  day,  and  to  have  kept 
my  Ibldiers  sober?  That  I  should  not  be  the  only  one  to  de¬ 
fend  my  cause  with  excessive  candour,  my  brother  himself, 
not  in  the  least  inclined  to  malice  or  suspicion,  says,  I  know 
nothing  more,  I  charge  them  with  nothing  more,  than  that 
they  came  in  arms  to  drink  with  me.  If  I  should  ask,  how 
come  you  acquainted  with  that  circumstance?  you  must  ne¬ 
cessarily  acknowledge,  either  that  my  house  was  full  of  your 
spies,  or  that  my  companions  took  arms  so  openlv,  as  that 
every  one  could  kno\v  their  purpose.  Lest  he  should  seem 
to  argue,  with  an  intention  to  aggravate  guilt,  he  desires  you 
to  inquire  from  the  persons,  whom  he  would  name,  whether 
they  had  carried  swords,  in  order  that,  in  such  a  case,  and 
respecting  a  fact  which  themselves  confess,  I  might  be  deem¬ 
ed  convicted.  Why,  Perseus,  do  you  not  rather  desire  in¬ 
quiry  to  be  made,  whether  thev  carried  swords  for  the  pur- 

38i 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

lY.  R.  sro. 

pose  of  killing  you?  whether,  by  my  directions  and  know¬ 
ledge?  for  this  is  what  you  wish  to  be  believed,  and  not  what 
they  will  confess,  and  what  is,  indeed,  notorious,  that  they 
carried  them  for  the  purpose  of  defending  themselves.  Whe¬ 
ther  they  acted  right  or  wrong,  let  them  account  for  their 
own  conduct.  My  cause,  which  is  in  no  way  affected  by  this 
act,  you  ought  not  to  have  blended  with  it;  or  you  ought  to 
have  explained,  whether  we  intended  to  attack  you  openly 
or  secretly.  If  openly,  why  did  we  not  all  carry  swords,  and 
not  those  only  who  had  beaten  your  spy?  If  privately,  what 
was  our  plan?  Were  four  to  remain,  when  the  banquet  broke 
up,  and  I,  your  guest,  bad  departed,  in  order  to  fall  on  you 
in  your  sleep?  How  would  they  have  escaped  detection,  as 
being  strangers,  and  belonging  to  me;  and,  above  all,  being 
liable  to  suspicion,  on  account  of  their  having  been  in  a  quar¬ 
rel  a  little  before?  And  how  were  they  to  escape  after  having 
killed  you?  Was  your  house  so  weakly  defended,  as  that  it 
could  be  stormed  by  the  aid  of  four  swords. 
XV.  “  Drop  then,  that  fable  of  last  night;  and  recur  to 
what  really  grieves  you,  what  kindles  your  envy.  Say, — Why, 
Demetrius,  is  mention  made  any  where  of  your  mounting  the 
throne?  Why  do  you  appear,  to  some,  more  worthy  to  suc¬ 
ceed  to  your  father’s  dignity  than  I?  Why  do  you  disturb, 
with  doubt  and  anxiety,  my  hopes  which  would  be  certain  if 
you  were  not  in  being?  These  are  the  thoughts  of  Perseus, 
though  he  does  not  express  them;  these  make  him  my  ene- 
my,  these  my  accuser;  these,  my  father,  fill  your  house,  these 
fill  your  kingdom  with  accusations  and  suspicions.  But  as  I 
ought  not  now  to  hope  for  the  crown,  or  perhaps  ever  to 
think  of  a  competition  for  it,  being,  as  I  am,  the  younger 
brother,  and  it  being  your  will  that  I  should  yield  to  the 
elder;  so  neither  ought  I,  at  any  former  time,  or  at  the  pre- 
‘ient,  to  act  in  such  a  manner,  as  to  appear  undeserving  of 
having  you  for  my  father,  and  of  all  the  other  blessings  of 
my  life.  That  would  be  the  consequence  of  vicious  conduct 

B.  C.  182.] 

BOOK  XL. 

in  me,  not  of  moderation,  and  of  yielding  to  him,  to  whom 
the  laws,  divine  and  human,  order  me  to  give  place.  I  am 
upbraided  in  regard  to  the  Romans;  and  what  ought  to  be 
deemed  an  honour,  is  turned  into  a  crime.  It  was  not  at 
my  request,  that  I  was  either  delivered  a  hostage  to  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  or  sent  ambassador  to  Rome.  Being  commissioned  by 
you,  I  did  not  refuse  to  go.  On  both  occasions,  I  conducted 
myself  in  such  a  manner,  as  to  be  no  disgrace  to  you,  to  yom 
kingdom,  or  to  the  Macedonian  nation.  You,  therefore,  fa¬ 
ther,  have  been  the  cause  of  my  friendship  with  the  Romans. 
As  long  as  peace  shall  subsist  between  you  and  them,  so 
long  will  I  also  continue  in  friendship  with  them;  but,  if  war 
should  arise,  I,  who  have  been  there  a  hostage,  and  no  un¬ 
profitable  ambassador  in  my  father’s  behalf,  will  be  their 
most  determined  enemy.  Nor  do  I,  this  day,  require,  that 
the  favour  of  the  Romans  should  be  any  advantage  to  me;  I 
only  deprecate  its  being  made  detrimental.  It  neither  com¬ 
menced  in  war,  nor  is  it  meant  to  subsist  in  war.  I  was  a 
pledge  of  peace;  and,  to  procure  a  continuance  of  peace,  I 
was  sent  ambassador.  Let  neither  be  esteemed  an  honour  or 
a  crime*  Father,  if  I  have  been  guilty  of  any  undutiful  be¬ 
haviour  towards  you,  or  any  criminal  behaviour  towards  my 
brother,  there  is  no  punishment  to  which  I  will  not  submit 
without  murmuring.  If  I  am  innocent,  let  me  not,  I  beseech 
vou,be  destroyed  by  envy.  My  brother’s  accusation,  this  day. 
is  not  the  first  that  he  has  brought  against  me;  but  it  is  the 
first  made  openly,  and  is  entirely  undeserved  by  me.  If  m\ 
father  were  angry  with  me,  it  would  become  the  elder  brothei 
to  intercede  for  the  younger,  to  obtain  pardon  for  his  youth 
and  for  his  error;  but,  in  the  very  person,  from  whom  I  ought 
to  receive  protection,  in  him  I  meet  my  ruin.  From  a  feast, 
and  intemperate  drinking,  I  have  been  hurried,  almost  halt 
asleep,  to  defend  myself  against  a  charge  of  fratricide.  With¬ 
out  advocates,  without  patrons,  I  am  compelled  to  plead  my 
own  cause.  If  I  were  to  speak  for  another,  I  would  have 

384 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  570. 

taken  time  to  study  and  compose  my  discourse;  though,  in 
that  case,  I  should  run  no  other  hazard  than  that  of  my  re¬ 
putation  for  abilities.  But  before  1  knew  the  reason  of  being 
summoned  hither,  1  heardCyou  in  a  paroxysm  of  passion,  or¬ 
dering  me  to  account  for  my  conduct  and  my  brother  accus¬ 
ing  me.  He  employed,  against  me,  a  speech,  long  before 
prepared  and  studied;  while  I  had  no  longer  time  for  learn¬ 
ing  the  nature  of  the  case,  than  while  the  charges  against  me 
were  recited.  During  that  short  space,  whether  should  I  Us- 
ten  to  my  accuser,  or  study  a  defence?  Thunderstruck  by 
the  sudden  and  unthought-of  calamity,  I  was  scarcely  capa¬ 
ble  of  understanding  what  was  alleged  against  me,  much 
less  of  settling  properly,  in  my  mind,  what  defence  I  should 
make.  What  hope,  indeed,  could  I  have,  if  my  judge  were 
not  my  father;  with  whom,  though  my  elder  brother  has  the 
advantage  of  a  larger  share  in  his  affection,  yet  surely,  stand¬ 
ing  thus  accused,  I  ought  not  to  meet  a  less  share  of  com¬ 
passion.  For  my  prayer  is,  that  you  would  save  me,  for  my 
sake,  and  for  your  own;  he  demands,  that  for  his  security, 
you  should  put  me  to  death.  In  what  manner,  do  you  think, 
will  he  act,  when  you  shall  deliver  the  kingdom  into  his 
hands,  'who,  even  now,  thinks  it  reasonable  that  he  should  be 
gratified  with  my  blood?”  While  he  was  proceeding  in  this 
manner,  his  voice  was  stopped  by  a  flood  of  tears.  Philip 
ordered  Perseus  and  Demetrius  to  withdraw;  and  after  con¬ 
ferring  a  short  time  with  his  friends,  declared,  that  he 
could  not,  from  a  single  hour’s  discussion,  form  a  definite 
judgment  on  the  cause  between  them.  This  could  only  be 
done  by  a  scrutiny  into  the  conduct  and  manners  of  both, 
and  a  close  observation  of  their  words  and  actions,  on  all 
occasions,  great  and  small.”  From  which  it  appeared  clearly 
to  every  one,  that  the  charge  relating  to  the  preceding  night, 
was  effectually  refuted;  but  that  Demetrius  was  viewed  with 
jealously,  as  too  closely  connected  with  the  Romans.  Such 
were  the  seeds  of  a  Macedonian  war,  which  were  sowed 

BOOK  XL. 

385 

B.  C.  182.J 
during  the  life-time  of  Philip,  though  they  did  not  ripen  in¬ 
to  effect  until  the  government  fell  into  the  hands  of  Perseus, 
with  whom  it  was  waged. 
XVL  Both  the  consuls  went  into  Liguria,  at  that  time, 
the  only  consular  province.  Their  successes  there  occasion¬ 
ed  a  supplication  of  one  day  to  be  decreed.  About  two  thou¬ 
sand  Ligurians  came  to  the  extreme  borders  of  the  Gallic 
province,  where  Marcellas  lay  encamped,  and  requested  him 
to  receive  their  submission.  Marcellas  ordered  them  to  wait 
where  they  were,  and  sent  a  letter  to  the  senate,  desiring  to 
know  their  pleasure.  The  senate  ordered  Marcus  Ogulnius. 
praetor,  to  write  back  to  Marcellus,  that  “  it  would  have  been 
more  proper  for  the  consuls,  whose  province  it  was,  than  foi 
them,  to  have  determined  what,  in  this  case,  was  for  the 
public  advantage.  That,  however,  as  the  matter  stood,  it 
was  their  opinion,  that  the  submis^on  of  the  Ligurians  should 
be  received;  that  their  arms  should  be  taken  from  them,  and 
sent  to  the  consuls,”  The  prsetors  arrived  at  the  same  time, 
in  Spain;  Publius  Manlius,  in  the  farther  province,  which  he 
had  governed  in  his  former  prsetorship,  and  Quintus  Fulvi- 
us  Flaccus,  in  the  hither  one,  where  he  received  the  com¬ 
mand  of  the  army  from  Terentius;  the  farther  province,  b) 
the  death  of  the  propraetor,  Publius  Sempronius,  having  been 
left  without  a  governor.  While  Fulvius  Flaccus  was  be¬ 
sieging  a  town  of  the  Spaniards,  called  Urbicua,  he  was  at¬ 
tacked  by  the  Celtiberians.  Many  severe  actions  were  fought 
on  the  occasion,  and  many  of  the  Romans  killed  and  w^ound- 
ed.  Nothing,  however,  could  prevail  on  Fulvius  to  raise  the 
siege;  and,  by  perseverance,  he  carried  his  point.  The  Cel- 
tiberians,  wearied  out  with  so  many  battles,  retired;  and  the 
city,  having  lost  their  assistance,  was,  within  a  few  days  af¬ 
ter,  taken  and  sacked,  when  the  praetor  bestowed  the  booty 
on  the  soldiers.  Fulvius,  after  reducing  this  town,  sent  his 
forces  into  winter  quarters;  and  Publius  Manlius  did  the 
same,  without  having  performed  any  thing  worth  mention: 
VOL.  V. — 3  D 

386 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  570. 

for  all  that  he  did  'was,  to  collect,  into  one  body,  the  troops 
which  had  been  scattered  in  various  places.  Such  were  the 
transactions  of  that  summer  in  Spain.  Terentius,  who  had 
come  home  from  that  province,  entered  the  city  in  ovation. 
He  carried  in  the  procession  nine  thousand  three  hundred 
and  twenty  pounds  weight  of  silver,  eighty  pounds  weight  of 
gold,  and  two  golden  crowns  of  the  weight  of  sixty-seven 
pounds. 
XVI 1.  This  year  the  Romans  were  arbitrators  in  a  dis¬ 
pute,  subsisting  between  the  people  of  Carthage  and  king 
Masinissa,  about  a  tract  of  ground.  This  ground,  Gala,  fa¬ 
ther  of  Masinissa,  had  taken  from  the  Carthaginians.  Syphax 
had  expelled  Gala,  and,  afterwards,  from  respect  to  his  fa¬ 
ther-in-law,  Hasdrubal,  had  made  a  present  of  it  to  the  Car¬ 
thaginians.  In  the  present  year,  Masinissa  had  expelled  the 
Carthaginians.  This  matter  was  debated  before  the  Roman 
deputies,  with  no  less  violent  heat  than  had  animated  the 
parties  when  engaged  in  the  field.  I'he  Carthaginians  re¬ 
claimed  the  ground,  first,  as  having  been  the  property  .of  their 
ancestors;  and  next,  on  the  title  which  they  had  derived  from 
*Syphax.  Masinissa  urged,  that  “  he  had  retaken  possession 
of  it  as  part  of  his  father’s  kingdom,  and  held  it  under  the 
law  of  nations;  and  that  he  had  the  advantage,  both  in  the 
merits  of  his  cause,  and,  in  the  present  possession.  That,  in 
this  discussion,  he  had  no  other  fear,  than  lest  the  modera¬ 
tion  of  the  Romans  might  operate  to  his  loss,  making  them 
dread  the  appearance  of  any  partiality  to  a  king  who  was 
their  friend  and  ally,  in  prejudice  to  the  common  enemy  of 
him  and  them.”  The  deputies  did  not  alter  the  right  of  pos¬ 
session,  but  remitted  the  cause  entire  to  the  senate  at  Rome. 
There  was  nothing  done  afterwards,  in  Liguria.  The  inha¬ 
bitants,  at  first,  retired  into  remote  forests;  and,  afterwards, 
disbanding  their  army,  separated,  and  went  off  to  their  seve¬ 
ral  forts  and  villages.  The  consuls,  too,  wished  to  disband 
their  forces,  and  wrote  to  the  senate  for  orders:  but  the  se- 

b.  C.  182.] 

BOOK  XL. 

387 

nate  directed,  that  one  of  them  should  discharge  his  troops, 
and  come  to  Rome  to  elect  magistrates  for  the  year;  and  that 
the  other,  with  his  legions,  should  pass  the  winter  at  Pisae. 
A  report  prevailed,  that  the  transalpine  Gauls  were  arming 
their  young  men,  and  it  was  not  known,  on  what  quarter  of 
Italy,  that  multitude  would  pour  itself.  The  consuls  settled 
the  matter  between  them, — that  Cneius  Bad^ius  should  go 
home  to  the  elections;  his  brother,  Marcus  Bsebius,  being  a 
candidate  for  the  consulship. 
XVIII.  The  assembly  for  the  election  of  con-  y 
suls  was  then  held,  and  Publius  Cornelius  Ceihe-  B.  c.  iSL 
gus  and  Marcus  Baebius  Tamphilus  were  chosen.  The  prae« 
tors  afterwards  elected  were,  Quintus  Fabius  Maximus, 
Quintus  Fabius  Buteo,  Caius  Claudius  Nero,  Quintus  Pe- 
tillius  Spurinus,  Marcus  Pinarius  Posca,  and  Lucius  Duro- 
nius.  When  the  magistrates  entered  into  office,  the  lots  dis¬ 
posed  of  the  provinces  thus:  to  the  consuls,  Liguria,  to  Quin¬ 
tus  Petillius,  the  city  jurisdiction;  to  Quintus  Fabius  Maxi¬ 
mus,  the  foreign;  to  Quintus  Fabius  Buteo,  Gaul;  to  Caius 
Claudius  Nero,  Sicily;  to  Marcus  Pinarius,  Sardinia:  and  to 
Lucius  Duronius,  Apulia,  to  which  was  annexed  I  stria,  in¬ 
formation  being  received,  from  Tarentum  and  Brundusium, 
that  the  country  on  the  sea-coasts  was  infested  by  foreign 
pirates.  The  IVIassilians  made  the  same  complaint,  with  re¬ 
gard  to  the  ships  of  the  Ligurians.  The  armies  were  then 
voted  to  the  consuls,  four  Reman  legions,  each  consisting  of 
hve  thousand  two  hundred  foot,  and  three  hundred  horse; 
and,  of  the  allies  and  Latines,  fifteen  thousand  foot,  and  eight 
hundred  horse.  In  the  two  Spains,  the  praetors  were  conti¬ 
nued  in  command,  with  the  armies  which  they  then  had;  and 
an  augmentation  was  voted  for  them,  amounting  to  three  thou¬ 
sand  Roman  foot,  with  two  hundred  horse,  and  six  thousand 
foot  and  three  hundred  horse,  of  the  Laiine  confederates. 
Nor  was  the  business  of  the  fleet  neglected.  The  consuls 
were  ordered  to  constitute  duumvirs  for  conducting  it;  and 

388 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.5n. 
these  were  to  man  twenty  ships,  which  they  launched,  with 
Roman  citizens,  who  had  been  in  servitude,  only  taking  care 
that  the  officers  should  be  men  of  free  birth.  I’he  duumvirs, 
each  at  the  head  of  ten  ships,  took  separate  parts  of  the  sea 
coast  under  their  protection,  so  that  the  promontory  of  Mi¬ 
nerva  formed  the  point  of  division  between  them;  one  was  to 
defend  the  part  on  the  right,  as  far  as  Marseilles;  the  other, 
that  on  the  left,  to  the  town  of  Barium. 
XIX.  Many  alarming  prodigies  were  seen  at  Rome  this 
year,  and  others  reported  from  abroad.  A  shower  of  blood 
fell  in  the  courts  of  the  temples  of  Vulcan  and  Concord,  and 
the  priests  reported  that  spears  moved  in  the  hands  of  the 
statues,  and  that  the  image  of  Juno  Sospita  at  Lanuvium 
shed  tears.  There  was  a  pestilence  in  the  country,  in  the 
market  towns  and  villages;  and  so  violent  was  it,  in  the  city, 
that  people  could  scarcely  be  found  to  bury  the  dead.  These 
prodigies,  and  the  mortality,  alarmed  the  senate  so  much, 
that  they  ordered  the  consuls  to  sacrifice  to  such  gods, 
their  judgment  should  direct,  victims  of  the  larger  kinds, 
and  that  the  decemvirs  should  consult  the  books.  Pursuant 
to  their  direction,  a  supplication  for  one  day  was  proclaimed, 
to  be  performed  at  every  shrine  in  Rome;  and  they  advised, 
besides,  and  the  senate  voted,  and  the  consuls  proclaimed, 
that  there  should  be  a  supplication,  and  public  worship,  for 
three  days,  throughout  all  Italy.  The  pestilence  raged  with 
so  great  fury,  that  when,  in  consequence  of  the  revolt  of 
the  Corsicans,  and  a  war  raised  in  Sardinia  by  the  Ibians, 
an  (^rder  M^as  passed  for  raising,  from  among  the  Latines, 
eight  thousand  foot  and  three  hundred  horse,  to  be  carried 
into  Sardinia,  with  Pinarius  the  praetor; — the  consuls  return¬ 
ed  a  representation,  that  so  great  a  number  of  men  had  died 
and  so  many  were  sick,  in  every  place,  that  such  a  body  ©f 
soldiers  could  not  be  collected.  On  this,  the  prsetor  was  or¬ 
dered  to  take  from  Cneius  Baebius,  proconsul,  who  was  in 
winter  quarters  at  Pisse,  as  many  soldiers  as  would  make  up 

B.  C.  181.J 

BOOK  XL. 

389 
the  deficiency^  and  then  to  sail  to  Sardinia;  Lucius  Duro- 
nius,  the  praetor,  to  whose  lot  Apulia  had  fallen,  received 
also  a  charge  to  make  inquiry  concerning  the  Bacchanalians^ 
for  some  remaining  seeds  of  the  evils,  formerly  excited  by 
those  people,  had  shown  themselves  there  the  year  before. 
The  inquiries,  though  commenced  under  the  praetor,  Lucius 
Pupius,  had  yet  been  brought  to  no  issue;  the  senate  there¬ 
fore  ordered  the  new  praetor  to  cut  up  that  evil  by  the  roots, 
so  that  it  should  never  spread  again.  The  consuls,  also,  by 
direction  of  the  senate,  proposed  to  the  people  certain  laws 
concerning  canvassing  for  elections. 
XX,  They  next  introduced  the  embassies  to  audience. 
And  first,  those  of  the  kings  Eumenes  and  Ariarathes,  the 
Cappadocian;  and  Pharnaces,  of  Pontus.  No  farther  answer 
was  given  to  these,  than  that  the  senate  would  send  persons 
to  examine,  and  decide,  their  disputes.  Ambassadors  from 
the  Lacedaemonian  exiles,  and  from  the  Achaeans,  were  next 
brought  in.  Hopes  were  given  to  the  exiles,  that  the  senate 
would  write  to  the  Achaeans  to  procure  their  restoration. 
The  Achaeans  gave  an  account,  to  the  satisfaction  of  the 
senate,  ol  the  recovery  of  Messene,  and  the  settlement  of 
affairs  there.  From  Philip,  king  of  Macedonia,  came  two 
ambassadors  also, — Phiiocles  and  Apelles;  not  on  any  busi* 
ness  w^ith  the  senate,  but  rather  to  pry  into  and  inquire  con¬ 
cerning  the  correspondence  with  the  Romans,  of  which  Per¬ 
seus  had  accused  Demetrius,  and,  particularly,  into  that  with 
Titus  Quintius,  concerning  the  kingdom,  to  the  supposed 
prejudice  of  his  brother.  The  king  had  emploved  these 
men,  believing  them  unbiassed  in  respect  of  either  party;  but 
tliey  were  accomplices  and  agents  of  Perseus,  in  his  treach¬ 
erous  designs.  Demetrius  ignorant  of  ail,  except  the  villain¬ 
ous  scheme  of  his  brother,  which  had  lately  broke  out,  at 
first,  neither  utterly  despaired,  nor  yet  entertained  much  hope, 
of  effecting  a  reconciliation  with  his  father;  but,  afterwards, 
he  trusted,  less  and  less,  every  dav,  to  Philip’s  affection. 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  571, 

having  observed  that  he  was  closely  beset  by  Perseus. 
Wherefore,  not  to  increase  the  suspicions  he  laboured  under, 
he  used  extreme  circumspection,  in  all  his  words  and  actiems, 
and  carefully  avoided  all  mention  of,  and  communication 
with,  the  Romans;  refraining  even  from  receiving  letters  from 
them,  as  he  knew  that  charges,  of  this  nature,  exasperated 
his  father  more  than  any  thing  else. 
XXL  Philip,  in  order  to  prevent  his  troops  from  being 
enervated  by  inactivity,  and,  at  the  same  time,  to  avert  all 
suspicion  of  his  harbouring  any  design  of  a  war  with  Rome, 
ordered  his  army  to  assemble  at  Stobi,  in  Paeonia;  and  thence 
he  led  it  on  into  Maedica.  He  had  been  seized  with  an  ear¬ 
nest  desire  of  ascending  to  the  summit  of  Mount  Hemus, 
for  he  gave  credit  to  a  vulgar  opinion,  that  from  thence  could 
be  seen  at  once  the  Pontic  and  Adriatic  seas,  the  river 
Danube,  and  the  Alps;  and  he  thought  that  the  having  a  view 
of  all  those  places,  would  be  of  no  small  consequence  to¬ 
wards  forming  his  plans  of  a  war  with  Rome.  On  inquiry, 
from  people  acquainted  with  the  country,  respecting  this 
mount,  he  was  told  that  there  was  no  way  by  which  an  army 
could  go  up  it;  but  that  a  small  party,  lightly  accoutred,  might, 
though  with  great  difficulty,  climb  to  the  toj>.  Then,  wishing 
to  soothe,  with  familiar  discourse,  his  younger  son,  whom  he 
had  determined  not  to  take  with  him,  he,  first,  asked  his 
opinion,  “  whether,  as  the  difficulty  of  the  journey  was  re¬ 
presented  to  be  so  great,  he  ought  to  persist  in  his  design, 
or  not?”  He  added,  that,  if  he  should  resolve  to  proceed, 
he  could  not  forget  the  caution  of  Antigonus,  respecting  un¬ 
dertakings  of  that  kind;  who,  having  all  his  family  on  board 
the  same  ship  with  him,  and  being  tossed  about  by  a  violent 
storm,  was  said  to  have  advised  his  sons,  to  remember,  and 
hand  down  to  their  children,  this  maxim:  never,  in  cases  of 
danger,  to  hazard  themselves,  and  their  whole  family  to¬ 
gether.  He  w'ould  therefore  attend  to  this  warning,  and  not 
expose  his  two  sons  at  once  to  those  perils,  which  were  re- 

BOOK  XL. 

391 

B.  C.181.1 
presented  to  lie  in  his  way;  and  as  he  meant  to  take  his  eldei 
son  with  him,  he  would  send  back  the  younger  into  Mace¬ 
donia,  as  a  reserve  to  his  hopes,  and  as  guardian  of  the  king- 
Demetrius  perceived  clearly  that  he  was  sent  out  of 
the  way,  that  he  might  not  be  present  at  their  deliberations, 
when,  with  the  above  mentioned  places  in  their  view,  they 
should  consult  which  were  the  shortest  roads  to  the  Adria¬ 
tic  sea  and  to  Italy,  and  what  was  the  general  plan  to  bt 
pursued  in  the  war.  He  was  obliged  however  not  only  to 
obey  his  father  on  the  occasion,  but  to  express  his  approba¬ 
tion  of  the  measure,  lest  a  reluctant  obedience  might  beget 
suspicion.  To  secure  his  safety  on  the  road  to  Macedonia, 
Didas,  one  of  the  king’s  general  officers,  and  governor  of 
Pseonia,  was  ordered  to  escort  him  with  a  small  party  of 
men.  This  man  had  united  with  Perseus,  in  the  conspiracy 
ruin  his  brother,  as  had  likewise  most  of  his  father’s 
friends,  as  soon  as  they  discovered  plainly  from  the  bent  ol 
the  king's  inclination,  which  of  the  two  was  to  inherit  the 
throne;  and  Perseus  charged  him  on  this  occasion,  to  insinu¬ 
ate  himself  by  every  kind  of  obsequiousness  into  the  most 
familiar  communication  with  Demetrius,  so  as  to  draw  from 
him  all  his  secrets,  and  to  pry  into  his  hidden  thoughts.  The 
prince,  therefore,  set  out  with  a  guard,  which  exposed  him 
to  greater  dangers  than  he  would  have  had  to  encounter  if 
he  had  gone  alone, 
XXIL  Philip  marched  first  into  Maedica,  then  across  the 
deserts,  that  lie  between  Maedica  and  Hemus;  and,  at  length, 
on  the  evening  of  the  seventh  day,  he  reached  the  foot  of 
the  mountain.  There  he  halted  one  day,  to  make  choice  of 
those  who  were  to  accompany  him,  and  on  the  next,  proceed¬ 
ed  on  his  journey.  At  first,  while  they  ascended  the  lower 
parts  of  the  hills,  the  fatigue  was  moderate;  but,  as  they  ad¬ 
vanced  upwards,  they  found  the  ground  more  thickly  cover¬ 
ed  with  woods,  and  in  many  places  impassable.  They  then 
came  to  a  part  where  the  way  was  shaded  by  the  thickness 

392 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  57i 

of  the  trees,  and  the  branches  so  interwoven  with  each  other, 
that  they  could  hardly  see  the  sky;  but  when  they  had  near¬ 
ly  reached  the  top,  what  is  rarely  seen  in  other  places,  the 
whole  tract  was  covered  with  a  thick  fog,  so  as  to  rendet 
their  advancing  no  less  difficult  than  if  it  had  been  night.  At 
last,  on  the  third  day,  they  arrived  at  the  summit.  On  com¬ 
ing  down,  they  said  nothing  to  discountenance  the  vulgar 
opinion,  being  unwilling,  I  suppose,  to  expose  the  journey 
to  ridicule,  and  not  because  it  was  there  possible  to  aiee  those 
seas,  and  mountains,  and  rivers,  so  widely  distant  from  each 
other.  They  were  all  greatly  fatigued  by  the  difficulty  ot 
the  way;  and  chiefly  the  king  himself,  whose  great  age  ren¬ 
dered  him  less  qualified  for  active  exertions.  After  sacri. 
ficing  to  Jupiter  and  the  sun,  on  two  altars  which  he  conse¬ 
crated  on  the  spot,  he  descended  in  two  days,  though  the 
ascent  had  cost  him  three;  fqr  he  was  particularly  afraid  of 
the  night  air,  for  though  the  dog  star  was  now  risen,  the 
cold  was  as  intense  as  in  winter.  After  struggling  with  nume¬ 
rous  hardships,  he  found  his  camp  in  a  condition  not  more 
pleasing,  for,  as  it  lay  in  a  country  inclosed  on  all  sides  by 
deserts,  it  laboured  under  extreme  want  of  every  thing.  He 
halted  therefore  but  one  day,  to  refresh  those  who  had  at¬ 
tended  him,  and  then  hastened  away  into  the  country  of  the 
Dentheletians,  with  all  the  precipitation  of  flight.  These 
were  allies,  but  the  Macedonians,  to  supply  their  own  neces¬ 
sities,  plundered  their  country,  as  if  it  belonged  to  an  enemy, 
for  they  first  pillaged  the  country  houses,  and  afterwards  se¬ 
veral  villages,  overwhelming  the  king  with  shame,  when  he 
heard  the  cries  of  his  allies,  calling,  in  vain,  on  the  gods  who 
witnessed  their  league,  and  on  himself,  by  name.  Having 
carried  off  corn  from  hence,  he  marched  back  into  Msedica, 
and  laid  siege  to  a  town  called  Petra.  He  pitched  his  camp 
in  a  plain,  and  sent  his  son  Perseus  with  a  small  party,  to  at¬ 
tack  the  city, from  higher  ground.  The  townsmen,  pressed 
by  danger  on  all  sides,  gave  hostages,  and,  for  the  present. 

B.  C.  181.J 

BOOK  XL. 

39S 

surrendered  themseives;  but  as  soon  as  the  army  retired^  re« 
gardless  of  the  hostages,  they  deserted  the  city,  and  fled  in¬ 
to  fastnesses  and  mountains.  Philip  returned  to  Macedonia, 
having  exhausted  his  troops  by  every  kind  of  fatigue,  with¬ 
out  effecting  any  purpose,  and  with  his  suspicions  of  his  son 
augmented  through  the  treachery  of  the  governor  Didas. 
XXIII.  This  man  being  sent,  as  before  mentioned,  to  es¬ 
cort  Demetrius,  had,  by  flattering  discourses,  and  even  ex- 
. pressing  his  own  indignation  at  the  treatment  shown  him, 
imposed  on  the  open  temper  of  the  youth,  who  was  too  much 
oflF  his  guard,  and  justly  incensed  against  his  relations;  and 
by  a  voluntary  offer  of  his  assistance  in  all  his  measures,  and 
giving  a  solemn  assurance  of  fidelity,  he  prevailed  on  him  to 
disclose  his  secrets.  Demetrius  was  meditating  flight  to 
Rome;  and  he  thought  himself  indebted  to  the  kindness  of 
the  gods  for  sending  him  such  an  assistant  in  that  design  as 
the  governor  of  Paeonia; — through  whose  province  he  sup¬ 
posed  he  might  make  his  escape.  This  scheme  was  immedi¬ 
ately  betrayed  to  his  brother,  and,  by  his  direction,  discover¬ 
ed  to  his  father.  The  information  was  conveyed  by  letter  to 
the  king,  v/hile  he  was  besieging  Petra;  and,  in  consequence 
of  it,  Herodotus,  who  was  the  most  intimate  friend  of  De¬ 
metrius,  was  taken  into  custody,  and  an  order  was  given 
that  Demetrius  himself  should  be  guarded,  without  his 
perceiving  it.  These  occurrences,  added  to  what  had  passed 
before,  made  the  king  return  into  Macedonia  with  his  heart 
burtheneci  with  grief.  He  thought  the  present  charges  re¬ 
quired  attention;  yet  he  resolved  to  wait  the  return  of  those, 
whom  he  had  sent  to  Rome,  to  procure  intelligence  of  every 
particular.  After  he  had  passed  several  months  under  this 
uneasiness  and  anxiety,  the  ambassadors,  who  had  preconcert¬ 
ed,  before  they  left  Macedonia,  what  information  they  should 
bring  horali  from  Rome,  at  last  arrived.  Besides  other 
grounds  of  accusation,  they  produced  to  the  king  a  forged 
letter,  sealed  with  a  counterfeit  seal  of  Titus  Quintius.  In 
VO} .  V. — 0  E 

694 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  571, 

this  letter  was  a  kind  of  interceding  apology,  that  if  the 
young  prince,  misled  by  the  ambition  of  reigning,  had  offer¬ 
ed  some  propositions  to  him  on  the  subject,  yet  he  was  sure 
that  Demetrius  would  never  attempt  any  thing  against  his 
relations;  and  that,  for  himself,  he  never  could  be  supposed 
to  recommend  undutiful  proceedings.’’  This  letter  was  deem¬ 
ed  a  full  confirmation  of  the  charges  made  by  Perseus;  He¬ 
rodotus  was,  therefore,  imnrediately  put  to  the  rack,  which 
he  endured  a  long  time,  and  died  under  the  torture,  without 
making  any  kind  of  discovery. 
'  XXIV.  Perseus  now  brought  before  his  father  a  second 
formal  accusation  against  Demetrius.  His  intention  of  flying 
through  Paeonia  was  alleged  against  him,  and  his  having 
bribed  certain  persons  to  accompany  him  on  the  journey; 
but,  what  bore  hardest  on  him,  was,  the  forged  letter  of  Ti¬ 
tus  Quintius.  There  was,  however,  no  severe  sentence  pro¬ 
nounced  openly,  it  being  rather  chosen  to  take  away  his  life 
by  secret  means,  in  the  fear,  lest  the  inflicting  punishment 
on  him  might  be  the  means  of  divulging  their  designs  against 
the  Romans.  The  king  himself  having  occasion  to  go  from 
Thessalonica  to  Demetrias,  sent  Demetrius,  with  the  same 
attendant  Didas,  to  Asterium  in  Pseonia,  and  Perseus  to 
Amphipolis,  to  receive  hostages  from  the  Thracians,  and  is 
said,  on  parting  with  Didas,  to  have  given  him  directions  to 
put  his  son  to  death.  Didas  either  intended  to  perform  a  sa¬ 
crifice,  or  made  a  pretence  of  doing  so,  and  Demetrius,  be¬ 
ing  invited  to  be  present  at  the  solemnity,  came  from  Asteri¬ 
um  to  Heraclea.  There,  as  we  arc  told,  poison  was  given  him 
at  supper.  The  moment  he  had  swallowed  the  draught,  he 
was  conscious  of  its  deadly  property;  and  being  quickly  af¬ 
ter  seized  with  violent  pains,  retired  to  a  chamber,  where  he 
continued  for  some  time  in  agony,  complaining  of  the  cruel¬ 
ty  of  his  father,  inveighing  against  the  fratricide  ff  Perseus, 
and  the  villainy  of  Didas.  Then,  one  Thyrsis  of  Stubera, 
and  one  Alexander  of  Beroea,  were  sent  in,  who,  covering 

H.  C,  181.] 

BOOK  XL. 

395 

his  head  and  mouth,  with  blankets,  suiFocated  him.  In 
this  manner  perished  that  innocent  youth,  his  enemies  not 
even  contenting  themselves  with  a  common  kind  of  murder. 
XXV.  While  these  matters  passed  in  Macedonia,  Lucius 
^milius  Paullus,  being,  on  the  expiration  of  his  consulate, 
continued  in  command,  led  his  army,  early  in  spring,  into 
the  country  of  the  Ingaunian  Ligurians.  He  had  no  sooner 
pitched  his  camp  in  the  enemy’s  territoiy^  than  ambassadors 
came  to  him,  under  pretext  of  suing  for  peace,  but,  in 
reality,  as  spies.  Paullus  declared,  that  he  would  enter  into 
no  treaty  whatever,  unless  they  first  surrendered;  to  this  they 
did  not  object,  but  said,  that  it  would  require  time  to  pro¬ 
cure  the  consent  of  such  a  rude  kind  of  people.  For  that 
purpose,  a  suspension  of  arms,  for  ten  days,  was  granted; 
and  then,  they  farther  requested,  that  his  men  might  not  go 
beyond  the  mountains,  for  wood  or  forage,  for  that  was  the 
part  of  their  lands  which  they  had  under  tillage.  This  being 
complied  with,  they  collected  all  their  forces  behind  those 
mountains,  which  they  had  prevented  the  Romans  from  ap¬ 
proaching;  and,  on  a  sudden,  with  a  vast  multitude,  assault¬ 
ed  every  gate  of  this  camp  at  once.  During  that  whole  day, 
they  prosecuted  the  attack  with  such  vigour,  that  Paullus 
had  not  time  to  march  out  of  the  camp,  nor  room  to  draw 
out  his  troops:  so  that  they  were  obliged  to  defend  their 
camp,  by  standing  so  thick  together,  in  the  gates,  as  to  stop 
the  passage,  rather  than  by  fighting.  The  enemy,  retiring  a 
little  before  sunset,  the  general  despatched  two  horsemen  to 
Pisee,  to  Cneius  Baehius,  proconsul,  with  a  letter,  requesting 
him  to  come,  with  all  speed,  to  his  relief,  as  the  Ligurians 
had  besieged  him,  in  the  midst  of  a  truce.  Bsebius  had  given 
up  his  army  to  Marcus  Pinarius,  the  praetor,  who  was  going 
into  Sardinia,  but  he  informed  the  senate  by  letter  that  Lu¬ 
cius  i£milius  was  besieged  by  the  Ligurians,  and  also  wrote 
to  Marcus  Claudius  Marcellus,  whose  province  lay  the  near¬ 
est,  that,  if  he  thought  proper,  he  should  march  his  army  out 

396  HISTORY  OF  ROML.  [Y,  R.  571, 
of  Gaul  into  Liguria,  and  to  the  relief  of  iEmilius.  These 
succours  would  have  come  too  late.  The  Ligurians  return¬ 
ed,  next  day,  to  the  attack  of  the  camp.  .£inilius,  who  was 
aware  of  this,  and  who  could  have  drawn  out  his  army  to 
meet  them,  yet  kept  his  men  within  the  lines,  for  he  wished 
to  protract  the  business  until  such  time  as  Basbius  should 
come  with  his  army  from  Pisae. 
XXVI.  Bajbius’s  letter  caused  a  great  alarm,  and  it  was 
increased  by  this  circumstance,  that,  in  a  few  days  after, 
Marcellas  coming  to  Rome,  having  given  up  the  command 
of  the  army  to  Fabius,  banished  all  hope  of  a  possibility  of 
the  forces,  then  in  Gaul,  being  removed  into  Liguria;  for 
hostilities  had  commenced  with  the  Istrians,  w^ho  obstructed 
the  settlement  of  the  colony  of  Aquileia;  and,  as  Fabius  had 
led  his  army  thither,  he  could  not  quit  that  country,  now 
that  the  war  was  begun.  There  was  but  one  thing  that  could 
afford  any  hope  of  relief,  and  even  that  too  slow  for  the  exi¬ 
gency  of  the  case, — this  was,  that  the  consuls  might  hasten 
their  march  into  that  province,  and  the  senators  earnestly 
pressed  them  to  do  so.  But  the  consuls  declared  that  the\ 
would  not  set  out  until  the  levies  were  completed,  and  that 
no  indolence  in  them,  but  the  violence  of  the  epidemic  sick¬ 
ness,  was  the  cause  of  their  delaying  so  long.  However, 
they  could  not  withstand  the  united  wishes  of  the  whole 
senate,  in  urging  them  to  depart  in  the  military  habit,  and 
to  publish  an  order  to  the  troops  which  they  had  enlisted,  to 
assemble  at  Pisse,  on  a  certain  day.  Authority  tvas  given 
them  to  enlist  soldiers  for  the  occasion,  on  the  road,  and  to 
take  them  with  them.  Orders  were  likewise  issued  to  the 
praetors,  Quintus  Petillius,  and  Quintus  Fabius,  that  Petilli- 
us  should  raise  two  tumultuary  legions  of  Roman  citizens, 
and  compel  every  person  under  fifty  years  of  age  to  enlist; 
and  that  Fabius  should  demand  from  the  Latine  allies,  fif¬ 
teen  thousand  foot,  and  eight  hundred  horse.  Commanders 
were  appointed  to  the  fleet,— Cuius  Matienus,  and  Caius 

BOOK  XL, 

h97 

B.  C.  18L] 
Lucretius,  and  ships  were  put  in  readiness  for  them.  Ma- 
tienus,  whose  station  was  at  the  Gallic  bay,  was  ordered  to 
lead  his  squadron,  with  all  expedition,  to  the  coast  of  Ligu¬ 
ria,  and  to  try  if  he  could  be  of  any  service  to  Lucius  iEmi- 
lius  and  his  army. 
XXVI L  iEmilius,  seeing  no  appearance  of  succour  from 
any  quarter,  supposed  that  his  couriers  had  been  intercepted. 
He  resolved,  therefore,  to  wait  no  longer,  but  to  make  a 
trial  of  fortune  by  himself;  and  for  this  purpose,  before  the 
coming  of  the  enemy,  who  now  made  their  attacks  with  less 
briskness  and  vigour,  he  drew  up  his  troops  at  the  four  gates, 
that,  on  a  signal  being  given,  they  might  sally  out  from  all 
sides  at  once.  To  four  independent  cohorts  of  auxiliaries, 
he  added  two  others,  and  gave  the  command  to  Marcus 
Valerius,  lieutenant-general,  with  orders  to  make  his  sally 
by  the  prjetorian  gate.  At  the  right  gate  of  the  first  cohort 
he  formed  the  spearmen  of  the  first  legion,  placing  the  first 
rank  men  of  the  same  legion  in  reserve;  these  bodies  were 
commanded  by  Marcus  Servilius,  and  Lucius  Sulnicius, 
military  tribunes.  The  third  legion  was  drawn  up  oppo¬ 
site  to  the  left  gate  of  the  first  cohort,  with  this  difference 
onh ,  that  here  the  first-rank  men  were  posted  in  front,  and 
the  spearmen  in  reserve.  Sextus  Julius  Caesar,  and  Luci¬ 
us  Aurelius  Cotta,  military  tribunes,  had  the  command  of 
this  legion.  Quintus  Fulvius  Flaccus,  lieutenant-general, 
with  the  right  wing  of  the  allies,  was  posted  at  the  qu«sto- 
rian  gate;  and  two  cohorts,  with  the  veterans  of  the  two 
legions,  were  ordered  to  stay  within  to  guard  the  camp. 
The  general  himself  went  round  by  all  the  gates,  haranguing 
the  troops  and  stimulating  the  soldiers,  bv  every  possible 
circumstance  that  he  could  mention;  at  one  time  declaiming 
against  the  treachery  of  the  enemy,  who  after  suing  for 
peace,  and  obtaining  a  truce,  had  come  during  the  very  time 
of  that  truce,  in  violation  of  the  law  of  nations,  to  attack  his 
camp;  at  another,  setting  before  them  wh^t  a  shame  it  was. 

J9S  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  fY.  R.  571 
that  a  Roman  army  should  be  besieged  by  Ligurians,  people 
more  properly  styled  robbers,  than  a  regular  enemy.  ‘‘  With 
what  face,”  continued  he,  “  if  you  make  your  way  hence,  by 
the  assistance  of  others,  and  not  by  your  own  valour,  will  any 
of  you  meet,  I  do  not  say  those  soldiers  that  conquered 
Hannibal,  or  Philip,  or  Antiochus,  the  greatest  kings  and 
generals  of  the  present  age,  but  those  who  often  drove  those 
very  Ligurians  before  them,  through  pathless  forests,  and 
put  them  to  the  sword?  What  the  Spaniards,  the  Gauls,  the 
Macedonians,  or  Carthaginians,  never  dared  to  attempt,  a 
Ligurian  enemy  dares:  he  marches  up  to  the  trenches  of  a 
Roman  camp,  besieges  and  assaults  it;  although,  but  a  little 
while  ago,  they  were  glad  to  hide  themselves,  and  lurk  in 
the  wilds  of  the  forests,  so  that  we  were  obliged  to  make 
diligent  search  before  we  could  find  them.”  This  was  an¬ 
swered  by  a  general  clamour,  that  “  the  soldiers  were  not 
to  be  blamed,  for  they  had  not  received  any  order  to  march 
out.  Let  him  but  give  the  order,  and  he  should  soon  be 
convinced,  that  both  the  Romans  and  the  Ligurians  wxrethe 
same  that  ever  they  were.” 
XXVI I L  There  were  two  camps  of  the  Ligurians  on  the 
hither  side  of  the  '  mountains,  from  which,  on  the  former 
days,  they  had  marched  forward  at  sun-rise,  all  in  order  and 
regular  array.  On  this  day  they  did  not  take  arms  until 
they  had  made  a  full  meal  of  food  and  wine;  and  then  they 
came  out  in  loose  order,  and  regardless  of  their  ranks,  as 
expecting,  with  certainty,  that  the  enemy  would  not  venture 
out,  beyond  the  rampart.  As  they  were  approaching,  in 
this  disorderly  manner,  the  shout  was  raised  by  every  one 
in  the  camp,  at  once,  even  by  the  suttlers  and  servants;  and 
the  Romans  rushed  out  by  all  the  gates  at  the  same  time. 
This  event  was  so  entirely  unexpected  by  the  Ligurians, 
that  it  confounded  them,  no  less  than  if  they  had  been  caught 
in  an  ambush.  For  a  short  time,  some  appearance  of  a  fight 
was  maintained,  and  then  followed  an  hasty  flight,  and  a 

B.  C.  181.] 

BOOK  XL. 

399 

general  slaughter  of  the  fugitives.  The  cavalry,  being  or¬ 
dered  to  mount  their  horses,  and  not  to  suffer  any  to  escape, 
the  enemy  were  driven,  in  the  utmost  confusion,  to  their 
camps,  and  soon  beaten  out  of  them  also.  Above  fifteen 
thousand  of  the  Ligurians  were  killed,  and  two  thousand 
five  hundred  taken.  In  three  days  after  the  whole  state  of 
the  Inguanian  Ligurians  gave  hostages,  and  surrendered. 
The  masters  and  crews  of  the  ships,  which  had  been  em¬ 
ployed  in  piracies,  were  carefully  sought  for,  and  thrown 
into  prison;  and  thirty-two  ships  of  that  description  were 
taken  by  Caius  Matienus,  on  the  Ligurian  coast.  Lucius 
Aurelius  Cotta,  and  Caius  Sulpicius  Callus,  were  sent  to 
Rome  with  an  account  of  these  transactions,  and  with  letters 
to  the  senate;  they  were  ordered,  at  the  same  time,  to  re¬ 
quest  that,  as  the  business  of  the  province  was  finished,  Lu¬ 
cius  iEmilius  might  have  permission  to  leave  it,  and  to 
bring  away  his  troops  and  disband  them.  The  senate  granted 
both,  and  decreed  a  supplication,  at  all  the  shrines,  for  three 
days;  giving  orders  to  the  praetors  that  Petillius  should  dis¬ 
charge  the  city  legions,  that  Fabius  should  excuse  the  allies, 
and  Latines,  from  the  levies,  and  that  the  city  praetor  should 
write  to  the  consuls,  that  the  senate  thought  proper  that  the 
occasional  soldiers,  enlisted  on  account  of  the  sudden  alarm, 
should  be  immediately  discharged. 
XXIX.  The  colony  of  Gravisca  was  established  this  year 
in  a  district  of  Etruria,  formerly  taken  from  the  Tarquini- 
ans,  and  five  acres  of  land  were  given  to  each  settler.  The 
commissioners  who  conducted  it  were  Caius  Calpurnius 
Piso,  Publius  Claudius  Pulcher,  and  Caius  Terentius  Istra, 
The  year  was  rendered  remarkable  by  a  drought,  and  a 
scarcity  of  the  productions  of  the  earth.  Writers  mention, 
that  during  the  space  of  six  months  no  rain  fell.  In  the 
same  year,  some  workmen,  in  the  farm  of  Lucius  Petillius, 
a  notary,  at  the  foot  of  the  Jauiculum,  digging  the  ground 
deeper  than  usual,  discovered  two  stone  chests,  about  eight 

400 

HISTORY  OF  ROME,  [Y.  R.  57U 
feet  long  and  four  broad,  the  covers  of  which  were  soldered 
with  lead.  Both  the  chests  had  inscriptions  in  Greek  and 
Latine  letters,  one  signifying  that  therein  was  buried  Numa 
Pompilius,  son  of  Pompo,  and  king  of  the  Romans;  the 
other,  that  therein  were  contained  the  books  of  Numa  Pom¬ 
pilius.  The  owner  of  the  ground  having,  by  the  advice  of 
his  friends,  opened  these  chests,  found  the  one,  which  ac¬ 
cording  to  its  inscription  contained  the  body  of  the  king, 
perfectly  empty,  without  any  appearance  of  a  human  body 
or  any  thing  else,  having  ever  been  in  it;  the  whole  being 
consumed  by  the  decay  of  such  a  number  of  years.  In  the 
other  were  found  two  bundles,  tied  round  with  waxed  cords, 
and  each  containing  seven  books,  not  only  entire,  but  appa¬ 
rently  quite  fresh.  Seven  were  in  Latine,  and  related  to  the 
pontifical  law;  and  seven  in  Greek,  containing  the  doctrines 
of  philosophy,  such  as  might  have  been  known  in  that  age. 
Valerius  Antias  adds,  that  they  contained  the  doctrines  of 
Pythagoras,  supporting,  by  this  plausible  fiction,  the  credit 
of  the  vulgar  opinion,  that  Numa  had  been  a  disciple  of 
Pythagoras.  The  books  were  read,  first,  by  Petillius’s 
friends,  who  were  present  at  the  discovery;  and,  afterwards, 
by  many  others,  until  they  came  to  be  publicly  spoken 
of.  Then  Quintus  Petiliius,  the  city  praetor,  having  a  de¬ 
sire  to  read  them,  borrowed  them  from  Lucius  Petiliius, 
with  whom  he  was  familiarly  acquainted;  in  consequence  of 
Quintus  Petiliius  having,  when  quaestor,  chosen  him,  who 
was  a  notary,  a  decurio  of  horse.  On  reading  the  principal 
heads  of  the  contents,  he  perceived  that  most  of  them  had  a 
tendency  to  undermine  the  established  system  of  religious 
doctrines,  and,  thereupon,  he  told  Lucius  Petiliius,  that  ‘‘  he 
was  determined  to  throw  those  books  into  the  fire;  but  be¬ 
fore  he  did  so,  he  gave  him  leave,  if  he  thought  he  had  any 
right  or  title  to  demand  the  restitution  of  them,  to  make  the 
trial,  which  would  not  give  him  the  least  offence.’’  The 
notary  applied  to  the  plebeian  tribunes,  and  the  tribunes  re* 

B,  C.  181,] 

BOOK  XL. 

401 

ferred  the  matter  to  the  senate.  The  praetor  declared,  that 
he  was  ready  to  make  oath,  that  those  books  ought  not  to  be 
read  or  preserved;  and  the  senate  decreed,  that  “the  prae^ 
tor’s  having  offered  his  oath  ought  to  be  deemed  sufficient 
evidence  that  those  books  should,  without  delay,  be  burned 
in  the  comitium,  and  that  the  owner  should  be  paid  for 
them  such  price  as  might  be  judged  reasonable  by  the  prae¬ 
tor  Quintus  PetilHus,  and  the  majority  of  the  plebeian  tri¬ 
bunes.”  This  the  notary  did  not  assent  to.  The  books, 
however,  were  burned  in  the  comitium,  in  the  view  of  the 
people,  the  fire  being  made  by  the  public  servants,  whose 
duty  it  was  to  assist  at  sacrifices. 
XXX.  A  formidable  war  broke  out  this  summer  in  the 
hither  Spain,  where  the  Celtiberians  assembled  such  a  force 
as  they  had  hardly  ever  brought  into  the  field  before,  amount¬ 
ing  to  no  less  than  thirty-five  thousand  men.  This  province 
was  gov’^erned  by  Quintus  Fulvius  Flaccus,  who,  on  hearing 
that  the  Celtiberians  were  arming  their  ycaing  men,  drew 
together  all  the  succours  he  could  procure  from  the  allies. 
But  he  was  still  far  inferior  to  the  enemy  in  point  of  num- 
berS.  Early  in  spring,  he  marched  his  army  into  Carpetania, 
and  fixed  his  camp  close  to  the  town  of  .^bura,  in  which  he 
posted  a  small  garrison.  In  a  few  days  after  the  Celtiberians 
pitched  their  camp  at  the  foot  of  a  hill,  about  two  miles  from 
thence.  When  the  Roman  praetor  was  informed  of  their 
coming,  he  detached  his  brother,  Marcus  Fulvius,  with  two 
troops  of  the  allied  horse,  to  the  enemy^s  post,  to  take  a  view 
of  them;  ordering  him  to  advance  as  near  as  possible  to  their 
rampart,  so  as  to  form  a  judgment  of  the  size  of  the  camp; 
and  not  to  engage  in  fight,  but  to  retreat  if  he  should  see  the 
enemy’s  cavalry  coming  out.  He  acted  according  to  his  in¬ 
structions,  and  for  several  days  there  was  nothing  farther 
done  than  these  two  troops  showing  themselves,  and  then  re¬ 
treating  when  the  enemy's  cavalry  sallied  from  their  tents. 
At  length,  the  Celtiberians  came  out,  with  their  entire  force 
VOL.  V. — 3  F 

402 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  sn. 

of  horse  and  foot  together,  and  drawing  up  in  a  line,  posted 
themselves  about  midway  between  the  two  camps.  The 
whole  plain  was  level,  and  convenient  for  fighting,  and  here 
the  Spaniards  stood  waiting  for  their  enemy.  The  Roman 
general  kept  his  men  within  the  rampart,  during  four  suc¬ 
cessive  days,  while  the  others  constantly  drew  up  theirs,  and 
formed  in  the  same  place.  The  Romans  never  stirred;  and 
froni  that  time  the  Celtiberians,  finding  no  opportunity  of 
engaging,  remained  quiet  in  their  camp;  their  cavalry  only 
appearing  as  an  advanced  guard,  to  be  ready  in  case  of  any 
movement  being  made  by  Fulvius.  Both  parties  went  for 
wood  and  forage  behind  their  own  camps,  neither  interrupt¬ 
ing  the  other, 
XXXI.  When  the  Roman  praetor  thought  that,  by  conti¬ 
nuing  inactive  so  many  days,  he  had  created  in  the  Celtibe¬ 
rians  a  firm  persuasion  that  he  would  not  be  first  in  any  en¬ 
terprise,  he  ordered  Lucius  4- cilius,^ith  the  left  wing  of 
allies  and  six  thousand  provincial  auxiliaries,  to  make  the 
circuit  of  a  mountain,  behind  the  enemy;  and  as  soon  as  he 
should  hear  the  shout  to  pour  down  from  thence  on  their 
camp.  This  party,  to  avoid  being  seen,  set  out  in  the  night* 
At  the  dawn  of  day,  Flaccus  sent  Caius  Scribonius,  a  prae. 
feet  of  the  allies,  with  the  select  horse  of  the  left  wing  to  the 
enemy’s  rampart;  when  the  Celtiberians,  observing  that  they 
approached  nearer,  and  were  also  more  numerous  than  usual^ 
made  the  whole  body  of  their  cavalry  sally  out  against  them, 
and  gave  orders  to  the  infantry  to  follow.  Scribonius,  accord, 
ing  to  his  instructions,  nosooner  heard  the  noise  of  the  ene¬ 
my’s  cavalry  than  he  wheeled  about  and  retreated;  on  which 
they  pursued  with  the  more  violence.  First  the  cavalry^ 
and  in  a  short  time  the  line  of  infantry,  came  up,  confidently 
expecting  that  they  should  be  able  to  assault  the  camp  before 
night,  and  they  advanced  within  five  hundred  paces  of  the 
rampart.  Flaccus,  therefore,  thinking  that  they  were  now 
drawn  far  enough  from  their  camp,  to  hinder  thumfrom  giv- 

BOOK  XL. 

403 

B.  C.  181.] 
ing  it  any  succour,  as  he  had  his  troops  already  formed  with¬ 
in  the  works,  burst  out  from  three  sides  at  once;  and  at  the 
same  time  raised  the  shout,  not  only  to  inspire  ardour  for  the 
fight,  but  also  that  it  might  be^  heard  by  the  party  on  the 
mountain.  Nor  did  these  make  any  delay,  but,  according  to 
their  orders,  poured  down  on  the  camp,  where  the  guard 
consisted  of  only  five  hundred  men,  who  were  so  terrified  by 
the  smallness  of  their  numbers,  the  multitude  of  the  assail¬ 
ants,  and  the  unexpectedness  of  the  affair,  that  the  camp  was 
taken  almost  without  a  dispute.  Acilius  set  fire  to  that  part 
of  it  which  was  most  exposed  to  the  view  of  the  combatants. 
XXXII.  The  Celtiberians  in  the  rear  of  their  line  first  ob¬ 
served  the  flames,  and  the  news  spread  quickly  through  the 
whole  army,  that  the  camp  was  lost,  being  at  that  moment 
in  a  blaze,  which  filled  them  with  dismay,  while  it  gave  fresh 
spirits  to  the  Romans:  for  these  now  heard  the  shouts  of  vic¬ 
tory  raised  by  their  friends,  and  saw  the  enemy’s  camp  on 
fire*  The  Celtiberians  hesitated  for  some  time,  uncertain 
how  to  act;  but  when  they  considered  that,  in  case  of  a  de¬ 
feat,  they  had  no  place  of  refuge,  and  that  their  only  hope 
now  lay  in  their  arms,  they  renewed  the  combat  afresh,  with 
greater  obstinacy.  Their  centre  was  pressed  hard  by  the 
fifth  legion;  but  their  men  advanced  with  more  confidence 
against  the  left  wing,  where  they  saw  that  the  Romans  had 
posted  the  provincial  auxiliaries,  troops  of  their  own  kind.  The 
left  wing  of  the  Romans  was  now  in  danger  of  being  defeat¬ 
ed,  had  not  the  seventh  legion  come  to  its  support.  At  the  same 
time,  the  troops  left  in  garrison  at  ^Ebura  came  up  during 
the  heat  of  the* battle,  and  Acilius  closed  on  the  enemy’s  rear* 
Thus  surrounded,  the  Celtiberians  were,  for  a  long  time,  cut 
off  in  great  numbers,  and  at  last  the  survivors  betook  them¬ 
selves  to  flight.  The  cavalry,  in  two  divisions,  was  sent  in 
pursuit,  and  made  great  havoc.  There  were  killed,  of  the 
enemy,  on  that  day  twenty-three  thousand,  and^four  thousand 
eight  hundred  were  taken,  with  more  than  five  hundred 

404 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  571. 

horses,  and  ninety-eight  military  ensigns.  The  victory  was 
great,  but  not  obtained  without  loss  of  blood.  There  fell  of 
the  two  Roman  legions,  a  few  more  than  two  hundred  men; 
of  the  Latine  confederates,  jig ht  hundred  and  thirty;  and  of 
the  foreign  auxiliaries,  about  two  thousand  four  hundred. 
The  praetor  led  back  his  victorious  troops  to  their  tents;  but 
ordered  Acilius  to  lodge  in  the  camp  which  he  had  taken. 
Next  day  the  spoils  were  collected,  and  presents  bestowed, 
in  public  assembly,  on  such  as  had  distinguished  themselves 
by  their  bravery. 
XXXIII.  The  wounded  were  then  conveyed  into  the 
town  of  iEbura,  and  the  legions  marched  through  Carpeta- 
nia,  against  Contrebia.  The  garrison  there,  on  being  invest¬ 
ed,  sent  for  succours  to  the  Celtiberians;  but  these  were  long 
in  coming,  not  because  they  were  unwilling  to  give  assistance 
but  that  after  they  had  begun  their  march  the  roads  were 
rendered  impassable,  and  the  rivers  swelled  by  continued 
rains,  so  that  their  countrymen,  despairing  of  assistance, 
capitulated.  The  same  severe  weather  forced  Flaccus  to 
bring  his  whole  army  into  the  city.  The  Celtiberians,  who 
wrere  on  their  march,  having  heard  nothing  of  the  capitula¬ 
tion,  when  the  rains  abated,  at  last,  passed  the  rivers,  and 
came  to  Contrebia.  When  they"  saw  no  camp  before  the 
town,  supposing,  either,  that  it  was  removed  to  the  other 
side,  or  that  the  enemy  had  retired,  they  came  up  towards 
the  walls,  in  careless  disorder;  on  which  the  Romans  sally¬ 
ing  out  from  two  gates,  attacked  them  before  they  could 
recover  from  their  confusion,  and  effectually  routed  them. 
The  same  circumstance  that  disabled  them  from  standing 
their  ground  and  maintaining  a  fight, — their  not  having  come 
in  one  body,  or  in  a  regular  disposition,  round  their  stand¬ 
ards, — proved  favourable  to  many  in  making  their  escape: 
for  they  scattered  themselves  widely"  over  the  whole  plain,  so 
that  the  Romans  could  no  where  inclose  any  considerable 
body  of  them.  However,  there  were  twelve  thousand  kil- 

BOOK  XL, 

405 

B.  C.  18L] 
led,  and  more  than  five  thousand  taken,  with  four  hundred 
horses,  and  sixty-two  military  standards.  The  stragglers, 
flying  homewards,  turned  back  another  body  of  Celtiberians, 
whom  they  met  on  the  road,  by  Informing  them  of  the  sur¬ 
render  of  Contrebia,  and  their  own  defeat;  whereupon  they 
all  immediately  dispersed,  and  made  the  best  of  their  way 
to  their  several  villages  and  forts.  Flaccus,  leaving  Contre¬ 
bia,  led  his  legions  through  Celtiberia,  ravaging  the  country, 
and  reducing  a  great  number  of  their  forts;  in  consequence 
of  which  the  greater  part  of  the  nation  surrendered  them¬ 
selves. 
XXXIV.  Such  were  the  transactions  of  that  year  in  the 
hither  Spain.  In  the  farther  -province,  Manlius  fought  seve¬ 
ral  successful  battles  with  the  Lusitanians.  In  the  same  year 
the  Latine  colony  of  Aquileia  was  established  in  the  Gallic 
territory.  Three  thousand  foot  soldiers  received  each  fifty 
acres,  centurions  an  hundred,  horsemen  an  hundred  and  for¬ 
ty.  The  commissioners  who  conducted  the  settlement  were 
Publius  Cornelius  Scipio  Nasica,  Caius  Flaminius,  and  Lu¬ 
cius  Manlius  Acidinus.  Two  temples  were  dedicated,  this 
year,  one  to  Venus  Erycina,  at  the  Colline  gate,  the  cere¬ 
mony  being  performed  by  Lucius  Porcius  Licinus,  duumvir, 
son  of  Lucius.  This  temple  had  been  vowed,  during  the 
Ligurian  war,  by  Lucius  Porcius,  consul.  The  other  to 
Piety,  in  the  herb-market.  This  was  dedicated  by  Manius 
Aciliiis  Glabrio,  duumvir,  who  erected  a  gilded  statue  of  his 
father  Glabiio,  the  first  of  the  kind  that  ever  was  seen  in 
Italy.  This  was  the  person  who  vowed  the  temple,  on  the 
day  whereon  \ie  gained  the  decisive  victory  over  king  Antio- 
chus,  at  Thermopyise,  and  who,  likewise,  had  contracted  for 
its  being  built,  in  pursuance  of  a  decree  of  senate.  At  the 
same  time,  when  these  temples  were  consecrated,  Lucius 
iEmilius  Paullus,  proconsul,  triumphed  over  the  Ingaunian 
Ligurians.  He  carried  in  the  procession  twenty-five  golden 
crowns,  but  no  other  article  of  either  gold  or  silver.  Many 

406 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

CY.  R.  572. 

Ligurian  chiefs  were  led  captives  before  his  chariot,  and  he 
distributed  to  each  of  his  soldiers  three  hundred  asses, ^ 
The  reputation  of  this  triumph  was  enhanced  by  the  ar¬ 
rival  of  ambassadors  from  the  Ligurians,  begging  that  a  per¬ 
petual  peace  might  be  established;  and  averring,  that  ‘‘  the 
Ligurians  had  come  to  a  resolution  never  again  to  take  arms, 
on  any  occasion,  except  when  commanded  by  the  Roman 
people.”  Quintus  Fabius,  praetor,  by  order  of  the  senate, 
gave  the  Ligurians  this  answer;  that  such  kind  of  language 
was  not  new  with  the  Ligurians;  but  it  concerned  chiefly 
their  own  interest  that  their  disposition  should  be  new,  and 
conformable  to  their  language.  They  must  go  to  the  con¬ 
suls,  and  act  as  they  should  command;  for  the  senate  would 
never  believe,  from  any  other  than  the  consuls,  that  the  Li¬ 
gurians  were  really  and  sincerely  disposed  to  peace.”  Peace 
however  was  made  with  that  people.  In  Corsica,  a  battle 
was  fought,  in  which  the  praetor,  Marcus  Pinarius,  slew  in 
the  field  two  thousand  of  the  islanders:  by  which  loss  they 
were  compelled  to  give  hostages,  and  an  hundred  thousand 
pounds  of  wax.  The  army  was  then  carried  over  into  Sar¬ 
dinia,  and  some  successful  battles  were  fought  with  the  II- 
lians,  a  nation,  even  at  the  present  day,  not  in  every  particu¬ 
lar  friendly  to  us.  In  this  year,  an  hundred  hostages  were 
restored  to  the  Carthaginians,  and  the  Roman  people  enabled 
them  to  live  m  peace,  not  only  among  themselves,  but  also 
with  Masinissa,  who  at  that  time,  with  an  armed  force,  held 
possession  of  the  land  in  dispute. 
y  XXXV.  The  consuls  had  nothing  to  do  in  their 
B.  c.  ISO.  province.  Marcus  Baebius,  being  suinmoned  home 
to  Rome  to  preside  at  the  elections,  created  consuls  Aulus 
Postumius  Albinus  Luscus,  and  Caius  Calpurnius  Piso. 
Then  were  made  preetors  Tiberius  Sempronius  Gracchus, 
Lucius  Postumius  Albinus,  Publius  Cornelius  Mammula, 
Titus  Minucius  Molliculus,  Aulus  Hostilius  Mancinus,  and 

19#.  4d. 

BOOK  XL. 

407 

B.  C.  180,] 

Caius  Mseaius.  All  these  entered  into  office  on  the  ides  o£ 
March.  In  the  beginning  of  this  year,  (the  consulate  of  Au- 
lus  Postumius  Albinus  and  Caius  Calpurnius  Piso,j  the  con¬ 
sul,  Aulas  Postumius,  introduced  to  an  audience  of  the  se¬ 
nate,  a  deputation,  sent  from  the  hither  Spain,  by  Quintus 
Fulvius  Flaccus,  and  composed  of  Lucius  Minucius,  lieu¬ 
tenant-general,  and  two  military  tribunes,  Titus  Msenius,  and 
Lucius  Terentius  Massa.  These,  after  informing  the  senate 
of  the  two  victories  gained,  of  the  submission  of  Celtiberia, 
and  of  peace  being  re-established,  and  that  there  was  no  oc¬ 
casion  either  to  send  pay,  as  usual,  or  corn  to  the  army,  for 
that  year,  requested,  first,  that  “  on  account  of  these  successes 
a  thanksgiving  should  be  performed  to  the  immortal  gods, 
and,  then,  that  leave  should  be  given  to  Quintus  Fulvius  on 
his  quitting  the  province,  to  bring  home  thence  the  army 
which  had  served  under  him,  and  many  former  praetors, 
with  much  bravery.  They  represented,  that  this  measure, 
besides  the  propriety  of  it,  was  in  some  degree  necessary, 
for  the  troops  were  so  obstinately  bent  on  it,  that  it  did  not 
seem  possible  to  keep  them  longer  in  the  province;  but,  if 
they  were  not  called  away,  they  would  either  leave  it,  with¬ 
out  orders,  or,  if  compulsory  methods  were  employed  to  de¬ 
tain  them,  would  break  out  into  a  dangerous  mutiny.”  Tht 
senate  ordered,  that  Liguria  should  be  the  province  of  both 
the  consuls.  The  praetors  then  cast  lots  for  theirs.  The 
city  jurisdiction  fell  to  Aulus  Hostilius,  the  foreign,  to  Ti¬ 
tus  Minucius,  Sicily,  to  Publius  Cornelius;  Sardinia,  to 
Caius  Maenius;  farther  Spain,  to  Lucius  Postumius,  and 
the  hither,  to  Tiberius  Sempronius.  As  this  last  was  to  suc¬ 
ceed  Quintus  Fulvius  Flaccus,  and  wished  that  the  province 
might  not  be  stripped  of  the  veteran  troops,  he  spoke  thus: 
Quintus  Minucius,  I  demand  of  you,  since  you  assert,  in 
your  report,  that  peace  is  re-established  in  the  province, — is 
it  your  opinion,  that  the  Celtiberians  will  always  faithfully 
observe  the  treaty,  so  that  the  province  may  be  kept  in  obe- 

408 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

£¥•  R.572. 

dience  without  an  army?  If  you  cannot  give  us  any  assurance 
of  that,  or  undertake  to  answer  for  the  fidelity  of  the  barba¬ 
rians,  but  think  that,  at  all  events,  there  must  be  an  army 
maintained  there;  I  pray  you,  whether  would  you  recom¬ 
mend  to  the  senate  to  send  a  reinforcement  into  Spain,  in 
order  that  those  soldiers,  only,  who  have  served  out  their 
time,  may  be  discharged,  and  the  recruits  mixed  with  the 
veterans,  or  to  withdraw  the  veteran  legions,  and  enlist  neVr 
ones,  in  their  place;  and  this,  although  the  contempt  enter¬ 
tained  for  such  soldiers  might  rouse  barbarians  ol  more  pa¬ 
cific  tempers  to  a  renewal  of  war?  It  would  be  a  matter 
easier  said  than  done,  to  reduce  to  complete  subjection  a 
province  naturally  fierce,  and  remarkable  for  its  frequent 
renewals  of  hostility.  A  few  states,  as  I  am  informed,  who 
were  awed,  more  than  the  rest,  by  the  nearness  oi  our  win¬ 
ter  quarters,  have  submitt(Ki  to  our  authority. and  dominion; 
while  those  more  remote  are  in  arms.  This  being  the  case, 
Conscript  Fathers,  I  now  give  notice  before  hand,  that,  with 
the  army  at  present  there,  I  will  undertake  to  execute  the 
business  of  the  public;  but,  if  Flaccus  brings  those  legions 
home  with  him,  I  will  choose  some  quiet  part  of  the  country 
for  winter-quarters,  and  will  not  expose  undisciplined  sol¬ 
diers  to  an  enemy  so  remarkably  ferocious.” 
XXXVI.  To  these  questions,  the  lieutenant-general  an¬ 
swered,  that  neither  he  nor  any  other  could  possibly  divine 
what  were  the  sentiments  of  the  Celtiberhffis,  or  what  they 
would  be  in  future;  therefore  he  could  not  deny  that  it  would 
be  proper  to  send  an  army  among  a  barbarous  people,  who, 
though  reduced  to  a  state  of  quiet,  were  not  yet  sufficiently 
inured  to  subjection;  but  whether  a  new  army  or  a  veteran 
one  might  be  requisite,  was  a  question  which  he  alone  could 
answer,  who  knew,  with  what  sincerity  the  Celtiberians 
would  observe  the  peac^;  and  who,  at  the  same  time,  had 
assurance  that  the  troops  would  remain  quiet,  if  kept  longer 
in  the  province.  If  a  conjecture  were  to  be  formed  of  their 

B.  C.  180.] 

BOOK  XL. 

409 

intentions,  either  from  their  conversations  with  each  other, 
or  from  the  expressions  with  which  they  interrupted  the 
general’s  harangues,  they  had  openly  and  loudly  declared^ 
that  they  would  either  keep  their  commander  in  the  province, 
or  come  home  with  him  to  Italy.”  This  discussion,  between 
the  prsetor  and  the  lieutenant-general,  was  suspended,  by  the 
consuls  introducing  other  matters;  for  they  demanded,  that 
the  business  of  their  own  provinces  might  be  adjusted  be¬ 
fore  that  of  the  prgetor’s  should  be  proceeded  on.  An  array 
entirely  new  was  decreed  to  the  consuls:  two  Roman  legions, 
with  their  proportion  of  cavalry^;  and  of  the  Latine  allies,  the 
usual  number,  of  fifteen  thousand  foot  and  eight  hundred 
horse.  With  these  forces,  they  were  directed  to  make  war 
on  the  Apuan  Ligurians.  Publius  Cornelius  and  Marcus 
Bsebius  were  continued  in  command,  and  ordered  to  hold 
the  government  of  the  provinces  until  the  consuls  should 
arrive.  I'hey  were  then  to  disband  their  troops,  and  return 
to  Home.  Next  was  taken  into  consideration  the  business 
of  the  army  under  Tiberius  Sempronius,  The  consuls  were 
ordered  to  enlist  for  him  a  new  legion  of  five  thousand  two 
hundred  foot,  and  four  hundred  horse;  and  also  a  thousand 
Roman  foot  and  five  hundred  horse;  and  to  command  the 
allies  of  Latium  to  furnish  seven  thousand  foot  and  three 
hundred  horse.  With  this  army,  it  'was  determined  that 
Sempronius  should  go  into  the  hither  Spain.  Permission 
w'as  granted  to  Quintus  Fulvius,  with  respect  to  all  those 
soldiers,  whether  Romans  or  allies,  who  had  been  transported 
into  Spain,  previous  to  the  consulate  of  Spurius  Postumius 
and  Quintus  itfarcius;  and  likewise  to  such  as,  after  the 
junction  of  the  reinforcements,  should  be  found  redundant 
in  the  two  legions,  above  the  number  of  ten  thousand  four 
hundred  foot  and  six  hundred  horse;  and  in  the  Latine 
auxiliaries  above  twelve  thousand  foot  and  six  hundred  horse, 
and  who  had  behaved  with  courage  under  Quintus  Fulvius 
in  the  two  battles  with  the  Celtlberians, — these,  if  he  thought 
VOL,  v. — 3  G 

410 

HISTORY  OF  ROML.  [Y.  K.  ^72 
proner,  he  might  bring  home.  Thanksgivings  for  his  suc¬ 
cesses  were  also  decreed;  and  the  rest  of  the  praetors  sent 
into  their  provinces.  Quintus  Fabius  Buteo  was  continued 
in  command  in  Gaul.  It  w’as  resolved  that  eight  legions 
should  be  employed,  this  year,  besides  the  veteran  army 
then  in  Liguria,  which  expected  to  be  speedily  disbanded; 
and  even  this  number  of  men  could  with  difficulty  be  made 
up,  in  consequence  of  the  pestilence  which  continued,  for  the 
third  year,  to  depopulate  the  city  of  Rome,  and  all  Italy. 
XXXV 11.  Tiberius  Minucius,  the  praetor,  died  of  this 
malady;  and  soon  after  Caius  Calpurnius  the  consul,  also 
many  illustrious  men  of  all  ranks;  so  that  at  last  it  began  to 
be  considered  as  a  prodigy.  Caius  Servilius,  chief  pontiff, 
was  ordered  to  find  out  proper  atonements  for  the  wrath  of 
the  gods;  the  decemvirs  to  inspect  the  books,  and  the  consul 
to  vow  offerings,  and  to  present  gilded  statues,  to  Apollo, 
jEsculapius,  and  Health;  all  which  he  performed.  The 
decemvirs  proclaimed,  on  account  of  the  sickness,  a  suppU” 
cation  of  two  days  in  the  city;  and  in  all  the  market-towns 
and  villages;  which  supplication,  every  person,  above  the 
age  of  twelve  years,  performed,  with  garlands  on  their  heads^ 
and  holding  laurel  in  their  hands.  There  had,  also,  crept 
into  people's  minds,  a  suspicion  of  human  villainy  in  regard 
to  it,  whereupon  Caius  Claudius,  prsetor,  who  had  been 
substituted  in  the  room  of  "I  iberius  Minucius,  was  commis¬ 
sioned,  by  a  decree  of  senate,  to  make  inquisition  concerning 
acts  of  sorcery  committed  in  the  city,  or  within  ten  miles  of 
it;  and  Caius  Msenius  was  ordered  to  do  the  same,  before  he 
passed  over  to  his  province,  Sardinia,  in  the  market-towns 
and  villages,  beyond  the  t6nth  stone.  The  death  of  the  con¬ 
sul  created  the  strongest  suspicions.  It  was  reported,  that 
he  had  been  murdered  by  his  wife  Quarta  Hostilia;  and 
when  her  son  Quintus  Fulvius  Flaccus,  was  proclaimed  con¬ 
sul  in  the  room  of  his  step-father,  the  suspicions  of  the  pub* 
lie,  respecting  the  death  of  Piso,  were  greatly  augmented; 

B.  C.  180.] 

BOOK  XL. 

411 

for  witnesses  appeared,  who  testified,  that,  after  Albinus  and 
Piso  were  declared  consuls,  in  which  election  Flaccus  had 
suffered  a  disappointment,  his  mother  upbraided  him  with 
being  refused  the  consulship,  a  third  time,  and  then  desired 
him  to  stand  candidate  again,  saying,  she  would  take  such 
measures  that  within  two  months  he  should  be  made  consul.” 
This  expression,  verified  by  the  event  exactly  corresponding 
with  it,  and,  joined  to  many  other  evidences  of  the  same 
tendency,  appeared  such  strong  proof,  that  Hostilia  was  con¬ 
demned.  In  the  spring  of  this  year,  the  levies  detained  the 
new  consuls  at  Rome;  while  the  death  of  one  of  them,  and 
the  holding  of  the  assembly  to  substitute  another  in  his 
place,  occasioned  still  farther  delays.  Publius  Cornelius, 
and  Marcus  Baebius,  who  in  their  consulate  had  done 
nothing  worth  mention,  led  their  troops  into  the  country  of 
the  Apuan  Ligurians. 
XXXV HI.  The  Ligurians  had  no  thought  of  being  at¬ 
tacked  before  the  consuls  arrived  in  the  province.  Being 
thus  surprised,  they  surrendered  to  the  number  of  twelve 
thousand  men.  Cornelius  andBxhlus,  having  consulted  the 
senate  by  letter,  determined  to  bring  them  down  from  their 
mountains  into  a  plain  country,  so  far  from  home,  that  they 
should  have  no  hope  of  a  return;  for  they  were  convinced, 
that  by  no  other  means  could  a  final  end  he  put  to  the  war  in 
Liguria.  There  was  a  tract  ot  land  in  Sainnium,  the  public 
property  of  the  Homan  people,  formerlt’  occupied  by  the 
Taurasians,  and  hither  they  intended  to  transplant  the  Apuan 
Ligurians.  Accordingly,  they  published  an  order,  that  this 
people  should  quit  the  mountains,  with  their  wives  and  child¬ 
ren,  and  bring  all  their  effects  along  with  them.  The  Ligu¬ 
rians  made,  by  their  ambassadors,  many  humble  supplica¬ 
tions  that  they  might  not  be  compelled  to  relinquish  their 
native  home,  the  soil  in  which  they  were  born,  and  the  tombs 
of  their  forefathers.  They  promised  to  give  up  their  annSt 
and  deliver  hostages;  but  failing  in  all  their  solicitations- 

412 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  5/2 

and  being  destitute  of  strength  for  the  maintenance  of  a  war 
they  obeyed  the  order.  Forty  thousand  men,  of  free  condi¬ 
tion,  with  their  women  and  children,  were  transplanted  at 
the  expense  of  the  public,  and  an  hundred  and  fifty  thousand 
sesterces*  were  given  them,  to  provide  necessaries  for  their 
new  habitat! oms.  Cornelius  and  Bsebius,  who  removed  them 
were  commissioned  to  divide  and  apportion  the  lands;  but 
at  their  own  request,  the  senate  appointed  five  other  com* 
missioners  to  assist  them  with  their  advice.  When  they  had 
finished  this  business,  and  brought  home  their  veteran  sol¬ 
diers  to  Rome,  the  senate  decreed  them  a  triumph.  These 
were  the  first,  who  ever  triumphed,  without  having  fought 
an  enemy.  Hostages  only  were  led  before  their  chariots;  for 
there  appeared  not,  in  their  triumphs,  either  spoils  to  be  car¬ 
ried,  or  prisoners  to  be  led  captives,  or  money  to  be  distribut¬ 
ed  to  the  soldiers. 
XXXIX.  With  regard  to  the  affairs  of  Spain;  this  year 
Fulvius,  proprsctor,  as  his  successor  did  not  come  to  the  pro¬ 
vince  at  the  usual  time,  drew  out  the  troops  from  their  win¬ 
ter  quarters,  and  proceeded  to  lay  waste  the  farther  part  of 
Celtiberia,  whose  inhabitants  had  not  come  in  to  make  sub¬ 
mission.  But  by  this  proceeding  he  rather  provoked,  than 
terrified  the  barbarians;  so  that,  having  collected  secret!)  a 
body  of  forces,  they  beset  the  Manlian  pass,  through  which 
they  knew,  with  certainty,  that  the  Roman  armv  was  to 
march,  Gracchus  had  commissioned  his  colleague,  Lucius 
Postumius  Albinus,  who  was  going  to  the  farther  Spain,  to 
desire  Quintus  Fulvius  to  bring  his  forces  to  Tarraco,  where 
he  intended  to  discharge  the  veterans,  to  fill  up  the  corps 
with  the  new  supplies,  and  to  put  the  whole  army  in  complete 
order.  The  day  also  was  mentioned  to  Flaccus,  and  that  not 
very  distant,  on  which  his  successor  would  arrive.  On  being  in¬ 
formed  of  this  new  disposition,  Flaccus  was  forced  to  drop  the 

1210^,  19#.  9c/ 

B.  C.  180.] 

BOOK  XL: 

bubiness  which  he  had  undertaken,  and  to  lead  away  the 
troops,  in  haste,  out  of  Celtiberia.  The  barbarians,  unac- 
quainted  with  the  reason,  and  supposing  that  he  had  disco¬ 
vered  their  revolt,  and  secret  assembling  of  an  army,  and  that 
he  was  retreating  through  fear,  exerted  themselves,  with 
greater  confidence  to  secure  the  pass.  The  Roman  army  en¬ 
tered  this  defile,  at  the  dawn  of  day,  and  imediately  the  enc 
my  starting  up,  suddenly  attacked  it  on  two  sides  at  once, 
Flaccus  seeing  this,  took  pains  to  quiet  the  confusion  caused 
by  the  first  alarm,  by  giving  orders  through  the  centurions, 
that  every  man  should  keep  his  post,  in  the  order  of  march, 
and  get  ready  his  arms;  then,  collecting  the  baggage  and 
beasts  of  burden,  into  one  spot,  partly  by  himself,  partly  by 
the  help  of  the  lieutenant-generals,  and  military  tribunes, 
without  any  hurry  or  confusion,  he  formed  his  troops,  as  the 
time  and  place  required.  He  put  them  in  mind,  that  they 
were  to  engage  with  men  who  had  been  twice  reduced  to 
submission;  who  had  acquired  an  addition  of  wickedness  and 
perfidy,  but  not  of  courage  or  spirit.  That  these  people  had 
put  it  in  their  power  to  make  their  return  to  their  country  glo¬ 
rious  and  splendid;  for  they  would  now  carry  home  theii 
swords  reeking  with  the  blood  of  the  enemy,  and  spoils  drop¬ 
ping  the  same.”  The  time  allowed  not  more  to  be  said,  the 
enemy  advanced  upon  them;  the  extemities  of  the  wings 
w  ere  already  engaged,  and  quickly  after  the  entire  lines. 
XL.  The  battle  was  furious  in  every  part,  but  the  success 
various.  The  two  legions  fought  with  extraordinary  bra¬ 
very,  nor  were  the  two  cohorts  of  the  allies  remiss;  but  the 
foreign  auxiliaries  were  hard  pressed,  by  men  armed  like 
themselves,  and  much  better  qualified  for  soldiers;  nor  were 
they  able  to  maintain  their  ground.  The  Celtiberians  per¬ 
ceiving,  that,  in  a  regular  line,  and  in  fair  fighting,  they 
were  no  match  for  the  legions,  made  a  push  against  them,  in 
the  form  of  a  wedge,  in  which  sort  of  attack  they  excel  so 
much,  that  on  whatever  part  they  direct  their  assault,  thev 

414 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.  R.  572. 
never  iaii  to  make  an  impression.  On  this  occasion,  too, 
the  legions  were  disordered,  and  the  line  was  almost  broken. 
When  Flaccus  observed  this  disorder,  he  rode  up  to  the  le¬ 
gionary  cavalry,  asking  them,  Have  we  any  support  in  you? 
Is  the  whole  army  to  be  lost?”  Whereupon  they  called  to 
nim,  from  all  sides,  to tell  them  what  he  wished  to  be  done 
and  that  it  should  be  instantly  attempted.”  Double  your 
troops,”  he  replied,  and  charge  the  wedge,  by  which  we 
arc  attacked;  increase  the  force  of  your  horses,  by  taking  off 
their  bridles;  and  then  spur  them  on  against  the  foe.”  This 
expedient  historians  mention  to  have  been  often  employed  by 
the  Roman  cavalry  with  great  advantage.  They  did  as  di¬ 
rected,  pushing  in  full  career,  through  that  body,  twice,  for¬ 
ward  and  backward,  breaking  their  spears  to  pieces,  and 
making  great  havoc  of  the  enemy.  The  Celtiberians,  on 
this  dispersion  of  their  wedge,  on  which  the)'  had  placed- 
their  whole  reliance,  were  quite  dismayed;  and,  almost  giv¬ 
ing  over  the  fight,  looked  about  for  ways  to  escape-  And 
now,  when  the  allied  horse  satv  this  brilliant  exploit  of  the 
Roman  cavalry,  they  were  so  inflamed,  by  the  example  of 
their  bravery,  that,  without  waiting  for  orders,  they  made  a 
charge  on  the  enemy,  while  they  were  in  confusion.  The 
Celtiberians  made  no  longer  resistance;  all  fled  in  haste,  and 
the  Roman  general,  when  he  saw  their  backs,  vowed  a  tem¬ 
ple  to  Equestrian  Fortune,  and  games  in  honour  of  Jupiter^ 
supremely  good  and  great.  The  fugitives,  dispersing,  were  . 
pursued  with  much  slaughter,  through  the  whole  length  of 
the  pass.  According  to  some  historians,  seventeen  thousand 
of  the  enemy  were  killed  on  this  occasion,  and  more  than 
three  thousand  taken,  with  two  hundred  and  seventy-seven 
military  standards,  and  near  one  thousand  one  hundred  hor¬ 
ses.  The  victorious  army  pitched  no  camp  on  that  day. 
This  victory,  however,  was  not  gained  without  loss;  four 
hundred  and  seventy -two  Roman  soldiers,  one  thousand  and 
nineteen  of  the  allies  and  Latines,  with  three  thousand  of 

B.  C.  180.J 

BOOK  XL. 

415 

the  auxiliaries,  perished.  The  Roman  troops,  having  thus 
re-asserted  their  former  renown,  finished  their  march  to  Tar- 
raco.  The  praetor,  Tiberius  Sempronius,  who  had  arrived 
two  days  before,  came  out  to  meet  Fulvius,  on  the  road,  and 
congratulate  him  on  the  important  services  which  he  had 
rendered  to  the  commonwealth.  They  then,  ^vith  perfect 
unanimity,  settled  what  soldiers  they  should  discharge,  and 
what  they  should  retain;  and  Fulvius,  embarking  the  dis¬ 
banded  soldiers  in  the  fleet,  set  sail  for  Rome,  while  Sem¬ 
pronius  led  the  legions  into  Celtiberia. 
XLL  Both  the  consuls  led  their  armies  into  Liguria,  but 
on  different  sides.  Postumius,  with  the  first  and  third  le¬ 
gions,  invested  the  mountains  of  Balista  and  Suismontium, 
and  by  securing  the  narrow  passes  leading  thereto,  with 
guards,  cut  off  all  supplies  of  provisions;  by  which  means  he 
reduced  them  to  an  entire  obedience.  Fulvius,  with  the  se¬ 
cond  and  fourth  legions,  marched  from  Pisas  against  the 
Apuan  Ligurians,  and  having  received  the  submission  of  that 
part  of  them  which  inhabited  the  banks  of  the  river  Macra, 
he  put  them  on  board  ships,  to  the  number  of  seven  thousand 
men,  and  sent  them  along  the  Etrurian  coast  to  Neapblis, 
from  whence  they  ;tvere  conducted  into  Samnium,  and  had 
lands  assigned  them  among  their  countrymen.  Aulus  Pos¬ 
tumius  cut  down  the  vineyards,  and  burned  the  corn  of  the 
Ligurians  of  the  mountains,  until,  by  making  them  suffer  all 
the  calamities  of  war,  he  compelled  them  to  surrender,  and 
deliver  up  their  arms.  From  thence,  Postumius  proceeded, 
by  sea,  to  visit  the  coast  of  the  Ingaunian,  and  Intemelian 
tribes.  Before  these  consuls  joined  the  army  at  Pisse,  it  was 
under  the  command  of  Aulus  Postumius,  and  a  brother  ol 
Quintus  Fulvius,  Marcus  Fulvius  Nobilior,  who  was  milita¬ 
ry  tribune  of  the  second  legion.  The  tribune,  in  his  months* 
^  As  there  were  six  tribunes  m  each  kgicij  tiic}  look  die  cemmaod  q! 
it  in  turn,  each  holding  ii  Un  two  months 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y,R.  572. 

416 
of  command,  disbanded  the  legion,  after  obliging  the  centu* 
rions  to  swear,  that  they  would  carry  the  money  in  their 
hands  to  the  treasury,  and  deliver  it  to  the  qusestors.  When 
intelligence  of  this  was  brought  to  Aulus  at  Placentia,  to 
which  place  he  happened  to  have  made  an  excursion,  he  set 
out  with  some  light  horsemen,  in  quest  of  the  disbanded 
men;  and  such  as  he  could  overtake,  he  sharply  rebuked,  and 
brought  back  to  Pisse,  and  then  sent  information  of  the  whole 
matter  to  the  consul.  He  laid  the  business  before  the  senate, 
who  passed  a  decree,  that  Marcus  Fulvius  should  be  banish¬ 
ed  into  that  part  of  Spain,  beyond  new  Carthage,  and  a  let¬ 
ter  was  given  him  by  the  consul,  to  be  carried  into  the  far¬ 
ther  part  of  Spain,  to  Publius  Manlius.  The  soldiers  were 
ordered  to  return  to  their  standards;  and  it  was  decreed,  that, 
as  a  mark  of  disgrace,  that  legion  should,  for  that  year,  re¬ 
ceive  but  half  a  year’s  pay.  The  consul  was  likewise  ordered 
to  sell,  as  a  slave,  every  soldier  who  should  not  return  to  the 
army,  and  to  confiscate  his  goods. 
XLII.  Lucius  Duronius,  who  had  been  prietor  the  year 
before,  returned  now,  with  ten  ships,  from  Illyricum  to  Brun- 
dusium,  and  leaving  the  fleet  in  that  harbour,  came  to  Rome. 
In  giving  a  recital  of  the  services  which  he  had  performed 
in  his  province,  he  threw  the  blame  of  all  the  piracies  com¬ 
mitted  by  sea,  on  Gentius,  king  of  Illyricum.  From  his 
kingdom,”  he  said,  “  came  all  the  ships  that  had  ravaged  the 
coast;  that  he  had  sent  ambassadors  on  the  subject,  but  they 
were  not  even  allowed  an  audience  of  the  king.”  Some  time 
before  this,  ambassadors  had  come  to  Rome  from  Gentius, 
who  said,  that  ‘‘  when  the  Romans  came  and  desired  au¬ 
dience  of  the  king,  he  happened  to  be  sick,  in  a  remote  part 
of  his  dominions;  and  that  Gentius  requested  of  the  senate, 
not  to  give  credit  to  the  for^'red  charges  which  his  enemies 
made  against  him.”  Duronius  added,  that  many  Roman  citi¬ 
zens  and  Latine  allies,  suffered  ill  treatment  in  Gentius’s 
dominions;  some  of  whom  he  held  in  confinement  in  Corcyra. 

BOOK  XL. 

4X7 

B.  C.  180,] 
An  order  was  made,  that  all  these  should  be  brought  to 
iRomej  that  the  prsetor,  Caius  Claudius,  should  inquire  inti* 
that  business,  and  that,  until  this  were  done,  no  answer 
should  be  given  to  the  king  or  his  ambassadors.  Among 
many  who  were  cut  off  by  the  pestilence  this  year,  were  se- 
veral  priests.  Lucius  Valerius  Flaccus,  a  pontiff,  died  of  it, 
and,  in  his  room,  was  substituted  Quintus  Fabius  Labeo. 
Publius  Manlius,  who  had  lately  come  home  from  the  far¬ 
ther  Spain,  and  was  triumvir  of  religious  feasts,  died  also, 
who  was  succeeded  by  Quintus  Fulvius,  son  of  Marcus,  then 
a  mere  youth.  The  appointing  of  a  king  of  the  sacrifices,  in 
the  room  of  Cneius  Cornelius  Dolabella,  gave  rise  to  a  dis¬ 
pute  between  Caius  Servilius,  chief  pontiff,  and  Lucius  Cor¬ 
nelius  Dolabella,  naval  duumvir.  The  pontiff  required,  be¬ 
fore  he  inaugurated  him,  that  he  should  resign  his  commis¬ 
sion,  and,  on  his  refusing  this,  the  pontiff'  imposed  a  fine  on  the 
duumvir.  The  latter  then  appealed,  and  the  affair  w  as  brought 
to  trial  before  the  people.  After  a  majority  oi  the  tribes 
were  called  in  to  give  their  votes,  and  had  ordered  that  the 
duumvir  should  comply  with  the  requisition  oi  the  pontiff, 
and  that  on  hib  resigning  his  commission  the  fine  should  be 
remitted,  an  iiufavourabie  omen  irom  the  heavens,  interven¬ 
ed,  and  broke  off  the  proceedings  of  the  assembly.  After 
this  the  pontiffs  were  prevented,  by  religious  scruples,  from 
inaugurating  Dolabella.  They  consecrated  Pubhus  Ckeiius 
Siculus  as  king  of  the  sacrifices,  who  had  been  invested  pon¬ 
tiff,  in  the  second  place.  Powards  the  end  ot  the  year,  Caius 
Servilius  Geminus,  the  chief  pontiff,  also  diedj  he  was  more¬ 
over  decemvir  of  religious  afuiirs.  In  his  ro  )ni,  as  pontiff, 
Quintus  Fulvius  Flaccus  was  nominated  b\  the  college,  but 
the  post  of  chief  pontiff,  though  sought  b\  nianv  illustriou*- 
candidates,  was  conferred  on  Marcus  iLmilius  Lepidus,  as 
was  that  of  decemvir  of  religious  affairs,  vacant  by  the  death 
of  the  same  person,  on  Quintus  Marcius  Philipus.  Spurius 
Postumius  Albinus,  an  augur,  died;  and  the  augurs  filled  his 
VOL.  V* — 3  H 

418 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

lY.  R.  573. 

place  with  Publius  Scipio,  son  of  Africanus.  On  the  request 
of  the  people  of  Cuma-,  leave  was  granted  them  to  use  the 
Latine  language  in  their  public  business,  and  their  auctioneers 
also,  in  selling  goods. 
XL  I II.  The  Pisans,  tnaking  an  offer  of  grounds  for  the 
establishment  of  a  Latine  colony,  received  the  thanks  of  the 
senate,  and  commissioners  were  appointed  to  conduct  that 
business;  these  were  Quintus  Fabius  Buteo,  Marcus  Pompi* 
lius  Ljenas,  and  Publius  Pompilius  Laenas.  Caius  Msenius, 
prsetor,  who,  on  his  appointment  to  the  government  of  Sar¬ 
dinia,  had  also  received  commission  to  make  inquisition 
concerning  practices  of  sorcery,  in  places  more  than  ten 
miles  distant  from  the  city  represented,  in  a  letter,  that  he 
had  already  passed  sentence  on  three  thousand  people,  and 
that  still,  in  consequence  of  fresh  discoveries,  the  business 
increased  so  much  on  his  hands,  that  he  must  either  drop  the 
prosecution  of  the  inquiries  or  give  up  the  province.’’  Quin- 
y  R  573  Fulvius  Flaccus  returned  from  Spain,  with  a 
B.  C.  no.  high  reputation  for  his  military  exploits;  and,  while 
he  waited  without  the  city,  in  expectation  of  a  triumph,  was 
elected  consul  with  Lucius  Manlius  Acidinus.  A  few  days 
after  which,  with  the  soldiers  whom  he  had  brought  home, 
he  rode  into  the  city  in  triumph.  He  carried  in  the  proces¬ 
sion  an  hundred  and  twenty-four  golden  crowns,  together 
witli  thirty-one  pounds  weight  of  gold,  and  of  coined  Oscan 
silver  an  hundred  and  seventy-three  thousand  two  hundred 
pieces."^  He  gave  out  of  the  booty,  to  each  of  the  soldiers, 
fifty  denariuses;  double  to  a  centurion;  triple  to  a  horseman; 
and  the  same  sums  to  the  Latine  allies,  with  double  pay  to 
all.  This  year,  for  the  first  time,  a  law  was  proposed  by 
Lucius  Villius,  plebeian  tribune,  ascertaining  the  ages  at 
vrhich  men  might  sue  for,  and  hold,  the  several  offices  in  the 
state.  H  cnce  his  family  acquired  the  surname  of  Annalis. 

5592/.  17^.  4(/ 

BOOK  XL. 

B.  c.  ir9.j 

419 

XLIV.  The  Bfebian  law,  which  ordered,  that  every  second 
year  the  number  of  praetors  elected  should  be  four,  and 
W’hich  had  been  overlooked  for  many  years,  was  now  ob¬ 
served;  and  the  persons  appointed  were,  Cneius  Cornelius 
Scipio,  Caius  Valerius  Lfevinus,  Quintus  Mucius  Scse- 
vola,  and  Publius  Mucius  Scsevola,  sons  of  Quintus.  To 
the  consuls,  Quintus  Fulvius  and  Lucius  Manlius,  was  de¬ 
creed  the  same  province,  as  to  the  preceding  ones,  and  the 
same  number  of  forces,  infantry,  cavalr\\  citizens,  and  allies. 
In  the  two  Spains,  Tiberius  Sempronius  and  Lucius  Postu- 
mi  us  were  continued  in  command,  wdth  the  same  armies 
which  they  then  had;  and,  to  fill  up  their  numbers,  the  con¬ 
suls  were  ordered  to  enlist,  of  Romans  three  thousand  foot 
and  three  hundred  horse,  and  of  the  Latine  allies  five  thou¬ 
sand  foot  and  four  hundred  horse.  The  lots  gave  to  Publius 
Mucius  Scaevola  the  city  jurisdiction,  and  the  business  of 
the  inquisitions  concerning  sorcery,  in  the  city,  and  within 
ten  miles  of  it;  to  Cneius  Scipio  the  foreign  jurisdiction;  to 
Quintus  Mucius  Scaevola,  Sicily;  and  to  Caius  Valerius  Laevi- 
nus,  Sardinia,  The  consul,  Quintus  Fulvius  before  he  med¬ 
dled  with  the  public  business,  declared,  that  he  intended  to 
acquit  both  himself  and  the  state  of  the  obligation  of  fulfill¬ 
ing  the  vows  which  he  had  made;  that,  on  the  day  of  his 
last  battle  with  the  Celtiberians,  he  had  vowed  to  perform 
games  in  honour  of  Jupiter  supremely  good  and  great,  and 
to  build  a  temple  to  Equestrian  Fortune;  and  that  the  Spa¬ 
niards  had  made  a  contribution  of  money  for  these  pur¬ 
poses.  A  vote  was  passed  that  the  games  should  be  per¬ 
formed,  and  that  duumvirs  should  be  appointed  to  contract 
for  the  building  of  the  temple:  With  regard  to  the  ex¬ 
penses,  a  limitation  was  fixed  that  ““  no  greater  sum  should 
be  expended  on  the  games  than  that  which  had  been  voted 
to  Fulvius  Nobilior,  when  he  exhibited  such  on  the  conclu¬ 
sion  of  the  ^Etolian  war;  and  that  the  consul  should  not,  on 
account  of  these,  send  for,  collect,  or  receive  anv  thing,  or 

120 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

LY,  K.  575 

act  in  any  respect  contrary  to  the  decree  of  senate,  passed 
concerning  games  in  the  consulate  of  Lucius  dKrnilius  and 
Cntius  Ba:bius.”  I'he  senate  qualified  their  vote  in  this  man¬ 
ner,  because  l  iheriub  Senipronius,  in  his  aedileship,  had  ex¬ 
pended,  on  the  like  exhibiuons,  such  enormous  sums  as  were 
hurthensonic  not  only  to  the  Latine  allies  and  Italy,  but  even 
to  the  provinces  abroad. 
XLV.  The  winter  of  that  year  was  rendered  remarkabh 
severe  by  great  falls  of  snow,  and  storms  of  every  kind;  those 
kinds  of  trees  which  are  susceptible  of  injury  from  cold,  were 
uitirely  blighted;  and  its  duration,  also,  was  unusually  long» 
so  that  tile  Latine  festival,  on  the  mount,  was  broken  off  soon 
after  its  commencement,  b)  a  hurricane  coming  on  suddenly, 
and  with  irresistible  fury;  but  it  was  celebrated  afterwards, 
pursuant  li)  an  order  of  the  pontiffs.  The  same  storm  alsc 
threw  down  many  statues  in  the  capitol,  disfigured  many 
buildings  b}  lightning,  as  tbe  temple  of  Jupiter  at  Tarracina> 
the  white  temple,  and  the  Roman  gate  at  Capua;  and  in  ma¬ 
ny  places  the  battlements  of  the  walls  were  overthrown 
Among  the  rest  ol  these  prodigies,  an  account  was  received 
from  Reate,  that  a  mule,  with  three  feet,  was  foaled  there^ 
On  account  of  those  portents,  the  decemvirs  were  ordered 
to  consult  the  books.  They  directed  to  what  gods,  and  with 
how  many  victims,  sacrifices  should  be  performed;  and  that 
on  account  of  the  many  places  being  struck  by  lightning,  a 
supplication  should  be  performed  at  the  temple  of  Jupiter, 
of  one  da) .  Then  the  votive  games  of  the  consul  Quintas 
Fulvius  were  exhibited  with  great  magnificence,  during  ten 
days.  Soon  after,  was  held  the  election  of  censors,  when 
Marcus  iEmilius  Lepidus,  chief  pontiff,  and  Marcus  Fulvius 
Nobiiior,who  had  triumphed  over  the  ^Etolians,  were  chosen. 
It  was  universally  known,  that  a  strong  enmity  subsisted  be¬ 
tween  these  two;  for  they  had  published  it  often,  by  many 
disputes  in  the  senate,  and  in  the  assemblies  of  the  people. 
^Vivn  the  election  was  ended,  according  to  ancient  custom. 

BOOK  XL. 

421 

B.  C.  179.] 
they  seated  themselves  in  curule  chairs  in  the  field,  near  the 
altar  of  Mars,  when,  in  a  few  minutes,  came  up  thither  the 
principal  senators,  accompanied  by  the  body  of  the  citizens, 
among  whom  was  Quintus  Csecilius  Metellus,  who  spoke  as 
follows: — 
XL  VI.  Censors,  we  are  not  unmindful  that  you  have 
been  just  now  invested,  by  the  whole  body  of  the  Roman 
people,  with  authority  to  preside  over  the  morals  of  the  state, 
and  that  w^e  ought  to  be  admonished  and  ruled  by  you,  not 
you  by  us.  Nevertheless,  it  may  not  be  improper  to  point 
out  what  all  good  men  blame  in  you,  or,  at  least,  somewhat 
which  they  wish  to  see  altered.  When  we  look  at  }ou  sepa¬ 
rately,  Marcus  ^milius,  Marcus  Fulvius,  vve  know  not,  in 
the  whole  state,  any  one  person  whom,  if  we  were  called 
back  again  to  vote,  wc  could  wish  to  be  preferred  to  you: 
but  when  we  behold  you  both  together,  we  cannot  avoid 
fearing  that  you  are  but  ill  associated;  and  that  the  public 
may  not  reap  as  much  advantage  from  your  being  exceed¬ 
ingly  pleasing  to  every  one  of  us,  as  prejudice,  from  your  be¬ 
ing  displeasing  one  to  another.  You  have,  for  many  years  past, 
harboured  an  enmity,  violent  in  its  degree,  and  detrimen¬ 
tal  to  yourselves;  and  we  justly  fear,  that  from  this  day  for¬ 
ward,  it  may  prove  more  detrimental  to  us,  and  to  the  state, 
than  it  has  been  to  you.  As  to  the  reasons,  on  which  these 
our  fears  are  founded,  many  observations,  w’hich  might  be 
made,  will  readdy  occur  to  yourselves;  unless  peihaps  your 
implacable  resentments  have  totally  engrossed  your  minds. 
These  resentments  we  all  beseech  vou  to  terminate  this  day, 
in  that  sacred  place,  and  to  suffer  persons,  whom  the  Roman 
people  have  united  by  their  suffrages,  to  be  united  ihrouch 
our  means;  and  that  you  wdll,  with  unanimity  and  harmonv, 
choose  the  senate,  review’  the  knights,  perform  the  survey, 
and  close  the  lustrum:  and  that  when  you  utter  those  W’ords, 
which  make  part  ol  almost  all  your  prayers,  ‘  that  such  a 
matter  may  prove  prosperous  and  happv  to  me  and  my  col* 

42 

HISTORY  OF  ROME 

[ Y.  H.  S7^ 

leagu<^/  you  will,  truly  and  sincerely,  wish  it  to  prove  so; 
and  that  you  will  act  in  such  a  manner,  as  that,  whatever 
you  beg  from  the  immortal  gods,  we  mortals  also  may  be 
convinced,  that  you  really  desire  it,  Titus  Tatius  and  Ro¬ 
mulus,  after  having  encountered,  as  enemies,  in  the  middle 
of  the  forum,  reigned  with  concord  in  the  same  city.  Not 
only  quarrels,  but  wars,  are  accommodated,  and,  from  bitter 
foes,  men  frequently  become  faithful  allies,  nay,  sometimes, 
countrymen.  The  Albans,  after  the  demolition  of  Alba,  were 
transplanted  to  Rome;  the  Latines,  the  Sabines,  were  admit¬ 
ted  into  the  number  of  citizens.  It  is  a  common  saying,  and, 
because  founded  in  truth,  has  become  a  proverb,  that  friend¬ 
ships  ought  to  be  immortal,  but  enmities  mortal.”  A  univer¬ 
sal  roar  of  approbation  was  now  heard;  and  presently  after, 
the  voices  of  everv  one  present,  all  joining  in  the  same  re¬ 
quest,  interrupted  his  discourse.  Then  ^milius,  besides 
other  complaints,  represented,  that  through  F ulvius’s  in¬ 
trigues,  he  had  been  twice  disappointed  of  the  consulship, 
when  he  had  reason  to  think  himself  sure  of  obtaining  it. 
On  the  other  hand,  Fulvius  complained,  that  .Emilius  sought 
every  opportunity  of  injuring  him;  had  instituted  a  prosecu¬ 
tion  against  him,  and  obliered  him  to  give  surety  to  abide 
judgment,  to  his  great  discredit.  Nevertheless,  each  of  them 
intimated,  that,  if  the  other  would  do  the  same,  he  was  rea- 
dv  to  submit  to  the  direction  of  such  a  number  of  the  most 
respectable  members  of  the  state;  and  all  present  urgently 
repeating  their  request,  they  mutually  pledged  their  right 
hands,  and  their  honour,  to  dismiss  and  forget  all  animosi¬ 
ty.  The  whole  assembly  expressed  the  highest  applause  ol 
their  behaviour;  and  then  escorted  them  to  the  capitoi,  where 
both  the  attention  paid  to  such  a  matter  by  the  persons  of 
the  first  consequence,  and  the  compliance  of  the  censors, 
were  most  warmly  approved,  and  commended  by  the  senate. 
The  censors,  then,  demanded,  that  a  sum  of  money  should 
be  assigned  to  them,  which  they  might  employ  in  public 

B.  C.  179.]  BOOK  XL,  42. 
works;  and  the  customs  of  one  year  were  accordingly  de^ 
creed  to  them. 
XL VII.  Meanwhile,  in  Spain,  the  proprsetors,  Lucius 
Postumius,  and  Tiberius  Sempronius,  settled  between  them, 
that  Albinus  should  march  through  Lusitania,  against  the 
Vaccaeans,  and  thence  return  into  Celtiberia.  Gracchus  pene¬ 
trated  into  the  remotest  parts  of  that  province;  because  the 
commotions  there  were  the  most  dangerous.  First,  he  made 
an  unexpected  assault  on  the  city  of  Munda,  by  night,  and 
took  it  by  storm;  then,  having  received  hostages,  and  placed 
a  garrison  in  the  town,  he  proceeded  to  attack  their  forts,  and 
ravage  the  country  with  fire,  until  he  arrived  at  another 
strong  town,  called  by  the  natives  Certima.  While  he  wat 
employed  here,  in  advancing  his  works  to  the  walls,  depu¬ 
ties  came  out  from  the  town,  who  spoke  with  all  the  simpli¬ 
city  of  the  earliest  times,  not  dissembling  their  wishes  to 
continue  the  war,  if  they  could  procure  stiength  to  support 
it.— ;-For  they  requested  permission  to  go  into  the  camp  of 
the  Celtiberians,  and  solicit  assistance  from  them,  and  sakl. 
that  “  if  they  did  not  obtain  it,  they  would  then  consult  their 
own  interests,  separately,  without  regard  to  them.”  Thisbe- 
ing  granted  by  Gracchus,  they  went  accordingly,  and,  in  a  few’ 
days  after,  came  back  with  ten  ambassadors.  They  arrived 
about  noon;  and  the  first  thing  that  they  asked  of  the  praetor 
was,  that  he  would  order  some  drink  to  be  given  them.  Aftei 
drinking  off  the  first  cups,  they  called  for  more,  while  all 
who  were  present  could  not  refrain  from  laughing  at  a  peo¬ 
ple  so  unpolished,  so  ignorant  of  every  thing  like  civilized 
manners.  Then  the  eldest  of  them  said,  “  we  have  been 
sent  by  our  nation  to  ask  what  it  is  that  gives  you  so  much 
confidence,  that  you  should  venture  to  come  and  make  an 
attack  on  them?”  To  this  question  Gracchus  answered,  that 
‘‘  he  came  relying  on  an  excellent  army;  which  if  they  chost 
to  see,  in  order  to  carry  back  certain  information  to  theii 
friends,  he  would  give  them  an  opportunity.”  and  then  he 

424 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  573, 

ordered  the  military  tribunes  to  draw  up,  in  array,  all  the 
forces  both  horse  and  foot,  and  make  them  go  through  their 
exercise  in  arms.  After  this  sight,  the  ambassadors  were 
dismissed;  and  they  gave  such  accounts,  as  deterred  their 
people  from  attempting  to  succour  the  besieged  city.  The 
townsmen  raised  hres  on  the  towers,  which  was  the  signal 
agreed  on,  but  receiving  no  answer,  and  being  thus  disap^ 
pointed  in  their  only  hope  of  relief,  they  capitulated.  A  con¬ 
tribution  of  two  million  four  hundred  thousand  sesterces’*^ 
was  imposed  on  them;  and  they  were  obliged  to  furnish  for¬ 
ty  horsemen,  of  the  highest  rank  among  them,  not  under  the 
denomination  of  hostages,  for  they  were  ordered  to  serve  as 
soldiers,  but  in  reality  to  be  pledges  for  their  fidelity. 
XL VIII.  Gracchus  then  marched  to  the  city  of  Alee, 
where  lay  the  camp  of  the  Celtiberians,  from  which  the  am¬ 
bassadors  bad  lately  come.  For  some  days,  he  harassed 
them  with  skirmishes,  sending  his  light  troops  to  chargL 
their  advanced  guards;  and  then  made  more  important  at¬ 
tacks,  in  order  to  draw  them  from  out  their  entrenchments. 
As  soon  as  he  perceived  that  his  plan  took  effect,  he  gave 
orders  to  the  prtefects  of  the  auxiliaries,  that,  after  a  short 
contest,  they  should  suddenly  turn  their  hacks,  as  if  over¬ 
powered  hv  numbers,  and  fly,  with  all  haste,  to  the  camp; 
in  the  meantime,  he  himself  drew  up  all  his  forces  in  order, 
within  the  rampart,  at  all  the  gates.  It  was  not  long  until  he 
saw  his  detachment  flying  towards  him,  as  had  been  previ¬ 
ously  agreed,  and  the  barbarians  following,  in  a  disorderly 
pursuit.  This  was  exactly  what  he  wanted;  and  his  troops 
were  formed  in  readiness  to  lay  hold  on  the  occasion.  He 
therefore  delayed  no  longer,  than  to  leave  the  passage  open 
for  his  party,  which  was  flying,  to  get  into  the  camp,  and 
then,  raising  the  shout,  he  caused  them  to  rush  out  from  all 
rhe  gates  at  once.  The  enemy  did  not  sustain  the  unexpect- 

BOOK  XL. 

425 

B.  C,  179,] 
ed  shock.  They  who  came  to  assault  his  camp,  could  not 
even  defend  their  own;  for  they  were  instantly  routed,  put 
to  flight,  driven  in  a  panic  within  their  trenches;  and,  at  last, 
beaten  out  of  them.  In  this  action,  nine  thousand  of  the  ene¬ 
my  were  killed,  and  three  hundred  and  twenty  taken,  with  an 
hundred  and  twelve  horses,  and  thirty-seven  militar}"  ensigns. 
Of  the  Roman  army  there  fell  an  hundred  and  nine. 
XL IX.  After  this  battle,  Gracchus  employed  the  legions 
in  ravaging  the  countr}^  of  Celtiberia.  After  he  had  spread 
depredations  of  every  kind,  to  a  vast  extent,  some  states  vo¬ 
luntarily,  others,  through  fear,  submitted  to  his  yoke;  so 
that  within  a  few  days,  he  received  the  submission  of  an 
hundred  and  three  towns,  besides  having  acquired  an  im¬ 
mense  booty.  He  then  marched  to  Alee,  whence  he  came, 
and  opened  the  siege  of  that  city.  The  townsmen  withstood 
the  first  assault;  but  when  they  afterwards  found  themselves 
attacked,  not  only  by  arms,  but  works  also,  they  despaired  of 
being  able  to  defend  the  place,  and  retired  into  the  citadel. 
After  some  time,  they  sent  envoys,  and  surrendered  them¬ 
selves,  and  every  thing  belonging  to  them,  to  the  Romans. 
The  plunder  here  was  very  great.  Many  prisoners  of  dis¬ 
tinction  fell  into  the  victor’s  hands,  among  whom  were  two 
sons  and  a  daughter  of  Turrus.  This  chieftain,  who  govern¬ 
ed  those  tribes,  was  by  far  the  most  powerful  of  all  the  Spa¬ 
niards.  On  hearing  the  disasters  of  his  countrymen,  he  sent 
for  a  passport,  and  coming  into  the  camp  to  Gracchus,  asked 
him,  first,  “  Whether  the  lives  of  himself  and  his  subjects 
would  be  spared?”  The  prsetor  answered  that  thev  would; 
then  he  asked  again,  Whether  it  would  be  allowed  him  to 
bear  arms  on  the  side  of  the  Romans?”  To  this  too  Grac¬ 
chus  assented,  on  which  he  said,  I  will  follow  you,  then, 
against  my  old  allies,  since  they  have  not  thought  proper  to 
pay  any  regard  to  me.”  From  that  time,  he  united  himself 
to  the  Romans,  and  acted  in  their  service,  on  many  occa¬ 
sions,  with  great  courage  and  fidelity 
•’^OL.  V. — 3  T 

42b  HISTORY  OF  HOME.  [Y.  H, 
L.  Alter  this,  Ergavia,  a  city  of  great  power  and  opu¬ 
lence,  terrified  by  the  disasters  of  the  surrounding  states, 
opened  its  gates  to  the  Romans.  Some  writers  say,  that  the 
submissions  of  these  towns  were  not  made  with  sincerity^ 
but  that,  whenever  the  legions  were  led  away  from  any  quar¬ 
ter  of  the  country,  the  natives  resumed  their  arms;  and  that 
the  Homan  general  fought,  afterwards,  near  Mount  Caunus, 
a  pitched  battle  with  the  Celtiberians,  which  was  warmly 
contested,  from  break  of  day  to  the  sixth  hour,  that  man> 
fell  on  both  sides,  and  that  the  Romans  had  no  strong  proof 
of  their  gaining  the  victory,  excepting  that,  next  day,  they 
offered  battle,  and  the  enemy  refused  to  come  out  of  their 
entrenchments;  that  they  employed  that  whole  day  in  collect¬ 
ing  the  spoils,  and,  on  the  day  following;  fought  a  more  des¬ 
perate  battle,  in  which  the  Celtiberians  were  at  length  cona- 
pletely  defeated,  and  their  camp  taken  and  plundered:  that 
tw  eniy-two  thousand  of  the  enemy  were  killed  in  the  action, 
more  than  three  hundred  taken,  with  almost  an  equal  num- 
her  of  horses,  and  seventy-two  military  standards:  that  this 
put  an  end  to  the  war,  and  that  the  Celtiberians  concluded  a 
peace,  with  a  real  intention  to  keep  it,  and  not  with  their 
former  insincerity.  They  say  also,  that  during  the  same  sum¬ 
mer  Lucius  Postumius  fought  two  battles,  in  the  farther 
Spain,  with  the  Vaccaeans,  and  gained  complete  victories, 
killed  thirty^-five  thousand  men,  and  took  their  cam'p.  It  is, 
however,  more  probable,  that  he  came  into  the  province  toe 
late  to  assist  greatly  in  that  campaign. 
LI.  The  censors  reviewed  the  senate  with  cordial  bar- 
mony.  Marcus  iEmilius  Lepidus,  the  censor,  who  was  like¬ 
wise  chief  pontiff,  was  chosen  head  of  the  senate;  three  were 
expelled.  Lepidus  restored  some  who  were  struck  out  by 
his  colleague.  They  then  divided  a  part  of  the  money  as 
signed  to  them,  and  completed  therewith  the  following  works: 
— Lepidus  built  a  mole  at  Tarracini,  an  unpopular  work, 
because  he  had  estates  there,  and  brought  into  the  account 
of  the  public  expenditure,  what  ought  to  have  been  done  at 

BOOK  XL. 

42} 

B.  C.  179.J 
his  own  expense.  He  agreed  with  contractors  for  building  a 
theatre  near  the  temple  of  Apollo,  and  for  embellishing  the 
temple  of  Jupiter  in  the  capitol,  and  the  columns  around  it: 
he  also  removed  from  those  columns  the  statues  that  stood 
incommodiously  before  them,  and  took  down  the  shields  and 
military  ensigns  of  all  sorts,  which  were  hung  upon  them. 
Marcus  Fulvius  made  contracts  for  more  numerous  and  more 
useful  works:  a  haven  on  the  Tiber,  and  piers  for  a  bridge 
across  it;  on  which  piers  Publius  Scipio  Africanus  and  Lu¬ 
cius  Mummius,  censors,  many  years  after,  caused  the  arch- 
es  to  be  erected;  a  court  of  justice  behind  the  new  bankers' 
houses,  and  a  fish-ntarket,  surrounded  with  shops,  which 
he  sold  to  private  persons;  also  a  forum  and  portico,  on  the 
outside  of  the  gate  Irigemina;  another  portico  behind  the 
dock-yard,  and  one  at  the  temple  of  Hercules;  also  a  temple 
of  Apollo  Mcdicus,  behind  that  of  Hope,  on  the  bank  of 
the  Til)er.  They  had,  besides,  some  of  the  money  undi¬ 
vided,  and  out  of  this  they  jointly  agreed  to  pay  for 
water  being  brought  to  the  city,  and  the  raising  of  the  ne¬ 
cessary  arches;  but  Marcus  Licinius  Crassus  put  a  stop  to 
this  work,  which  he  would  not  suffer  to  be  brought  through 
his  grounds.  Fhey  also  established  manv  port  duties  and 
customs,  and  took  care  that  several  public  chapels,  which 
were  then  occupied  by  private  persons,  should  again  be  open 
to  the  people.  They  likewise  i^ade  an  alteration  in  the  mode 
of  voting;  for,  through  all  the  regi(>ns,  they  divided  the 
tribes*  according  to  the  different  ranks  of  men,  and  th.^ir  se¬ 
veral  occupations  and  callings. 
LIL  One  of  the  censors,  Marcus  iEmilius,  petitioiyd 
the  senate,  that  a  sum  of  money  should  be  voted  to  him  for 
the  celebration  of  games,  on  occasion  of  the  dedication  of 
the  temples  of  Imperial  Juno  and  Diana,  which  he  had  vowed 
^ight  years  before,  when  employed  in  the  Ligurian  war.  They 
"  In  consequence  of  whicii  regulation,  all  those  of  each  tribe,  who  wen 
the  «amc  rank  and  occupation^  Viifed  together 

HISTORY  OF  ROML. 

[Y.  R.  5rs 

accordingly  voted  twenty  thousand  asses He  dedicated 
those  temples  in  the  Flaniinian  circus;  in  which  place  he 
exhibited  stage  plays  for  three  days,  after  the  dedication  ol 
the  temple  of  Juno,  and  two,  after  that  of  Diana,  and  foi 
one  day  in  the  circus  of  Rome.  He  also  dedicated  a  temple 
to  the  deities!  of  the  sea  in  the  field  of  Mars.  This  had  been 
vowed  eleven  years  before,  by  Lucius  iEmilius  Regillus,  in 
the  sea-fight  with  the  ships  of  king  Andochus.  Over  the 
gate  of  the  teniple  was  hung  up  a  tablet  with  this  inscrip¬ 
tion:  ,  #  #  #  #  *  *  # 
^  #  #  #  #  # 
The  same  was  placed  over  the  gate  of  the  temple  of  Jupiter, 
on  the  capitol. 
LI  II.  Two  days  after  the  censors  had  reviewed  the  se¬ 
nate,  the  consul  Quintus  Fulvius  marched  against  the  Ligu¬ 
rians;  and,  making  his  way  amid  the  mountains  and  difficult 
passes,  fought  a  pitched  battle  with  the  enemy,  and  not  only 
defeated  them  in  the  field,  but  took  their  camp  the  same  day. 
Three  thousand  two  hundred  of  the  enemy,  and  all  that  tract 
of  Liguria,  surrendered  to  the  conqueror.  The  consul  brought 
down  all  those  who  surrendered,  into  the  low  lands,  and 
posted  guards  on  the  mountains.  His  letters  from  that  pro¬ 
vince  quickly  reached  Rome;  and  a  thanksgiving,  of  two 
days,  w2ls  voted  on  account  of  his  successes.  The  praetors, 
during  this  thanksgiving,  sacr^ced  forty  victims  of  the  larger 
kinds.  The  other  consOl,  Lucius  Manlius,  did  nothing  in  Li¬ 
guria  worth  recording.  Some  transalpine  Gauls,  to  the  number 
of  three  thousand,  came  over  into  Italy,  without  offering  to 
cogfimit  hostilities  of  any  kind,  and  petitioned  the  consul  and 
senate  for  some  land,  proposing  to  live  as  became  peace¬ 
able  subjects,  under  the  government  of  the  Roman  people 
^  64/.  4</.  t  Neptune,  Thetis  and  Glacus. 
I  Mere  arr  given  in  t!ie  originaK  some  lines,  as  the  inscription,  but  so 
corrupted  and  so  defective,  as  to  be  utterly  unintelligible.  Gronovius  en¬ 
deavours,  in  vain,  to  explain  them:  Crevier  gives  the  matter  up. 

B.  C.  179.j 

BOOK  XL. 

42^’ 

But  the  senate  ordered  them  to  quit  Italy,  and  enjoined  the 
consul  Quintus  Fulvius  to  search  after  and  punish  those, 
who  had  been  their  advisers  and  leaders  in  passing  the 
Alps. 
LI  V.  This  year  died  Philip,  king  of  Macedonia,  being  worn 
out  with  age,  and  the  grief  which  had  continually  preyed  on 
him  since  the  death  of  his  son  Demetrius.  He  spent  the  win¬ 
ter  at  Demetrias,  in  great  anguish  of  mind,  occasioned  by 
the  loss  of  his  son,  and  by  remorse  for  his  own  cruelty.  He 
also  received  constant  cause  of  disquiet  from  Perseus,  who 
now  considered  himself,  as  did  every  one  else,  quite  secure 
of  the  throne.  Philip  perceived  that  the  eyes  of  all  were 
turned  from  himself;  in  his  old  age,  forsaken  and  desolate. 
Some  only  waited  for  his  death  to  show  their  inclinations, 
while  others  did  not  even  wait  for  that  event.  All  this  add* 
ed  to  the  bitterness  of  his  sorrow;  in  which  the  only  one  who 
sympathized  with  him,  was  Antigonus,  son  of  Echecrates, 
named  after  his  uncle  Antigonus,  who  had  been  guardian  to 
Philip.  He  was  a  man  of  royal  dignity,  and  famed  for  a 
remarkable  battle  which  he  fought  against  Cleomenes  the 
Lacedaemonian.  The  Greeks  called  him  the  Guardian,  to  dis¬ 
tinguish  him  from  the  other  princes  of  that  surname.*  His 
nephew  Antigonus,  of  all  the  friends  whom  Philip  had  ho¬ 
noured  with  his  favours,  alone,  remained  uncorrupted;  and 
this  faithful  attachment  was  the  cause  that  Perseus,  who 
had  never  been  his  friend,  became  now  his  open  and  most 
inveterate  enemy.  He  plainly  foresaw  the  great  dangers 
which  threatened  him,  in  case  of  the  succession  of  the  crown 
coming  to  Perseus;  and  therefore,  as  soon  as  he  perceived 
the  king’s  mind  to  be  softened,  and  that  he  sometimes  sigh¬ 
ed  with  regret  for  the  loss  of  Demetrius;  that  he  sometimes 
listened  to  people  conversing,  on  the  subject,  and  some¬ 
times  even  introduced  the  mention  of  it,  as  of  a  proceeding  too 
♦  They  called  him  also  Euergetes.  and  Soter. 

430 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y,  R.  573, 

rashly  executed,  accompanying  the  lamentations  of  Antigo- 
nus  with  his  own; — and,  as  the  truth  usually  affords  many 
traces  of  itself,  he  pursued  these  with  the  most  zealous  di¬ 
ligence,  in  order  that  the  whole  might  be  brought  to  light  as 
speedily  as  possible.  Of  the  agents  employed  in  that  busi¬ 
ness,  those  who  were  most  generally  supposed  guilty, 
were  Apelles  and  Philocles,  who  had  gone  ambassadors  to 
Rome,  and  had  brought  the  letter  under  the  name  of  Fla- 
mininus,  which  had  proved  so  ruinous  to  Demetrius,  The 
common  cry  in  the  palace  now  was,  that  it  was  a  forgery, 
contrived  by  the  secretary,  and  that  the  seal  was  counter¬ 
feited. 
LV.  While  this,  however,  was  rather  a  matter  of  suspi- 
.fion,  than  of  certainty,  Antigonus  accidentally  met  X\  chus, 
on  whom  he  immediately  laid  hands,  and  brought  to  the  pa¬ 
lace;  then,  leaving  him  in  custody  of  a  guard,  he  xvent  on  to 
the  apartment  of  Philip,  to  whom  he  said. — From  many 
conversations,  I  think  I  mav  conclude,  that  it  would  be  high¬ 
ly  satisfactory  to  you,  to  be  able  to  learn  the  truth  respecting 
your  sons;  which  of  the  two  was  guilty  of  treachery,  and 
plotting  against  the  other.  The  only  man  in  the  world  who 
can  unravel  this  mystery  is  now  in  your  power,  Xychus.  I 
met  him  by  accident,  and  I  have  brought  him  to  the  palace; 
I  entreat  you  to  order  him  to  be  called  into  your  presence.’’ 
On  being  brought  in,  he  at  first  denied  every  thing,  but  with 
such  irresolution,  as  showed  that  a  slight  application  to  his 
fears  w'ould  readily  extort  the  truth.  Accordingly,  he  did 
not  withstand  the  sight  of  the  executioner  and  the  instru¬ 
ments  of  torture,  but  disclosed  the  whole  process  of  the  vil¬ 
lainy  of  the  ambassadors,  and  the  part  which  he  himself  had 
acted  in  it.  Orders  were  instantly  despatched  to  seize  the 
ambassadors;  and  Philocles,  who  was  in  the  towm,  was  ap¬ 
prehended;  but  Apelles,  who  had  been  sent  in  pursuit  of  a 
person  called  Chserea,  getting  notice  of  the  discovery  made 
by  Xychus,  fled  over  into  Italy.  With  respect  to  Philocles. 

B.  C.irD.] 

BOOK  XL, 

431 

no  certain  account  has  been  published;  some  say,  that,  for  a 
time,  he  boldly  denied  all  knowledge  of  the  matter;  but  that, 
when  Xychus  was  confronted  with  him,  he  persisted  no  longer; 
^  others,  that  he  even  suffered  the  rack  without  confessing. 
Philip’s  grief  was  hereby  renewed  and  doubled,  and  he  felt 
his  unhappiness,  with  regard  to  his  children  press  the  heavi¬ 
er  on  4iim,  because  one  of  them  was  still  alive. 
LVI.  When  Perseus  was  told  that  all  was  discovered, 
being  too  powerful  to  think  flight  necessary,  he  only  took' 
care  to  keep  out  of  the  way,  intending  to  guard  himself,  dur¬ 
ing  the  remainder  of  Philip’s  life,  from  the  flame,  as  it  were 
of  his  burning  resentment.  His  father,  having  now  no  hope 
of  bringing  him  to  punishment,  resolved  to  take  vengeance 
in  the  only  way  that  was  left  him;  and  accordingly  he  em¬ 
ployed  all  his  endeavoui'-  to  prevent  his  enjoying  the  prize 
his  villainy  aimed  at.  I’o  this  end,  he  addressed  himself  to 
Antigonus,  to  whom  he  was  obliged  for  the  full  discovery 
of  the  fratricide;  and  whom  he  supposed  the  Macedonians, 
considering  the  fresh  renown  of  his  uncle  Antigonus,  would 
neither  be  ashamed  nor  displeased  at  having  for  their  king. 
‘‘  Antigonus,”  said  he,  since  I  have  been  brought  into  such 
a  situation,  that  the  being  childless,  a  state  which  other  pa¬ 
rents  reckon  a  curse,  would  to  me  be  a  blessing,  I  am  re¬ 
solved  to  transfer  to  you  the  kingdom  which  I  received 
from  your  uncle,  and  which  his  faithful  and  resolute  guar¬ 
dianship  not  only  preserved  for  me,  but  even  enlarged.  You 
are  the  only  triend  I  have,  whom  I  can  judge  worthy  of  the 
throne;  and,  if  I  had  not  one  sucli,  I  should  wish  the  regal 
dignity  to  perish  and  become  extinct,  rather  than  be  a  prize 
to  the  treacherous  villainy  of  Perseus.  I  shall  think  Deme¬ 
trius  recalled  from  the  dead,  and  restored  to  me,  if  1  can 
leave  in  this  place  such  a  representative  as  you,  tvho  alone 
have  wept  for  his  innocent  death,  and  for  my  unhappy  error.” 
After  this  discourse  he  omitted  no  opportunity  of  promoting 
his  interest,  by  conferring  bn  him  honours  of  every  kind; 

432 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  $73, 

and,  as  Perseus  was  absent  in  Thrace,  he  made  a  circuit 
round  the  cities  of  Macedonia,  recommending  Antigonus  to 
the  men  of  principal  consequence:  and,  had  he  lived  a  little 
longer,  he  would  undoubtedly  have  left  him  in  possession 
of  the  throne.  After  leaving  Demetrias,  he  staid  longest  at 
Thessalonica;  and  on  going  thence  to  Amphipolis,  was  there 
seized  with  a  severe  sickness.  Yet  it  was  evident  that  the 
disorder  of  his  mind  was  greater  than  that  of  his  body,  and 
that  the  immediate  causes  of  his  death  were  his  troubled 
thoughts  and  want  of  rest;  for  he  was  frequently  thrown  into 
violent  agitation  by  a  supposed  apparition  of  his  innocent, 
murdered  son,  and  drew  his  last  breath  in  dreadful  impre¬ 
cations  on  the  other.  Nevertheless,  Antigonus  might  have 
been  seated  on  the  throne,  if  either  he  had  been  on  the  spot,  or 
the  death  of  Philip  had  been  immediately  divulged.  But  Ca- 
ligenes,  the  physician,  who  had  the  care  of  the  king  in  his 
sickness,  as  soon  as  he  observed  the  first  desperate  symp¬ 
toms,  despatched  the  account  to  Perseus  by  couriers,  who, 
according  to  a  plan  settled,  had  been  previously  disposed  in 
convenient  places;  and  until  the  prince  arrived,  he  concealed 
the  death  ol  the  king  from  all  but  those  who  were  in  the  pa* 
lacc. 
LVIL  Perseus,  therefore,  by  his  sudden  arrival,  as  peo¬ 
ple  neither  expected  it,  nor  knew  what  had  happened,  crushed 
all  thoughts  of  opposition,  and  siezed  on  the  throne,  the  ob¬ 
ject  of  his  wicked  devices.  1  he  demise  of  Philip  happened 
very  seasonably  for  the  purpose  of  gaining  time,  and  collect¬ 
ing  strength  for  the  support  of  a  war;  for,  in  a  few  days  after, 
the  nation  of  the  Bastarniaiis,  in  consequence  of  long  solicita* 
tion,  set  out  from  their  own  country,  with  a  large  force  of 
infantry  and  cavalry,  and  crossed  the  Danube.  Antigonus 
and  Cotto  went  forward,  to  carry  intelligence  of  this  to  the 
king.  Cotto  was  a  Bastarnian  of  distinction,  and  Antigo¬ 
nus  had  been  sent,  much  against  his  will,  with  this  same  Cot¬ 
to,  as  ambassador,  to  persuade  his  countrymen  to  take  arms. 

B.  C.  179.] 

BOOK  XL. 

433 

At  a  small  distance  from  Amphipolis,  common  report  first, 
and  then  authentic  information,  acquainted  them  with  the 
king’s  death;  which  event  disconcerted  the  whole  of  their 
plan.  rhe  scheme  had  been  settled  in  this  manner: — Philip 
was  to  procure  for  the  Bastarnians  a  safe  passage  through 
Thrace,  and  supplies  of  provisions;  in  order  to  be  able  to 
effect  which,  he  had  gained  the  confidence  of  the  chieftains 
in  that  country  by  presents,  and  had  pledged  his  faith,  that 
they  should  march  through  it  in  a  peaceable  manner.  It  was 
proposed  to  exterminate  the  nation  of  the  Dardanians,  and 
to  give  settlements  to  the  Bastarnians  in  their  country;  from 
which  measure  a  double  advantage  was  expected;  as,  in  the 
first  place,  the  Dardanians,  a  nation  ever  hostile  to  Macedo¬ 
nia,  and  watchful  to  take  advantage  of  the  misfortunes  of  its 
kings,  w’ould  be  removed  out  of  the  way;  while  the  invaders 
might  leave  their  tvives  and  children  in  Dardania,  and  be 
sent  to  ravage  Italy.  It  was  concluded,  that  the  road  to  the 
Adriatic  sea  and  Italy  was  through  the  country  of  the  Scor- 
discians,  and  that  the  army  could  not  make  its  passage  by 
any  other  wa} ;  that  the  Scordiscians  would  readily  grant  a 
passage  to  the  Bastarnians,  for  they  would  have  no  dislike  to 
people  resembling  themselves  in  language  and  manners,  and 
would  probably  join  them  in  an  expedition,  when  they  saw 
that  their  object  was  the  plunder  of  a  most  opulent  nation. 
The  remainder  of  the  plan  was  accommodated  to  every  kind 
of  event  that  might  take  place;  for,  in  case  of  the  Bastarni¬ 
ans  being  cut  off  by  the  Romans,  still  the  removal  of  the 
Dardanians,  the  booty  to  be  gained  from  the  remains  of  the 
former,  and  the  full  possession  of  Dardania,  would  prove  a 
great  consolation.  But  if  they  should  be  successful;  then, 
while  the  force  of  the  Romans  would  be  directed  against  the 
Bastarnians,  the  king  might  recover  what  he  had  lost  in 
Greece.  Such  had  been  the  designs  of  Philip. 
LV^III.  The  Bastarnians  at  first  marched  through  the 
country,  without  doing  any  mischief,  according  to  the  en- 
VOL.  V — 3  K 

4S4 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.  R.  574. 

gagements  of  Cotto  and  Antigonus.  But,  on  hearing  the 
news  of  Philip’s  death,  the  Thracians  soon  became  trouble¬ 
some  to  deal  with,  and  the  Bastarnians  not  content  with  what 
they  could  purchase;  nor  could  they  be  kept  in  a  body,  so  as 
not  to  go  out  of  the  road.  In  consequence,  injuries  were 
committed  on  both  sides;  and,  from  the  daily  multiplication 
of  these,  war  at  last  blazed  out.  In  the  end,  the  Thracians, 
unable  to  withstand  the  great  strength  and  numbers  of  the 
enemy,  deserted  their  tciwns  in  the  plains,  and  betook  them- 
stives  to  a  high  mountain,  which  they  call  Donuca.  The 
Bastarnians  in  vain  attempted  to  follow  them.  We  are  told 
that  tlu  Gauls,  when  plundering  Delphi,  were  destroyed  by 
a  storm;  so  a  like  storm  now  discomfited  the  people,  when 
they  were  approaching  the  summit  of  the  mountain.  They 
were  not  only  overwhelmed  with  a  deluge  of  rain,  followed 
by  prodigious  thick  showers  of  hail,  and  accompanied  wdth 
tremendous  noises  in  the  skv,  peals  of  thunder,  and  flashes 
of  lightning,  which  dazzled  their  sight;  but  the  thunderbolts, 
also,  fell  so  tlfick  on  all  sides,  that  they  seemed  to  be  aimed 
at  their  bodies;  ard  nor  only  the  soldiers,  but  their  officers 
also,  were  struck  by  them,  and  fell.  They  fled,  therefore, 
precipitate!}-;  and  hurrying  along,  without  looking  before 
them,  tumbled  down  the  high  precipices  of  the  rocks,  while 
the  Thracians,  pursuing  close,  increased  their  dismay:  but 
they  themselv^es  said,  that  the  gods  had  put  them  to  flight, 
and  that  the  sky  was  falling  on  them.  When,  after  their 
dispersion  by  the  storm,  as  after  a  shipwreck,  the}'  returned 
(^most  of  them  half  armed )  to  the  camp  whence  they  had  set 
out,  they  held  a  consultation  about  their  future  proceedings; 
on  which  a  disagreement  ensued,  some  advising  to  return 
home,  and  others  to  push  forward  into  Dardania.  About 
thirty  thousand  men,  under  the  command  of  Clondicus,  pro¬ 
ceeded  thither;  the  rest  marched  back,  by  the  same  road 
through  which  they  came,  to  the  country  beyond  the  Danube. 
Perseus,  as  soon  as  he  got  possession  of  the  kingdom,  or- 

B.  C.  178.] 

BOOK  XL. 

435 

dered  Antigonus  to  be  put  to  death;  and,  until  he  could  set¬ 
tle  his  affairs  on  a  firn)  foundation,  sent  ambassadors  to  Rome, 
to  renew  the  treaty  concluded  by  his  father,  and  to  request 
the  senate  to  give  him  the  tide  of  king.  These  were  the 
transactions  of  that  year  in  Macedonia. 
LIX.  The  consul  Quintus  Fulvius  triumphed  over  the 
Ligurians;  but  it  was  plain  that  he  was  indebted  for  this  tri¬ 
umph  to  interest,  rather  than  to  the  greatness  of  his  exploits. 
He  carried  in  the  procession  a  vast  quantity  of  arms,  taken 
from  the  enemy,  but  no  money;  yet  he  distributed  to  each 
soldier  three  hundred  a6‘6'es;  double  to  centurions,  triple  to 
horsemen.  There  was  nothing  in  this  triumph  more  remark¬ 
able,  than  that  it  happened  to  be  celebrated  on  the  same  day 
of  the  year  on  which  he  had  triumphed,  after  his  prsetorship, 
the  year  before.  After  this,  he  proclaimed  the  y.  K.  574. 
assenihl}  of  election,  in  which  were  chosen  con-  ^  'S* 
suls,  Marcus  Junius  Brutus,  and  A\dus  Manlius  Vulso. 
Afterwards,  when  three  piietors  had  been  appointed,  Pub¬ 
lius  i£lius  Ligus,  Titus  ^butius  Cams,  and  Marcus  Titi- 
nius,  a  storm  interrupted  the  election;  but  on  the  following 
day,  the  fourth  before  die  ides  of  IMarch,*  the  other  three 
were  elected,  Marcus  Titinius  Curvus,  Tiberius  Claudius 
Nero,  and  Titus  Fonteius  Capito.  The  Roman  games  were 
repeated  by  the  curuic  j  diles,  Cneius  Servilius  Caepio,  and 
Appius  Claudius  Cento,  on  account  of  the  prodigies  which 
had  occurred.  In  the  public  Forum,  during  the  celebration 
of  a  iectisternium,  there  was  an  earthquake.  The  heads  of 
the  gods  who  lay  on  the  couches,  turned  away  their  faces, 
and  the  cloak  and  coverings  placed  on  Jupiter  fell  off.  It  was 
also  construed  as  a  prodigy,  that  the  olives  on  the  table  were 
gnawed  by  mice.  For  the  expiation  of  these,  nothing  more 
was  done  than  the  re-cekbration  of  the  games. 
'  The  eleventh  of  March. 

KXD  OF  VOL.  V. 

THE 
HISTORY  OF  ROME, 
BY 
TITUS  LIVIUS, 

VOL.  VI. 

THE 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 
BY 
TITUS  LIVIUS. 

TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  ORIGINAL, 
WITH  NOTES  AND  ILXDSTBATIONS, 
BY  GEORGE  BAKER,  A.  M. 

History  is  Plulosophy  teaclung  by  examples. 
BOLIHOBBOKE. 

FiaST  AMERICAN,  VROM  THE  LAST  LONDON  EDITION. 
IN  SIX  VOLUMES^VOL.  VI. 

NEW  YORK  : 
VCHLISaZD  BT  BSTSB  A.  MESIEB,  COLUNS  &  CO.,  T.  Sc,  7.  SWOBDS,  A.  T.  eOOD« 
RICH,  HENRT  I.  MEOART,  U.  &  W.  A.  BARTOW.  8.  OOULD,  W.  B.  GILLET,  7AHXS 
XASTBURN,  OEOaOE  LONO,  PRIOR  &  DUNNINO,  SAMUEL  CAMPBXXJb  &  SON,  S. 
BLISS  &  B,  WHITS,  A.  BCEBLL  &  CO.  AND  JAMES  T,  SBAMAN. 
is^es. 

FhOPERTY  OF  OOLJ-^rf-  I  - 
HAiVPHFN  Qvn-;- 

CONTENTS 
OF 
THE  SIXTH  VOLUME. 

BOOK  XLI.  ....  1 
BOOK  XLII.  ...  49 
BOOK  XLIII.  .  .  .  136 
BOOK  XLIV.  .  .  .167 
BOOK  XLV.  .  .  .234 
Contents  of  the  Lost  Books,  303 

THE 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

BOOK  XLI. 
The  sacred  fire  of  the  temple  of  Vesta  extinguished.  Titus  Sempromus 
Gracchus,  proconsul,  subdues  the  Celtiberians,  receives  their  subnus* 
sion,  and,  for  a  perpetual  monument  of  his  exploits,  builds  a  town  in 
Sp^n,  to  which  he  gives  the  name  of  Gracchurit.  The  Vaecaeans  and 
Lusitanians  subdued  by  Postumius  Albinus,  who  triumphs  over  them, 
Aulus  Manlius,  consul,  marching  into  Istna,  suffers  a  partial  defeat ;  but 
afterwards  routs  the  Istrians.  Quintus  Voconius  Saxa  proposes  a  law, 
that  women  shaU  not  inherit,  which  is  supported  by  Cato,  and  carried. 
Successful  operations,  under  (Afferent  commanders,  against  the  Ligurians, 
Istrians,  Sardinians,  and  Celtiberians.  Perseus  prepares  for  war ;  solicits 
the  assistance  of  the  Cartha^nians,  of  the  Grecian  states,  and  of  Antio- 
chus  Epiphanes.  Character  of  Antiochus.* 
I.  IN’  the  distribution  of  the  provinces^  those  assigned  to 
the  consuls  were^ — to  Manlius^  Gaul;  and  to  yunius^ 
Liguria.  As  to  the  praetors y  the  city  jurisdiction  g  j  yg* 
fell  to  Mar  cm  Titinius  Curvus ;  the  foreigUy  to 
ITiberius  Claudius  Nero;  Sicily y  to  Publius  jElius  Ligus ; 
SardiniGy  to  Titus  Mbutius :  the  Hither  SpatUy  to  the  other 
*  This  book  is  very  imperfect :  a  great  part  of  the  beginning  of  it  is 
lost ;  and  there  are,  besides,  considerable  chasms  in  other  parts  of  it.  The 
supplemental  passages  which  the  translator  has  introduced,  to  complete 
the  connection,  are  taken  from  Crevier.  They  are  printed  in  a  different 
character. 
VOL.  VI. — B 

2 

history  of  ROME. 

[Y.R.  574. 

Marcus  Titinius  ;  and  the  Farther  Spatfiy  to  Titus  Fonteius 
Capita.  A  Jire  broke  out  in  the  Forum^  and  destroyed  a  great 
number  of  buildings.  The  sacred  fire  of  Vesta  was  extinguish¬ 
ed;  the  virgin  who  had  the  care  of  it  was  punished  with 
stripes^  by  order  of  Marcus  Mmilius^  the  chief  pontiff.^  and 
supplication  was  performed.^  as  usual  in  such  cases^  The 
lustrum  was  closed  by  Marcus  JEmilms  Lepidus  and  Marcus 
Fulvius  Nobiltor^  censors^  in  which  were  rated  two  hundred 
and  seventy  thret  thousand  two  hundred  and  forty  four 
citizens.  The  ambassadors  of  Perseus  arrived.^  desiring 
a  renewal  of  the  league.,  and  the  title  of  King;  and  although 
the  Romans  entertained  no  friendly  disposition  to  Perseus^ 
whom  they  had  reason  to  believe  disposed^  as  soon  as  he 
should  think  himself  strong  enough^  to  take  the  first  oppor¬ 
tunity  of  commencing  that  war^  which  had  been  so  long  pro¬ 
jected  by  his  father  Philip  ;  yet^  not  to  furnish  him  with  my 
pretext  for  a  quarrel.^  they  complied  with  both  his  requests. 
When  Perseus  received  their  answer^  he  thought  himself  ef¬ 
fectually  confirmed  on  the  throne.,  at  the  same  time  hoping  to 
gain  the  favour  and  affection  of  the  Greeks^  and  which^  by 
various  acts  of  kindness  and  munificence.^  he  in  a  great  mea¬ 
sure  effected.  Before  the  new  prmtors  arrived  in  the  Spanish 
provinces^  very  important  services  were  performed  there  by 
Postumius  and  Gracchus ;  the  latter  of  whom.,  in  particular^ 
acquired  a  very  high  reputation^  not  only  as  a  military  com¬ 
mander.,  but  as  a  statesman.,  from  his  wise  adjustment  of  the 
the  terms  of  peace  between  the  Romans  and  the  conquered 
nations.  For  he  distributed  lands^  and  assigned  habitatiom^ 
to  such  as  wanted  them;  and.,  for  all  the  states  in  that  part 
of  the  country^  he  wrote  out  accurate  copies  of  the  like  con¬ 
ditions  of  amity  and  aUicmce  as  with  the  others.,  and  had  them 
ratified  by  the  oaths  of  all  the  parties  ;  and  the  authority  of 
which  treaty  was  often  appealed  tOy  in  the  following  age^  on 
occasion  of  the  wars  which  then  broke  out*  To  a  town  hitherto 

B.C.  17B.]  BOOK  XLI.  S 
ealkd  Jlhtrcia^  Ae  gme  the  name  of  Gracckurie^  m  a  memorial 
ef  hie  meritorioue  labours  in  the  province.  Postumiue  did  not 
obtain  an  equal  share  of  renovm ;  yet  he  subdued  the  Vatcmans 
and  Lusitanians  ;  and  both  of  them^  on  their  return  home^ 
after  deleting  up  the  provinces  to  their  successors^  were 
honoured  with  triumphs.  In  G<ml^  Manltusy  the  consul^  to 
whose  lot  that  province  had  fallen.,  not  finding  any  employ 
ment  tlua  could  afford  him  hopes  of  a  triumph^  eagerly  em^ 
braced  <m  opportunity y  which  fortune  threw  in  his  way^  of 
entering  into  a  war  with  the  Istrians.  This  people  had for* 
merly  sent  assistance  to  the  ^toHanSy  in  their  quarrel  with 
the  Romans y  and  had  lately  shown  a  disposition  to  be  trouble* 
some.  The  King  at  that  time  on  the  thronty  was  called  EpulOy 
and  was  of  a  turbulent  temper.  His  father  had  kept  the 
nation  quiet ;  but  it  was  now  reportedy  that  this  prince  fmd 
compelled  them  to  take  armsy  and  that  this  had  higMy  endear#* 
ed  him  to  the  youth  of  the  country,  who  were  eager  for 
plunder.  The  consul  held  a  council  on  the  subject  of  a  war 
with  Istria  ;  in  which  some  were  of  opinion,  that  it  ought  to 
be  begun  immediately,  before  the  enemy  could  collect  forces  i 
others,  that  the  senate  oug^t  first  to  be  ccaisulted :  the  for¬ 
mer  opinion  was  adopted.  Accordingly,  the  consul,  march¬ 
ing  from  Aquileia,  pitched  his  camp  at  the  lake  Timatrus, 
which  lies  very  near  the  sea.  Thither  came  Caius  Furius, 
one  of  the  naval  commanders,  with  ten  ships  ;  for  two  com¬ 
manders  had  been  appointed  to  direct  the  operations  of  the 
fleet  against  that  of  the  Illyrians ;  and  they  were  ordered, 
with  twenty  vessels,  to  protect  the  coast  of  the  upper  sea, 
making  Ancona  the  common  boundary  between  thdr  sta¬ 
tions  ;  so  that  Lucius  Cornelius  had  to  guard  the  coasts  on 
the  rig^t,  from  thence  to  Tarentum ;  and  Caius  Furius  those 
on  the  left,  as  far  as  Aquileia.  TMs  squadron  was  sent  to 
the  nearest  port  in  the  Istrian  teiritory,  with  a  number  of 
transports,  and  a  large  store  of  provkkms ;  while  the  consul, 

4 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  574. 

foHowing  vith  the  legions,  encamped  at  the  distance  of  about 
five  miles  from  the  coast.  A  plentiful  market  was  soon  es¬ 
tablished  at  the  port,  and  every  thing  conveyed  thence  to  the 
ramp.  That  this  might  be  done  with  greater  safety,  outposts 
were  fixed  around  the  camp  ;  with  a  guard  opposite  the 
country  of  Istria.  A  newly-levied  cohort  of  Placentines  was 
posted  between  the  camp  and  the  sea  ;  and  that  the  watering- 
pafties  might  likewise  have  protection  at  the  river,  orders 
were  given  to  Marcus  ^butius,  military  tribune,  to  take 
thither  two  companies  of  the  second  legion.  Titus  .£lius, 
military  tribune,  led  out  the  third  legion,  on  the  road  towards 
Aquileia,  in  support  of  those  that  went  for  food  and  forage. 
In  the  same  quarter,  at  the  distance  of  about  five  miles,  a 
party  of  Gauls,  not  exceeding  three  thousand  in  number,  lay 
encamped,  under  the  command  of  a  chieftain,  called  Carme- 
lus.  #*####### 
########## 
##*####*** 
II.  When  the  Roman  army  first  reached  the  lake  Tima- 
vus,  the  Istrians  took  post  behind  a  hill,  where  they  could 
not  be  seen  ;  and  on  its  march  thence  followed  it  through 
by-ways,  watching  attentively  for  some  opportunity  that 
might  give  them  an  advantage  ;  nor  did  any  thing  that  was 
done,  either  on  land  or  sea,  escape  their  observation.  When 
they  saw  the  weakness  of  the  advanced  guards  of  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  and  that  the  market-place  was  filled  with  an  unarmed 
crowd,  who  carried  on  a  traffic  with  the  camp,  and  that  they 
had  not  fortified  themselves  either  by  works  on  land,  or  by 
the  help  of  sTiips,  they  made  an  assault  on  two  of  their  posts 
at  once,  the  Placentine  cohort,  and  the  two  companies  of  the 
second  legion.  A  morning  fog  concealed  their  design  ;  and 
when  this  began  to  disperse  as  the  sun  grew  warm,  the  light, 
piercing  through  it  in  some  degree,  yet  still  being  far  from 
clear,  and,  as  usual  in  such  cases,  magnifying  the  appearance 

BOOK  XLI, 

5 

B.C.  178.] 
of  every  thing/impcffled  so  far  on  the  Romans,  that 
thought  the  force  of  the  enemy  much  greater  than  it  rcsffliy 
ifas.  The  troops  in  both  the  posts  were  so  terrified,  that 
they  ran  in  the  utmost  confusion  to  the  camp,  where  tl^ 
caused  much  greater  alarm  than  that  which  they  were  under 
themselves  ;  for  they  could  neither  tell  what  had  made  them 
fly,  nor  answer  any  question  that  was  asked.  Then  a  shout¬ 
ing  was  heard  at  all  the  gates.  There  were  no  guards  at 
them  capable  of  withstanding  an  attack ;  and  the  hurry  in 
which  the  men  crowded  and  pressed  against  each  odier,  from 
the  want  of  light,  made  it  suspected  that  the  enemy  were 
already  in  the  camp.  One  only  cry  was  heard  from  all,  to 
hasten  to  the  sea.  These  words  were  uttered  by  one  alone, 
yet  the  cry  quickly  resounded  in  every  part.  At  first,  there¬ 
fore,  a  few  with  their  arms,  and  many  more  without  them, 
as  if  they  had  received  orders  so  to  do,  ran  off  to  the  sea¬ 
shore  ;  then  followed  others  in  greater  numbers,  and,  at 
length,  almost  the  whole  of  the  army,  with  the  consul  him¬ 
self,  who  had  endeavoured  to  call  back  the  runaways  by 
commands,  advice,  and,  at  last,  by  entreaties,  but  all  to  no 
purpose.  Marcus  Licinius  Strabo,  a  military  tribune  of  the 
third  legion,  with  three  companies  alone,  remained  j  the  rest 
of  his  legion  having  gone  off.  The  Istrians,  breaking  into 
the  empty  camp,  and  meeting  none  other  to  oppose  them, 
came  upon  him  while  he  was  drawing  up  and  encouraging 
his  men  at  the  general’s  quarters  ;  on  which  a  fight  ensued, 
more  vigorous  than  could  have  been  expected  from  so  small 
a  band  j  nor  did  it  cease  until  the  tribune,  and  those  who 
stood  round  him,  were  all  slain.  The  enemy  then,  tearing 
down  the  general’s  tent,  apd  seizing  on  all  they  could  find, 
went  on  to  the  quaestor’s  quarters,  and  the  adjoining  Forum, 
called  Quintana.  In  the  quaestor’s  tent  was  plenty  of  all 
kinds  of  food  ready  dressed  and  laid  out,  and  the  couches 
being  placed  in  order,  their  chieftain  lay  down,  and  began  to 

6 

HISTORY  OF  ROME* 

[Y.R.  574. 
Pretei^  dl  ibit  rest,  thinktcg  no  more  dt  or 
of  the  enemy,  did  the  same ;  and  beiag  uoaccut^<Miied  to  my 
smt  of  rich  food,  they  greedily  gm'ged  thenmdres  with  me»t 
aad  wine« 
111.  Afbm  among  the  Rmnans  wore  a  very  deferent  as* 
pect.  There  was  nothing  hut  concision  both  on  land  ami 
sea ;  the  mminers  struck  dieir  tents,  mid  hi^tily  conveyed  on 
board  the  provisions  which  had  been  sent  on  shore  ;  die  sd* 
diers  in  a  panic  pressed  into  die  Imats,  and  evem  into  die  wa» 
ter*  The  seamen  were  in  fear  lest  their  vessels  should  be 
overcrowded,  so  thm  some  of  them  opposed  the  entrance  of 
die  multitude,  while  others  pushed  off  into  the  deep.  Hence 
ar<»ie  a  dispute,  and  in  a  short  time  a  fight,  not  without 
wounds  and  loss  of  lives,  both  of  ^diers  and  seamen  ;  and!, 
by  order  of  the  consul,  the  fleet  was  removed  to  a  distance 
{tom  the  shore.  He  next  set  about  separating  the  armed  from 
the  unarmed ;  and,  out  of  so  large  a  number,  he  hsudly  found 
twelve  hundred  who  had  preserved  their  arms :  very  few 
horsemen  who  had  brought  dieir  hmrses  widi  them  ;  while 
the  rest  formed  <mly  an  irregubr  iU-looking  throng,  like  ser¬ 
vants  and  sutlers,  and  would  certainly  have  fallen  a  prey  to 
the  enemy^,  had  they  thought  of  put^uing  their  advantage.  At 
length  an  express  was  dispatched  to  call  in  the  third  legion 
and  the  foragers  ;  and  at  the  same  dme  the  troops  began  to 
mancK  back  from  all  parts,  in  cn'der  to  retake  the  camp,  and 
repair  their  disgrace.  The  military  tribunes  of  the  third 
gion  ordered  their  men  to  throw  away  the  forage  smd  wood, 
and  the  centurions  to  mount  two  elderly  soldiers  on  heuaes 
from  which  the  loads  were  dirown,  each  hoi^maa  taking  a 
yoimg  foot-sc^ier  behind  him.  He  told  them,  it  would 
refect  gyeat  honour  on  their  legion,  if  they  should  recover, 
^  by  bimvciy,  the  camp  which  had  been  lost  by  the  cowardice 
^  of  die  second  ;  and  that  this  might  be  easily  effected,  if  the 
Inubariami  were  surprised  while  busied  in  plundering.  In 

BOOK  XLI. 

B.c.  ira.] 

T 

like  msamer  as  they  had  taken  it,  so  might  it  be  retakeQ«^ 
His  exhcatation  was  received  by  the  army  with  tokens  of  die 
utmost  alacrity  ;  die  standard!  advanced  with  speed,  imr  dkl 
the  soldiers  give  any  delay  to  the  standard-bearers.  The  ccm- 
sol,  and  the  troops  that  went  back  from  the  shore,  reached 
the  rampart  first.  Lucius  Atius,  first  tribune  of  the  seco^ 
legion,  not  only  urged  on  his  men,  but  told  them,  that  if 
^  the  Istrians  meant  to  retain  the  camp  which  they  had  tsken 
**  by  the  same  arms  which  gave  them  possesion  of  it,  they 
would,  in  the  first  place,  have  pursued  their  enemy  to  die 
sea  ;  and,  in  the  next  |dace,  they  would  certainly  have  sta- 
**  doned  guards  outside  the  rampart ;  and  that,  in  all  prcAm- 
“  bility,  they  were  lying  m  sleep,  or  drowned  in  wine.^* 
IV.  Saying  this,  he  ordered  his  own  standard-bearer,  Au- 
his  Biscuionius,  a  man  of  known  bravery,  to  bear  in  the  stand- 
smd ;  wlm  replied,  that  if  the  men  were  willing  to  follow  him, 
he  would  throw  it  in*  Then,  exerting  all  lus  strength,  he 
threw  iht  standard  acrc^s  the  imtrenchix^nt,  and  was  the  first 
that  entered  the  gate.  At  this  juncture  arrived,  on  the  odier 
side,  Titus  i£lius  and  Calus  ^lius,  military  tribunes  of  the 
third  legion,  with  their  cavalry ;  amd,  quickly  after  them,  the 
soldiers  whom  they  had  mounted  in  pairs  on  the  beasts  of  bur¬ 
den  ;  also  the  consul,  with  the  main  bi^iy.  As  to  the  Istrians, 
a  few,  who  were  not  quite  so  much  intoidcated  as  the  rest, 
had  sense  enot^h  kft  to  fly ;  death  perpetuated  the  sleep  of 
die  odiers  ;  and  the  Romans  recovered  all  their  effects  unim¬ 
paired,  except  the  victusds  and  wine  which  had  been  consum¬ 
ed.  The  soldiers,  too,  who  had  been  left  sick  in  the  camp, 
when  they  saw  their  countrymen  within  the  trenches,  «iatch- 
ed  up  arms,  and  committed  great  slaughter.  Caius  Popilius, 
sumamed  Sabellus,  a  horseman,  disdnguished  himself  mi  ibh 
occasion  above  all  the  rest.  He  had  been  kft  behind  m  dbe 
camp,  on  account  of  a  wound  in  his  foot,  notwithstaiadmg 
which  he  did  much  greater  execution  among  the  enemy  than 

a 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[y.R.  S74. 

any  other.  Eight  thousand  Istrians  were  killed,  but  not  one 
prisoner  taken  j  for  rage  and  indignation  had  made  the  Ro¬ 
mans  regardless  of  booty.  The  King  of  the  Istrians,  though 
in  a  state  of  ebriety,  was  hastily  mounted  on  a  horse  by  his 
people,  and  effected  his  escape.  Of  the  conquerors  there  were 
lost  two  hundred  and  thirty- seven  men  j  more  of  whom  fell 
in  the  fight  in  the  morning,  than  in  the  retaking  of  the  camp. 
V.  It  happened  that  Cneius  and  Lucius  Cavillius,  with 
recruits  lately  enlisted  at  Aquileia,  coming  with  a  convoy  of 
provisions,  and  not  knowing  what  had  passed,  were  very  near 
going  into  the  camp  after  it  was  taken  by  the  Istrians.  These 
men  then,  leaving  their  baggage,  and  fiyingback  to  Aquileia, 
caused  a  general  consternation  and  alarm,  not  only  there,  but, 
in  a  few  days  after,  at  Rome  also  ;  for  there  it  was  reported, 
not  only  that  the  camp  was  taken,  and  that  the  troops  ran 
away,  as  was  really  the  case,  but  that  the  whole  army  was 
entirely  cut  off.  Wherefore,  as  usual  in  cases  of  uncommon 
danger,  extraordinary  levies  were  ordered  by  proclamation, 
both  in  the  city  and  throughout  all  Italy.  Two  legions  of 
Roman  citizens  were  raised,  and  the  Latine  allies  were  or¬ 
dered  to  furnish  ten  thousand  foot  and  five  hundred  hbrse. 
The  consul  Marcus  Junius  was  sent  into  Gaul,  to  demand 
from  the  several  states  of  that  province,  whatever  number  of 
troops  each  was  able  to  supply.  At  the  same  time  it  was 
mentioned  in  the  decree,  that  Tiberius  Claudius,  the  praetor, 
should  issue  orders  for  the  fourth  legion,  and  five  thousand 
foot  and  two  hundred  and  fifty  horse,  of  the  Latines,  to  assemble 
at  Pisae  ;  that,  with  this  force,  he  should  guard  that  province 
during  the  consul’s  absence  :  and  that  Marcus  Titinius,  prae¬ 
tor,  should  order  the  first  legion,  and  an  equal  number  of  al¬ 
lied  foot  and  horse,  to  meet  at  Ariminum.  Nerp,  habited  in 
general’s  robes,  set  out  for  Pisae,  the  province  allotted  him. 
Titinius,  sending  Caius  Cassius,  military  tribune,  to  Arimi¬ 
num,  to  command  the  legion  there,  employed  himself  in  rais- 

BOOK  XLI. 

9 

B.C.  178.] 
ing  soldiers  in  Rome.  The  consul  Marcus  Junius,  (passing 
over  from  Liguria  into  the  province  of  Gaul,  and,  as  he  went 
along,  collecting  auxiliaries  from  the  Gallic  states,  and  re¬ 
cruits  from  the  colonies,)  came  to  Aquileia,  There  he  learn¬ 
ed  that  the  army  was  safe  ;  wherefore,  after  dispatching  a 
letter  to  Rome,  to  put  an  end  to  the  alarm,  he  sent  home  the 
Gallic  auxiliaries,  and  proceeded  himself  to  join  his  col¬ 
league.  The  unexpected  news  caused  great  joy  at  Rome ; 
the  levies  were  stopped,  the  soldiers  who  had  been  enlisted 
and  sworn  were  discharged,  and  the  troops  at  Ariminum, 
who  were  afflicted  with  a  pestilential  sickness,  were  remand- 
ded  home.  The  Istrians,  who,  with  a  numerous  force,  were 
encamped  at  no  great  distance  from  the  consul,  when  they 
understood  that  the  other  consul  was  arrived  with  a  new 
army,  dispersed  and  returned  to  their  several  states  ;  when 
the  consuls  led  back  their  legions  into  winter-quarters  at 
Aquileia. 
VI.  The  alarm  caused  by  the  affairs  of  I  stria  being  at 
length  composed,  the  senate  passed  an  order,  that  the  con¬ 
suls  should  settle  between  themselves  which  of  them  should 
come  to  Rome,  to  preside  at  the  elections.  Two  plebeian 
tribunes,  Aulus  Licinius  Narva  and  Caius  Papirius  Turdus, 
in  their  harangues  to  the  people,  uttered  severe  reflections  on 
Manlius,  then  abroad ;  and  proposed  the  passing  of  an  or¬ 
der,  that  although  the  government  of  their  provinces  had 
already  been  continued  to  the  consuls  for  a  year,  yet  Manlius 
should  not  hold  command  beyond  the  ides  of  March  ;  in 
order  that  he  might  immediately,  on  the  expiration  of  his 
office,  be  brought  to  trial.  Against  this  proposition,  Quintus 
iElius,  another  tribune,  protested  ;  and,  after  violent  strug¬ 
gles,  prevailed  so  far,  as  to  prevent  its  being  passed.  About 
this  time,  Tiberius  Sempronius  Gracchus  and  Lucius  Postu- 
jnius  Albinus  came  home  from  Spain.  The  praetor  Marcus 
Titinius  gave  them  an  audience  of  the  senate,  in  the  temple 
VOL.  Vi. — C 

10 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  574. 

of  Bellona,  that  they  might  represent  their  services  j  and 
demand  such  honours  as  they  merited,  together  with  a 
thanksgiving  to  the  immortal  gods.  At  the  same  time  ar¬ 
rived  a  letter  from  Titus  iEbutius,  the  praetor,  brought  by 
his  son  to  the  senate,  informing  them  of  great  commotions  in 
Sardinia ;  that  the  Ilians,  having  procured  aid  of  the  Bala- 
rians,  had  made  an  inroad  into  the  peaceable  part  of  the  pro¬ 
vince  ;  and  that  it  was  not  possible  to  make  head  against 
them  wlft  a  feeble  army,  whose  numbers  were  greatly  dimin¬ 
ished  by  an  epidemic  sickness.  Ambassadors  from  the  Sar¬ 
dinians  made  the  same  representations,  and  besought  the 
senate  to  send  relief  to  their  cities  ;  for  as  to  the  country,  it 
was  already  entirely  ruined.  This  embassy,  and  every  thing 
relative  to  Sardinia,  was  referred  to  the  new  magistrates. 
An  embassy  froni  the  Lycians,  no  less  entitled  to  commisera¬ 
tion,  complained  of  the  cruel  treatment  which  they  suffered 
from  the  Rhodians,  to  whose  government  they  had  been  an¬ 
nexed  by  Lucius  Cornelius  Scipio.  ‘‘  They  had  formerly,’^ 
they  said,  been  under  the  dominion  of  Antiochus  ;  and 
‘‘  their  bondage  under  that  King,  compared  to  their  present 
“  condition,  appeared  an  honourable  state  of  liberty  ;  that 
‘‘  they  were  not  only  oppressed  by  acts  of  government,  but 
‘‘  individuals  underwent  every  suffering,  as  if  really  slaves. 
That  themselves,  their  wives,  and  children,  were  abused 
“  alike  by  them  ;  cruelties  were  practised  on  their  persons, 
while  the  vilest  aspersions  and  calumnies  were  cast  on 
their  character.  They  were  openly  treated  with  con- 
“  temptuous  insults,  merely  for  the  purpose  of  exercising  an 
“  usurped  prerogative,  and  to  show  that  no  distinction  was 
made  between  them  and  purchased  slaves.”  The  senate 
was  highly  displeased  at  such  proceedings,  and  gave  the  Ly¬ 
cians  a  letter  to  the  Rhodians,  acquainting  them,  that  it 
“  was  the  will  of  the  senate,  that  neither  the  Lycians  should 
be  subjected  to  the  Rhodians  as  slaves,  nor  any  other  free-* 

BOOK  XLL 

11 

B.C.  178.] 

“  born  people  be  reduced  to  such  a  state  ;  but  that  the  Ly- 
cians  should  be  under  the  government,  and,  at  the  same 
«  time,  the  protection  of  the  Rhodians,  in  like  manner  as  the 
"  allied  states  were  subjected  to  the  Roman  people.” 
VII.  Two  triumphs  for  conquests  in  Spain  were  then  suc¬ 
cessively  celebrated.  First,  Sempronius  Gracchus  triumphed 
over  the  Celtiberians  and  their  allies  ;  next  day,  Lucius  Pos- 
tumius,  over  the  Lusitanians,  and  the  other  Spaniards  in  that 
quarter.  Tiberius  Gracchus  carried  in  the  procession  twenty 
thousand  pounds  weight  of  silver,  Albinus  forty  thousand. 
They  distributed  to  each  of  their  soldiers  twenty-five  dena- 
riuses,*  double  to  a  centurion,  triple  to  a  horseman  ;  the 
same  sums  to  the  allied  troops  as  to  the  Roman.  The  con¬ 
sul  Marcus  Junius  happened  to  arrive  at  Rome  at  this  time 
from  Istria,  in  order  to  hold  the  elections.  The  plebeian 
tribunes,  Papirius  and  Licinius,  after  harassing  him  in  the 
senate,  with  questions  relative  to  what  had  passed  in  Istria, 
brought  him  into  the  assembly  of  the  people.  To  their  in¬ 
quiries,  the  consul  answered,  that  he  had  been  not  more 
than  eleven  days  in  that  province  ;  and  that,  as  to  what  had 
happened  when  he  was  not  present,  his  information, ‘^ike 
‘‘  their  own,  rested  on  report.”  But  they  still  proceedednto 
ask,  “  why,  then,  did  not  Manlius  rather  come  to  Ropi6, 
“  that  he  might  account  to  the  Roman  people  for  his  haviq^ 
“  quitted  Gaul,  the  province  allotted  to  him,  and  gone 
‘‘  Istria  ?  When  had  the  senate  decreed  a  war  with  that  da- 
“  tion  When  had  the  people  ordered  it  ?  But  he  will  say, 
“  ‘  Though  the  war  was  indeed  undertaken  by  private  authori- 
“  ty,yet  it  was  conducted  with  prudence  and  courage.’  On  the 
^  contrary,  it  is  impossible  to  say,  whether  the  impropriety 
‘‘  in  undertaking  it,  or  the  misconduct  in  the  carrying  it  on, 
was  greater.  Two  advanced  guards  were  surprised  by  the 

16s. 

12 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  574. 

“  Istrians  ;  a  Roman  camp  was  taken,  with  whatever  infantry 
‘‘  and  cavalry  were  in  it ;  the  rest,  in  disorder,  without  arms, 
and  among  the  foremost  the  consul  himself,  fled  to  the 
shore  and  the  ships.  But  he  should  answer  for  all  these 
matters  when  he  became  a  private  citizen,  since  he  had 
“  avoided  it  while  consul.” 
VIII.  The  elections  were  then  held,  in  which  Caius  Clau¬ 
dius  Pulcher  and  Tiberius  Sempronius  Gracchus  were  chosen 
consuls.  Next  day,  the  following  persons  were  elected  prae¬ 
tors,  Publius  iElius  Tubero,  a  second  time,  Caius  Quintius 
Flamininus,  Caius  Numisius,  Lucius  Mummius,  Cneius 
Cornelius  Scipio,  and  Publius  Valerius  Laevinus.  The  city 
jurisdiction  fell,  by  lot,  to  Tubero  ;  the  foreign,  to  Quintius ; 
Sicily,  to  Numisius ;  and  Sardinia,  to  Mummius ;  but  this 
last,  on  account  of  the  importance  of  the  war  there,  was 
made  a  consular  province,  and  bestowed  on  Gracchus.  The 
lots  gave  Istria  to  Claudius ;  and  Gaul,  divided  into  two 
provinces,  to  Scipio  and  Laevinus.  On  the  ides  of 
Y  R  575  ^  ^  ^ 
B  C  177  Sempronius  and  Claudius 
assumed  the  administration,  a  cursory  mention 
onLvVwas  made  of  the  provinces  of  Sardinia  and  of  Istria, 
and  of  those  who  had  commenced  hostilities  there  ;  but  on 
the  day  following,  the  ambassadors  of  the  Sardinians,  who 
i|ad  been^  referred  to  the  new  magistrates,  were  introduced, 
and  Lucius  Minucius  Thermus,  lieutenant-general  under  the 
<iinsul  Manlius  in  Istria,  attended  ;  and  from  them  the  senate 
learned  the  real  state  of  the  war  in  those  provinces.  The 
attention  of  the  senate  was  also  attracted  by  ambassadors 
from  the  confederate  states  of  Latium,  who,  after  having  in¬ 
effectually  applied  to  the  former  consuls  and  censors,  were  at 
last  introduced  to  an  audience.  They  came  with  complaints, 
the  amount  of  which  was,  that  ‘‘  their  citizens,  having  been 
rated  in  the  general  survey  at  Rome,  had,  most  of  them, 
removed  thither  ;  and  that,  if  this  practice  were  allowed. 

BOOK  XLl. 

13 

B.C.  177.] 
it  would  come  to  pass,  in  the  course  of  a  very  few  lustrums, 
“  that  their  towns,  and  eve®  their  country,  would  be  so  de- 
“  serted  as  to  be  unable  to  furnish  any  soldiers.’^  The  Sam- 
nites  and  the  Pelignians  also  represented,  that  four  thousand 
families  had  emigated  to  Fregellae  ;  and  that  in  the  levying 
of  soldiers  their  quota  was  not  lessened,  nor  that  of  the  others 
increased  on  this  account.  That  there  had  been  practised  two 
species  of  fraud  in  the  method  of  an  individual  quitting  one 
state  to  become  a  member  of  another :  there  was  a  law,  which 
granted  liberty  to  an/  of  the  allies  or  Latines,  who  should  not 
leave  his  offspring  at  home,  to  be  enrolled  a  citizen  of  Rome  ; 
yet,  by  a  perversion  of  this  law,  some  did  injury  to  the  allies, 
others  to  the  Roman  people.  For,  first,  to  evade  the  leaving 
offspring  at  home,  they  made  over  their  children  as  slaves  to 
some  Roman,  under  an  agreement  that  they  should  be  again 
set  free,  and  thus  become  citizens  by  emancipation and  then 
those  men,  who  had  now  no  children  to  leave,  became  Roman 
citizens.  Afterwards,  they  neglected  even  these  appearan¬ 
ces  of  conformity  to  law ;  and,  without  any  regard  either  to 
the  ordinances  or  to  progeny,  passed  indiscriminately  into 
the  Roman  state  by  migration,  getting  themselves  included 
in  the  survey.  To  prevent  such  proceedings  in  future,  the 
ambassadors  requested  the  senate  to  order  the  allies  to  return 
to  their  respective  states,  and  to  provide  by  a  law,  that  ‘‘  no 
“  one  should  acquire  a  property  in  any  man^s  person,  or  alien- 
“  ate  such  property  for  the  purpose  of  that  man’s  enfranchise- 
“  ment,  in  any  other  state  than  his  own  ;  and  that  if  any  per- 
“  son  should  by  such  means  be  made  a  citizen  of  Rome,  he 
“  should  not  enjoy  the  rights  of  a  citizen.” 
IX.  The  senate  granted  their  petitions  ;  and  then  proceed¬ 
ed  on  the  business  of  Sardinia  and  Istria,  the  provinces  which 
were  in  a  state  of  war.  It  was  ordered,  that  two  legions 
should  be  raised  for  Sardinia,  each  containing  five  thousand 
two  hundred  foot,  and  three  hundred  horse  ;  and  of  the  al- 

14 

HISTORY  OF  ROME* 

[Y.R.  SfS. 

lies  and  Latines,  twelve  thousand  foot  and  six  hundred  horse  ; 
and  that  the  consul  should  take  ten  ships^  of  five  banks  of 
oars,  out  of  any  docks  he  chose.  The  same  numbers  of  in¬ 
fantry  and  cavalry  were  decreed  for  Istria  as  for  Sardinia. 
The  consuls  were  ordered  to  send  into  Spain,  to  Marcus  Ti* 
tinius,  one  legion,  with  three  hundred  horse,  and  five  thou¬ 
sand  foot,  and  three  hundred  horse  of  the  allies.  Before  the 
consuls  cast  lots  for  their  provinces,  several  prodigies  were 
reported  :  that,  in  the  Crustumine  territory,  a  stone  fell  from 
the  sky  into  the  grove  of  Mars ;  that,  in*the  Roman  territory, 
a  boy  was  born  defective  in  his  limbs ;  that  a  serpent  with 
four  feet  had  been  seen  ;  that  at  Capua,  many  buildings  in  the 
Forum  were  struck  by  lightning ;  and,  at  Puteoli,  two 
ships  were  burned  by  lightning.  While  these  prodigies 
were  reported  from  abroad,  one  happened  in  Rome  itself ; 
for  a  wolf,  having  come  in  through  the  Colline  gate  in  the 
middle  of  the  day,  was,  for  a  long  time,  driven  about  through 
the  city,  and  at  length,  though  pursued  by  great  multitudes, 
escaped  through  the  Esquiline.  On  account  of  these  prodi¬ 
gies,  the  consuls  sacrificed  victims  of  the  larger  kinds,  and 
there  was  a  supplication,  for  one  day,  at  all  the  shrines. 
When  the  sacrifices  were  duly  performed,  they  cast  lots  for 
their  provinces  j  when  Istria  fell  to  Claudius,  Sardinia  to 
Sempronius.  Then  Caius  Claudius,  by  direction  of  the  sen¬ 
ate,  procured  a  law  to  be  passed  respecting  the  allies,  and  is¬ 
sued  a  proclamation,  that  ‘‘  any  of  the  allies  and  Latine  con- 
federates,  who,  themselves,  or  whose  ancestors,  had  been 
“  surveyed  among  the  associated  states  of  Latium  in  the  cen- 
‘‘  sorship  of  Marcus  Claudius  and  Titus  Quintius,  or  at  any 
‘‘  time  since,  should  all  return,  each  to  his  respective  state, 
‘‘  before  the  calends  of  November.”  Lucius  Mummius,  the 
prseror,  was  commissioned  to  make  inquiry  concerning  such 
as  did  not  obey.  To  the  law,  and  the  proclamation  of  the 
consul,  was  added  a  decree  of  the  senate,  that  the  dictator, 

BOOK  XLI. 

15 

B.c.  irr.] 

‘‘  consul,  intcrrex,  censor,  or  praetor,  for  the  time  being,  be- 
fore  whom  any  slave  should  be  brought,  to  receive  manu- 
^  mission,  should  cause  the  said  slave  so  to  be  discharged,  to 
“  make  oath,  that  the  person  giving  him  liberty  did  not  do  it 
for  the  purpose  of  his  being  admitted  a  citizen  of  any  state, 
“  of  which  he  was  not  already  a  member and  any  one  re¬ 
fusing  this  oath,  the  decree  ordered,  should  not  be  manumit¬ 
ted.  The  cognizance  and  jurisdiction  in  this  business,  for 
the  future,  was  assigned  to  Caius  Claudius  the  consul. 
X.  While  these  matters  passed  at  Rome,  Marcus  Junius 
and  Aulus  Manlius,  the  consuls  of  the  preceding  year,  after 
remaining  during  winter  at  Aquileia,  led  their  army,  early  in 
the  spring,  into  the  Istrian  territories,  and  spread  their  de¬ 
predations  through  a  great  part  of  the  country  ;  on  which  the 
Istrians,  rather  out  of  grief  and  indignation  at  seeing  their 
property  plundered,  than  from  any  well-grounded  hope  of  be¬ 
ing  ^le  to  make  head  against  these  joint  forces,  flew  to  arms. 
They  hastily  assembled  their  young  men,  who  ran  together 
from  all  their  cantons ;  and  this  raw  and  tumultuary  army 
made  its  first  onset  with  more  vigour  than  it  was  able  steadi¬ 
ly  to  support.  Four  thousand  of  them  were  slain  in  the  field ; 
and  the  rest,  renouncing  all  thoughts  of  farther  opposition, 
dispersed  and  fled  to  their  homes.  Soon  after,  they  sent  am¬ 
bassadors  to  the  Roman  camp  to  sue  for  peace,  and  then  de¬ 
livered  up  the  hostages  required  of  them.  When  these  trans¬ 
actions  were  made  known  at  Rome,  by  letters  from  the  pro- 
consul,  Caius  Claudius,  the  consul,  began  to  fear  that  this 
proceeding  might,  perhaps,  take  the  province  and  the  army 
out  of  his  hands  ;  and  therefore,  without  offering  vows,  with¬ 
out  assuming  the  military  habit,  and  unaccompanied  by  his 
lictors,  haviaig  acquainted  his  colleague  alone  with  his  inten¬ 
tion,  he  set  out  in  the  night,  and  with  the  utmost  speed  hast¬ 
ened  to  the  province,  where  he  conducted  himself  even  with 
less  prudence  than  he  had  shown  in  coming.  For,  in  an  as- 

16 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

[Y.R.  575, 

sembly  which  he  called,  after  making  severe  remarks  on 
Manlius’s  running  away  from  the  camp,  which  were  very  of¬ 
fensive  to  the  ears  of  the  soldiers,  as  they  themselves  had  be¬ 
gun  the  flight ;  and,  after  railing  at  Marcus  Junius,  as  having 
made  himself  a  sharer  in  the  disgrace  of  his  colleague,  he  at 
last  ordered  boA  of  them  to  quit  the  province.  They  replied, 
that  when  the  consul  should  come,  in  the  regular  manner, 
agreeably  to  ancient  practice  ;  when  he  should  set  out  from 
the  city,  after  offering  vows  in  the  Capitol,  attended  by  his 
lictors,  and  dressed  in  the  military  habit,  then  they  would 
obey  his  orders.  This  threw  him  into  such  a  furious  rage, 
that  he  called  the  person  who  acted  as  quaestor  to  Manlius, 
and  ordered  him  to  bring  fetters,  threatening  to  send  Junius 
and  Manlius  to  Rome  in  chains.  This  man,  too,  slighted  the 
consul’s  command  ;  and  the  surrounding  crowd  of  soldiers, 
who  favoured  the  cause  of  their  commanders,  and  were  in¬ 
censed  against  Claudius,  supplied  him  with  resolution  to  re¬ 
fuse  obedience.  At  last  the  consul,  overpowered  by  the  re¬ 
proaches  of  individuals  and  the  scoffs  of  the  multitude,  for 
they  even  turned  him  into  ridicule,  went  back  to  Aquileia  m 
the  ship  that  had  brought  him.  From  thence  he  wrote  to  his 
colleague,  desiring  him  to  give  notice  to  that  part  of  the  new 
raised  troops,  who  were  enlisted  for  Istria,  to  assemble  at 
Aquileia,  in  order  that  he  should  have  no  delay  at  Rome, 
but  set  out,  as  soon  as  the  ceremony  of  offering  vows  was 
finished,  in  the  military  habit.  These  directions  his  colleague 
punctually  executed,  and  a  short  day  was  appointed  for  the 
assembling  of  the  troops.  Claudius  almost  overtook  his  own 
letter.  On  his  arrival  he  called  an  assembly,  that  he  might 
represent  the  conduct  of  Manlius  and  Junius  ;  and,  staying 
only  three  days  in  Rome,  he  offered  his  vows  im  the  Capitol, 
put  on  the  military  habit,  and,  attended  by  his  lictors,  set  out 
to  his  province  with  the  same  rapid  speed  which  he  had  used 
in  the  former  journey. 

B.C.  177.]  BOOK  XU*  17 
XI.  A  few  day$  before  hh  arri^^  ^smius  tmd  Msmlka 
had  laid  vigorous  siege  to  tovm  of  Kesartiutn,  in  which 
the  irrincipal  Istrians^  and  Epido  dieir  King,  bad  shut  them¬ 
selves  up.  Clauchus,  bringing  thither  the  two  new  le|poi|^ 
dismissed  the  old  army,  with  its  commanders ;  invested  the 
town  himself ;  and  prosecuted  the  siege  with  regular  works* 
A  river  which  flowed  on  the  outside  of  the  wall,  and  greiuty 
impeded  the  proceedings  of  the  besiegers,  while  it  supplied 
the  besieged  with  a  convenience  of  watai^  he,  with  many 
days  labour,  turned  out  of  its  course,  and  conveyed  away  in 
another  channel.  This  event,  of  the  water  being  cut  off,  ter¬ 
rified  the  Barbarians,  as  if  effected  by  some  supernatural 
power  ;  yet  still  they  entertained  no  thoughts  of  peace,  but 
set  about  killing  their  wives  and  children  ;  exhibiting  a  spec¬ 
tacle  shocking  even  to  their  enemies  ;  and,  after  putting  them 
to  death  in  open  view  on  the  walls,  tumbled  them  down. 
During  this  horrid  carnage,  the  soldiers,  staling  the  walls, 
effei^ted  an  entrance  into  the  town.  As  soon  as  dieir  King 
heard  the  uproar,  and  understood,  from  the  cries  of  terror 
uttered  by  the  flying  inhabitants,  that  the  place  was  captured, 
he  plunged  his  sword  into  his  breast,  that  he  might  i|Ot  be 
taken  ^ vie :  the  rest  were  either  killed  or  mi^e  prisoneis. 
After  this,  two  other  townsyMutila  and  Fa^^ria,  were 
ed  and  destroyed.  The  bodly,  which  exceeded  expectation,* 
considering  the  poverty  of  the  nation,  was  all  given  iip4o  the 
soldiers.  Fivoi^bousaod  six  hundred  and  tlpty^two  persons 
were  ;^d  by  auction,  and  the  fomenters  of  the  wm"  wetts 
beaten  with  rods,  and  beheaded.  the  destructionof  theee 
three  towns,  and  the^death  of  the.  King,  the  whole*  countiy, 
of  Istria  was  brought  to  terms  of  peace  ;  every  one  of  ks 
states,  giving  hostages,  and  submuting  to  the  domiaion 
Rmnans.  .  •  .  . 
XIL  For  some  time  before  the  conclusion  of  the  war  of 
Istria,  the  Ligurians  had  begun  to  hold  con  ^ul  tali  ops  about 
VOL.  VI. — D 

HIST<^Y  OF  ROME. 

tY.R.  575. 

renewal  of  Tibmus  Oandioa^  proconsul,  who 
had  been  ccnmil  the  year  before^  at  the  bead  of  mm  k- 
gion,  posted  at  Pisse^  held  the  govemmoa^  of  ;itet.ppoviiK:e. 
He  gave  information  to  the  Senate,  by  letter,  of  tS^eke  pro¬ 
ceedings  ;  and  they  ordered,  that  ‘‘  the  same  lettet*  should 
**  be  earned  to  Cains  Claudius,”  for  Gracchus  had  already 
tn^ssed  over  into  Sardinia  ;  and  diey  added  a  decree,  that, 
peace  being,  estiddished  in  the  province  of  Istria,  he  should, 
if  he  thought  proper,  lead  his  army  into  Liguria.  At  the 
same  time,  a  supplicaticm  for  two  days  was  decreed,  in  con¬ 
sequence  of  the  account  given  by  the  consul,  in  his  letter,  of 
his  services  performed  in  Istria.  The  other  consul,  Siempro- 
liius,  Ukewise,  was  successful  in  his  operations  in  Sardinia. 
He  carried  his  army  into  the  territory  of  the  Ilian  tribe 
Sardinians,  who  had  received  a  powerful  reinforcement  from 
die  Balarians.  He  fought  a  pitched  battle  against  the  com¬ 
bined  forces  of  the  two  states,  defeated  and  put  them  to 
flight,  and  made  himself  master  of  their  calnp,  having  Allied 
twelve  thousand  of  their  men.  Next  day,  the  consul  orckred 
their  arms  to  be  gathered  into  a  heap  and  burned,  as  an  of¬ 
fering  to  Vulcan.  He  then  led  back  bis  victorious  troops 
into  winter-quarters  in  the.  allied  cities.  Caius  Claudius, 
on  receipt  of  letter  of  Tiberius  Claudius,  and  the  de- 
"creeof  the  senate,  marched  Ids  lemons  out  of  Istria  into 
Xiguria. .  The  enemy,  having  advanced  into  the  plains, 
were  eiH^mpediipn  the  river  ScuUenna;  herein  pitched  lattle 
was  fought,  in  which  fifteen  thousand  nf  the  enemy  were 
killed,  and  about  seven  hundred  captured  in  the  fight,  and  in 
the  camp,  for  that  too  was  stormed  ;  imd  also  fifty-ot^  mili¬ 
ary  standards  were  taken.  The  Ligurians,  who  survived, 
ikcy^ack  into  the  mountains  $  the  consul  ravaged  all  the  low 
country,  but  ti^,  nowhere,  any  appearance  of  arms.  Clau¬ 
dius,  having  thus  in  one  year  subdued  two  nations,  and,  what 

*  BOOK  Xti 

19 

BX.  trr.] 

rarely  been  adueved  m  m  fmf^  consulate,  com^^d  tibic 
reduction  of  two  piwkic«»^  came  bouse  to  B^me.  / 
^  XIll^  Several  prodigies  were  reported  this  year ;  that  at 
Cn^uflsinumv  akiiul*of  vidture,  which  they  call  the  Bipod- 
sucker,  cut  a  sacred  stone  with  its  beak  j  that  a  cow  spoke,  in 
Campania  ;  that,  at  Syracuse,  a  brazen  statue  of  a  cow  was 
mounted  by  a  farmer’s  bull,  which  had  strayed  fronrthe  herdr 
A  supplication  of  one  day  was  performed  in  Crustunsinum^ 
on  the  spot ;  the  cow  in  Campania  was  c^piered  to  be  main¬ 
tained  at  the  public  expense,  and  the  prodigy  at  Syracuse 
was  expiated  according  to  directions  given  by  the  aruspices, 
respecting  the  deities  to  whom  supplications  should  be  of¬ 
fered.  .This  year  died,  in  the  office  of  pontiff,  Marcus  Clau¬ 
dius  Marceilus,  who  had  been  consul  and  censor ;  and  his 
son,  Marcus  Marcelhis,  was  chosen  into  the  vacant  place. 
The  same  year  a  colony  of  two  thousand  Roman  citizens 
was  settled  at  Luna^  under  the  care  of  Publius  JBlius,  Lucius 
Egilius,  and  Cneius  Sicinius,  who  allotted  to  each  fifty-one 
acres  and  a  half  of  land.  This  land  had  been  taken  from  the 
Ligurians,  and  had  been  the  property  of  the  Etrurians,  be¬ 
fore  it  fell  into  their  possession.  Caius  Claudius,  consul,  ar¬ 
rived  at  the  city,  and,  after  laying  before  the  senate  a  detail 
of  his  successful  services  in  1  stria  and  Liguria,  demanded  a 
triumph,  which  was  granted.  He  triumphed,  in  office,  over 
the  two  nations  at  once.  In  this  procession  he  carried  three 
hundred  and  seven  thousand  denariuses,*  £md  eighty-five 
thousand  seven  hundred  and  two  qiunariuses.|  To  each  sol¬ 
dier  he  gave  fifteen  denariuses4  double  to  a  centurion,  triple 
to  a  horseman.  The  allied  soldiers  received  less,  by  half, 
than  the  native  troops,  for  which  reason  they  followed  hts 
chariot  in  silence,  to  show  thfeir  disgust. 
XIV.  While  thk  triumphing  over  the  Ligurians  was  cele- 

*  9,9141.  Os,  lOd.  t  1*^251. 12s.  Id.  i  98.  8d. 

t 

2© 

HISTOH^^  QF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  575. 

brated^  that  ii<^  only  the  comular  army 
returned  to  Rt^me,  bt^  abo  that  the  kgicHi  at  Pis®  had  been 
disbanded  by  Tiberius  Claudius,  laid  aside  their  fears,  and", 
collecting  an  army,  secretly  crossed  die  mountakis  by  wind- 
mg  paths,  atld  came  down  into  the  plains ;  wheie,  after 
ravaging  the  }ands»<^  Mutina,  by  a  sudden  assault  they  gain¬ 
ed  possession  of  the  city  itself.  When  an  account  of  this  was 
brought  to  Rome,  the  senate  ordered  Caius  Claudius,  the 
consul,  to  hold  tlse  elections  as  soon  as  possible,  and  (after 
appointing  magistrates  for  the  ensuing  year)  to  go  Imck  to 
his  province,  and  rescue  the  cc4ony  out  of  the  hands  of  the 
enemy.  The  elections  were  held  as  the  senate  had  directed  ; 
and  Cneius  Cornelius  Scipio  Hispalus,  with  Quintas  PctilHus 
Spurinus,  were  chosen  consuls.  Then  were  elected  praetors, 
Marcus  Popiliius  L®nas,  Publius  Licintus  Oassus,  Marcus 
Cornelius  Scipio,  Lucius  Papirius  Maso,  Marcus  Aburius, 
and  Lucius  Aquilius  Gallus.  Caius  Claudius,  ,  consul,  was 
continued  in  command  for  a  year  in  the  province  of  Gaul ; 
and  he  was  ordered,  lest  the  Istrians '  should  follow  the  ex¬ 
ample  of  the  Ligurians,  to  send  into  Istria  the  allied  Latine 
troops,  which  he  had  brought  home  to  attend  his  triumph. 
When  the  consuls,  Cneius^  Cornelius  and  Quintus 
Y  R  576 
B  C  *176*  the  day  of  entering  into  office,  sacri¬ 
ficed  each  an  ox  to  Jupiter,  according  to  custom, 
the  head  of  the  liver  was  not  found  in  the  victim  sacrificed 
by  Pctillius  j  which  being  reported  to  the  senate,  he  was  or¬ 
dered  to  sacrifice  other  oxen,  until  he  should  find  the  omens 
favourable.  The  senate  then  proceeded  to  the  disposal  of 
the  provinces,  when  Pis®  and  Liguria  were  decreed  to  the 
consuls.  It  w^S  further  decreed,  that  he  to  whose  lot  Pis® 
fell,  should,  at  the  time  of  the  elections,  come  home  to  pre¬ 
side  at  them  ;  and  that  they  should  severally  enlist  two  new 
legions,  and  three  hundred  horse  ;  and  should  order  the  allies, 
and  Latine  confederates,  to  furnish  ten  thousand  foot  and  six 

BOOK  XLI. 

21 

BjC.  176.] 
hundred  htn’se  lo  eficb.  Tiberius  Claudius  was  cqncmued 
in  command  until  siM:h  time  the  consul  should  arrive,  in 
the  province. 
XV,  W4dlc  the  senate  waa^mployed  in  these  affairs,  Caius 
Cornelius,  being  called^y^a  messenger,  went  out  of  the  senate* 
house  ;  and,  after  a  short  time,  returned  iprith  a  troubled 
countenance,  and  told  the  Conscript  Fathers,  that  the  liver 
of  ^  fat  ox,  which  he  had  sacrificed,  had  melted  away  ;  that 
when  this  was  told  to  him  by  the  person,  who  dressed  the 
victims,  he  did  not  believe  it,  but  went  himself  and  ordered 
the  water  to  be  poured  out  of  the  vessel  in  which  the  entrails 
were  boiled  ;  when  he  saw  all  entire  bin  the  liver,  which  had 
been  unaccountably  consumed.  While  the  Fathers  were  un¬ 
der  much  terror  on  account  of  this  prodigy,  their  alam  was 
augmented  by  the  other  consul,  who  informed  them,  that,  on 
account  of  the  first  victim  having  wanted  the  head  of  the  liver, 
he  had  -sacrificed  three  oxen,  and  had  not  yet  found  favt)ura- 
hle  omens.;  The  senate  ordered  him  to  continue  sacrificing 
the  larger  victims,  until  he  should  find  the  desired  toJtens, 
It  is  said,  that  the  victims  offered  to  the  other  deities,  at 
length  presented  good  omens ;  but  that  in  those  offered  to 
Health,  Petillius  could  find  none  such.  Then  the  consuls  and 
praetors  cast  lots  for  their  provinces,  whenFissefcU  toCneius 
Cornelius  ;•  Liguria  to  Petillius.  Of  the  praetors,  Lucius 
Papirius  Maso  obtained  the  city  jurisdiction ;  Marcus 
Abutius,  the  foreign ;  Marcus  Cornelius  Scipio  Malu- 
ginensis,  the  Farther  Spain  ;  Lucius  Aquilius  Callus,  Sicily. 
Two  of  them,  petition^  to  be  excused  from  going  into  their 
provinces.  First,  Marcus  Popillius  requested  he  might  not 
be  obliged  to  go  to  Sardinia,  alleging,  that,  **  Gracchus  was 
“  bringing  that  province  into  a  state  of  tranquillity ;  that  the 
‘‘  senate  had  assigned  him  the  praetor  Titus  -fibutius,  as  an 
‘‘  assistant ;  and  that  it  was  by  no  means  expedient  to  intcr- 
‘‘  rupt  the  train  of  business,  for  the  completion  of  which  dlere 

2?  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  fYM.  $76. 
was  no  meUiod  so  efficacious  as  the  continuing  the  manage^ 
“  ment  in  the  same  hands  ;  for,  between  the  traitsferring  of 
“  the  command,  and  the  successor  coming  (a  stranger  to  the 
^  business  of  the  province),  it  often  happened,  that  very  fa- 
**  vourable  opportunkies  were  lost,”  The  excuse  of  Popilius 
was  admitted.  Then  Publius  Licinius  Bassus  alleged,  that  he 
was  prevented  from  going  into  his  province  by  solemn  sacrifi¬ 
ces,  necessary  to  be  performed.  That  which  had  fallen  to 
his  lot  was  the  Hither  Spain.  But  he  was  ordered  either  to 
proceed  thither,  or  to  swear,  in  the  public  assembly,  that  he 
was  hindered  by  the  performance  of  solemn  anniversary  sa¬ 
crifices.  When  this  determination  was  made  in  the  case  of 
Publius  Licinius,  Marcus  Cornelius  demanded  that  his  oath, 
of  the  like  import,  might  be  admitted  as  an  excuse  for  his  not 
going  into  the  Farther  Spain.  Both  the  praetors  accordingly 
took  an  oath  in  the  same  words.  It  was  ordered,  that  Mar¬ 
cus  Titinius  and  Titus  Fonteius,  proconsuls,  should  remain 
in  Spain,  with  authority  as  before  ;  and  that  a  reinforcement 
should  be  sent  to  them,  of  three  thousand  Roman  foot,  with 
three  hundred  horse ;  and  five  hundred  Latine  foot,  with  three 
hundred  horse. 
XVI  The  Latine  festival  Was  celebrated  on  the  third  day 
before  the  nones  of  May  and  because,  on  the  offering  of 
one  of  the  victims,  the  magistrate  had  not  prayed 'for  the  ro¬ 
man  PEOPLE,  THE  qxjiRiTEs,  a  sctuplc  arose  concerning  the 
validity  of  the  performance.  The  matter  being  laid  before 
the  senate,  and  referred  by  them  to  the  college  of  pontiffs,  the 
the  latter  determined,  that  the  Latine  ^festival  had  not  been 
duly  performed,  and  must  be  repeated  j  and  that  the  Lanuvi- 
ans,  who  had  given  cause  for  the  repetition,  should  furnish 
die  victims.  Besides  the  concern,  excited  by  matters  of  a 
religious  nature,  another  iucident  caused  no  small  degree  of 

*  5th  May. 

BOOK  XL!- 

2$ 

B.C.  tf6.3 

uneasiness.  The  consul  Ctreius  Cornelius,  as  he  was  retims- 
ing  from  the  Alban  moynt,  fell  down,  and  lost  the  use  of  one 
half  of  his  limbs ;  he  was  carried  to  the  waters  of  Ct^ae, 
where,  his  disorder  still  increasing,  he  died.  His  body  was 
conveyed  to  Rome  to  be  buried,  and  the  funeral  obsequies 
were  performed  with  great  magnificence :  he  was  likewise  a 
pontiff.  The  other  consul,  Quintus  Petillhis,  was  ordered  to 
hold  an  assembly,  as  soon  as  the  auspices  could  be  taken,  for 
the  election  of  a  consul  in  the  room  of  his  late  colleague,  and 
to  proclaim  the  Latine  festival.  Accordingly,  by  proclama¬ 
tion,  he  fixed  the  election  for  the  third  day  before  the  nones 
of  August,*  and  the  Latine  festival  for  the  third  before  the 
ides  of  the  same  month.f  While  people’s  minds  were  much 
troubled,  from  the  apprehension  of  the  displeasure  of  the 
gods  f  to  add  thereto,  several  prodigies  were  reported  to  have 
happened:  that  a  blazing  torch  was  seen  in  the  sky  at  Tuscu- 
lum  ;  that  the  temple  of  Apollo,  and  many  private  buildings, 
at  Gabii,  and  a  wall  and  gate  at  Graviscse,  were  struck  by 
lightning.  The  senate  ordered  these  to  be  expiated  as  the 
pontiffs  should  direct.  While  the  consuls  were  detained,  at 
first  by  religious  ceremonies,  and  afterwards,  one  of  them,  by 
the  death  of  the  other,  and  then  by  the  election  and  the  repe¬ 
tition  of  the  Latine  festival.  Gains  Claudius  marched  the  ar¬ 
my  to  Mutina^  which  the  Ligurians  had  taken  the  year  be¬ 
fore.  Within  three  days  ftom  the  comtnencement  of  the 
siege  he  retook  it,  and  delivered  it  back  tq  the  colonists :  on 
this  occasion  eight  thousand  Ligurians  were  killed  within  the 
walls.  He  immediately  dispatched  a  letter  to  Rome,  in 
which  he  not  only  represented  this  success,  butlikewise  boast¬ 
ed,  .that,  through  his  good  conduct  and  good  fortune,  there 
was  not  one  enemy  of  the  Rcunan  people  left  on  this  side  the 
Alps ;  and  that  a  large  tract  of  land  had  been  taken,  sufficient. 

3d  August. 

f  ilth  August. 

24  HISTORY  OF  SOME.  [Y*S.  S76. 
if  distributed  in  shares,  fdr  tibe  accommod^km  offspif  diou« 
sand  people.  . 
XVII.  During  the  same  period,  Tiberius  Semprcmins,  af¬ 
ter  gaining  many  y ictories,  and  kUUag  fifteen  diousmid  of  the 
enemy,  totally  subdued  the  people  of  Sardinia,  and  reduced, 
under  the  Roman  dominimi,  every  state  in  the  island  that  had 
revtdted.  On  those  which  had  formerly  been  tr&utary,  dou¬ 
ble  taxes  were  imposed  and  levied ;  the  rest  paid  a  contribu¬ 
tion  ill  com.  When  he  had  thus  restored  peace  in  the  pro¬ 
vince,  and  received  hostages  from  all  parts  of  the  island,  to  the 
number  of  two  hundred  and  thirty,  he  sent  deputies  to  Rome, 
to  give  information  of  these  transactions,  and  to  request  of 
the  senate,  that  in  consideration  of  those  services,  performed 
under  the  conduct  and  auspices  of  Tiberius  Sempronitis,  a 
thanksgiving  might  be  offered  to  the  irnmorml  gods,  and  per¬ 
mission  granted  him  to  quit  the  province,  and  bring  home  the 
army  with  him.  The  senate  gave  audience  to  the  deputies 
in  the  temple  of  Apollo,  ordered  a  thanksgiving  for  two  days, 
and  that  the  consuls  should  sacrifice  forty  victims  of  the  lar¬ 
ger  kinds ;  but  commanded  the  proconsul,  Tiberius  Sempro^ 
nius,  and  his  army,  to  continue  in  the  province  for  the  year. 
Then  the  election  for  filling  the  vs^cant  place  of  a  consul, 
which  had  been  fixed  by  proclamation  for  the  third  day  before 
the  nones  of  August,'*'  was  finished  in  one  day,  and  thq  coii- 
sul  Qumuis  Petillius  declared  Caius  Valerius  Lsevinus  duly 
elected  hta  colleague,  who  was  to  assume  immediately  the  ad¬ 
ministration  of  his  office.  This  man  had  been  long  ambitious 
of  the  government  of  a  province,  and,  very  reasonably  for  the 
gratification  of  his  wishes,  a  letter  now  arrived  with  intelli¬ 
gence,  that  the  Ligurians  were  again  in  arms.  Wherefore, 
on  the  nones  of  August, f  he  assumed  the  military  habit  ;  md 
ordered  that,  on  account  of  this  alarm,  the  third  legion  should 

*  August. 

f  5th  August. 

BOOK  XLI. 

25 

B.C.  176.] 
march  into  Gaid,  and  join  Gains  Claudius,  proconsul,  and 
that  the  commanders  of  the  fleet  should  sail  with  their  ships 
to  Pisae,  and  coast  along  the  Ligurian  shore,  to  terrify  that 
people  by  the  sight  of  a  naval  power  also.  The  other  consjil, 
Quintus  Petillius,  had  appointed  a  day  for  his  troops  to  as¬ 
semble  in  the  same  place.  On  the  other  hand,  Caius  Clau¬ 
dius,  proconsul,  on  hearing  of  tRe  rebellion  in  Liguria,  has¬ 
tily  collected  some  soldiers,  in  addition  to  those  whom  he 
had  with  him  at  Parma,  and  with  this  force  marched  to  the 
frontiers  of  Liguria. 
XVIII.  On  the  approach  of  Caius  Claudius,  the  enemy, 
reflecting  that  this  was  the  same  commander  who  had  de¬ 
feated  them  at  the  river  Scultenna,  resolved  to  rely  on  situa¬ 
tion,  rather  than  arms,  for  their  defence  against  a  force  with 
which  they  had  so  unsuccessfully  struggled.  With  this  de¬ 
sign,  they  took  post  on  two  mountains,  called  Letum  and  Ba¬ 
li  sta  ;  and,  for  greater  security,  they  surrounded  their  en¬ 
campment  with  a  wall.  Some,  who  were  too  slow  in  remov¬ 
ing  from  the  lo]y  grounds,  were  surprised,  and  put  to  the 
sword, — one  thousand  five  hundred  in  number.  The  others 
kept  themselves  close  on  the  mountains  ;  and  retaining,  in  the 
midst  of  their  fears,  their  native  savage  disposition,  vented 
their  fury  on  the  prey  taken  at  Mutina.  The  prisoners  they 
mangled  in  a  shocking  manner,  and  put  to  death  ;  the  cattle 
they  butchered  in  the  temples,  rather  than  decently  sacrificed ; 
and  then,  (satiated  with  the  destruction  of  living  creatures,) 
they  turned  their  fury  against  things  inanimate,  dashing 
against  the  walls  even  vessels  made  for  use,  rather  than  for 
show,  Quintus  Petillius,  the  consul,  fearing  that  the  war 
might  be  brought  to  a  conclusion  before  he  arrived  in  the 
province,  wrote  to  Caius  Claudius  to  bring  the  army  into 
Gaul,  saying,  that  he  would  wait  for  him  at  the  Long  Plains. 
Claudius,  immediately  on  receipt  of  the  letter,  marched  out 
of  Liguria,  and  at  the  appointed  place  gave  up  the  conrvm^tid  of 
VOL.  VI, — E 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

EY.R.  5r^ 

the  army  to  the  consul.  To  these  plains  came,  in  aJbw  days 
after,  the  other  consul  Caius' Valerius.  Hfrediey  agreed  on 
a  division  of  their  forces  ^  but  before  they  stymied,  bo^  to¬ 
gether  performed  a  purification  of  the  ti*oops»  They  then 
cast  lots  for  their  routes,  it  having  been  resolved  that  they 
should  not  assail  the  enemy  on  the  same  side.  Valerius 
clearly  performed  his  part^f  the  ceremony  with  propriety  ; 
but  with  regard  to  Petillius,  as  the  augurs  afterwards  pro» 
nounced,  the  procedure  was  faulty,  for  he  was  not  m  the  ccm- 
secrated  place  when  he  put  his  lot  into  the  um,  which  was  af¬ 
terwards  carried  in.  They  then  began  their  march  m  differ¬ 
ent  directions ;  Petillius  led  his  troops  against  die  ridge  of 
Ralista  and  Letum,  which  joined  the  two  together  with  one 
continued  range,  and  encamped  at  the  foot  of  it.  We  are 
told,  that,  while  he  was  here  encouraging  his  soldiers,  whom 
he  had  assembled  for  the  purpose,  without  refiecting  on  the 
ambiguity  of  the  word,  he  uttered  this  ominous  expression : 
“  Before  night  I  will  have  Letum/’*  He  made  his  troops 
march  up  the  mountain  in  two  places  at  the  same  time.  The 
division,  where  he  commanded  in  person,  advanced  briskly ; 
die  other  was  repulsed  by  the  enemy  ;  and  the  consul  riding 
up  thither,  to  remedy  the  disorder,.rallied  indeed  his  troops, 
but  exposing  himself  too  carelessly  in  the  front,  was  pierced 
through  with  a  javelin,  and  fell.  The  conoimanders  of  the 
enemy  did  not  know  that  he  was  killed ;  and  the  few  of  his 
own  party,  who  saw  the  disaster,  carefully  covered  the  body 
from  view,  knowiijg  that,  on  the  concealment  of  what  had 
happened,  the  victory  depended.  The  rest  of  the  troops, 
horse  and  foot,  though  deprived  of  their  leader,  dislodged  the 
enemy,  and  took  possession  of  the  mountains.  Five  thoi^and 
of  the  Ligurians  were  slain,  and  of  the  Roman  army  only 
fifty-two  were  lost.  Besides  this  evident  compkrion  of  the 

*  LethuD),  the  name  of  tlie  place,  in  the  language,  slg^iifies  death. 

»OOK  XU. 

%T 

B.C.  175.] 
unhappf  Ac  keq^er  of  the  chickens  was  heard  to  aay^ 
that  thene  had  b^n  a  defect  in  the  auspices,  and  that  the 
sul  was  not  of  it.  Caius  Valerius,  rv/ien  he  "was  i»- 
formed  of  the  deo^  of  Petitlms^  made  the  army^ 
thm  her^t  of  its  eommcmder^  join  his  oiAm  ;  then^  attaching' 
the  enemy  again^  he  shed  copious  streams  of  their  bloody  to  ap^ 
pease  the  shade  of  his  departed  coHeague,  He  had  the  homw 
of  a  triumph  over  the  Ligurians.  The  iegion^  at  whose  head 
the  cmsni  was  killed.^  xvas  severely  punished  by  the  senate; 
their  year'^  pay  was  stopped^  and  thcd  campaign  was  not  ah- 
loxved  in  their  number  for  not  exposing  themselves  to  the  ene^ 
my^s  weapons  in  defence  of  their  commander.  About  this  time 
ambassadors  came  to  Rome  from  the  Dardanians,^  who  were 
greatly  distressed  by  the  numerous  army  of\BastarnianSy  un- 
der  ClondicuSy  mentioned  above.  These  ambassadors^  afer 
describing  the  vast  multitude  of  the  Bastarnians^  their  tall  and 
huge  bodies^  and  their  daring  intrepidity  in  facing  danger  ^  ad¬ 
ded,^  that  there  was  an  alliance  between  them  and  Perseus^  and 
that  the  Dardanians  were  really  more  afraid  6f  him  than 
even  of  the  Bastarnians  ;  and  therefore  begged  of  the  senate 
to  send  them  assistance.  The  senate  thereupon  agreed^  that 
ambassadors  should  be  sent  to  examine  into  the  affairs  ofMa- 
cedotHu;  and  Auhis  Postumius  was  immediately  commissioned 
to  go  thither.  The  colleague-  joined  with  him  were  some 
young  men^  that  he  might  have  the  principal  direction  and 
management  of  the  embassy.  The  senate  then  took  into  con^ 
sideration  the  election  of  magistrates  for  the  ensuing  year.^  on 
which  subject  there  was  a  long  debate  ;  for  people  skilled  in 
the  rules  of  religion  and  politics  affirmed,  that,  as  the  regular 
consuls  of  the  year  had  died,  one  by  the  sword^  the  other  by 
sickness,  the  substituted  consul  was  not  quaMed  to  hold  the 
elections.  An  interregnum.,  therefore.,  took  place  ^  and 
the  interrex  elected  consuls  Publius  Alucius  Sew-  j 
voia.,  and  Marcus  Mmilhis  hepidns.,  a  second  time. 

28 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[y.R.  S77. 

Then  were  chosen  praetors^  Cains  Poptllkus  l^nas^  Titus 
Anntus  LuscuSy  Cams  Memmius  Callus^  Caius  Che^im  Saxula^ 
Servius  Cornelius  Sulla^  and  Appius  Claudius  Centho.  The 
provinces  assigned  to  the  consuls  were  Gaul  and  Liguria,  Of 
the  prcetorian  provinces Sardinia  fell  to  Cornelius  Sulla^  and 
Hither  Spain  to  Claudius  Centho  ;  but  how  the  rest  were  dis-^ 
trihuted  is  not  known.  There  was  a  great  mortality  of  cattle 
this  year.  The  Ligurians,^  a  nation  ever  vanquished^  yet  ever 
rebelling ravaged  the  lands  of  Luna  and  Pisce ;  and  at  the 
same  time  there  were  alarming  rumours  of  disturbances  in 
Gaul,  Lepidus  easily  quelled  the  commotions  among  the  Gauls,^ 
and  then  marched  into  Liguria,  Several  states  of  this  country 
submitted  themselves  to  his  disposal;  and  he y  supposing  that 
the  rugged  face  of  the  mountainsy  which  they  inhabitedy  con¬ 
tributed  to  the  ferocity  of  their  temperSy  followed  the  exam- 
^ple  of  some  former  consuls y  and  brought  them  down  into  the 
plains.  Of  these  the  Garulians,  Lapicinians,  and  Hercatians, 
had  lived  on  the  hither  side  of  the  Appennine,  and  the  Brin- 
catians  on  the  farther  side. 
XIX.  On  the  hither  side  of  the  river  Audena,  Quintus 
Mucius  made  war  on  those  who  had  wasted  the  lands  of 
Luna  and  Pisae,  reduced  them  all  to  subjection,  and  stripped 
them  of  their  arms.  On  account  of  these  services,  perform¬ 
ed  under  the  conduct  and  auspices  of  the  two  consuls,  the 
senate  voted  a  thanksgiving  for  three  days,  and  sacrifices  of 
forty  victims.  The  commotions  which,  broke  out  in  Gaul 
and  Liguria,  at  the  beginning  of  this  year,  were  thus  speedily 
suppressed,  without  any  great  difficulty  ;  but  the  apprehen¬ 
sions  of  the  public,  respecting  a  war  with  Macedonia,  still 
continued.  For  Perseus  laboured  to  embroil  the  Bastamians 
with  the  Dardanians  ;  and  the  ambassadors,  sent  to  exahiine 
into  the  state  of  affairs  in  Macedonia,  returned  to  Rome,  and 
brought  certain  information,  that  hostilities  had  commenced 
in  Dardania.  At  the  sanae  time,  came  envoys  from  King 

BOOK  XLI. 

29 

B.C.  175.] 
Perseus^  isritfe  assurances,  that  he  had  neither  invited  the  Bas- 
tamiaiia,-^^  ^tuitenanced  any  of  their  proceedings.  The 
senate  neither  acquitted  the. King  of  the  imputation,  nor  urged 
it  against  him  ;  they  only  ordered  warning  to  be  given  him,  to 
be  very  careful  to  show,  that  he  considered  the  treaty  be¬ 
tween  him  and  the  Romans  as  inviolable.  The  Dardanians, 
perceiving  that  the  B%stamians,  so  far  from  quitting  their 
country,  as  they  had  hoped,  became  daily  more  troublesome, 
as  they  were  supported  by  the  neighbouring  Thracians  and 
Scordiscians,  thought  it  necessary  to  make  some  effort  against 
them,  though  without  any  ^reasonable  prospect  of  success. 
Accordingly,  they  assembled  together  in  arms  from  all  quar¬ 
ters,  at  the  town  that  was  nearest  to  the  camp  of  the  Bastar- 
uians.  It  was  now  winter,  and  they  chose  that  season  of  the 
year,  as  supposing  that  the  Thracians  and  Scordiscians  would 
return  to  their  own  countries.  As  soon  as  they  heard  that 
these  were  gone,  and  the  Bastarnians  left  by  themselves,  they 
divided  their  forces  into  two  parts,  that  one  might  march 
openly  along  the  straight  road  to  attack  the  enemy  ;  and  that 
the  other,  going  round  through  a  wood,  which  lay  out  of 
sight,  might  assault  them  on  the  rear.  But,  before  these 
could  arrive  at  the  enemy’s  post,  the  fight  commenced,  and 
the  Dardanians  were  beaten,  and  pursued  to  the  town,  which 
was  about  twelve  miles  from  the  Bastarnian  camp.  The  vic¬ 
tors  immediately  invested  the  place,  not  doubting  that,  on 
the  day  following,  either  the  enemy  would  surrender  it,  or 
they  might  take  it  by  storm.  Meanwhile,  the  other  body  of 
Dardanians,  which  had  gone  round,  not  having  heard  of  the 
defeat  of  their  countrymen,  easily  possessed  themselves  of 
the  camp  of  the  Bastarnians,  which  had  been  left  without  a 
guard.  The  Bastarnians^  thus  deprived  of  all  their  provisions 
and  warlike  stores^  and  having  no  means  of  replacing  them  in 
a  hostile  country  and  at  that  unfavourable  season^  resolved  to 
return  to  their  native  home.  When  they  arrived  at  the  Da- 

*0 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

£Y.R,  srf. 

nuhe^  they  found  it^  to  their  great  .mmred  with  iee  es 
thick  as  to  seem  capMe  of  sustainityg 
it  ccme  to  be  pressed  under  the  immeme  wdght^.  the  whole 
body  of  men  and  cattle^  crowM^  together  m  tfmr  kaste^  af» 
ter  supporting  the  burthen  for  a  long  time^  it  suddenly  spM 
into  numberless  pieces^  mid  phmged  the  entire  mukHude  in  the 
deep*  The  greatest  part  were  instantly  swallowed  ;  msmy^ 
stimsing  to  swkn  out^  were  stmk  by  the  fragments  of  the  fc<?, 
mid  a  very  few  escaped  to  either  hank^  none  without  being 
severely  cut  or  bruised.  About  this  time^  AnMochus^  son  to 
Antiochus  the  Great^  who  had  baen  for  a  long  time  a  hostage 
at  Romcy  came  into  possession  of  the  kingdom  of  Syria.,  on 
the  death  of  his  brother  Seleucus.  For  Seleucus^  whom  the 
Greeks  call  Philopator^  hamng  received  the  kingdom  of  Syria 
greatly  debilitated  by  the  misfortunes  of  his  father.,  during  a 
reign  of  twelve  years  never  distinguished  himself  by  any 
morable  enterprise  ;  and.,  at  this  time.,  called  home  from  Rome 
this  his  younger  brother.,  sending.,  in  his  stead.,  his  own  son 
Demetrius y  according  to  the  terms  of  the  treaty^  which  allow^ 
ed  the  changing  of  the  hostages  from  time  to  time,  Antiochus 
had  but  just  reached  Athens  on  his  way^  when  Seleucus  was 
murder edy  in  consequence  of  a  conspiracy  formed  by  Heliodo^ 
fitSy  one  of  the  nobles.  This  man  aimed  at  the  crown  for  him^ 
self  but  was  obliged  to  fly  by  Attalus  and  Eumenesy  who  put 
Antiochus  in  possession  of  ity  expecting  great  advantages  to 
themselves  from  having  him  bound  to  them  in  gratitude  for 
a  service  so  important.  They  now  began  to  harbour  some 
jealousy  of  the  Romans y  on  account  of  several  trifling  causes 
of  disgust,  Antiochus  was  received  by  the  people  with  such 
transports  of  joyy  that  they  gave  him  the  surname  of  Epi^ 
phaneSy  or  Rising  Stary  because  y  when  akens  to  the  royal  blood 
were  about  to  seize  the  throne y  he  appeared  like  a  propitious 
stOTy  to  assert  his  hereditary  right.  He  was  not  deficient  in 
capacity  or  vigour  of  mind  to  make  a  figure  in  war ;  but 

BOOK  XLI. 

at 

B.C.  tf5.J 
mch  ptrversit^  md  indkcretion  prevuikdin  ik  tuhsk  conduct 
SHd tk^  tkey^  soon  changed  the  surname  wikck  they 
had  given  and  instead  of Epiphanes^  cMed  him  Epmun^^ 
Or  madman  i  for  many  %ime  the  acts  of  foUy  ar  madn^s  which 
he  committed.  He  med frequently  tago  out^  without  tkehnow-^ 
hedge  of  any  of  hk  servants^  clad  in  gaermenSs  embroideredwkh 
gold  ;  at  one  time  to  annoy  the  passengers^  by  throt^gston^ 
at  them  ;  at  another  to  amuse  himself  by  fiingmg  handfuk  of 
money  among  the  crowd^^to  be  scrambkdfor*  He  cMowedhkn^ 
self  to  commit  the  most  egregious  foUiesandthe  vilest  indmen^ 
ties  in  common  tippling  houses  and  in  the  public  baths  ;  drink¬ 
ing  with  strangers^  and  mingling  with  the  lowest  of  the 
people.  Among  many  other  instances  of  his folly.,  it  is  mention¬ 
ed  that  he  used  to  lay  aside  his  royal  robes.,  and  put  on  a  gown^ 
as  he  had  se^  the  candidates  for  office  do  at  Rome.,  and  then  go 
about  the  Forum  saluting  and  embracing  each  of  the  plebeians  ; 
soliciting  at  one  time for  the  mdrkship.,  at  another  for  the  ple¬ 
beian  tribuneship.,  until  at  last  he  obtained  the  office  by  the  suf¬ 
frages  of  the  people.,  emd  then^  according  to  the  Roman  custom, 
he  took  his  seat  in  an  ivory  chair,  where  he  heard  caiuses,  and 
listened  to  debates  on  the  most  trivial  matters. 
XX.  He  never  thought  of  adhering  to^any  rule,  but  ramUed 
incessantly,  adopting  by  turps^^very  kind  of  behaviour,  inso¬ 
much,  that  no  one  could  judge  with  certainty  as  to  his  |*eal 
character.  Sometimes  he  would  not>spe^  to  his  friends,  nor 
scarcely  afford  a  smile  to  hi^  acquaintance.  By  a  preposter¬ 
ous  kind  of  liberality,  he  made  himself  and  others  subjects  of 
ridicule  ;  for  to  some,  in  the  most  elevated  stations,  and  who 
thought  highly  of  themselves,  he  would  give  childish  presents 
of  sweetmeats,  cakes,  or  toys  \  while  on  others,  who,  having 
no  claims,  expected  nothing,  he  would  bestow  large  sums  of 
money.  Wherefore  to  many  he  appeared  not  to  know  w^t 
he  was  doing  ;  some  said  that  he  acted  from  a  siUy  sportive 
temf^i  j  others,  tl^t  he  was  evidently  mad.  In  two  great 

5^ 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  5rr. 

and  honourable  instances,  however,  he  showed  a  spirit  truly 
royal, — in  the  presents  which  he  made  to  several  cities,  and 
the  honour  he  paid  to  the  gods.  To  the  inhabitents  of  Me¬ 
galopolis  in  Arcadia,  he  made  a  promise  to  build  a  wall  round 
their  city,  and  he  gave  them  the  greater  part  of  the  money 
requisite  for  the  purpose.  At  Tegea  he  began  to  erect  a  mag¬ 
nificent  theatre  of  marble.  At  Cyzicum,  he  presented  a  set 
of  golden  utensils  for  the  service  of  one  table  in  the  Pryta- 
neum,  the  state-room  of  the  city,  where  such  as  are  entitled 
to  that  honour  dine  together.  To  the  Rhodians  he  gave  pre¬ 
sents  of  every  kind  that  their  convenience  required,  but  none 
very  remarkable.  Of  the  magnificence  of  his  notions,  in 
every  thing  respecting  the  gods,  the  temple  of  Jupiter  Olym- 
pius  at  Athens  was  of  itself  a  sufficient  testimony  ;  being  the 
only  one  in  the  world,  the  plan  of  which  was  suitable  to  the 
greatness  of  the  deity.  He  likewise  ornamented  Delos  with 
altars  of  extraordinary  beauty,  and  abundance  of  statues.  A 
magnificent  temple  of  Jupiter  Capitolinus,  which  he  promised 
to  build  at  Antioch,  of  which  not  only  tile  ceilings,  but  ail  the 
walls  were  to  be  covered  with  plates  of  gold,  and  many  other 
edifices  which  he  intended  in  various  places  he  did  not  finish, 
as  his  reign  was  short.  His  magnificence  in  the  exhibition 
of  public  shows,  also  surpassed-  that  of  all  former  kings,  both 
by  their  uncommon  splendour,  usual  in  his  own  kingdom,  and 
by  the  great  number  of  Grecian  performers.  He  gave  a  show 
of  gladiators  in  the  Roman  manner,  which  at  first,  among  a 
people  unaccustomed  to  such  sights,  caused  more  terror  than 
pleasure  ;  but  by  frequently  repeating  them,  sometimes  per¬ 
mitting  the  combatants  to  go  no  farther  than  wounds,  at  other 
times  to  proceed  to  extremities,  he  rendered  such  kind  of 
shows  not  only  familiar  to  people’s  eyes,  but  even  agreeable, 
and  kindled  in  the  young  men  a  passion- for  arms  ;  insomuch 
that,  although,  at  the  beginning,  he  was  obliged  to  entice  gla¬ 
diators  from  Rome,  by  high  rewards,  he  soon  found  a  suffix 

BOOK  XLL 

33 

B.C.  175.] 

cieftt  number  in  his  oxvn  dominions  -willing  to  perform  for  a 
moderate  hire.  The  shows  which  he  exhibited^  formed.^  in 
every  respect^  a  perfect  contrast  to  his  own  character^  xvhich 
was  a  compound  of  every  thing  that  was  absurd  and  trifling: 
nothing  could  be  more  magnificent  than  these  were  :  nothing 
more  vile  and  contemptible  than  the  King  himself  To  return^ 
however to  the  Roman  affairs.^  from  xvhich  the  mention  of 
this  King  has  caused  us  to  digress  too  far.  Tiberius  Sem’^ 
pronius  Gracchus.^  after  holding  the  government  of  Sardinia 
two  years ^  resigned  it  to  Servius  Cornelius  Sulla^  the  praetor ^ 
and^  coming  home  to  Rome^  triumphed  over  the  Sardinians. 
We  are  told  that  he  brought  such  a  multitude  of  captives  from 
that  island^  that  from  the  long  continuance  of  the  sale^  ‘‘  Sar^ 
“  dinians  for  salef  became  a  vulgar  proverb.,  to  denote  things 
of  little  price.  Both  the  consuls  ( Sccevola  and  Lepidus)  tru 
umphed  over  the  Ligurians ;  Lepidus  over  the  Gauls  also. 
Then  were  held  the  elections  of  magistrates  for  the  ensuing 
year.  Spurius  Postumius  Albinus  and  Quintus  Mucius 
Sccevola  were  chosen  consuls.  In  the  election  of  prce^ 
*  Y  R  578 
tors.^  there  happened  a  particular  competition  be- 
tween  Lucius  or  Cneius  Cornelius  Scipio.,  son  of 
Publius  Africanus.^  and  Caius  Cicereius^  who  had  been  his 
fat  heps  secretary.  For  after five  praetors  had  been  declared 
Caius  Cassius  Longinus.,  Publius  Furius  Philus.,  Lucius  Clau¬ 
dius  Asellus.,  Marcus  Atilius  Serranus.,  and  Cneius  Servilius 
Caepio  ;  although  Scipio  struggled  hard  to  be  admitted  even  in 
the  last  place.,  yet  he  xvas  thought  to  have  degenerated  so  far 
from  the  virtues  of  his  father.,  that  every  one  of  the  centuries 
xvould  have  given  the  preference  to  Cicereius.,  had  not  the  latter., 
with  lingular  modestly .,  withdrawn  himself.  He  coidd  not  re¬ 
concile  it  to  himself  that.,  in  a  disputed  election.,  he  should  gain 
the  victory  over  the  son  of  his  patron.,  but.,  immediately.,  throxv- 
ing  off  the  xvhite  gown.,  he  became.,  from  a  competitor  sure  of 
success.,  the  grateful  friend  and  supporter  of  the  interest  of  his 
\oi..  VI. — F 

34 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y,R.  578 

rival,  ^hus^  by  the  help  of  Cicereius,,  Scipio  obtained  a  post 
which  he  would  never  have  procured  from  the  people,^  arujl 
which  refected  gteater  honour  on  Cicereius  than  on  himself 
XXI,  The  provinces  assigned  to  the  consuls  were  Gaul  and 
Liguria,  On  the  prastors  casting  lots^  the  city  jurisdiction  fell 
to  Cams  Cassius  Longinus,,  and  the  foreign,  to 'Lucius  Corne¬ 
lius  Scipio.  The  province  of  Sardinia  fell  to  Marcus  Atilius, 
who  was  ordered  to  sail  over  to  Corsica,  with  a  new  legion, 
raised  by  the  consuls,  consisting  of  five  thousand  foot  and 
three  hundred  horse  ;  and  while  he  was  engaged  in  carrying 
on  the  war  there,  Cornelius  was  continued  in  command,  that 
he  might  hold  the  government  of  Sardinia.  To  Cneius 
Servilius  Caepio,  for  the  service  of  the  Farther  Spain,  and  to 
Publius  Furius  Philus  for  that  of  the  hither  Spain,  were  as¬ 
signed, — to  each,  three  thousand  Roman  foot,  with  one  hun¬ 
dred  and  fifty  horse,  and  five  thousand  Latine  foot  with  three 
hundred  horse.  Sicily  was  decreed  to  Lucius  Claudius  with¬ 
out  any  reinforcement.  The  consuls  were  ordered  to  levy 
two  more  legions,  of  the  regular  numbers  in  foot  and  horse, 
and  to  call  on  the  allies  for  ten  thousand  foot  and  six  hundred 
horse :  but  they  met  great  difficulty  in  making  the  levies  ;  for 
the  pestilence  which,  the  year  before,  had  fallen  on  the  cattle, 
in  the  present  year  attacked  the  human  species.  Such  as  were 
seized  by  it,  seldom  survived  the  seventh  day  ;  those  who 
did  survive,  lingered  under  a  tedious  disorder,  which  gene¬ 
rally  turned  to  a  quartan  ague.  The  mortality  was  greatest 
among  the  slaves,  of  whom  heaps  lay  unburied  on  all  the 
roads.  Nor  were  there  conductors  of  funerals  sufficient  to 
bury  even  the  people  of  free  condition.  The  bodies  were 
consumed  by  putrefaction,  without  being  touched  by  the  dogs 
or  vultures  ;  and  it  was  universally  observed,  that,  during 
that  and  the  preceding  year,  while  the  mortality  of  cattle  and 
men  was  so  great,  no  vultures  were  any  where  seen.  Of 
the  public  priests,  there  died,  by  this  contagion,  Cneius  Ser- 

BOOK  XLI. 

35 

B.C.  174.]  . 

viUus  Caspio,  father  of  the  praetor,  a  pontiff ;  Tiberius  Sem- 
pronius  Longus,  son  of  Tiberius,  decemvir  of  religious  rites  ; 
Publius  iElius  Paetus,  and  Tiberius  Sempronios  Gracchus, 
augurs  ;  Caius  M amilius  Vituhis,  chief  curio  ;  and  Marcus 
Sempronius  Tuditanus,  a  pontiff.  In  the  vacant  places  of 
pontiffs*  were  chosen  Caius  Sulpicius  Galba,  in  the  room  of 
Tuditanus.  New  augurs  were  appointed,  Titus  Veturius 
Gracchus  Sempronianus,  in  place  of  Gracchus ;  and  Quintus 
iElius  Psetus,  in  place  of  Publius  iElius.  Caius  Sempronius 
Longus  was  made  decemvir  of  religious  rites,  and  Caius 
Scribonius  Curio,  chief  curio.  The  plague  continuing,  the 
senate  voted  that  the  decemvirs  should  consult  the  Sibylline 
books ;  and,  by  their  directions,  a  supplication  of  one  day 
was  performed  ;  and  the  people,  assembled  in  the  forum, 
made  a  vow,  in  words  dictated  by  Quintus  Marcius  Philip- 
pus,  that  if  the  sickness  and  pestilence  should  be  removed 
out  of  the  Roman  territory,  they  would  solemnize  a  festival 
and  thanksgiving  of  two  days’  continuance.”  In  the  district 
of  Veii,  a  boy  was  born  with  two  heads;  at  Sinuessa,  one 
with  a  single  ^nck;  and  at  Oximum,  a  girl  with  teeth  ;  in 
the  middle  of  the  day,  the  sky  being  perfectly  clear,  a  rain¬ 
bow  was  seen,  stretching  over  the  temple  of  Saturn,  in  the 
Roman  Forum,  and  three  suns  shone  at  once  ;  and,  the  fol¬ 
lowing  night,  many  lights  were  seen,  gliding  thropgh  the  air, 
about  Lanuvium.  The  people  of  Caere  affirmed  that  there 
had  appeared  in  their  town  a  snake,  with  a  mane,  having  its 
body  marked  with  spots  like  gold  ;  and  it  was  fully  proved, 
that  an  ox  had  spoken  in  Campania. 
XXII.  On  the  nones  of  June,^  the  ambassadors  returned 
from  Africa.  They  had  first  waited  on  King  Masinissa ; 
whence  they  proceeded  to  Carthage  ;  but  they  received  much 
*  So  in  the  original ;  the  name  of  the  person  who  was  chosen  in  the 
room  of  Csepio  being  lost. 
f  7th  of  June. 

36 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

,  [Y.R.  578. 
more  certain  information  respecting  the  proceedings  in  that 
city  from  the  King  than  from  the  Carthaginians  themselves. 
They  said,  they  had  sufficient  proof,  that  ambassadors  had 
come  from  Kiiig€*erseus,  and  that  the  senate  had  given  them 
audience,  by  night,  in  the  temple  of  ^sculapius  ;  and  the 
King  asserted,  that  the  Carthaginians  had  sent  ambassadors 
to  Macedonia,  which  they  themselves  did  not  positively  deny. 
The  senate,  hereupon,  resolved  to  send  an  embassy  to  Mace¬ 
donia.  They  made  choice  of  Caius  Laelius,  Marcus  Valerius 
Messala,  and  Sextus  Digitius,  who  accordingly  proceeded 
thither.  About  this  time,  Perseus,  in  order  to  chastise  some 
of  the  Dolopians,  who  were  refractory,  and  insisted  on  the 
matters  in  dispute  being  determined  Iry  the  Romans,  and  not 
by  the  King,  marched  an  army  into  their  country,  and  re¬ 
duced  the  whole  nation  under  his  jurisdiction  and  dominion. 
Thence  he  passed  through  the  mountains  of  CEta,  and,  on 
account  of  some  religious  scruples  affecting  his  mind,  went 
up  to  Delphos,  to  apply  to  the  oracle.  His  sudden  appear¬ 
ance  in  the  middle  of  Greece  caused  a  great  alarm,  not  only 
in  the  neighbouring  states,  but  even  in  A^,  ^|^ther  an  ac¬ 
count  of  the  disturbance  was  brought  to  KingRumenes.  He 
staid  only  three  days  at  Delphos,  and  then  returned  to  his 
own  dominions,  through  Phthiotis,  Achaia,  and  Thessaly, 
without  doing  the  least  injury  or  damage  to  those  countries. 
He  did  not  think  it  sufficient  to  conciliate  the  esteem  of  the 
several  states  through  which  his  road  lay ;  but  dispatched 
either  ambassadors  or  letters  .to  et^ry  one  of  the  Grecian 
powers,  requesting  that  they  would  “think  no  more  of 
the  animosities  which  had  subsisted  between  them  and  his 
father ;  for  that  the  disputes  had  not  been  so  violent  as  that 
they  might  not,  and  ought  not,  to  be  dropped.  On  his  part, 
there  was  no  kind  of  obstacle  to  the  forming  of  a  cordial 
friendship.’’  Above  all,  he  wished,  particularly,  to  find  some¬ 
way  of  ingratiating  himself  with  the  Achaean  nation. 

BOOK  XLI. 

37 

B.C.  174.] 
XXIII.  This  nation,  and  the  state  of  Athads,  had  csffried 
their  resentment  to  such  a  length,  as  to  prohildt  the  Mace¬ 
donians  entering  their  territories.  In  consequence  of  this, 
Macedonia  became  a  place  of  refuge  for  slaves  rtinning  away 
out  of  Achaia ;  for,  as  the  Achseans  had  forbidden  the  inhabi¬ 
tants  of  Macedonia  to  set  foot  in  their  territories,  they  could  not 
presume  to  pass  the  boundaries  of  that  kingdom.  When  Per¬ 
seus  observed  this,  he  seized  all  the  fugitives,  and  wrote  a  letter 
to  the  Achceam^  tellkng  them^  thaty  out  of  good  will  toward  them 
he  had  sent  home  their  slaves  who  had fed  into  his  dominions; 
but  that  they  ought  to  consider  of  the  proper  means  of  pre¬ 
venting  such  elopements  for  the  future.  When  this  letter 
was  read  by  the  praetor  Xenarchus,  who  wished  to  recom¬ 
mend  himself  to  the  notice  of  the  King,  the  greater  part  who 
were  present,  but  especially  those  who  had  lost  their  slaves, 
commended  the  moderation  and  kindness  with  which  it  was 
written  ;  but  Callicrates,  one  who  thought  that  the  safety  of 
the  nation  depended  on  the  treaty  with  Rome  being  preserved 
inviolate,  delivered  his  sentiments  to  this  effect: — Achseans, 
— some  of  you  seem  to  consider  the  business  under  considera¬ 
tion,  as  being  of  little  consequence.  Now,  for  my  part,  I 
think  it  of  the  utmost  importance  ;  and  that,  instead  of  being 
under  consideration,  it  is  already  in  a  manner  decided.  We 
prohibited  the  kings  of  Macedonia,  and  all  their  subjects, 
from  entering  our  territories,  and  made  a  perpetual  decree, 
not  to  receive  from  those  sovereigns  either  ambassadors  or 
messengers,  who  might  attempt  to  draw  us  from  our  duty ; 
yet  we,  I  say,  listen  to  what  may,  in  some  measure,  be  deem¬ 
ed  the  discourse  of  the  King,  though  absent,  and  what  is 
more,  approve  of  his  discourse.  Although  brute  beasts  gene¬ 
rally  reject  and  shun  the  food  laid  in  their  way  for  their  de¬ 
struction  ;  yet  we,  blinded  by  the  specious  offer  of  an  insig¬ 
nificant  favour, -swallow  the  bait,  and  would,  for  the  sake  of 
recovering  a  parcel  of  wretched  slaves,  of  no  value  worth 

38 

HISTORY  OF  SOME. 

[Y.R,  578. 

mtntkaxm^  our  independence  to  be  undermined  and 
»id>vefted.  Is  there  a  man  among  you  who  does  not  see, 
that  the  restdt  expected  from  this  business,  is  an  ailiance  with 
the  King,  md  consequently  a  dissolution  of  the  treaty  with 
Rome,  the  grand  support  of  all  our  interests  ?  That  there 
must  be  a  war  between  Perseus  and  the  Romans,  is  not,  I 
believe,  a  matter  of  doubt ;  it  was  expected  during  the  life  of 
Philip,  and  would  have  taken  place,  if  his  death  had  not  in¬ 
terrupted  its  progress ;  it  will,  now,  that  he  is  dead,  most 
certainly  ensue.  Philip,  you  all  know,  had  two  sons,  Deme¬ 
trius  and  Perseus.  Demetrius  was  far  superior  in  birth,  on 
the  mother’s  side,  in  merit,  capacity,  and  in  the  esteem  of  the 
Macedonian  nation.  But  Philip,  having  set  up  the  crown  as 
the  prize  of  hatred  towards  the  Romans,  put  Demetrius  to 
death,  for  no  other  crime  than  having  contracted  a  friendship 
with  that  people  ;  and  raised  Perseus  to  the  throne,  because 
he  knew  that  his  own  antipathy  to  the  Romans  would  de¬ 
scend  to  him,  with  the  crown.  Accordingly,  how  has  the 
present  king  employed  himself  since  his  father’s  death,  but 
in  preparing  for  the  war  ?  In  the  first  place,  to  the  terror  of 
all  the  surrounding  nations  he  brought  the  Bastamians  into 
Dardania ;  where,  if  they  had  made  a  lasting  settlement, 
they  would  have  proved  more  troublesome  neighbours  to 
Greece,  than  the  Gauls  are  to  Asia.  Disappointed  in  that 
hope,  he  did  not  drop  his  design  of  a  war  ;  nay,  if  we  choose 
to  speak  the  truth,  he  has  already  commenced  hostilities.  He 
subdued  Dolopia,  by  force  of  arms  ;  and  would  not  listen  to 
their  appeal  to  the  arbitration  of  the  Ronaans.  Then,  cross¬ 
ing  CEta,  that  he  might  show  himself  in  the  very  heart  of 
Ghreece,  he  went  up  to  Delphos.  What,  think  you,  was  his 
view  in  taking  a  journey  so  uncommon  ?  He  next  traversed 
Thessaly ;  and  as  to  his  refraining  on  his  ‘rout  from  doing 
injury  to  the  people  whom  he  hated,  I  dread  his  machinations 
the  more  on  that  very  account.  He  then  sent  a  letter  to  us, 

BOOK  XLI. 

S9 

B.C.  174.] 
with  show  of  an  act  of  kindness^  and  in  which  it  ^ 
mended  that  we  consider  of  such  measures  as  may  prevent 
our  needing  the  same  in  future,  that  is,  to  repeal  the  decree 
by  which  the  Macedonians  are  excluded  from  Peloponnest^, 
to  receive  again  ambassadors  from  him  their  king ;  to  re* 
new  intimacies  contracted  with  his  principal  subjects  ;  so  i^ 
in  a  short  time,  we  should  see  Macedonian  armies,  himself  at 
their  head,  crossing  over  the  narrow  streight  from  Delphos 
into  Peloponnesus,  and  thus  be  blended  with  this  people, 
while  they  are  arming  themselves  against  the  Romans.  My 
opinion  is,  that  we  ought  not  to  resolve  on  any  new  proceed¬ 
ing,  but  to  keep  every  thing  in  its  present  state,  until  the 
question  shall  be  decided  with  certainty,  whether  these  our 
fears  he  well  or  ill  grounded.  If  the  peace  between  the  Ro¬ 
mans  and  Macedonians  shall  continue  inviolate,  then  may  we 
also  have  a  friendship  and  intercourse  with  Perseus  ;  but  to 
think  of  such  a  measure  now,  appears  to  me  both  premature 
and  dangerous.” 
XXIV.  After  him,  Arco,  brother  to  the  praetor  Xenarchus, 
said : — Callicrates  has  laid  me,  and  every  one  who  differs 
in  opinion  from  him,  under  a  difficulty  in  delivering  our  sen¬ 
timents  i  for  after  his  pleading  in  favour  of  the  Roman  alli¬ 
ance,  alleging  designs  formed,  and  meditated  attacks  on  that 
state,  yet  (although  there  be  no  design  formed,  or  attack 
meditated,)  whoever  dissents  from  him,  must  seem  to  argue 
against  the  cause  of  the  Romans.  In  the  first  place,  as  if  he 
had  just  left  the  senate-house  of  the  Roman  people,  or  had 
been  admitted  into  the  privy  councils  of  kings,  he  knows  and 
tells  us  every  transaction  that  passed  in  secret.  Nay  more, 
inspired  with  a  divining  faculty,  he  pronounces  what  would 
have  happened  if  Philip  had  lived,  how  Perseus  became  heir 
of  the  kingdom  ;  what  are  theintentions  of  the  Macedonians, 
and  what  the  thoughts  of  the  Romans.  But  we,  who  neither 
know  for  what  cause,  nor  in  what  manner,  Demetrius  .perish- 

40 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  578- 

cd,  nor  what  Philip  would  have  done,  if  he*  had  lived,  must 
accommodate  our  resolutions  to  the  transactions  that  have 
passed  in  op#n  view.  We  know  that  Perseus,  on  his  coming 
to  the  throne,  sent  ambassadors  to  Rome,  and  received  the 
title  of  King  from  the  senate,  and  we  hear  that  ambassadors 
came  from  Rome  to  the  King,  and  were  graciously  received 
by  him.  As  far  as  I  can  judge,  all  these  circumstances  do 
not  prognosticate  hostility ;  and  the  Romans  cannot  be  of¬ 
fended,  if,  as  we  followed  their  lead  in  war,  so  we  follow  now 
their  example  in  peace.  For  my  part,  I  cannot  see,  why  we 
alone,  of  all  mankind,  wage  implacable  war  against  this  king¬ 
dom.  Are  we  exposed  to  insult  by  a  close  neighbourhood  to 
Macedonia?  or  are  we  like  the  Dolopians,  whom  Perseus 
subdued  lately,  the  weakest  of  all  states?  No  ;  on  the  cem- 
trary,  thanks  to  the  bounty  of  the  gods,  we  are  sufficiently 
secured,  as  well  by  our  own  strength,  as  by  the  remoteness  of 
our  situation.  But  we  have  as  much  reason  to  apprehend 
ill  treatment,  as  the  Thessalians  and  the  iEtolians ;  we  have 
no  more  "credit  or  influence  with  the  Romans,  though  ever 
their  friends  and  allies,  than  the  yEtolians  who,  but  lately, 
were  their  enemies.  Whatever  reciprocal  rights  the  ^to- 
lians,  the  Thessalians,  the  E  pi  rots,  in  short,  every  state  in 
Greece,  allow  to  subsist  between  them  and  the  Macedonians, 
let  us  allow  the  same.  Why  are  we,  alone,  to  carry  inveter¬ 
ate  rancour  so  far  as  to  oppose  the  common  claims  of  man¬ 
kind?  Admitting  that  Philip’s  conduct  was  such  as  to  jus¬ 
tify  our  passing  the  decree  against  him,  which  we  did  when 
he  was  in  arms,  and  making  war  on  us  ;  yet  how  has  Perseus, 
a  prince  just  seated  on  the  throne,  whom  we  cannot  charge 
with  any  kind  of  injustice  toward  us,  and  who  endeavours, 
by  his  own  kindness,  to  obliterate  the  memory  of  his  father’s 
quarrels  ; — how  has  he  deserved,  at  our  hands,  that  we  should 
be  his  only  enemies  ?  I  may  go  farther,  and  affirm,  that  so 
great  have  been  our  obligations  to  the  former  kings  of  Mace- 

Moi:  xLt 

a'c.  tr4.] 

* 

s%ffeiFed  frola  a  prite^cil^^ir 
redSy  be€:n  Fhili^^ oug^^  ^ 
jm^Uen^  espa^^aBf^^er  hSi  When  a  Roman  Ifeet 
was  lying  at  anlt  thaiclili%ul,  a^h^liis  anny,  wW^ 
Elatia,  we  w#^  three  4lays  in  counc#,  deliberating  whethi^ 
we  should  ^  ibmans  or  Philip.  Now,  granting  that 
the  fear  of  Immeditite  danger  from  the  Romans  had  no  influ¬ 
ence  on  oijr  judgments,  yet  there  was,  certainly,  something 
that  made  our  deliberation  last  so  long ;  and  that  was,  the 
connection  which  had  long  subsisted  between  us  and  the 
Macedoniaiw  ;  distinguished  favours  which  we  had,'  of 
old,  received* from  their  kings.  Let  the  same  considerations 
prevml  at  present, — not  to  make  ta^his  singular  friendsV  but 
to  hinder  us  from  becoming  his  singular  enemies.  Let  us  not, 
Callicrtitcs,  pretend  what  is  not  even  thought  of.  No  one 
advises  us  to  form  a  new  aHis^tec,  or  sign%  new  treaty,  by 
which  we  migbtNinconsiderately  entangle  ourselves,  but  mere* 
ly  to  open  the  intercourse  of^ording  and  demanding  justice  ; 
and  so  as  not,  by  excluding  his  subjects  from  our  territories, 
to  exclude  our  slaves  from  his  dominions  ;  nor  yet  to  let  the 
latter  have  a  hiding-place  to  fly  to.  How  does  this  operate 
against  the  Roman  treaty  ?  Why  3b  we  give  an  air  of  im¬ 
portance  and  suspicion  to  a  matter  which  is  trifling  and  open 
to  the  World  i  Why  d#we  raise  groundless  alarms  ?  Why, 
for  the  sake  of  ingratiating  ourselves  still  more  partkulariy 
with  our  allies,  render  others  odious  and  suspected  ?  If  war 
shall  take  place,  «ven  Persetm  himself  does  not  doubt  bur 
taking  part  with  jdte  RoOrans;’  While  peace  continues,  let 
animoiutie>,itf  they  aretmt  teftmnated;  6e  atleast'suspemled.’^ 
Th<»e  who  s^^roved  ^  Swing’s  ktter  expressed  thbir  js^pto- 
badon  of  this  sp^df  >  btyl^thefciikf  mch  a^n^ly 
predated  as  so 
without  de%amg^4itt^  the  becalm, 
should  Bis  by%%e^r  felr*^wes;  tliaiS 
yoL.  vj. — Cl 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[YJ#.  sfi. 

agreed  to  po$^o^  coming  to  my  mohidmi 
Perseus  afterward  ^t  amiaffiisadora,  when  co^m^  was 
si^g  at  Megdopoiis ;  Mit  iSiose  who  di^mkd  a  i^pture 
with’  Rome,  took  care  to  prevent  didr  being  admitted  to 
audience.  n 
XXV.  Sometime  before  diis,  the  ^oliana  vaHed  their 
fury  on  each  otlujr,  with  such  violmce,  and  so  much  blood 
was  shed  by  the  contending  parties,  that  the  total  extincticm 
of  the  nation  seemed  to  be  at  no  great  distance.  TThen  both 
parties,  being  wearied,  sent  ambassadors  to  Rome,  and  also 
opened  a  negociation  between  themselves  for  the  restoration 
of  concord  ;  but  this  was  broken  off,  by  an  act  of  barbarity, 
which  revi%%d  their  old  quarrels.  Some  exiles  from  Hypata, 
who  were  of  the  faction  of  Proxenus,  had  received  a  prmnise 
of  being  re*admitted  into  their  native  city  ;  and  Euj^emus, 
first  magistrate  of  the  state,  Having  pledged  the  public  faith 
for  dieir  security,  they  returned  home,  to  die  number  of 
eighty  persons  of  distinction.  Eupolemus  went  out,  among 
the  rest  of  the  multitude,  to  meet  them  ;  they  were  received 
and  saluted  with  every  expression  of  kindness,  and  right 
hands  were  reciprocally  given.  But  no  sooner  did  they  en¬ 
ter  the  gate,  than  they  were  all  put  to  death,  while  they,  in 
vain,  appealed  to  the  faith  pledged^  them,  and  the  gods  who 
witnessed  the  transaction.  On  this  the  war  *  blazed  mst  anew, 
with  greater  fury  than  ever.'  Caius  Valerius  Lasvinus,  Ap- 
pius  Claudius  Fulcher,  Caius  Memmius,  Marcus  PopilUus, 
and  Lucius  Cmiuleius,  being  sent  as  amt^issadors  by  die  sen¬ 
ate,  arrived  in  that  country.  The  deputies  of  bolh  parties 
debated  the  business  before  them  at  B^^hos,  with  great  l^at 
on bodi sides;  but  Prox^us  particularly  dktingoished  him¬ 
self,  mi  ap^^ed  to  have  gready  tkpe  advat^^,  both  in  die 
meri^  of  hisT cause,  md  hit  talea^  m  A  few  days 
after,  he  was  pdis^ed  hy  his  wife  Oidmbida,  who  beeing  con¬ 
victed  ctf  die  crime  wem  iMo  Cve^  was  txm  in 

BOOK  XLI. 

B.C. 

4S 

pecim  by  s^me  lawA  of  madiiess ;  on  thf 
of  Qatnms  Minucius,  Ueut€nalpi<^|^p»'a4  wasjnmt  with 
ten  to  tl^  iidmb^asts  had  some 
prospect  of  j^ace  ;  hoti^eter,  Ihey-ody  cmcluded  a 
sion  of  arm  ie£r  six  m<m£lis^  nfter  wlikh  the  war  was  agam 
renewed  wMimocb^^  violence*  AlKmt  this  lime,  the 
Lyckns,  WS,  steered  many  hardships  frmn  the  Rhodians. 
Bnt  the  wtm  <tf mitions,  amo^  ttonselves,  or  the 
seveial  methods  in  which  they  were  condneted,  it  k  not  my 
business  to  det^S  ;  having,  in  the  relation  of  those  affairs,  i^n 
which  the  Ekimans  were  concerned,  a  task  of  more  tbm  m£~ 
hcient  W€4ght;  - 
XX^^.  In  Spain,  the  Cekiberians,  (who,  smcn^dieir  reduc** 
ticm  by  Tiberius ‘Gracchxis,  and  their  ccmseqmmt  surrender 
to  Mm,  had  remained  quiet ;  Marcus  TitinUrs,  pra^r,  hold- 
ing  die  government  of  the  province,)  mi  the  arrival  of  Ap- 
pins  Claudius,  resumed  their  arms,  and  commenced  ht^Mli* 
tks,  with  a  sudden  attack  cm  the  Roman  camp.  At  the^rst 
dawn  the  sentinels  on  the  rampart,  and  the  men  On  guard 
before  the  gates,  descrying  the  enemy  approaching  at  a  dis¬ 
tance,  gave  the  alarm.  Appius  Claudius  instantly  displayed 
the  signal  of  battle  ;  and,  after  exhorting  the  troops,  in  few 
words,  ordered  them  to  msh  out  by  three  gates  at  emee-  Bat 
they  w^  Qppo^d  fey  Ae  Celtiberians  in  the  very  passage, 
and,  ki  cons^Uence,  the  figM  was  for  some  time  equal  on 
both  sides,  as,  on  account  of  the  narrowness  of  the  same,  the 
Romans  could  toot  aH  come  mto  action.  Pressing  forwards, 
however,  and  following  close  on  each  others  they  made  their 
way  beyond  the  trenches,  so  that  they  were^  able  to  stretch 
out  their  line,  Until  it  extended  as  far  as  the  wings  of  the 
criciny,  who  endei^ouring  to  surroimd  thein  5  and  now 
they  made  their  emset  with  such  sudden  impetumity,  that  the 
Celtiberians  could  not  support  the  assault.  Before  the  secotkl 
hour,  they  were  driven  from  the  field!  fi^fteen  thousand  were 

44 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [YM.  sm 
cither  killed  pade  prisoners,  and  ^hirty-two  ^amdards 
were  Hiehr  camp^  alao,  wa$  ^tckrnied  the  .sime  day^. 
and  a  conclusion  put  to  the.  war  j  fcH*  who  survived  the 
battle  ^ed  by  different  ways  |6o  tteir .  several  lowns,  and^ 
thenceforward,  submitfeed  quietly  to  the  Romaa  goverrojent. 
XXVII,  Quintus  F ulvius  Flaccus  and  Aulus  Fpstumius 
being  created  censors,  this  year,  r^%wed  the  seni^.  M^- 
cus  iEtnilius  ^epidus,  chief  pont^,  was  chosen  chief  of  die 
senate.  Nine  senators  were  expelled.  The  remarkable  cen¬ 
sures  pronounced,  were  on  Marcus  Cornelius  Malugin€nst% 
who  had  been  praetor  in  Spain  two  years  before  ,5  on  Lucius 
Cornelius  Scipio,  then  praetor  and  exercising  the  jurisdiction 
between  natives  and  foreigners ;  and  on  Cneius  Fulvius, 
brother  to  the  censor,  and,  as  Valerius  Antias^aays,  partner 
in  property.  The  consuls,  after  offering  vows  in  the  Capitol, 
set  out  for  their  provinces. ,  Marcus  AUnilius  was  commis¬ 
sioned  by  the  senate  to  suppress  an  insurrection  of  the  Pata- 
vians  in  Venetia  ;  for  their  own  ambassadors  bad  given 
formation  that  the  disputes  between  contending  factions  had 
become  so  violent  as  |o  produce  a  civil  war.  The  ambassa¬ 
dors  who  had  gone  into  ^tolia,  to  suppress  commotions  of  a 
similar  kind,  reported,  on  their  return,  that  the  outrageous 
temper  of  that  nation  could  not  be.  restrained.  .The  consul’s 
arrival  among  the  Patavians  saved  from  ruin  ;  muji,  hav¬ 
ing  no  other  business  in  the  province,  he  returned  to  Rpme. 
The  present  censors  were  the  fimt  who  engaged  workmen  to 
pave  the  streets  of  Rome  with  flint  to  make  roads,  * 
outside  the  city^  wkK  gravel,  and.to:£^n»%raised  fpotrW^s  on 
&e  sides.  They^  caused  bridges  to  be.bp|lt  is  (ipveral  places, 
and  sea^  in  die  theatre  to  be  set  apart  for  the  pra^^is:^!^ 
series  i  .fixed  up. goals  in  the  Citx:us,  with  balls  mx  the  goals 
for  marking  the  number  of  courses  of  thp  efiariots.;  and 
erected  iron  grates,  through  which  wild  beasts  might  be  let 
in.  .They  caused  the  Capitoline  hill  to  be  paved  with 

B£.  174.]  "  .  I^K  XLI.  4S 
«nd  crictai'*  jiaaxa  from  the  temple  of  Saturo,  is  tfaeCapi* 
t(d,  to ihe.seoate<faotise,«Qd  ov^  dwt  a  pubiich^..  On  the 
outside  of  the  ^te  Ttigetnioa^  titty  aho  paved  a  inaT}|^- 
place  with  stones,  and  inclosed  it  with  a  paling ;  repmi^  the 
iEmilian  portico ;  apd  formed  an  ascent,  by  ^rs,  from  the 
Tiber  to  the  tnarket-pUtte.  They  paved,  with  Aim,  the  pot^ 
tico,  from  the  same  gataf  tothe  Aventine,  and  built  a  court* 
house  ;  cmitracted  for  walls  to  be  built  at  Galatia  and  Oxi- 
mum,  and,  selling  lots  of  ground  there,  which  belonged  to 
the  puldic,  employed  the  money  arising  from  the  sale  in  build* 
ing  shops  round  the  Forums  of  both  places.  Fulvius  Flac- 
cus  (for  Postumiui  deofored,  that,  without  a  decree  of  the 
senate,  or  order  of  the  people,  he  would  not  expend  any 
money  belonging  to  them)  agreed  for  building  a  temple  of 
Jupiter  at  Pisaurum,  and  another  at  Fundi ;  for  brmging 
water  to  Pollentia  ;  for  paving  the  stteet  of  Pisaurum,  and 
for  many  various  works  at  Sinuessa  }  amongwhich  were,  Ae 
drawing  round  a  sewer^to  foil  into  the  river,  the  inclosing  «rf 
the  Forum  with  porticos  and  shops,  and  erecting  three  pta- 
tues  of  Janus.  These  works  were  all  executed  under  the 
direction  of  F ulvius,  and  gained  him  a  high  dcgrese. of- favour 
with  those  colonists.  These  censors  were  jdso  very  active 
and  strict  in  their  supermtendence  of  the  morals  of  the  peo¬ 
ple.  Many,  knights  wet# deprived  of  their  .horses. 
-  XXVJJJ.  At  the  close  of  the  year,  there  wasa  thanksgiv- 
ing,  for  One^ds^r  on  account  of  the  advantages  obtained  in 
Spain  umier-tbe  conduct  and  duspkcs  of  Appius  Claudius, 
proconsul  ;  when  |WMity  victtma,’i0f  the  lar^r  kinds,  were 
sacrificed,  .There  was  abp  a  siqi^kii^on,  fisr  one  day,  at  the 
temples  of  Ceres,.  liibec,  and  Liberia,  on  accoam.  of  a  vio¬ 
lent  earthquake  which  bad  htqqiened  m  Sabinia,  aiul  demo¬ 
lished  a  great  num  ber  of  buddings.  When  Amus  Claudius 
came  honie^from-Spain,  the  senate  voted  that^  shouM  en¬ 
ter  the  city  in  ovation.  The  election  of  consuls  now  came 

46 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.S.  579. 

oki,  and,  after  a  warm  contest,  in  consequence  of  the 
great  number  of  candidates,  the  choice  fell  on  Lucius  Postu- 
niius  Albtnus  and  Marcus  Popiilius  Lsnas.  Then 
Y  R.579  ^ 
B*C  173  chosen  fwaetors,  Numcrius  Fabius  Buteo, 
Marcus  Matienus,  Caius  Cicereius,  Marcus  Fu- 
riu«  Crassipes  a  second  time,  Marcus  Atilius  Serranus  a  se¬ 
cond  time,  and  Caius  Cluvius  Saxula  a  second  time.  After 
the  elections  were  finished,  Appius  Claudius  Centho,  enter¬ 
ing  the  city  in  ovation  over  the  Celtiberians,  conveyed  to  the 
treasury  ten  thousand  pounds  weight  of  silver,  and  five  thou¬ 
sand  of  gold.  Cneius  Cornelius  was  inaugurated  flamen  of 
Jupiter. ,  In  the  same  year  a  tablet  was  hung  up  in  the  tem¬ 
ple  of  Mother  Matuta,  with  this  inscription ; — under  the 
command  and  auspices  of  TIBERIUS  SEMPRONIUS  GRAC¬ 
CHUS,  CONSUL,  A  LEGION  AND  ARMY  OF  THE  ROMAN  PEOPLE 
SUBDUED  SARDINIA  ;  IN  WHICH  PROVINCE  ABOVE  EIGHTY 
THOUSAND  or  THE  ENEMY  WERE  KILLED  OR  TAKEN.  HAV¬ 
ING  EXECUTED  THE  BUSINESS  OF  THE  PUBLIC  WITH  THE 
HAPPIEST  SUCCESS  ;  HAVING  RECOVERED  THE  REVENUES, 
AND  RESTORED  THEM  to  the  Commonwealth;  he  brought 
HOME  THE  ARMY  SAFE,  UNINJURED,  AND  ENRICHED  WITH 
SPOIL,  AND,  A  SECOND  TIME,  ENTERED  THE  CITY  OF  ROME 
IN  TRIUMPH.  IN  COMMEMORATION  OF  WHICH  EVENT  HE 
PRESENTED  THIS  TABLET  AN  OFFERING  TO  JUPITER.  A 
map  of  the  island  of  Sardinia  was  engraved  on  the  tablet, 
and  representations  of  the  battles,  fought  there,  were  de¬ 
lineated  on  it.  Several  small  exhibitions  of  gladiators  were 
given  to  the  public  this  year ;  the  only  one  particularly  re-^ 
markable,  was  that  given  by  Titus  Flaminius  on  occasion  of 
his  father’s  death,  which  was  accompanied  with  a  donation 
of  meat,  a  feast,  and  stage  plays,  which  lasted  four  days. 
Yet,  in  the  whole  of  this  great  exhibition,  only  seventy-four 
men  fought  in  three  days.  The  close  of  this  year  was  rendered 
memorable  by  the  proposal  of  a  nm)  and  important  rule^  which 

BOOK  XLI- 

4T 

B.C.  173.] 
was  debated  with  great  heat.  Hitherto^  m  the  law  stoody 
women  were  equally  capable  of  taking  inheritances  as  men. 
In  consequence  of  this  capacity^  the  wealth  of  the  most  illus^ 
trious  houses  was  frequently  transferred  into  other  fmdlhsy 
to  the  great  detriment^  as  was  supposed.^  of  the  state  ;  to  which 
it  was  no  small  advantage  that  the  descendants  of  Sstinguish’^ 
ed  ancestors  should^  by  their  wealth  and  splendour y  he  an  or^ 
nament  and  defencCy  rather  thaUy  by  being  reduced  to  indi-' 
gencej  become  a  disgrace y  and  a  burden  to  the  public.  It  was 
also  thoughty  thaty  to  the  weaker  seXy  wealth  might  hold  out 
dangerous  temptations  to  luxurious  indulgence;  and  thaty 
fondy  by  naturCy  of  dissipationy  dresSy  and  shoWy  they  might 
he  induced  to  depart  from  that  sanctity  of  mannerSy  and  purity 
of  conduct y  which y  of  oldy  werq  deemed  the  brightest  ornaments 
of  the  female  character.  To  obviate  these  evilSy  ^intus  Vo- 
conius  SaxQy  plebeian  tribunCy  proposed  to  the  peoplcy  that 
no  person  whatever  should  make  any  womaUy  whether  mar¬ 
ried  or  unmarriedy  his  heir ;  alsOy  that  no  womaUy  whether 
married  or  unmarriedy  should  be  capable  of  taking y  by  inherit- 
ancCy  goods  exceeding  the  value  of  one  hundred  thousand  ses¬ 
terces^. VoconiuSy  alsOy  thought  it  proper  to  provide  that 
estates  should  not  be  too  much  diminished  by  legacies ;  or, 
which  sometimes  happenedy  left  away  entirely  from  the  right 
heirs.  Accordingly  he  added  a  clause  to  his  laWy  that  “  no 
person  should  bequeath  to  any  person  or  persons  property  ex¬ 
ceeding  in  value  what  was  to  go  to  the  right  heirs,'*'^  This 
latter  clause  readily  met  the  general  approbation  ;  it  appeared 
reasonable y  and  likely  to  be  very  little  grievous  to  any.  Bui 
the  former  clausCy  utterly  disqualifying  women  from  taking 
inheritanceSy  passed  not  so  easily  ;  there  rvas  a  strong  oppo¬ 
sition  to  ity  and  a  very  violent  debatCy  to  whichy  at  lengthy  a 
speech  of  Marcus  Porcius  Cato  put  an  end.  His  str'enuoirs 

8072).  18s.  4d. 

4a 

HISTORY  OF  UQME. 

[y.R. 
e^ence  ^  th^jOppkm  iaw^  and  bitier  invective  against  the 
indecorvm  iekavieur  of  the  women^  we  hme  edrefudy^  related^ 
On  the  preseifd  ocaxsim  he  exerted  himeelf  v^h  equal  eameeU 
mr  Ad  ^  treat  the  femcdik  character  with  less  severity. 
He  deckwmd^  with  great  vehemence^  against  the  extravagance 
andjoeUMation  of  the  richer  matrons^  “  whof  he  eaidy  re^ 
tarn  to  themselves  large  sums  of  money  which  they  do  not 
entrust  to  the  power  of  their  husbands^  but  only  lend  to  them  ; 
and  then  upon  any  quarrel  arising  between  tkem^  they  send 
their  own  slaves^  who  importunately  demand  repayment^  and 
treat  the  husbands  as  if  they  were  entire  strangers^  happen^ 
ning  to  be  their  debtors — The  law  passed^  as  proposed  by 
Voconius. 

HAMPDtN-S^DNt^,  ViRtiN-:' 
^  -  ■ 

THE 
HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

BOOK  XLn. 
Eaiteeiies,  King  makes  heavy  c^nnplaints  ami  changes,  hi  the  eenatet 
Against  Perseus,  King  Macedonia.  War  d<H^Iared  i^^nst  Perseus. 
Publius  iMnius  Crassus,  the  consul,  to  whom  the  condimt  of  the  war  is 
committed,  leads  an  army  into  Macedonia ;  hghts  Perseus,  unsuccess¬ 
fully,  in  several  ^nall  engagements,  in  Thessaly ;  at  length,  defeats  him 
entirely  near  Phalanna.  ‘The  senate  appended  to  by  Masinissa  and  the 
Carthagin^ns,  in  a  dispute  ccmceming  the  bounds  of  their  terniories.  A 
census  held ;  the  number  of  Rmnan  citizens  fouml  to  be  two  hundred 
and  Rfty>seven  thousand  two  hundred  and  thiity-one.  Successes  against 
the  Corsicans  and  Ligurians. 
1.  THE  first  business  which  Lucius  Postumius  Albinus  and 
Marcus  Popilius  Laenas  brought  before  tbe^enate, 
was  the  distribution  of  the  provinces  ;  when  Ligu*  g  £ 
ria  was  assigned  the  joint  province  of  both,  with 
directions  that  they  should  enlist  new  legions,  each  having 
two  assigned  him  for  the  service  of  that  province,  and  also 
ten  thousand  foot  and  six  hundred  horse,  of  the  Latine  con¬ 
federates  {  and,  as  a  supplement  to  the  army  in  Spain,  three 
tSiiicisatid  Roman  foot  and*  two*liundred  horse.  Besides  these, 
they  were  ordered  to  raise  one  thousand  five  hundred  Roman 
foot,  and  one  hundred  horse  ;  with  which  the  praetor,  to 
VOL.  VI. — H 

so 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  S79. 

whose  lot  Sardinia  should  fall,  might  cross  over  to  Corsica, 
and  carry  on  the  war  there  ;  and  it  was  farther  ordered,  that, 
in  the  mean  time,  the  former  praetor,  Marcus  Atillius,  should 
hold  the  government  of  that  country.  The  praetors  then  cast 
lots  for  .their  provinces.  Aulus  Atillius  Serranus  obtained 
the  city  jurisdiction  j  Caius  Cluvius  Saxula,  that  between 
natives  and  foreigners  ;  Numerius  Fabius  Buteo,  Hither 
Spain;  Marcus  Matienus,  Farther  Spain;  Marcus  Furius 
Crassipes,  Sicily  ;  and  Caius  Cicereius,  Sardinia.  The  sen¬ 
ate  resolved,  that,  before  the  magistrates  went  abroad,  Licius 
Postumius  should  go  into  Campania,  to  fix  the  bounds  be¬ 
tween  the  lands,  which  were  private  property,  and  those 
which  belonged  to  the  public  ;  for  it  was  understood  that  in¬ 
dividuals,  by  gradually  extending  their  bounds,  had  taken 
possession  of  a  very  considerable  share  of  the  common  lands. 
The  consul  had  conceived  a  great  aversion  from  the  people 
of  Praeneste,  because  on  his  going  thither  formeriy,  in  a  pri¬ 
vate  capacity,  to  offer  sacrifice  in  the  temple  of  Fortune,  they 
had  paid  him  no  compliment  either  general  or  particular  ;  for 
which  reason,  before  he  set  out  from  Rome,  he  sent  a  letter 
to  Praeneste,  ordering  the  chief  magistrate  to  meet  him,  and 
to  provide  him  lodging  at  the  public  expence  ;  and,  that,  at 
his  departure,  cattle  should  be  ready  to  carry  his  baggage. 
No  consul  before  him  ever  put  the  allies  to  any  trouble  or 
expence  whatever.  To  prevent  any  such  exaction,  those 
magistrates  were  furnished  with  mules,  tents,  and  every  other 
requisite  for  a 'campaign.  They  had  private  lodgings,  ii^ 
which  they  behaved  with  courtesy  and  kindness,  and  j:heir 
houses  at  Rome  were  always  open  to  their  hosts  with  whom 
they  used  to  lodge.  Ambassadors  indeed  sent  to  any  place, 
on  a  sudden  emergency,  demanded  each  a  single  horse  in  the 
several  towns  through  which  their  journey  lay,  but  no  other 
expence  was  ever  imposed  on  the  allies  by  the  Roman  ma¬ 
gistrates.  The  resentment  of  the  consul,  which,  even  if  well 

BOOK  XLII. 

51 

B,C.  173.] 
fcmnded,  ought  liot  to  have  been  exerted  during  his  office, 
and  the  too  modest,  or  too  timid  acquiescence  of  the  Prae- 
Destines,  gave  to  his  successors,  as  if  by  an  approved  prece¬ 
dent,  the  privilege  of  laying  on  the  confederates  other  Such 
kinds  of  burdens,  the  weight  of  which  was  continually  in¬ 
creased. 
II.  In  the  beginning  of  this  year,  the  ambassadors,  who 
had  been  sent  to  iEtolia  and  Macedonia,  returned  and  re¬ 
ported,  that  “  they  4iad  not  been  able  to  obtain  an  inter¬ 
view  with  Perseus,  some  of  his  court  saying  that  he  was 
abroad,  others  that  he  was  sick  ;  both  of  which  were  false 
pretences.  Nevertheless,  they  clearly  perceived  that  he  would 
not  long  defer  the  commencement  of  hostilities.  That  in 
i£tolia,  likewise,  the  dissensions  grew  daily ,  more  violent ; 
and  the  leaders  of  the  contending  parties  were  not  to  be  re¬ 
strained  by  their  authority,”  As  a  war  with  Macedonia  was 
daily  expected,  the  senate  resolved,  that,  before  it  broke  out, 
all  prodigies  should  be  expiated,  and  the  favour  of  the  gods 
invoked,  in  such  kind  of  supplications  as  should  be  found 
directed  in  the  books  of  the  fates.  It  was  said  that  at  Lanu- 
vium  the  appearance  of  large  fleets  was  seen  in  the  air ;  that 
at  Privernum  black  wool  grew  out  of  the  ground  ;  that  in  the 
territory  of  Veii,  at  Remens,  a  shower  of  stones  fell,  and  that 
the  whole  Pomptine  district  was  covered  with  clouds  of  lo¬ 
custs  ;  also  that  in  the  Gallic  province,  where  a  plough  was 
at  work,  fishes  sprung  up  front  under  the  earth  as  it  was 
turned.  The  books  of  the  fates  were  accordingly  consulted, 
and  the  decemvirs  directed  both  to  what  gods,  and  with  what 
victim^,  sacrifices  should  be  offered  ;  that  a  supplicattoii 
should  be  performed,  in  expiation  of  the  prodigies  ;  and  also 
another,  which  had  been  vowed  in  the  preceding  year  for  the 
health  of  the  people,  with  a  solemn  festival.  Accordingly, 
sacrifices  were  offered  agreeably  to  the  written  directions  of 
the  decemvirs. 

52  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y-R.  5^9. 
HL  I0  the  same  year,  the  temple  of  Juno  l^ackiia  was  mi* 
covered.  Quintus  Fulvius  Flaccus,  censor,  in  erecting  a 
temple  to  Equestrian  Fortune,  which  he  bad  vowed  during 
the  Celtiberian^war,  was  anxiously  desirous  that  it  should  not 
be  surpassed  by  any  other  at  Rome,  either  in  si^se  or  magni* 
ficence.  Thinking  that  it  would  be  a  very  great  embellish* 
ment  to  this  temple  if  it  were  roofed  with  marble,  he  went  to 
Rruttium,  and  stripped  off  about  the  half  of  that  of  the  tem* 
pie  of  J ono  Lacinia,  for  he  Cbmputed  Aat  so  much  would  be 
sufficient  to  cover  the  one  he  was  building.  Ships  were  in 
readiness  to  tal(e  on  board  the  materials,  while  the  alli^  were 
deterred  by  the  authority  of  the  censor,  from  making  opposi¬ 
tion  to  the  sacrilege.  On  his  return,  the  marble  was  landed, 
and  carried  to  the  temple  ;  but,  though  he  made  no  moition 
of  the  place  from  which  it  was  brought,  yet  such  an  affair 
could  not  be  concealed.  Accordingly  it  occasioned  consider¬ 
able  murmuring  in  the  senate ;  and  all  the  members  express¬ 
ed  their  desire  that  the  consuls  should  take  the  opinion  of  the 
Fathers  on  the  subject.  When  the  censor,  on  being  summon¬ 
ed,  appeared  in  the  senate-house,  they  all,  both  ^parately  and 
in  a  body,  inveighed  against  him  with  much  asperity.  They 
cried  out,  that  he  was  not  content  with  violating  the  most 
venerable  temple  in  all  that  part  of  the  world,  a  temple  which 
neither  Pyrrhus  nor  Hannibal  had  violated ;  but  he  had  strip¬ 
ped  it  shamefully,  and  almost  demolished  it.  Though  crea¬ 
ted  censor,  for  the  purpose  of  regulating  men’s  msmners,  and 
bound  in  duty,  according  to  long-established  rules,  to  enforce 
die  repairing  of  edifices  for  public  worship,  and  the  keeping 
them  in  due  order,  he  had  nevertheless  gone  about  through 
the  cities  of  the  allies,  stripping  off  the  roofs  of  their  sacred 
buildings,  and  even  demolishing  them.  Jn  a  word^  and  what 
might  be  deemed  scandalous,  if  practised  on  private  houim, 
be  committed  against  the  temples  of  the  immortal  gods,  in¬ 
volving  the  Roman  people  in  the  guilt  of  impiety  ;  as  if  the 

BOOK  XLII. 

53 

BX.  173.] 
duties  were  tbe  same  m  all  places,  but  that  smse  should 
be  decorated  with  tte  spoils  of  others.”  Such  evidet^y  up* 
peaired  lo  be  the  ^nttmeots  of  the  senators,  before  dieir  opin* 
km  asked  ;  aud,  whoi  the  was  put,  diey  ummi- 
mously  couciuTed  m  vodog,  that  proper  persoas  should  be 
employed  to  carry  back  the  marble  in  question  to  the  temple, 
and  that  atonement  should  be  tiered  to  Juno.  What  re* 
garded  the  attmements  was  carefully  executed,  bt^  those  who 
undertook  to  sec  to  the  repairing  of  the  building,  made  a  re¬ 
port  that  they  were  obliged  to  leave  the  maiide  in  the  court 
of  it,  because  no  workman  could  be  found  who  knew  how  to 
re|dace  die  same. 
IV,  Of  the  prseUnrs  wlm  set  out  for  the  provinces,  Nume- 
rius  FabiuSy  on  his  way-to  Hither  Spain,  died  at  Mar^illes. 
Envo}^,  sent  by  the  Massiiians,  brought  an  ac^munl  of  diis 
event,  on  which  the  senate  resolved  that  Publius  Furius  »id 
Cneius  Servilius,  to  whom  successors  had  been  sent,  should 
cast  lots  to  determine  which  of  them  should  hold  the  govern¬ 
ment  of  Hither  Spain,  with  a  continuation  of  authority  ;  and 
the  lot  determined,  very  commodiously,  diat  Publius  Furius, 
the  former  governor,  should  continue.  During  this  year,  on 
its  appearing  that  large  tracts  of  land  in  Gaul  and  Liguria, 
which  had  been  taken  in  war,  lay  unoccupied,  the  senate 
passed  a  decree,  that  those  lands  should  be  distributed  in  sm- 
gle  shares  ;  and  A  ulus  Atilius,  city  praetor,  in  pursuance  of 
the  said  decree,  appointed  ten  commissioners  for  that  purpose, 
Marcus  Emilias  Lepidus,  Caius  Cassius,  Tims  iEbutius 
Cams,  Caius  Trcmellius,  Publius  Cornelius  Cetheges,  Quin¬ 
tus,  and  Lucius  Appuleius,  Marcus  Caecilius,  Caius  Sahmi- 
us,  and  Caiu^  Mimatius.  They  appropriated  ten  acres  to 
each  Roman,  and  three  to  each  Latine  col^ist.  At  this  time, 
ambassadors  came  to  Rome  from  iEtt^ia  with  representations 
of  the  quarrels  and  dissensions  subsisting  in  that  countn' ;  as 

$4  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  579. 
did  others  from  Thessaly,  with  accounts  of  the  proceedings 
in  Macedonia. 
V.  Perseus,  applying  his  thoughts  to  the  war,  which  had 
been  resdired  on  during  the  lifetime  of  his  father,  endeavoar- 
ed,  by  s^uling  embassies,  and  by  promising  a  great  deal  more 
than  he  performed,  to  attach  to  himself  not  only  the  common¬ 
wealth  of  Greece,  but  also  each  particular  state.  The  incli¬ 
nations  of  that  people  in  general,  were  much  better  disposed 
towards  him  than  towards  Eumenes,  notwithstanding  that 
most  of  the  leading  men  were  under  obligations  to  Eumenes, 
for  valuable  presents,  and  other  acts  of  kindness  ;  and  that, 
in  the  administration  of  government,  his  conduct  was  such, 
that  none  of  the  states  luider  his  dominion  felt  any  disposition 
to  change  situations  with  those  which  were  free.  With  re¬ 
gard  to  Perseus,  it  was  currently  reported,  that,  after  his 
father’s  deaUi,  he  had  killed  his  wife  with  his  own  hand ;  and 
invited  from  exile  A  pelles,  who  bad  formerly  been  his  in¬ 
strument  in  the  villanous  destruction  of  his  brother,  and  who 
had,  on  that  account,  been  carefully  searched  after  by  Philip, 
in  order  to  bring*  him  to  punishment.  Perseus  having  pre¬ 
vailed  ©n  Apelles  to  return,  by  promises  of  the  most  ample 
rewards  for  his  services,  put  him  privately  to  death.  Al¬ 
though  he  had  rendered  himself  infamous  by  many  other 
murders,  both  of  his  own  relations,  and  of  others,  and  pos¬ 
sessed  not  one  good  quality  to  recommend  him,  yet  the  Gre¬ 
cian  states  in  general  gave  him  the  preference  to  Eumenes, — 
to  a  prince  of  such  affection  towards  his  relations,  such  jus¬ 
tice  towards  his  subjects,  and  such  liberality  towards  all  man¬ 
kind  ;  whether  they  were  so  prejudiced  by  the  fame  and  dig¬ 
nity  of  the  Macedonian  kings,  as  to  despise  a  kingdom  lately 
formed,  or  were  led  by  a  wish  for  a  change  in  affairs,  or  w^re 
desirous  of  exposing  him  to  the  arms  of  the  Romans.  The 
iEtolians  were  not  the  only  people  in  a  state  of  distraction, 
on  account  of  the  intolerable  burden  of  their  debts:  the 

BOOK  XLII, 

55 

.C,  173.] 
Thessalians  were  in  the  same  situation ;  and  the  cvif ,  like  a 
pestilence,  had  spread  into  Perrhaebia  also.  As  soon  as  it 
was  known  that  the  Thessalians  were  in  arms,  the  senate  sent 
Appius  Claudius,  as  ambassador,  to  eicamine  and  adjust 
affairs.  He  severely  reprimanded  the  leaders  of  both  par¬ 
ties  ;  and,  after  cancelling  so  much  of  the  debts,  as  had  been 
accumulated  by  iniquitous  usury,  which  he  did  with  the  con¬ 
sent  of  the  greater  part  of  the  creditors  themselves,  he  or¬ 
dered  the  remaining  just  debts  to  be  discharged  by  annual 
payments.  In  the  same  manner,  Appius  regulated  the  busi¬ 
ness  of  Perrhaebia.  In  the  mean  time,  Marcellus,  at  Delphi, 
gave  a  hearing  to  the  disputes  of  the  .£tolians,  which  they 
maintained  with  no  less  hostile  acrimony  than  they  had  shown 
agmnst  each  other  in  the  heat  of  their  civil  war.  Perceiving 
that  they  vied  with  each  other  in  inconsiderate  violence,  he 
did  not  choose  to  make  any  determination,  to  lighten  or  ag¬ 
gravate  the  grievances  of  either  party,  but  required  of  both 
alike  to  cease  from  hostilities,  and,  forgetting  what  was  past, 
to  put  an  end  to  their  quarrels.  A  reconciliation  accordingly 
took  place  between  them,  and  was  confirmed  by  a  reciprocal 
exchange  of  hostages. 
VI.  A  meeting  was  appointed  at  Corinth,  in  order  that 
the  hostages  might  be  lodged  in  that  city.  On  the  breaking 
up  of  the  iEtolian  council,  Marcellus  crossed  over  from 
Delphi  into  Peloponnesus,  where  he  had  summoned  a  diet 
of  the  Achaeans.  There,  by  the  praises  which  he  bestowed 
on  ^at  nation,  for  having  resolutely  maintained  their  old  de¬ 
cree,  which  prohibited  the  admission  of  the  Macedonian 
kings  within  the  limits  of  their  territories,  he  manifested  the 
inveterate  hatred  of  the  Romans  towards  Perseus  ;  and  this 
hatred  broke  out  into  effect,  the  sooner,  in  consequence  of 
King  Eumenes  coming  to  Rome,  and  bringing  with  him  a 
written  state  of  the  preparations  made  for  war,  which  he  had 
drawn  up,  after  a  full  inquiry  into  every  particular.  Five 

$6 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  579. 

ainbassadors  were  now  sent  to  the  in  onrder  to  take  a 
view  affairs  in  Macedcmia ;  wlnmce  diey  were  to  proceed 
to  Aleximdriaf  to  renew  the  treaty  of  friendship  with  Ptolemy. 
These  were  Cains  Valerios,  Cneius  Lutatius  Cenro,  Quinttus 
Basbittt  Sulca,  Marcus  Comelitis  Mammola,  and  Marcus 
Csscffiiis  Denter.  About  the  ^none  time,  came  aitib^sadors 
from  King  Antiochus;  and  the  {^incipal  of  them,  called 
Apollonius,  being  admitted  to  audience  of  die  senate,  pre¬ 
sented,  on  behalf  of  his  King,  many  and  reasonable  apologies 
for  paying  the  tribute  later  than  the  day  appointed.  ^  He 
now  brought,”  he  said,  the  whole  of  it,  that  the  King  might 
not  trespass  on  their  indulgence,  in  any  odier  respect  than 
that  of  time.  He  was  moreover  charged  with  a  pesent  of 
golden  vases,  in  weight  five  hundred  pounds.  Antiochus 
requested,  that  the  treaty  of  alliance  and  amhy,  which  hial 
been  made  with  his  father,  might  be  renewed  with  him ;  and 
entreated  the  Roman  people  freely  to  demand  from  him  every 
service  which  might  be  expected  from  a  prince  sincerely  dis¬ 
posed  to  prove  himself  a  faithful  ally.  They  would  never  find 
him  remiss  in  the  performance  of  any  duty  towards  them. 
He  had,  while  in  Rome,  experienced  so  great  kinAiess  from 
the  senate,  and  so  much  courtesy  from  the  younger  part  of 
the  community,  that,  among  all  ranks  of  men,  he  was  treated 
as  a  soverei^,  not  as  a  hostage.”  A  gracious  answer  was 
returned  to  die  ambassadors,  and  Aulus  Atilius,  city  praetor, 
was  ordered  to  renew  with  Antiochus  the  alliance  formerly 
made  with  his  father.  The  city  quaestors  received  the  tri¬ 
bute,  and  the  censors  the  golden  vases,  which  they  were 
directed  to  deposit  in  whatever  temples  they  should  judge 
proper.  One  hundred  thousand  asses*  were  presented  to  the 
ambassador,  and  it  was  ordered,  diat  a  house  ibould  be  given 
him  for  his  accommcKlation,  and  his  expenses  defrayed,  as 

BOOK  XLII. 

B.C.  17$.] 

S7 

Icmg  as  he  should  rem^  in  Italy.  The  aidimssadors, 
had  been  in  Syria,  represented  him  as  standing  in  the 
degree  of  favour  with  tiac  Kh^,  and  a  very  warm  &knd  b> 
the  Romans.  Such  were  the  occurrences  of  tins  year  rt^|iec&* 
ing  the  provinces. 
VII.  Caius  Cicereius,  praetor  in  Corsica,  fought  the  ei^ny 
in  a  pitched  battle,  in  which  seven  thousand  of  the  Cprsicans 
were  slain,  and  more  than  one  thousand  seven  hundred  tab^. 
During  the  engagement,  the  praetor  vowed  a  temple  to  Jimo 
Moncta.  Peace  was  then  granted  to  that  pec^e,  on  their 
petitioning  for  it,  and  a  contribution  was  imposed,  of  two 
hun<hred  thousand  pounds  weight  of  wax.  Corsica  being  thus 
reduced  to  subjection,  Cicereius  sailed  back  to  Sardinia.  In 
Liguria,  also,  a  battle  was  fought  in  the  territory  of  Statiella, 
at  the  town  of  Carystas.  The  Ligurians  had  assend^led  them 
a  numerous  army,  who,  for  some  time  after  M^cus  Popillius’ 
arrival,  kept  themselves  within  the  walls ;  but  afterwards,  on 
the  Roman  general  preparing  to  lay  siege  to  the  town,  they 
marched  out  beyond  the  gates,  and  drew  up  in  order  of  bat* 
tie.  The  consul  declined  imt  an  engagement ;  it  was,  indeed, 
the  point  he  aimed  at  in  threatening  a  siege.  The  fight  was 
maintained  for  more  than  three  hours,  in  such  a  manne^t  that 
the  hope  of  victory  leaned  to  neither  side  ;  but  when  the  con* 
sul  perceived  that  the  Ligurian  battalions  no  where  gave 
ground,  he  ordered  the  cavalry  to  mount  their  horses,  and 
charge  in  three  places  at  once,  with  all  possible  violence.  A 
great  part  of  the  horse  broke  dirough  the  middle  of  the 
enemy’s  line,  and  made  their  way  to  the  rear  of  the  troops 
engaged,  which  struclc  such  terror  into^  their  whole  array  that 
they  fled  in  confusion  on  all  sides.  Very  few  ran  back  into 
the  town,  because  in  that  quarter,  chiefly,  the  cavalry  had 
thrown  themselves  in  their  way.  So  obstinate  a  contest  sw^t 
off  great  numbers  of  the  Ligurians,  and  many  perished  in 
the  flight ;  ten  thousand  of  them  are  said  to  have  been  kilt* 
VOL.  VI. - 1 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

[YM.S79. 

and  more  than  seven  hundred  taken,  in  various  places ; 
besides  whidi,  the  victors  brought  off  eigl^^two  of  dieir 
military  standards.  Nor  was  the  victcay  gained  without  loss 
of  blood  I  2bove  three  thousand  of  the  conquerors  fell  in  the 
conflict ;  for  neither  party  giving  way,  the  foremost  on  both 
sides  were  cut  off. 
VIII.  When  the  Ligurians,  after  their  dispersion  in  this 
defeat,  re-assembled  in  one  body,  they  found  that  a  much 
greater  number  of  their  countrymen  were  lost,  than  left  alive 
(for  there  were  not  above  ten  thousand  men  surviving) ;  on 
which  they  surrendered.  They  did  not  stipulate  for  any 
terms,  yet  entertained  hopes  that  the  consul  would  not  treat 
them  with  greater  severity,  than  had  been  practised  by  for¬ 
mer  commanders.  But  he  immediately  stripped  them  all  of 
their  arms,  and  razed  their  town.  He  then  made  sale  of 
themselves  and  their  effects  ;  which  done,  he  sent  a  letter  to 
the  senate,  relating  the  services  which  he  had  performed. 
When  A  ulus  Atilius  read  this  letter  in  the  council,  (for  the 
other  consul,  Postumius,  was  absent,  being  employed  in  sur¬ 
veying  the  lands  in  Campania,)  the  proceeding  appeared  to 
the  senate  in  a  heinous  light ;  “  that  the  people  of  Statiella, 
who  alone,  of  all  the  Ligurian  nation,  had  not  borne  arms 
against  the  Romans,  should  be  attacked,  when  not  offering 
hostilities,  and  even  after  surrendering  themselves  into  the 
protection  of  the  Roman  people, .  should  be  abused 'and  ex¬ 
terminated  by  every  instance  of  the  most  barbarous  cruelty, 
they  held  utterly  unpardonable  ;  Aat  so  many  thousands  of 
innocent  persons  suffering,  who  had  reckoned  on  the  faith  of 
the  Roman  people,  afforded  an  ex^ple  of  the  most  mis¬ 
chievous  tendency  ;  and  was  enough  to  deter ^y  from  sur¬ 
rendering  to  them  in  future  ;  dragged  as  they  were  away 
into  various  parts  of  the  country,  and  made  slaves  to  those 
who  were  formerly  the  avowed  enemies  of  Rome,  though 
now  reduced  to  quiet.  For  these  reasons  the  senate  ordered, 

BOOK  XLII, 

B.c.  trs.] 

S9 

that  the  c<m»u1,  Marcus  Popillius,  should  re-ins^tc  the  Li¬ 
gurians  in  their  liberty,  repaying  the  purchase-money  to  the 
buyers,  and  should  likewise  use  his  best  endeavours  to  re¬ 
cover  and  restore  their  effects,  and  also  their  arms ;  and  that, 
when  these  things  were  done,  he  should  immediately  retire 
out  of  the  province  ;  for  they  observed,  that  victory  became 
honourable  by  subduing  opposition,  not  by  cruelty  to  the  van* 
quished.” 
IX.  But  the  same  ferocious  temper  which,  actuated  the 
consul  in  his  conduct  towards  the  Ligurians,  urged  him  to  re¬ 
fuse  obedience  to  the  senate.  He  immediately  sent  the  le¬ 
gions  into  winter  quarters  at  Pisse,  and,  full  of  resentment 
against  the  sensUors  and  the  praetor,  went  home  to  Rome ; 
where,  instantly  assembling  the  senate  in  the  temple  of  Bel- 
lona,  he  poured  forth  a  torrent  of  invectives  against  the  city 
magistrate,  who,  “  when  he  ought  to  have  proposed  the  of¬ 
fering  of  a  thanksgiving  for  the  happy  successes  obtained  by 
the  Roman  arms,  had  procured  a  decree  of  the  senate  against 
him,  in  favour  of  the  enemy  ;  transferring  thereby  his  victory 
to  the  Ligurians  ;  and,  though  only  a  praetor,  he  had  ordered 
the  consul,  in  a  manner,  to  be  surrendered  to  them  :%e  there¬ 
fore  gave  notice,  that  he  would  sue  to  have  him  fine^.  From 
the  senate  he  demanded  a  repeal  of  their  decree  passed 
against  him ;  and  that  the  thanksgiving,  which  they  ought  to 
have  voted  on  the  authority  of  his  letter,  sent  from  abroad, 
with  an  account  of  the  success  of  the  arms  of  the  common¬ 
wealth,  should,  now,  when  he  was  present,  be  voted  j  first,  in 
consideration  of  the  honour  due  to  the  immortal  gods,  and, 
.next,  out  of  some  kind  of  regard  to  himself.’’  Many  of  the 
senator^  censured  him  to  his  face,  in  terras  no  less  severe  than 
they  had  used  in  his  absence  ^  and,  not  being  able  to  obtain 
either  of  his  requests,  he  returned  to  his  province.  The  other 
consul,  Postumius,  after  spending  the  whole  summer  in  sur¬ 
veying  the  lands,  without  even  seeing  his  province,  came 

60 

HISTORY  OF  ROME- 

[Y.R.  S79. 

home  to  Rome  to  hold  the  elections,  when  Cains  Popillius 
Laenas  and  Publius  iElius  Ligus  were  chosen  consuls.  Then 
were  elected  praetors,  Cains  Licinius  Crassns,  Marcus  Ju¬ 
nius  Pennus,  Spurius  Lucretius,  Spurius  Cluvius,  Cneius  Si- 
cinius,  and  Cains  Memmius,  a  second  time. 
X.  The  lustrum  was  closed  this  year.  The  censors  were 
Quintus  Fulvius  Flaccus  and  Lucius  Postumius  Albinus, 
the  latter  of  whom  performed  the  ceremony.  In  this  survey 
were  rated  two  hundred  and  sixty-nine  thousand  and  fifteen 
Roman  citizens.  The  number  would  have  been  much  greater 
had  not  the  consul,  Lucius  Postumius,  given  public  orders, 
in  assembly,  that  none  of  the  Latine  allies,  (who,  according  to 
the  edict  of  the  consul  Caius  Claudius,  ought  to  have  gone 
home,)  should  be  surveyed  at  Rome,  but  all  of  them  in  their 
respective  countries.  The  censors  conducted  themselves  in 
the  office  with  perfect  harmony,  and  zeal  for  the  public  good. 
They  disfranchised  and  degraded  from  their  tribes  every  one 
whom  they  expelled  the  senate,  or  from  whom  they  took 
away  his  horse ;  nor  did  either  approve  a  person  censured 
by  the  other,  Fulvius,  at  this  time,  dedicated  the  temple  of 
Equest^an  Fortune,  which  he  had  vowed  six  years  before, 
and  when  proconsul  in  Spain,  during  the  battle  with  the  Cel- 
tiberians  ;  he  also  exhibited  stage-plays,  which  lasted  four 
days,  in  one  of  which  the  performance  was  in  the  Circus. 
Lucius  Cornelius  Lentulus,  decemvir  in  religious  matters, 
died  this  year,  and  Aulus  Postumius  Albinus  was  substituted 
in  his  room.  Such  great  clouds  of  locusts  were  suddenly 
brought  by  the  wind  over  the  sea  into  Apulia,  that  they  cov¬ 
ered  a  great  part  of  the  country ;  in  order  to  remove  this  pest, 
so  destructive  to  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  Caius  Sicinius,  prae- 
tear  eject,  was  sent  in  command,  with  a  vast  multitude  of  peo¬ 
ple,  to  gather  them  up,  which  took  a  ccmsiderable  time.  The 
beginning  of  the  year,  in  which  Caius  Popillius 
B  C  1^*  and  Publius  iElius  were  consuls,  was  employed  in 
the  disputes  which  had  arisen  in  the  last.  The 

BOOK  XLn. 

61 

B.C- 172.] 

senators  were  desirous  tteit  the  business  resj^cting  the  Ligu- 
ri^s  should  be  reconsidered,  and  the  decree  renewed,  -filius, 
the  consul,  was  willing  to  propose  it,  but  Popillius  warmly  in¬ 
terceded  for  his  brother,  both  widi  his  colleague  and  die  sen¬ 
ate  ;  and,  by  giving  notice,  that  if  any  vote  should  be  passed  on 
the  subject  he  would  enter  his  protest,  he  deterred  him  from 
proceeding  in  the  matter.  The  senate  being  hereby  equaHy 
incensed  against  them,  persisted  the  more  obstinately  in  their 
intention  ;  and,  when  they  took  into  consideration  die  distri¬ 
bution  of  the  provinces,  although  the  consuls  wished  for  Ma¬ 
cedonia,  because  a  war  with  Perseus  was  daily  expected, 
they  a»Bigned  Liguria  as  the  province  of  both,  declaring  that 
they  would  not  vote  Macedonia  to  them,  unless  the  question 
vrcTC  put  on  the  affair  of  Marcus  PopiUius.  The  consuls,  af¬ 
terwards,  demanded  that  they  might  be  authorised  to  raise 
either  new  armies,  or  recruits  to  fill  up  the  old  ;  both  were 
refused.  The  prsetors  for  Spain,  also,  applied  for  reinforce¬ 
ment  ;  Marcus  Junius  for  Hither  Spain,  and  Spurius  Lucre¬ 
tius  for  the  Farther,  and  were  in  like  manner  refused,  Caius 
Licinius  Crassus  obtained,  by  lot,  the  city  jurisdiction ; 
Cneius  Sicinius,  the  foreign  ;  Caius  Memmius,  Sicily  ;  and 
Spurius  Cluvius,  Sardinia.  'Fhc  consuls,  enraged  against  the 
senate,  appointed  an  early  day  for  the  Latine  festival,  at  the 
^ame  time  declaring  openly,  that  they  would  go  away  to  their 
province,  and  would  not  transact  any  kind  of  business,  ex¬ 
cept  what  belonged  to  their  own  government. 
XI.  Valerius  Antias  writes,  that,  in  this  consulate,  Attalus, 
brother  to  King  Eumenes,  came  to  Rome  as  ambassador, 
with  heavy  charges  against  Perseus,  and  an  account  of  his 
preparations  for  war.  But  the  greater  number  of  historians, 
and  those  deemed  most  worthy  of  credit,  assert,  that  Eu¬ 
menes  came  in  person.  Eumenes  then,  on  his  arrival,  Vas 
received  with  every  degree  of  respect  which  the  Roman  pco^ 
pie  judged  suitable,  not  merely  to  his  deserts,  but  also  to 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R. 
tl^ir  own  fbrm^  favours,  bestowed  on  him  ia  great 
dance.  Being  introduced  to  the  ^aate,  he  said^  that  the 
reasmi  which  had  induced  himi  to  come  to  Rome,  besides  Us 
wish  to  visit  those  gods  and  mm  who  had  placed  him  in 
a  situation  beyond  which  he  could  not  presume  to  form  a 
wish^  was,  that  he  might  in  person  forewarn  the  senate  to 
tmcmteract  the  designs  of  Perseus.”  Then,  begiiming  with 
the  projects  of  Philip,  he  mentioned  his  murder  of  Demetrius, 
because  that  prince  was  averse  from  a  war  with  Rome,  and 
of  calling  the  Bastarnian  nation  from  their  several  residences, 
that  he  might  have  their  support  in  coming  into  Italy. 
‘‘  While  Us  thoughts  were  busied  in  plans  of  this  >abrt,  he 
was  surprised  by  the  approach  of  death,  and  left  his  kingdom 
to  the  person  whom  he  knew  to  be,  of  aU  men,  the  bitterest 
foe  to  the  Romans.  Perseus,  therrfofe,”  said  he,  **  having 
received  this  scheme  of  a  war,  as  a  legacy  bequeathed  by  his 
father,  and  descending  to  him  along  with  the  crown,  adtances 
jmd  improves  it,  as  his  primary  object,  by  every  means  that 
he  can  devise.  He  is  powerful,  in  respect  of  the  number  of 
his  young  men,  a  long  peace  having  produced  a  plentiful  pro¬ 
geny  ;  he  is  powerful,  in  respect  of  the  resources  of  his  king¬ 
dom  ;  and  powerful,  likewise,  in  respect  of  his  age.  And  as, 
at  his  time  of  life,  he  possesses  vigour  of  body,  so  his  mind 
has  been  thoroughly  trained,  both  in  the  theory  and  practice 
of  war ;  for,  even  from  his  childhood,  he  accompanied  his 
father  in  his  campaigns,  and  thereby  became  enured  to  it,  not 
only  against  the  neighbouring  states,  but  also  against  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  being  employed  by  him,  in  many  and  various  expedi¬ 
tions.  Add  to  this,  diat  since  the  government  came  into  Us 
own  hands,  he  has,  by  a  wonderful  train  of  prosperous  events, 
*acccomplished  many  things  which  PUlip,  after  using  his  best 
efIE&rts,  could  never  effect,  cither  by  force  or  artifice. 
XII.  “  Besides  his  strength,  he  has  such  a  degree  of  influ¬ 
ence,  as  is  usually  acquired,  in  a  great  length  of  time,  by  ma- 

BOOR  XWL 

e$ 

BX.172.] 
ny  and  impm^tant  kindnesses.  For^  in  the  several  st^ites 
tluroughout  Greece  and  Asia,  all  men  revere  the  digiuty  of 
his  character  i  nor  do  I  perceive  for  i«hat  deserts,  for 
generosity,  such  uncommon  respect  is  paid  him  ;  neither  can 
I,  with  certainty,  say,  whether  it  is  the  ^ect  of  some;good 
fortune  attending  him,  or  whether,  what  I  mention  with  re-* 
luctance,  a  general  dislike  to  the  Romans  attacl^s  men  to  bis 
interest.  Even  among  sovereign  priiH:es,  his  influence  is  ex¬ 
ceedingly  extensive.  He  married  the  daughter  of  Seleucus,  a 
match  which  he  did  not  solicit,  but  to  which  he  was  solicited 
by  her  friends ;  and  he  gave  his  sister  in  marriage  to  Prurias, 
in  compliance  with  his  earnest  prayers  and  entreaties.  Both 
these  marriages  were  solemnized  amidst  congratulations  aod 
presents  from  innumerable  embs^ies,  the  royal  couples  be¬ 
ing  escorted  by  the  mast  renowned  nations,  acting  as  bridal 
attendants.  The  Boeotians  could  never  be  brought,  by  all  the 
intrigues  of  Philip,  to  sign  a  treaty  of  friendship  with  him  ; 
but  now,  a  treaty  with  Perseus  is  engraved  at  three  different 
places,  at  Thebes,  in  Delos,  in  the  most  venerable  and  cele- 
teited  temple,  and  at  Delphi.  Then,  in  the  diet  of  Achaia, 
(only  that  the  proceeding  was  stopped  by  a*  few  persons, 
threatening  them  with  the  displeasure  of  the  Roman  govern¬ 
ment,) — ^the  business  was  nearly  effected,  of  allowing  him  ad¬ 
mission  into  that  country.  But,  as  to  the  honours,  formerly 
paid  to  myself,  (whose  kindnesses  to  that  nation  have  been 
such,  that  it  is  hard  to  say,  whether  my  public  or  private  bene¬ 
factions  were  the  greater,) — ^they  have  been  lost,  partly 
through  neglect,  and  partly  by  hostile  means.  Who  does  not 
know  that  the  iEltolians,  lately,  on  occasion  oi  their  intestine 
broils,  .sought  protection,  not  from  the  Romans,  but  from 
Perseus  ?  For,  while  he  is  upheld  by  these  alliances  and 
friendships,  he  has  at  home  such  preparations  of  every  re¬ 
quisite  for  wm*,  that  he  wants  nothing  from  abroad.  He  has 
thirty  thousand  foot,  and  five  thousand  horse,  and  is  laying 

64 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  580. 
a  store  of  com  for  ten  years,  so  that  hxs  country  is  in  no 
kind  of  danger  with  respect  to  provisions.  He  h^s  amassed  mo¬ 
ney  to  such  m  mnouat,  as  to  have  in  readiness  the  pay  of  t^ 
thousand  mercenary  soldiers,  besides  the  .Macedonian  troops, 
for  the  amne  number  of  years,  as  well  as  the  annual  revenue 
accming  from  the  royal  mines.  He  has  stored  up  arms  for 
three  times  that  number  of  men ;  and  has  Thrace  under  sub- 
jectmn,  from  w^^^ch,  as  a  never-failing  spring,  he  can  draw 
suppties  of  young  men.” 
XIII.  The  rest  of  his  discourse  contained  exhortations  to 
timely  exertions :  Conscript  Fathers,”  said  he,  the  re- 
jnresentations  which  I  have  made  to  you  are  ndt  founded  on 
uncertain  rumours,  and  too  readily  believed  by  me,  because 
I^wished  such  charges  against  my  enemy  to  be  true  but  cm  a 
clear  discovery  of  t^  facts,  as  if  I  had  been  sent  by  you  to 
make  it.  Nor  would  I  have  left  my  kingdom,  which  you  have 
rendered  ample,  and  highly  respectable,  and  crossed  such  a 
tract  of  sea,  to  injure  my  own  credit  by  offering  you  unau¬ 
thenticated  reports.  I  saw  the  most  remarkable  states  of  Asia 
and  Greece,  every  day,  gradually  unfolding  their  sentiments, 
and  ready  to  -proceed,  shortly,  to  such  lengths,  as  would  not 
leave  them  room  for  repentance.  I  saw  Perseus,  not  confimng 
himself  within  the  limits  of  Macedonia,  but  seizing  some 
places  by  force  of  arms,  and  seducing,  by  favour  and  kind¬ 
ness,  those  which  he  could  not  subdue.  I  perceived  how  un¬ 
fair  a  footing  matters  stood  on,  while  his  intentions  towards 
you  were  evidently  hostile,  and  yours  towards  him  perfectly 
pacific.  Although  to  my  judgment,  he  did  not  appear  to  be 
preparing,  but  to  be  rather  waging  war.  Abrupolis,  your 
ally  and  friend,  he  dethroned.  Artetarus  the^ Illyrian,  another 
ally  and  friend  of  yours,  he  put  to  death,  on  hearing  of  some 
information  which  he  had  afforded  you.  The  Thebans,  E  ver¬ 
sa  and  Callicratus,  two  of  the  chief  men  in  the  state,  he  pro¬ 
cured  to  be  taken  off,  because,  in  the  council  of  the  Boeotians, 

BOOK  XLIL 

65 

B.c.  irs.] 
they  had  spoken  with  more  than  ordinary  freedom  against 
him,  and  declared,  that  they  would  inform  the  Romans  of 
what  was  going  on.  He  carried  succour  to  the  Byzantians, 
contrary  to  the  treaty.  He  made  war  on  Dolopia.  He  over¬ 
ran  Thessaly  and  Doris,  with  an  army,  in  order  to  take  ad¬ 
vantage  of  the  civil  war  then  raging,  and  by  the  help  of  the 
party,  which  had  the  worse  cause,  to  crush  the  other,  which 
had  more  right  on  its  side.  He  raised  universal  confusion 
and  disorder  in  Thessaly  and  Perrhaebia,  by  holding  out  a 
prospect  of  an  abolition  of  debts,  that,  by  means  of  the  mul¬ 
titude  of  debtors  thereby  attached  to  his  interest,  he  might 
overpower  the  nobles.  As  you  remained  inactive  and  patient 
during  all  these  transactions,  and  as  he  sees  Greece  yielded 
up  to  him  by  you,  he  firmly  believes  that  he  will  not  meet 
with  one  opponent  in  arms,  until  he  arrives  in  Italy.  How 
safe  or  how  honourable  this  might  be  for  you,  yourselves  will 
consider  ;  for  my  part,  I  thought  it  would  certainly  reflect 
dishonour  on  me,  if  Perseus  should  come  into  Italy  to  make 
war,  before  I,  your  ally,  came  to  warn  you  to  be  on  your 
guard.  Having  discharged  this  duty,  necessarily  incumbent 
on  me,  and,  in  some  measure,  freed  and  exonerated  my  faith, 
what  can  I  do  farther,  except  beseeching  the  gods  and  god¬ 
desses  that  you  may  adopt  such  measures  as  will  prove  salu¬ 
tary  to  yourselves,  to  your  commonwealth,  and  to  us,  your 
allies  and  friends,  who  depend  upon  you.” 
XIV .  His  discourse  made  a  deep  impression  on  the  senate. 
However,  for  the  present,  no  one,  without  doors,  could  know 
any  thing  more  than  that  the  Ring  had  been  in  the  senate - 
house,  such  secrecy  was  observed  by  all  the  members  ;  and 
it  was  not  until  after  the  conclusion  of  the  war,  that  the  pur¬ 
port  of  King  Eumenes’s  speech,  and  the  answer  to  it,  trans¬ 
pired.  In  a  few  days  after,  the  senate  gave  audience  to  the 
ambassadors  of  Perseus.  But  their  minds  had  been  so  pre¬ 
possessed  by  King  Eumenes,  that  every  plea  offered  in  his 
VOL.  VI. — K 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  58a 

0fe 
justification  by  the  ambassadors,  and  every  argument  to  alle¬ 
viate  the  charges  against  him,  was  disregarded.  They  were 
still  farther  exasperated  by  the  immoderate  p/esumption  irf 
Harpalus,  chief  of  the  embassy,  who  said,  that  “  the  King 
was  indeed  desirous,  and  even  anxious,  that  they  should  give 
credit  to  his  asseveration,  respecting  his  conduct,  that  he  had 
neither  said  nor  done  any  thing  hostile  ;  but  that,  if  he  saw 
them  obstinately  bent  on  finding  out  a  pretence  for  war,  he 
wouW  defend  himself  with  courage  and  resolution.  The  for¬ 
tune  of  war  was  open  to  all,  and  the  issue  uncertain.”  All 
the  states  of  Greece  and  Asia  were  full  of  curiosity  to  learn 
what  the  ambassadors  of  Perseus,  and  what  Eumenes,  had 
effected  with  the  senate ;  and  most  of  them,  on  hearing  of  the 
latter’s  journey  to  Rome,  which  they  supposed  might  pro¬ 
duce  material  consequences,  had  sent  ambassadors  thither, 
under  pretexts  of  other  business.  Among  the  rest  came  an 
embassy  from  Rhodes,  at  the  head  of  which  was  a  person 
named  Satyrus,  who  had  no  kind  of  doubt,  but  that 
had  included  his  state  in  the  accusations  brought  against  Per¬ 
seus.  He  therefore  endeavoured,  by  every  means,  through 
his  patrons  and  friends,  to  get  an  opportunity  of  debating  the 
matter  with  Eumenes  in  presence  of  the  senate.  When  he 
obtained  this,  he  inveighed  against  that  King  with  intempe¬ 
rate  vehemence,  as  having  instigated  the  people  of  Lycia  to 
an  attack  on  the  Rhodians,  and  as  being  more  oppressive  to 
Asia  than  Antiochus  had  been.  This  rendered  his  discourse 
flattering  indeed,  and  acceptable  to  the  states  of  Asia,— (for 
the  popularity  of  Perseus  had  spread  even  to  them,) — ^but 
very  displeasing  to  the  senate,  and  disadvantageous  to  him¬ 
self  and  his  nation..  This  apparent  conspiracy  against  Eu¬ 
menes  increased,  indeed,  the  favour  of  the  Romans  towards 
him,  so  that  every  kind  of  honour  was  paid,  and  the  most 
magnificent  presents  were  made  him  ;  among  which  were  a 
curule  chair  and  an  ivory  sceptre. 

BOOK  XLII. 

er 

B.C.  una.] 
XV.  After  the  enAi^sies  were  dismissed,  Harpalus  ha^e»- 
ed  home  to  Macedcmia,  and  told  the  King,  that  he  had  left  file 
Romans,  not  indeed  making  immediate  preparations  for  war, 
but  in  such  anangryt^mper,thatitwas  very  evident  they  would 
not  defer  it  long.  Perseus  himself,  who  all  along  believed 
that  this  would  be  the  case,  now  even  wished  for  it,  as  he 
thought  himself  at  the  highest  pitch  of  power  that  he  could 
ever  expect  to  attain.  Being  more  vic^ndy  incensed  agamst 
Eumenes  than  against  any  other,  he  resolved  to  con^aem;e 
the  war  by  shedding  his  blood  ;  and  he  suborned  Evander,  a 
Cretan,  commander  of  the  auxiliaries,  and  three  Macedoni¬ 
ans,' who  were  accustomed  to  the  perpetration  of  such  deeds, 
to  murder  that  King,  giving  them  a  letter  to  a  woman  called 
Praxo,  an  acquaintance  of  his,  the  wealthiest  and*  most  pow¬ 
erful  person  at  Delphi,  It  was  generally  known  that '  Eu¬ 
menes  intended  going  up  to  Delphi,  to  sacrifice  to  Apollo. 
Thither  the  assassins,  with  Evander,  proceeded  in  search  of 
a  convenient  place  for  the  execution  of  their  design.  On  the 
road  from  Cirra  to  the  temple,  before  they  came  to  the  places 
thickly  inhaWted,  there  was  a  wall  on  the  left  side,  at  the  foot 
of  which  was  a  narrow  path,  where  single  persons  could  pass  ; 
on  the  right,  the  ground  had  sunk,  and  formed  a  precipice  of 
considerable  depth.  Behind  this  wall  they  concealed  them¬ 
selves,  and  raised  up  steps  to  it,  that  from  thence,  as  from 
that  of  a  fortress,  they  might  discharge  their  weapons  on  the 
King,  as  he  passed  by.  At  first,  as  he  came  up  from  the  sea, 
he  was  surrounded  by  a  multitude  of  his  friends  and  atten¬ 
dants ;  afterwards,  the  road,  growing  gradually  narfower, 
consequently  made  the  train  thinner  about  him.  When  they 
arrived  at  the  spot  where  each  was  to  pass  singly,  the  first 
who  advanced  on  the  path  was  Pantaleon,  an  iEtolian  of  dis¬ 
tinction,  who  was  at  the  time  in  conversation  with  the  King. 
The  assassins  now,  starting  up,  roiled  down  two  huge  stones, 
one  of  which  struck  Eumenes  on  the  head,  and  the  other  on 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  580. 

tEe  shoulder,  with  such  force  as  to  deprive  bka  of  aeapation, 
^d,  as  he  tumbled  from  the  sloping  path  down  the 
they  poured  a  multitude  of  stones  upon  him.  The  rest  his 
friends  and  attendants,  on  seeing  him  fall,  fled  different  ways, 
but  Pantaleon,  with  great  in^^pidity  and  resolution,  kept  his 
ground,  in  order  to  protect  the  King. 
XVI.  The  assassins  might,  by  making  a  short  circftk  round 
the  wall,  have  run  down  and  completed  their  business ;  they 
yet  fled  off  towards  the  top  of  Parnassu^jivith  precipitation. 
One  of  them,  however,  being  unable  to  keep  up  with  the  rest 
through  the  pathless  and  steep  grounds,  and  thus  retarding 
their  flight,  they  killed  him  lest  he  should  be  taken,  and  a 
discovery  ensue.  The  friends,  and  then  the  guards  and  ser- 
vants  ofthe  King  ran  together  and  raised  him  up,  while  he 
was  in  a  swoon,  and  quite  insensible.  However,  they  per¬ 
ceived  from  the  warmth  of  his  body  and  the  breath  remaining 
in  his  lungs,  that  he  was  still  alive,  but  had  little  or  no  hopes 
that  he  would  ever  recover.  Some  of  bis  guards  puisued  the 
tracks  of  the  assassins  with  much  fatigue  to  the  summit  of  the 
hill,  but  returned  without  being  able  to  overtake  them.  As 
the  Macedonians  set  about  the  deed  injudiciously,  so,  aftef 
making  the  attempt  with  boldness,  they  abandoned  it  in  a 
manner  both  foolish  and  cowardly.  Next  day  the  JSling,  who 
had  by  this  time  come  to  himself,  was  conveyed  by  his  friends 
on  ship-board,  and  sailed  thence  to  Corinth  ;  then,  having 
drawn  their  vessels  across  the  neck  of  the  isthmus,  they  cross¬ 
ed  over  to  Agina^^Here  his  cure  was  conducted  with  such 
secrecy,  no  one  being  admitted  to  see  him,  that  a  report  of 
bis  death  was  carried  into  Asia,  and  was  believed,  even  by 
Attains,  with  more  readiness  than  became  an  affectionate 
brother :  for  he  talked,  both  to  Eumenes'  consort,  and  to  the 
governor  of  the  citadel,  as  if  he  had  actually  succeeded  to  the 
crown. .  This,  afterwards,  came  to  theinowledge  of  the  King, 
who,  though  he  had  determined  to  .dissemble,  and  to  it 

B(mK  XLB. 

at 

over  US  lienee,  ytt  could  not  re£ram,  at  thek  first  s^thig, 
tcom  ralfymg  Attsdos,  on  his  premature  haste  to  a  wife. 
The  report  of  Eumenes’  death  spread  even  to  Rome* 
XVIL  About  Ae  same  time,  Caius  Valerius,  who  had 
l^en  sent  ambassador  Greece,  to  examine  Ae  state  g£ 
Aat*country,  and  to  chs^*ve  timmoveo^nts  of  Kmg  Perseus, 
mturm^d  home  ;  and  hk  repenrts  aixorded,  in  every  circum¬ 
stance,  with  the  representations  made  by  Eumenes.  Ac 
brought  with  him,3)/rom  Delphi,  Praxo,  the  woman  whose 
house  had  served  as  a  receptacle  for  the  s^sassins ;  ai^  Lu¬ 
cius  Rammius,  a  Brundusian,  giving  informatimi  to  Ais  ef* 
feet :  Aat  Rammius  was  a  person  of  the  first  distinction  at 
Brundttsium,  accustomed  to  entijsrtain  in  his  house  the  Ro¬ 
man  commanders,  and  such  ambassadors  as  came  Aat  way 
from  foreign  powers,  especially  those  of  the  Kings.  By  th^e 
means  he  became  known  to  Perseus,  although  his  dominions 
were  so  distant ;  and,  in  consequence  of  a  letter  from  him, 
which  gave  hopes  of  a  more  intimate  friendship,  and  of  great 
advantages  to  accrue  to  him,  he  went  on  a  visit  to  the  King, 
and,  in  a  short  time,  found  himself  treated  with  particular  fa¬ 
miliarity,  and  drawn  oftener  than  he  wished,  into  privaiEe  con¬ 
versations.  Perseus,  after  promises  of  the  highest  rewards, 
pressed  him,  with  the  most  earnest  solicitations,  as  all  the 
commanders  and  ambassadors  of  the  Romans  used  to  lodge 
at  his  house,  to  procure  poison  to  be  given  to  such  of  them 
as  he  should  point  out  by  letter and  told  him,  that,  as  he 
knew  the  preparation  of  poison  to  be  at^ded  with  the  great¬ 
est  difficulty  and  danger,  and  Aat  ordinarily  it  could  not  be  ad- 
mimstered  without  the  privity  of  several.  Besides,  the  dose  was 
not  always  certain  in  its  operation,  either  as  to  its  power  to 
produce  Ae  desired  effect,  or  its  safety  wiA  respect  to  con- 
cealment *he  would,  therefore,  give  him  some  which  would 
not  afford  any  sign  that  could  lead  to  detection.^’  Rammius 
dreading,  lest,  in  case  of  refusal,  he  should  himself  be  the 

70 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  J^80. 

first  on  whom  the  poison  would  be  tried,  promised  compli¬ 
ance,  and  departed  ;  but  not  thinking  it  prudent  to  return  to 
Brundusium^  without  first  applying  to  Caius  Valerius^  the 
ambassador,  who  was  said  to  be  at  that  time  in  the  neigh¬ 
bourhood  of  Chalcis,  he  first  disclosed  the  affair  to  him  ;  and 
then,  by  his  order,  accompanied  him  to  Rome,  where,  being 
feought  before  the  senate,  he  gave  them  an  account  of  what 
had  passed. 
XVIII.  These  discoveries,  added  to  the  representations 
made  before  by  Eumenes,hastened  a  declaration  of  war  against 
Perseus  ;  the  senate  perceiving  that  he  did  not  content  him¬ 
self  with  preparing,  with  the  spirit  of  a  King,  for  a  fair  and 
open  war,  but  pushed  his  designs  by  all  the  base  clandestine 
means  of  assassination  and  poison.  It  was  resolved,  that  the 
new  consuls  should  have  the  conduct  of  the  war  j  but,  in  the 
mean  time,  an  order  was  given,  that  Cneius  Sicinius,  the 
prgetor,  whose  province  was  the  jurisdiction  between  natives 
and  foreigners,  should  raise  a  body  of  troops,  to  be  led  with 
all  expedition  to  Brundusium,  and  thence  carried  over  into 
Apollonia  in  Epirus,  in  order  to  secure  the  cities  on  the  sea- 
coasts  ;  so  as  that  the  consul,  who  should  have  Macedonia  as 
his  province,  might  put  in  bis  fleet  witH  safety,  and  land  his 
troops  with  convenience.  Eumenes  was  detained  a  long  time 
at  -/Egina,  his  wounds  proving  dangerous,  and  the  cure  diffi¬ 
cult  ;  but,  as  soon  as  he  could  remove  with  safety,  he  went 
home  to  Pergamus,  and  set  on  foot  the  most  vigorous  pre¬ 
parations  for  war,  to  which  he  was  now  stimulated  by  the 
late  atrocious  villany  of  Perseus,  in  addition  to  the  ancient 
enmity  which  subsisted  between  them.  Ambassadors  soon 
came  from  Rome,  with  congratulations  on  his  escape  from  so 
great  a  danger.  The  war  with  Macedonia  was  deferred  to 
the  next  year ;  on  this,  (when  the  other  praetors  had  gone 
away  to  their  provinces,)  Marcus  Junius  and  Spurius  Lucre¬ 
tius,  to  whom  the  Spanish  affairs  had  fallen,  by  tcazing  the 

BOOK  XLII. 

ri 

B.C.  172,] 
senate  with  frequent  repetitions  of  the  same  request,  dtoined 
at  last  a  grant  of  recruits  for  their  army.  They  were'  com* 
manded  to  raise  three  thousand  foot  and  one  hundred  and 
fifty  horse  for  the  Roman  legions ;  and  to  levy,  from  the  at* 
lies,  for  the  confederate  troops,  five  thousand  foot  and  three 
hundred  horse  :  this  number  of  forces  the  new  praetors  car¬ 
ried  with  them  into  Spain. 
XIX.  In  consequence  of  the  inquiries,  made  by  the  consul 
Postumius,  a  large  portion  of  the  lands  of  Campania,  which 
had  been  usurped  by  private  persons,  indiscriminately,  in  va¬ 
rious  parts,  had  been  recovered  to  the  public.  Wherefore,  in 
this  year,  Marcus  Lucretius,  plebeian  tribune,  published  a 
proposal  for  an  order  of  the  people,  that  the  censors  should 
let  those  lands  to  farm ;  a  measure  which  had  been  omitted 
during  so  many  years,  since  the  taking  of  Capua,  that  the 
greediness  of  individuals  might  have  clear  room  to  work  in. 
After  war,  though  not  yet  proclaimed,  had  been  resolved  cai, 
and  while  the  senate  was  anxious  to  know  which  of  the  seve¬ 
ral  kings  would  espouse  their  cause,  and  which  that  of  Per¬ 
seus,  ambassadors  came  to  Rome,  from  Ariarathes,  bringing 
with  them  his  younger  son.  The  purport  of  their  message 
was,  that  ‘‘  the  King  had  sent  his  son  to  be  educated  at  Rome, 
in  order  that  he  might,  even  from  childhood,  be  acquainted 
with  the  manners  and  the  persons  of  the  Romans ;  and  he  re¬ 
quested,  that  they  would  allow  him  to  enjoy,  not  only  the  pror 
tection  of  his  particular  friends,  but  likewise  the  care,  and  in 
some  measure  the  guardianship,  of  the  public.’’  This  embas¬ 
sy  was  highly  pleasing  to  the  senate  ;  and  they  ordered,  that 
Cneius  Sicinius,  the  praetor,  should  hire  a  furnished  house 
for  the  accommodation  of  the  young  prince  and  his  attendants. 
Ambassadors  from  some  of  the  states  of  Thrace  attended  the 
senate,  for  their  decision  of  a  dispute,  and  requested  a  treaty 
of  alliance  and  friendship  ;  and  they  not  only  obtained  their 
request,  but  received,  each  of  them,  a  present  to  the  amount 

72 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  580. 

of  two  thousand  mses  y*  for  the  Romans  were  rejoiced  at 
gaming  the  friendship  of  those  states,  in  {articular,  as  they 
lay  at  the  back  of  Macedonia.  But,  in  order  to  acquire  a  clear 
knowledge  of  every  thing  in  Asia  and  in  the  islands,  they 
sent  ambassadors,  Tiberius  Claudius  Nero  and  Marcus  De- 
eimus,  with  orders  to  go  to  Crete,  and  Rhodes,  to  renew  the 
treaties  of  friendship,  and  at  the  same  time  to  observe  whether 
any  attempts  were  made  by  Perseus  to  seduce  the  affections 
of  the  allies, 
XX.  While  the  minds  of  the  public  were  in  a  state  of  ex¬ 
treme  anxiety  and  suspense,  with  respect  to  the  impending 
war,  a  storm  happened  in  the  night,  during  which  the  pillar 
in  the  Capitol,  ornamented  with  beaks  of  ships,  which  had 
been  erected  in  the  first  Punic  war,  by  the  consul  Marcus 
Mmilius^  whose  colleague  was  Servius  Fulvius,  was  shatter¬ 
ed  to  pieces,  even  to  the  very  foundation,  by  lightning.  This 
event  was  deemed  a  prodigy,  and  reported  to  the  senate,  who 
ordered,  that  it  should  be  laid  before  the  aruspices,  and  that 
the  decemvirs  should  consult  the  books.  The  decemvirs,  in 
answer,  directed  that  the  city  should  be  purified  ;  that  a  sup¬ 
plication,  and  prayers,  for  the  averting  of  misfortunes,  should 
be  offered,  and  victims  of  the  larger  kinds  sacrificed,  both  in 
the  Capitol  at  Rome,  and  at  the  promontory  of  Minerva  in 
Campania;  and  that  games  should  be  celebrated,  as  soon 
as  possible,  in  honour  of  Jupiter,  supremely  good  and  great, 
during  ten  days.  All  these  directions  were  carefully  execu¬ 
ted,  and  the  aruspices  answered,  that  the  prodigy  would  prove 
happy  in  the  issue ;  that  it  portended  extension  of  territory 
and  destruction  of  enemies ;  for  those  beaks  of  ships, 
which  the  storm  had  scattered,  were  to  be  held  as  spoils. 
There  were  other  occurrences  which  occasioned  religious  ap¬ 
prehensions  :  it  was  said,  that  at  the  town  of  Satumia  showers 

61.  9s.  2d. 

BOOK  XML 

blood  fell  tkreft  success^  ^ys  ;  tiixt  m  fms^  widi 
difW  feet,  Wm  iaaijed  ni  Calada  a  bdl,  with  fere  cowa, 
«we  kiUedhyone  stroll  of  Kghlaasg;  smi  diat  a 
emrth  had  fallen  at  Oskmvmir  On  accomM^  o(  these  pro^gks, 
abOf  fniUic  worship  was  perforou^l,  "a  supplicatkm 
f^val  observed  ior  otie  day. 
XXI.  The  comuk  were  laot  yet  gone  to  dtchr  provintes  ' 
for  they  would  not  ctmiplf  with  the  senate,  in  proposing^die 
Business  respecting  Marcus  PopiUius,  and,  <m  the  oth^  hand, 
die  senate  was  determined  to  pr€«:eed  on  no  other  until  that 
was  done.  The  general  resentment  against  Popillius  was 
gravated  by  a  ktter  received  from  him,  in  which  he  mendod* 
ed  that  he  had,  as  proconsul,  fought  a  second  Imule  widi  ^ 
Ligurians  of  Statiella,  ten  thousand  of  whom  he  had  kiUed, 
and  that  the  rest  of  the  Ligurian  stales,  (no  dmibt  provoked 
at  the  injusdce  of  this  attack,)  had  ail  taken  aims.  On  thk 
the  most  severe  animadversions  were  uttered  m  die  semuxi, 
not  cmly  against  the  absent  Popillius,  for  having,  contrary  to 
all  laws  human  and  divine,  made  war  on  people  who  hi^  sub¬ 
mitted  to  terms,  and  stirred  up  to  rebeilimi  states  that  were 
disposed  to  live  in  peace,  but  also  against  the  consuls  for  not 
having  proceeded  to  that  province.  Encouraged  by  die 
unanimous  opinion  of  the  senators,  two  plebeian  tri^^m^,* 
Marcus  Marcius  Sermo  and  Quintus  Marcius  Scyda,  de¬ 
clared  publicly,  that  they  would  institute  a  suit  for  a  fine  to 
be  laid  on  the  consuls,  if  they  did  not  repair  to  their  station. 
They  likewise  read  before  the  senate  a  proposal  for  an  order 
of  the  people  respecting  the  Ligurians,  which  they  intended 
to  publish.  The  purport  of  it  was,  diat  it  should  be  de¬ 
creed,  that,  in  case  any  of  the  surrendered  Statiellans  should 
not  be  restored  to  liberty,  before  the  calends  of  Augu^  thim 
next  ensuing,  the  senate,  on  oath,  should  appoint  a  magistral 
to  inquire  into  the  business,  and  to  punish  the  parson  throng 
whose  wicked  practices  he  had  been  brought  ix^  davery 
VOL.  VI. - L 

74 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R. 

and  accordingly^  by  direction  of  the  senate^  they  i^ued  the 
same.  Before  the  departure  of  the  coimub,  the  senate  gave 
audience,  in  die  temple  . of  BeUona,  to  Caiua  Cicereius,  prse* 
tor  of  the  former  year.  After  reommtmg  his  services  in  Cor¬ 
sica,  he  demanded  a  triumph  ;  but  this  being  refused,  he  rode 
in  state  on  the  Alban  mount ;  a  mode  of  celebraticm  for  vic¬ 
tory  without  public  authority,  which  had  now  become  usual. 
The  people,  with  universal  approbation,  passedr  and  ratified 
the  order  proposed  by  Marcius,  respectii^  the  Ligurians  \ 
and,  in  pursuance  thereof,  Caius  Licinius,  prsetor,  desired  the 
senate  to  appoint  a  person  to  conduct  the  inquiry,,  according 
to  the  order ;  whereupon  the  senate  directed  tlmt  he  himiMslf 
should  conduct  it. 
XXIl.  The  consuls  repaired,  at  last,  to  their  province,  and 
received  the  command  of  the  army  from  Marcus  Popiliius. 
But  the  latter  did  not  dare  to  go  home  to  Roipe  ;  for  he 
dreaded  the  being  brought  to  trial,  while  the  senate  were  so 
highly  displeased  with  him,  the  people  still  more  exasperat¬ 
ed,  and  before  a  praetor  likewise,  who  had  taken  the  opinion 
of  the  senate,  on  an  inquiry  pointed  against  him.  Against 
this  design,  to  evade  a  trial,  the  plebeian  tribunes  employed 
the  menace  of  another  order,— that  if  he  did  not  come  into 
.the  city  of  Rome  before  the  ides  of  November,  Caius  Licini¬ 
us  should  judge  and  determine  respecting  him,  though  absent. 
This  drew  him  home,  in  spite  of  his  reluctance  ;  and  when 
he  appeared  in  the  senate,  he  was  received  with  the  strongest 
marks  of  displeasure  and  resentment.  His  conduct  was  ar- 
laigned  by  many  of  the  members  in  the  bitterest  terms  ;  and 
a  decree  was  passed,  that  the  praetors,  Caius  Licinius  and 
Cneius  Sicinius,  should  take  care  that  all  such  of  the  Liguri¬ 
ans,  as  had  not  been  in  open  arms,  since  the  consulate  of 
Quintus  Fulvius  and  Lucius  Manlius,  should  be  restored  to 
liberty  ;  and  that  the  consul  Caius  Popiliius  should  assign 
them  lands  on  the  farther  side  of  the  Po.  By  this  decree. 

BOOK  XLEI. 

75 

B.c.ira.] 

maBy  diousands  were  so  restored^  kd  beyond  the  Po,  and  re¬ 
ceived  poatkms  of  land  accordingly*  The  trial  of  Marcus 
Pc^iilius,  cm  the  Marcian  law,  was  twice  brought  to  a  hear¬ 
ing,  before  Caius  Licinius,  but,  at  a  third  hearing,  the  praetor, 
overcome  by  his  regard  for  the  absent  consul,  and  the  prayers 
of  the  Popillian  family,  oidercd  the  defendant  to  appear  on 
the  ides  of  March,  on  which  day  the  new  magistrates  were 
to  enter  into  ofice,  so  that,  being  then  in  a  private  capacity, 
he  could  not  preside  at  the  trial*  Thus  was  the  order  of  the 
people,  respecting  the  Ligurians,  eluded  by  artifice. 
XXIIl.  There  were,  at  this  time,  in  Rome,  ambassadors 
from  Carthage,  and  also  from  Gulussa,  son  of  Masinissa,  b^ 
tween  whom  very  warm  disputes  passed,  in  presence  of  the 
senate.  The  Carthaginians  complained,  that  “  besides  the 
district,  about  which  ambassadors  were  formerly  sent  from 
Rome,  to  determine  the  matter  on  the  spot,  Masinissa  had, 
within  the  last  two  years,  by  force  of  arms,  possessed  himself 
of  more  than  seventy  towns  and  forts  in  the  Carthaginian  ter¬ 
ritories,  This  was  easy  for  him,  who  suffered  no  considera¬ 
tion  to  restrain  him.  But  the  Carthaginians,  being  tied  down 
by  treaty,  were  silent ;  for  they  were  prohibited  from  carry¬ 
ing  arms  beyond  their  own  frontiers  :  and  although  they  knew 
that,  if  they  forced  the  Numidians  thence,  the  wkr  would  be 
waged  within  their  own  territory,  yet  they  were  deterred,  by 
another  clause  in  the  treaty,  too  clear  to  be  mistaken,  in  which 
they  were  expressly  forbidden  to  wage  war  against  the  allies 
of  the  Roman  people.  But  things  were  come  to  such  a  pass, 
that  the  Carthaginians  could  not  longer  endure  his  pride,  his 
cruelty,  and  his  avarice.  They  were  sent,”  they  said,  “  to 
beseech  the  senate  to  grant  them  one  of  these  three  things  ; 
either  that  they,  as  a  common  ally,  should,  on  a  fair  discus¬ 
sion,  determine  what  was  the  right  of  each^  or  give  permis¬ 
sion  to  the  Carthaginians  to  defend  themselves,  in  a  just  war, 
against  unjust  attacks  ;  or,  finally,  if  favour  swayed  more 

76 

HISTaSY  OF  HOME. 

[Y.R.  580, 

with  them  than  the  truth,  to  fix  at  once  how  nrndi  of  the  pro¬ 
perty  of  others  they  wished  ^ouldbe  bestowed  on  MasinisMi. 
Their  grants  would,  at  all  events,  be  more  moderate  dian  his 
usurpations  ;  and  the  extent  o(  them  woirid  be  ascertained : 
whereas,  1»e  would  set  noj limits  but  the  arbitrary  dictates  of 
Wfi  own  ambition.  If  they  could  c^tain  none  of  these,  and  if 
dicy  had,  skicc  the  peace  granted  by  Publius  Scipio,  been 
guilty  of  any  transgression,  they  begged  that  the  Romans 
themselves  would  rather  inflkt  the  punishment.  They  pre¬ 
ferred  a  secure  bondage,  under*  Roman  masters,  to  a  smte  of 
freedom,  exposed  to  the  injustice  of  Masinissa.  It  was  bet- 
im  for  them  to  perish  at  once,  than  to  continue  ,  to  breathe, 
under  the  will  of  an  executioner.^  Having  spoken  thus,  they 
burst  into  tears,  prostrated  themselves  on  the  groui^,  airf,  in 
this  posture,  excited  both  compassion  for  themselves,  and  no 
less  displeasure  against  the  King. 
XXIV.  It  was  then  voted,  that  Gulussa  should  be  asked, 
what  answer  he  had  to  make  to  these  charges,  or  that,  if  it 
were  more  agreeable  to  him,  he  should  first  tell,  on  what 
bi^iness  he  had  come  to  Rome.  Gulussa  said,  diat  “  it  was 
hard  for  him  to  speak  on  subjects,  concerning  which  he  had 
no  instructions  from  his  father  ;  and  that  it  would  have  been 
hard  for  his‘  father  to  have  given  him  instructions,  when  the 
Carthaginians  neither  diisclosed  the  business,  which  they  in¬ 
tended  to  bring  forward,  nor  even  their  desife  of  going  to 
Rome.  That  they  had,  for  several  nights,  held  private  con* 
sultationsi,  in  the  temple  of  iEsculapius,  from  whence  ambas¬ 
sadors  were  dispatched  with  secret,  information  to  Rome. 
This  was  his  father’s  reason  for  sending  him  into  Italy,  that 
he  might  entreat  the  senate  not  to  give  credit  to  imputations, 
laid  by  their  common  foe,  against  him,  whomr  they  hated  for 
no  other  cause  than  his  inviolable  fidelity  to  the  Roman  peo- 
|dc.”  After  hearing  both  parties,  the  senate,  on  the  question 
being  put,  respecting  the  demands  of  the  Carthaginians,  or- 

BOOK  XLII. 

TT 

B.C.  172.] 

dercd  this  anawrcr  to  te  pvcn,  ^  it  was  their  wHI,  tlmt 
Golam  shcMdd,  whho):^  delay,  r&ixxm  to  Numidia,  and  de« 
sii^  his  father  to  send  ambasss^ors  imB^diatdiy  ^tbeaenate, 
to  answer  compla^rts  of  the  Carthaginians,  and  to  ^rt 
fiodccrto  diat  peo{»le  to  come,  aiwi  suppcattiicir  idbgadotw. 
All  the  honour  in  their  power  they  had  hitherto  paM  to  Mfai- 
sinissa,  and  woidd  continue  to  f»y  him  ;  but  they  did  not 
give  him  a  privilege  of  screening  misconduct  umter  their  &- 
vour.  Thdr  wish  was,  that  the  lands  should,  every  where, 
be  possessed  by  the  real  owners ;  nor  did  they  intend  that 
new  boundaries  should  be  established,  but  that  the  old^^nes 
should  be  observed.  When  they  vanquished  the  Carthil^ 
ginians,  tibey  left  them  in  possession  of  cities  and  lands,  not 
with  the  purpose  of  stripping  them  by  acts  of  injustice  ha 
time  ^  peace,  of  what  they  had  not  taken  from  them  by  the 
right  of  war.’’  .  With  this  answer  the  Csurdiaginians,  and  the 
prince,  were  dismissed.  The  customary  presents  were  sent 
to  bodi  fMarties,  and  the  other  attentions,  whiiA  ho8|utality  re^ 
quired,  were  perfemned  with 'all  courtesy. 
XXV.  About  this  time  Cncius  Servilius  Csepio,  Appius 
Claudius  Cendio,  and  Titus  Annius  Luscus,  who  had  been 
sent  ambzmsadors  to  Macedonia,  to  demand  restitution  and 
renounce  the  King’s  friendship,  returned,  and  inflamed,  to  a 
greater  height,  the  resentment  already  entertained  by  the  sen¬ 
ate  against  Perseus,  by  relating,  m  order,  all  that  they  faaai 
s^n  and  heard.  '  They  said,  that  “  throu^  all  the  cities  of 
Macedonia  they  saw  preparations  for  war,  carried  on  with 
the  utmost  diligence.  When  they  arrived  at  the  residence  of 
the  King,  they  were  refused  admission  to  him,  for  many 
days  ;  at  the  end  of  which,  despairing  of  meeting  with  him, 
they  left  the  place,  nnd  were  then,  at  last,  called  back  from 
their  jountey  and  introduced  to  him.  The  topics  on  which 
they  insisted  in  their  discourse  were,  the  treaty  concluded 
with  Philip,  and,  after  his  father’s  death,  renewed  with  lum- 

78 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

[Y.R.  580. 

self ;  in  which  he  was  expressly  prohibited  from  carrying  his 
arms  beyond  his  own  dominions,  and,  likewise,  from  making 
war  on  the  allies  of  the  Roman  people.  They  then  laid  be¬ 
fore  him,  ill  order,  the  true  and  w'ell-authenticated  account, 
which  they  themselves  had  lately  heard  from  Eumenes,  in 
the  senate.  They  took  notice,  besides,  of  his  having  held  a 
secret  consultation,  in  Samothracia,  with  ambassadors  from 
the  states  of  Asia  ;  and  told  him,  that  for  these  injuries,  the 
senate  expected  satisfaction  to  be  given,  as  well  as  restitution, 
to  them,  and  their  allies,  of  their  property,  which  he  held, 
contrary  to  the  tenor  of  the  treaty.  On  this,  the  King  spoke 
at  first  with  great  vehemence,  frequently  upbraiding  the  Ro¬ 
mans  with  pride  and  avarice,  and  with  sending  ambassadors, 
one  after  another,  to  pry  into  his  words  and  actions ;  expect¬ 
ing  that,  in  every  case,  he  should  speak,  and  act,  in  compli¬ 
ance  with  their  dictates,  and  obedient  to  his  nod.  After 
speaking  a  long  time  with  great  loudness  and  Violence,  he 
ordered  them  to  return  the  next  day,  for  he  intended  to  give 
his  answer  in  writing.  This  he  accordingly  delivered  to 
them  ;  of  which  the  purport  was,  that  the  treaty  concluded 
with  his  father  in  no  respect  concerned  him  ;  that  he  had  suf¬ 
fered  it  to  be  renewed,  not  because  he  approved  of  it,  but  be¬ 
cause,  being  so  lately  come  to  the  throne,  he  was  obliged  to 
acquiesce  in  every  thing.  If  they  chose  to  form  a  new  en¬ 
gagement  with  him,  the  terms  ought,  first,  to  be  agreed  an ; 
if  they  were  satisfied  to  treat  on  an  equal  ft)oting,  he  would 
consider  what  was  to  be  done,  on  his  part,  and  he  doubted 
not  but  they  would  be  careful  enough  of  the  interest  of  their 
own  state.  After  this,  he  hastily  turned  away,  and  they  were 
desired  to  quit  the  palace.  '  They  then  declared,  that  they  re¬ 
nounced  his  friendship  and  alliance,  at  which  he  was  highly 
exasperated  ;  halted,  and  with  a  loud  voice,  charged  them  to 
quit  his  dominions  within  three  days.  They  departed  ac¬ 
cordingly  ;  and,  neither  on  their  coming,  nor  while  they  staid, 

BOOK  XLII. 

79 

B.C.  172.] 
was  any  kind  of  attention  or  hos^^ality  shown  them.”  The 
Th^salian  and  iEtolian  ambassadors  were  then  admitted  to 
audience.  The  senate  wishing  to  know,  as  soon  as  possiUe, 
what  commanders  were  to  be  employed  in  the  service  of  the 
state,  voted,  that  a  letter  should  be  sent  to  the  consuls,  direct¬ 
ing,  that  whichever  of  them  was  most  able  should  come  to 
Rome  to  elect  magistrates. 
XXVI.  The  consuls,  during  that  year,  performed  no  ex¬ 
ploits  that  deserved  much  notice.  As  the  Ligurians  had  been 
highly  exasperated,  it  was  thought  the  most  eligible  plan,  to 
pacify  and  appease  them.  While  the  public  were  looking 
forward  to  a  Macedonian  war,  ambassadors  from  Issa  gave 
them  reason  to  suspect  the  inclinations  of  Gentius,  King  of 
Illyria ;  for  they  complained  that  he  had,  a  second  time, 
ravaged  their  country affirming,  likewise,  that  the  Kings 
of  Macedonia  and  Illyria  lived  on  terms  of  the  closest  inti¬ 
macy  ;  that  both  were  preparing,  in  concert,  for  war  against’ 
the  Romans,  and  that  there  were  then  in  Rome  Iilyriai|  spies, 
under  the  appearance  of  ambassadors,  and  who  were  sent 
diither  by  the  advice  of  Perseus.”  The  Illyrians,  being  called 
before  the  senate,  said,  that  they  were  sent, by  their  King,  to 
justify  his  conduct,  if  the  Issans  should  make  any  complaint 
against  him.  They  were  then  asked,  why  they  had  not  ap¬ 
plied  to  some  magistrate,  that  they  might,  according  to  the 
regular  practice,  be  furnished  with  lodging-  and  •entertain¬ 
ment,  that  their  arrival  might  be  known,  and  the  business  on 
which  they  came ;  but,  not  giving  a  satisfactory  answer,  thty 
were  ordered  to  retire  out  of  the  senate-house.  It  was  not 
thought  proper  to  ^ive  the  many  answer,  as  delegates,  be¬ 
cause  they  had  not  applied  for  an  audience  of  the  senate  ;  but 
a  resolution  passed,  that  ‘‘  ambassadors  should  be  sent  to  the 
King,  to  acquaint  him  with  the  complaints  made  by  the  allies, 
of  his  having  ravaged  their  country  ;  and  to  represent  to  him 
the  impropriety  of  his  conduct.”  On  this  embassy  were  sent 

80 

HISTCMY  OF  HOME. 

[YJft.  5K). 
Aulus  Tercntius  Varro,  Caius  Plaetorius,  and  Caius  Cicerd- 
us.  The  ambs^sadors,  who  had  been  sent  to  the  several 
kings  in  aUianee  with  the  slate,  came  hmae  from  Asia,  and 
reported,  diat  they  had  conferred  there  widi  Eumenes  ;  in 
S5rria,  with  Antiochns  ;  and  at  Alexandria  with  Ptolemy  ; 
idl  of  whom,  though  strongly  solicited  by  embassies  from  Per¬ 
seus,  remained  perfectly  faithful  to  their  engagements,  and 
gave  assurances  of  their  readiness  to.  execute  every  order  of 
the  Roman  people.  That  they  had  also  visited  the  allied 
states;  that  all  were  firm  in  their  attachment,  exc^t  the 
Rhodians,  who  seemed  to  be  wavering,  and  infected  by  the 
counsels  of  Perseus.”  Am*bassadors  had  come  from  the 
Rhodians,  to  exculpate  them  i^om  the  imputations,  which, 
they  knew,  were  openly  urged  against  them  ;  but  a  resolution 
was  made,  that  they  should  have  audience  of  the  senate, 
when  the  new  magistrates  came  into  office.” 
XXVII.  It  was  judged  necessary  to  make  immediate  pre- 
parati^  for  war.  A  commission  was  accordingly  given  to 
Caius  Licinius,  prsetor,  to  refit  as  many  as  could  be  made 
serviceaUe  of  the  old  quinqueremes  which  lay  in  the  docks 
at  Rome,  to  mak^  up  a  fleet  of  fifty  ships^  and,  if  he  were  at 
a  loss  for  any  to  com^te  that  number,  to  write  to  his  etd- 
league,  Caius  Memmius,  in  Sicily,  directing  him  to  repair 
and  fit  out  ^ch  vessels  as  were  in  that  province,  so  as  that 
they  might  be  sent,  with  all  expedition,  to  Brundusium. 
Caius  Licinius,  praetor,  was  ordered  to  enlist  Roman  citizens 
%[  the  rank  of  freedmen’s  sons,  to  man  twenty-five  ships ; 
Caius  Sicinius  ^  levy,  from  the  allies,  an  equal  numl^r  for 
the  other  twenty-five,  and  likewise  to  require  from  the  La- 
tine  confederates,  eight  thousand  foot  and  four  hundred 
horse.  Aulus  AuUkis  Serranus,  who  had  been  praetor  the 
5’^ear  before,  was  commissioned  to  receive  these  troops  at 
Brundusium,  and  transport  them  to  Macedonia ;  and  Cneius 
Sicinius,  the  praetor,  to. keep  them  in  readiness  for  embarka- 

w?rQtfe  to  the  coo^id  Cituus  to  xsrdfiar  ^  aec<;m4  Ic- 
f^rxy  whiqb  wm  the  ^dde^  to  Li^rto,  together 
four  thousand  ^^aot.  auid  two  himdred  ho^e,  of  the  La4^  UIM* 
tion,  to  be  in  Ifoundusiuint  ou  the  i^es  of  Febu*uary»  WiA 
thb  fleet,  and  this  army,  Ci^ius  Sicinius,  being  contmued 
year  in  command  for  the  purpose,  ws^  ordered  to  take  care 
of  the  province  of  Macedonia,  until  a  new  governor  dtould 
arrive^  All  these  measures,  voted  by  the  senate,  vi¬ 
gorously  executed ;  thiny-eight  quinqucremes  .were  drawn 
out  of  die  docks,  and  given  to  Xuoius^Eorcii;^  Xichdu^)  to 
be  ccmducted  to  Jflrundusium,  and  twelve  were  sentfrom  Si¬ 
cily  ;  three  commissaries  were  , dispatched  into  Apulia  and 
Calabria,  to  buy  up  com  for  the  fleet  and  army  i  these  were 
Sextus  Digitius,  Titus  Juventius,  and  Marcus  Caecilius. 
When  all  things  were  in  readiness,  the  praetor,  Cneii^  rSid- 
aius,  in  his  military  robes,  set  out  from  the  city,  smd  went  to 
Ifrundusium.  . 
XXVHI.  The  consul,  Caius  Eopillius,  came  home  to 
Rome,  when  the  year  had  almost  expired,  much  later  dum  had 
l^n  dir^ted  by  die  vote  of  the  isen^ ;  for  he  had  been  or¬ 
dered,  in  consideration  of  such  an  important  war  impending, 
to  elect  magistrates  as  soon  ^s  possible.  For  this  reason  the 
consul’s  recital,  ip  the  temple  of  Bellcma,  of  his  services  per- 
fortned  in  Liguria,  was  not  favourably  Ustoned  to  by  the  sen¬ 
ate,  He  was  frequently  interrupted,  and  asked,  why  he  had 
not  restored  to  li^rty  the  Ligurians,  who  had  been  oppres¬ 
sed  by  his  brother  ?  The  election  was  held  on  the  day  ap¬ 
pointed  by  procl^ation,  the  twelfth  before  the  calends  of 
March.  ‘  The  consuls  cho^n  were,  Piblius  Licinius  Cras- 
sus,  and.Caius  Cassius  Longinu^-  Next  day  were  electod 
pr^k}rs,  Caius  Sulpicips  Oalba,  Lucius  Furius  Philus,  Lu¬ 
cius  Canuleius  Dives,  Caius  Lucretius  Gallos,  Caius  Canini- 
us  Rebilus,  and  Lucius  Villius  Annalis.  The  provinces  dt- 
VOL.  VI. - M 

82  HISTORY  OF  ROME. 
creed  to  these  praetors  were,  th^  two  civil  jorisdk^ns  in 
Rome,  Spain,  Sicily,  and  Sardinia^  and  one  of  them  wi» 
kept  disengaged,  that  he  might  be  employed  wherever  the 
senate  should  direct.  The  consuls  elect  received,  orders  from 
the  senate,  to  offer  a  sacrifice,  with  victims  of  the  larger 
kinds,  on  the  day  of  their  entering  into  office  ;  and  to  pray  to 
the  gods,  that  the  war,  which  the  Roman  people  intended  to 
engage  in,  might  prove  fortunate  in  the  issue.  On  the  same 
day,  the  senate  passed  an  order,  that  the  consul  Caius  Popil- 
lius  should  vow  games,  of  ten  days’  continuance,  to  Jupiter 
supremely  good^and  great,  with  offerings,  in  all  the  temples, 
if  the  commonwealth  should  remain  for  ten  years  in  its  pre¬ 
sent  state.  Pursuant  to  this  vote,  the  consul  made  a  vow  in 
the  Capitol,  that  the  games  should  be  celebrated,  and  the  of¬ 
ferings  made,  at  such  expence  as  the  senate  should  direct, 
and  the  vow  was  expressed  in  terms  dictated  by  Lepidus  the 
chief  pontiff,  in  the  presence  of  not  less  than  one  hundred  and 
fifty  persons.  There  died  this  year,  of  the  public  priests, 
Lucius  iEmilius  Papus,  decemvir  of  religious  rites,  and 
Quintus  Fulvius  Flaccus,  a  pontiff,  who  had  been  censor  the 
year  before.  The  latter  ended  his  life  in  a  shocking  manner  : 
he  had  received  an  account,  that,  of  his  two  sons  who  were 
in  the  army  in  Illyria,  one  was  dead,  and  the  other  labouring 
under  a  heavy  and  dangerous  malady  5,  his  grief  and  fears, 
together,  overwhelmed  his  reason,  and  his  servants,  on  going 
into  his  chamber  in  the  morning,  found  him  hanging  by  a 
rope,  ft  was  generally  believed,  that,  since  his  censorship, 
his  understanding  had  not  been  sound ;  and  it  w^s  now  said, 
that  the  resentment  of  Juno  Lacinia,  for  the  spoil  committed 
on  her  temple,  had  caused  the  derangement  of  his  intellects. 
Marcus  Valerius  Messalt  was  substituted  decemvir,  in  the 
place  of  iEmilius ;  and  Cneius  Domitius  iEnc^arbus,.  though 
a  mere  youth,  was  chosen  into  the  priesthood  as  pontiff,  in 
the  room  of  Fulvius. 

BOOK  XLH, 

BX.  171.] 

8S 

XXIX.  la  Ais  coasulate  of  Pablii;^  Licinius  and  Cains 
Cassias,  not  <m\y  the  city  of  Rome,  but  the  whole  ^ 
of  Italy,  with  all  the  kings  and  states,  bodi  in  Eu-  g  1  * 
rope*  and  in  Asia,  had  their  attention  fixed  on  the 
approaching  war  between  Rome  and  Macedonia.  Eumenes 
was  instigated  against  Perseus,  not  only  by  an  old  hatred, 
but  also  by  recent  ang^,  for  having  been,  through  his  nefa¬ 
rious  contrivance,  almost  slaughtered,  like  a  victim,  at  Del¬ 
phi.  l^rusias.  King  of  Bithynia,  resolved  keep  clear  of 
hostilities,  and  to  wait  the  event  f  for  as  he  did  not  think  it 
proper  to  carry  arms  on  the  side  of  the  Romans,  against  his 
wife^s  brother,  so  he  trusted,  that,  in  case  of  Perseus  proving 
victorious,  his  favour  might  be  secured  through  the  means 
of  his  sister.  Ariathes,  King  of  Cappadocia,  besides  having, 
in  his  own  name,0promi8ed  aid  to  the  Romans,  had,  ever 
since  his  connesdcm  of  affinity  with  Eumenes,  united  with  him 
in  all  his  plans,  whether  of  ^war  or  peace.  Antiochus,  indeed, 
entertained  designs  on  the  kingdom  of  Egypt,  and  despising 
the  unripe  age  of  Ptolemy,  and  the  inactive  disposition  of  his 
guardians,  thought  he  might,  by  raising  a  dispute  about  Cce- 
lesyria,  find  sufficient  pretext  for  proceeding  to  extremities, 
mid  carry  on  a  war  there,  without  any  impediment,  while  the 
Roman  arms  were^  employed  against  Macedonia :  yet,  by  his 
ambassadors  to  the  senate^  and  to  their  ambassadors  sent  to 
him,  he  made  the  fairest  promises.  The  King  of  Egypt,  too 
young  to  determine  for  himself,  was  directed  by  othcra;  and 
his  guardians,  at  the  same  time,  while  they  were  preparing 
for  war  with  Antioebusy  to  secure  possession  of  Ccslesyria, 
promised  the  Romans  every  support  in  the  war  against  Ma¬ 
cedonia.  Masinissa  not  only  furnished  supplies  of  com  to  ' 
the  Romans,  but  prepared  to  send  into  the  field,  to  their  as¬ 
sistance,  a  body  troops,  and  a  of  dephants,  with 
his  son  Misagenes.  He  so  arranged  his  plans  as  to  answer 
&very  event  that  might  take  place  j  for,  if  success  should  ^ 

84 

HISTORt  OP  mUE.  [Y.R*  m. 
tend  the  he  jadged  ilmt  bisr  i&iifs  we^d  mt 
in  their  piesent  and  that  he  46  eeek 
farther ;  as  the  Ronians  would  not  m0kf^  ^lence  t6  be  offered 
to  the  Carth^inians ;  and  if  the  powef  of  tibe  Rtmians,  wMeh, 
at  that  time,  protected  the  Cartiiagmians,  shoutld  be  reduced^ 
then  an  Africa  would  be  his  own.  Gentius,  King  of  lUyria, 
had  indeed  given  cause  of  suspicion  to  the  Romans ;  bat  he 
had  not  yet  determined  which  party  to  espouse,  mid  it  was 
believed  that  he  would  join  either  one  or  the  otbet^,  through 
some  sudden  impulse  of  pa^ion,  ratl^r  than  from  any  ra¬ 
tional  motive.  Cotys,’  the  Thracian  King  of  the  Odrysians, 
declared,  openly,  in  favour  of  the  Macedonians. 
XXX.  Such  were  the  inclinations  of  the  several  kings, 
while,  in  the  free  natiom  and  states,  the  plebeians,  favouring 
as  usual  the  yreaker  cause,  w^re  almost  wulO^etsally  inclined 
to  the  Macedonians  and  their  king;  but  unlong  the  nt^les 
might  be  observed  different  viCw^,  One  party  Were  so 
warmly  devoted  to  the  Romans,  that,  by  the  exce^  of  their 
zeal,  they  diminished  their  own  inffuence^  Of  these,  a  few 
wete  actuated  by  their  admiration  of  the  justice  of  the  Roman 
government;  but  by  far  the  greater  number,  by  the  hope  that 
their  distinguished  eKcrttons  would  procure  them  a  large 
share  of  power  in  tiieir  severar  states.  A  second  party 
wished  to  Court  the  King’s  fevodr  by  every  ccnnpliance, 
some  (rf  them  being  driven  headlong  into  every  scheme  of 
innovation  by  their  debts,  and  despair  of  retrieving  their  cir¬ 
cumstances  while  the  public  ^airs  remained  in  their  present 
^tate;  and  others,  through  a  iickkness  of  temper,  following 
Perseus  as  the  more  popular  character*  A  tlur d  party,  the 
wisest  and  the  best,  wished,  in  case  of  being  allowed  the 
choice  of  a  master,  to  live  under  the  Romaic,  ratl^t  than 
under  the  King.  Yet,  could  they  bavehad  the  free  disposal  of 
events,  it  was  their  wish  that  power  should  not  be  acquired 
from  the  ruin  of  either  party,  but  rather  that  both,  with  their 

mOK  XLIL 

m 

B.c.  in.] 

stren^  unlttqDlfoai,  nh&eid  tmtitm  lor  tm  lb  ^qual 
£^mg;  &r  cCNiditioii  of  ^bxAt  WouM  be  the 
hmppi^f,  ^  ttiey  imtMlAw^ys  be  protected  by  one  from  miy 
HI  treamient  tafen^d  by  the  otber,  fudging  thus,  without 
dedbrifig  their  sentiments,  they  viewed,  in  safety,  the  contest 
between  the  psfttiians  rf  tiie  two  xontending  powers.  The 
consuls,  having  on  the  d^  of  their  commencement  in  office, 
in^compliance  with  the  ordet  of  thd  senate,  sacrificed  victims 
of  the  larger  kinds,  in  all  the  temples  where  the  lectistemium 
was  usually  celebrated  for  the  greater  part  of  the  year,  add  hav¬ 
ing,  from  them,  coHected  omens  that  their  prayers  were  ac¬ 
cepted  by  the  immortal  gods,  reported,  th^t  the  sacrifices  had 
been  duly  performed,  and  prayers  offiercd  respecting  the  war. 
The  aruspices  declared,  that,  **  if  kny  new  nndertaking  was 
intended,  ir ought  to  be  proceeded  in  without  delay;  that 
victory,  triumphs,  and  extension  of  empire  were  portended.’’ 
The  senate  then  resolved,  that  “  the  consuls  should,  on  die 
first  proper  day,  propose  to  the  people  assembled  by  centu¬ 
ries, — that  whereas  Perseus,  sOU  of  Philip,  and  King  of  Ma¬ 
cedonia,  contrary  to  the  league  struck  with  his  father,  and 
after  Philip’s  death  renewed  with  himself,  had  committed 
hostilities  on  the  alhes  of  Rome,  had  wasted  their  lands,  and 
seized  their  towns,  and  also  had  formed  a  design  of  making 
war  on  the  Roman  people.  Thb  he  had,  for  that  purpose, 
prepared  arms,  troops,  and  a  fleet ;  and  therefore,  unless  he 
gave  satisfkctitm  concerning  those  matters,,  that  war  should 
be  proclaimed  against  him.”  The  question  was  passed 4>y 
the  people  in  the  affirmative  ;  on  which,  the  senate  decreed, 
that  **  the  consuls  should  setde  between  themselves,  or  c^*t 
lots  for  the  provinces  of  Italy  and  Macedonia ;  that  fte  ible 
to  whose  tot  Macedonia  fell,  should  seek  redress,  by  force  of 
arms,  from  TCing  Perseus,  and  alT  who  concurred  in  his  de¬ 
signs;  unless  they  made  amends  to  the  Roman  people.” 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[YJl.  581. 

m 
XXXI.  It  was  ordered,  that  four  uew  legions  should  be 
raised,  two  for  each  consul.  For  the  service  in  Macedk^a, 
it  was  judged  proper  to  exceed  the  usual  standard.  Ixts^^cad, 
therefore,  of  five  thousand  foot,  and  two  hundred  hor^, 
signed  to  the  consul’s  legions  accordkig  to  isacient  prac« 
tice,  six  thousand  foot  and  three  hundred  horse  were  m'dered 
to  be  enlisted,  for  each  of  the  legions  that  were  to  serve  in 
Macedonia.  Of  the  allied  troops^  also,  the  number  was  aug¬ 
mented  in  the  army  ordered  into  MacedcHuay^-^amely,  six¬ 
teen  thousand  foot  and  eight  hundred  horse,  besides  the  six 
hundred  horsemen  carried  thither  by  Cneius  Sicinius.  For 
Italy,  twelve  thoufand  foot  and  six  hundred  horse,  <rf  the 
allies,  were  deemed  sufficient.  In  another  instance,  an  ex¬ 
traordinary  degree  of  attention  was  shown  to  the  service  in 
Macedonia ;  for  the  consul  was  authorised  to  enlist  veteran 
centurions  and  soldiers,  whom  he  chose  as  old  as  fifty  years. 
An  unusual  mode  of  proceeding,  with'  regard  to  the  military 
tribunes,  was  also  introduced  on  the  same  occasion ;  for  the 
consuls,  by  direction  of  the  senate,  recommended  to  the  peo¬ 
ple,  that,  for  that  year,  the  military  tribunes  should  not  be 
created  by  their  suffrages ;  but  that  the  consuls  and  praetors 
should  have  full  power  to  choose  and  appoint  them.  The 
praetors  had  their  several  commands  assigned  them,  in  the 
following  manner:  he  to  whose  lot  it  feH  to  be  employed 
wherever  the  senate  should  direct,  had  orders  to  go  to  Brun- 
dusium,  to  the  fleet,  to  review  the  crews,  and,  dismissing 
such  men  as  appeared  unfit  for  the  service,  to  enlist,  in  their 
places,  sons  of  freedmen,  taking  care  that  two  thirds  should 
be  Roman  citizens,  and  the  remainder  allies.  For  supplying 
provisions  to  the  ships  and  legions,  from  Sicily  and  Sardinia, 
it  was  resolved,  that  the  praetors,  who  obtained  the  govern¬ 
ment  of  those  provinces,  should  be  enjoined  to  Ifevy  a  second 
tenth  on  the  inhabitants,  and  to  take  care  to  have  the  com 
conveyed  into  Macedonia,  to  the  army.  The  lots  gave  Sicily 

BOOK  XLII. 

ar 

B.C.171.] 
to  Caiiut  Cmiinius  ReUlus;  Sairdinia,  to  Lucius  Forius  Phi* 
ius;  to  Lucius  Xanuleius;  the  city  jurisdiction^  to 
Cains  Suipicius  Galba;  and  the  foreign,  to  Luciu^Villius 
Annaik.  lot  of  Catus  i42cretius  Gallus  was,  to  be  em¬ 
ployed  wlietev^  tim  senate^should  dii^ct. 
XXXH.  The  consuls  had  a  slight  dispute  about  their  pro¬ 
vince.  Cassius  said,  that  ^^he  would  take  the  command 
against  Macedonia  without  casting  lo^,  nor  could  his,  col¬ 
league,  without  pcijmy,  abide  their  determinadon.  When 
be  ws^  praetor,  to,  avoid  going  to  his  province,  he  made  oath 
in  the  public  assembly,  that  he  had  ssu:3iiices  to  perform  on 
stated  days,  in  a  stated  place,  and  that  foey  could  not  be  duly 
performed  in  his  absence  ;  and,  surely,  they  could  no  more 
be  performed  duly  in  his  absence,  when  he  was  consul,  than 
when  he  was  praetor.  If  the  senate  thought  proper  to  pay 
more  re^d  to  what  Publius  Lkinius  wished,  in  his  ccmsul- 
ship,  than  to  what  he  ^d  sworn  in  his  praetorship,  he  himself, 
for  his  part,  would,  at  all  events,  be  rided  by  tlmt  body.” 
When  the  question  was  put,  the  senators  thought  it  would  be 
a  degree  of  arrogance  in  them  to  refuse  a  province  to  him, 
whom  the  Roman  people  had  not  refused  to  elect  to  the  con- 
sulship.  They,  however,  ordered  the  consuls  to  cast  lots. 
Macedonia  fell  to  Publius  Licinius,  Italy  to  Caius  Cassius. 
They  then  cast  lots  for  the  legions  ;  when  it  fell  to  the  lot  of 
the  first  and  third  to  gp  over  into  Macedonia  ;  and  of  the 
second  and  fourth,  to  remmn  in  Italy.  In  making  the  levies, 
the  consuls  took  unusual  pains.  .  Licinius  enlisted  even  vete¬ 
ran  centurions  £md  soldiers ;  and  many  of  them  offered  them¬ 
selves  voluntarily,  as  they  saw  that  those  men  who  had  serv¬ 
ed  in  the  former  Macedonian  war,  or  in  Asia,  had  become 
rich.  When  the  military  tribunes  cited  the  centurions,  and 
especially  those  of  the  highest  rank,  twenty-three  of  them, 
and  who  had  held  the  first  posts,  appealed  to  the  tributes  of 
the  people.  Two  of  that  body,  Marcus  Fulvius  Nobilior 

88  HISTOBY  OF  BOIklE.  [Y4.  5ai, 
and  Marcus  Claudius  IVbureeUus,.  vished  to  refer  the  fsauifx 
to  the  ccmsuJs  ;  “  the  cognizamce  of  it  belm^ijag  propt^ly 
those  who  h^d  the  chsurge  of  the  kvks  imd  of  the  war  but 
the  rest  ^kclared,  that  since  t^  af^>^  had  been  madf  to 
them,  they  would  examine  into  the  affair;  and,  if  there^ 
were  mjy  injustice  in  the  ease^  would  support  )feir  ^^aw*cU 
tizens. 
XXXIII.  The  business,  therefore,  came  iito  cq^  of 
the  tribunes.  There  the  consul  and  the  cei^urions  attended, 
with  Marcus  TopUUus,  a  consular  rank,  as  advocate 
feu:  the  centurions.  The  consul  t}:usn  reqiufed,  that  the  mat* 
ter  might  be  discussed  in  a  general  assembly  ;  and,  acconUng* 
ly,  the  people  were  ^summoned.  On  die  side  of  the  centu¬ 
rions,  Marcus  Popiltius,  who  had  been  consul  two  years  be¬ 
fore,  argued  thus :  that  “  as  military  men,  they  had  served 
out  their  regular  time,  and  that  their  strength  was  now  spent 
through  age  and  cqntinu^  hardships.  Nevertheless,  they  did 
not  refuse  to  give  the  public  tins  benefit  of  their  services,  they 
only  entreated  that  they  might^bc  favoured  so  far,  as  not  to 
be  appointed  to  posts  inferior  to  those  which  they  had  .for¬ 
merly  held  in  the  army.”  The.  consul,  Publius  Licinius,  first 
ordered  the  decree  of  the  senate  to  be  read,  in  which  war 
was  determined,  against  Perseus;  and  dien  the  other,  which 
directed,  that  as  many  veteran  centurions  as  could  be  fwocured 
should  be  enlisted  for  that  war ;  and  that  no  exemption  from 
the  service  should  be  allowed  to  any  who  was  not  upwards  pf 
fifty  years  of  age.  He  then  entreated  that,  “  at  a  time  when 
a  new  war  was  breaking  out,  so  near  to  Italy,  and  with  a 
most  powerful  King,  they  would  not  either  obstruct  the  mili¬ 
tary  tribunes  in  making  the  levies,  or  prevent  the  consul  from 
assigning  to  each  person-such  a  post  as  best  suited  the  con- 
veniemse  of  the  public ;  and  that,  if  any  doubt  should  arise 
in  the  proceedings,  it  might  be  referred  to  the  decision  of  the 
senate.”- 

8^ 

BjS*  tFi  •]  BOOK 
had all  thsMt  he  thought  pro* 
o(  thmc  wiu>faad  appeidbd  to 
dbe  ^be  W  i^ueated  permi^on  irom  the 
^d  tribal^  to  sp^idc  a  i^w  leords  to  tl^  pa<^  I  ^ 
having  he  spoke,  we  s0e  told^to  tins  effect :  So* 
mam,  msm  i»  Spiitf  itis  ligusdnus  ;  1  am  €ff  Crusm* 
^  a  bmX^  origmally  &ibine.  My  lather 
h^  <ff  taoi,  aiad  a  smaU  eott^i^  in  whichl  ^aa 
bom  and  eduoi^d,  mid  where  I  now  ^dweil.  Ao  mm^  m  I 
came  to  mait^s  njy  lather  marr||||Me  ^  bk& 
daughter,  who  bxm^bt  noi^itig  withlllpbut  inde|^ad^ce 
and  modesty  ;  except,  indeed,  a^dei^e  of  fruilfuhim  dim 
would  have  better  suited  a  wealthier  family*  We  have  six 
sons  and  two  dau^texa^  the  latter  are  both  married  ;  of  mnr 
sons,iour  are  g^own  up  to  manhood,  the  odier  two  m^e  yet 
boys*  I  became  a  aeddier  in  the  ctn^ulate  of  PabUus  St^i* 
ciiiB  aid  jCaius  Aurelius.  4n  the  army  which  was  sent  over 
Into  Macedonia,  I  smved  as  a  commop  eoldier,  againt  Phii^, 
two  years  ;  and  in  dre  third  year,  Titus  Quintius  Flanuniua, 
in  r^ard  of  my  good  conduct,  gave  me  die  command  of  the 
tmitfa  ca|^any  of  spearmen.  When  Philip  a^d  the  Macedo* 
nians  were  sthdued,  and  we  were  brought  bach  to  Italy  smd 
chkharged,  I  immediately  went  a  volunteer^  with  the  consul 
Marcus  Porcius^into  Spain.  That  no  one  commmider  livu^ 
was  a  more  acemate  ^>^erver,  mid  judge  of  s^rit,  is  w^^ 
kncrwn  .toaU  who  have  had  experience  of  him,  and  of  other 
generals^  in  a  long  course  of  service.  This  commander  jadg^ 
me  deserving  of  being  set  at  the  head,  of  die  first  coospany  of 
spearmen.  A  third  time,  I  entered  a  vedunteer  in  the  aritiy 
which  was  sent  against  the  j&olians  and.  Kixig  Antiochos  ; 
and  Manius  Aciliusgave  me  the  command,  of  the  first  edm* 
pany  of  first^rank  men.  After  Antiochus  mos  driven  oat  of 
the  country,  and  the  iEtolians  were  reduce^  we  ware  btoss^^ 
home  to  Italy,  where  I  served  t^e  two  succeeding  y^imt  hi 
von,  VI. — N 

HISTORY  OF  I^ME. 

[YM.  SBi. 

legions  that  were  mised  annudlly.  I  al^rwards  made  .two 
campaigns  in  Spain ;  one  imder  Quintus /Falvius  Fl^ccm^ 
the  other  Tiberius  S^mpronius  Gracchi^,  pne^ms. 
Fkccus  brou^t  me  with  him^  among  t^hers,  to  attend  his 
triumph^  out  of  regard  to  our  good*  services*  It  was  at  the 
particular  request  of  Tiberius  Gracchus  that  I  went  a^th  him 
to  his  province.  Four  times  within  a  few  years  was  I  first 
centurion  of  my  cm-ps^  thirty-four  times  I  was  honoured  fay 
my  commanders  with  presents  for  good  behavh^ur*  1  have 
neccived  six  civic  >  I  have  fu]PKlled  tweh^-|wo  yearn 
of  service  in  the  ariay,  and  I  ^  upwards  of  fifty  yeai^  <rf 
But,  if  I  had  neither  served  out  all  my  com^gns,  nor 
was  en^ded  to  exemption  on  account  of  my  age,  yet,  Publius 
Licinius,  as  I  can  supply  you  with  four  soldiers  instead  of 
myself,  I  might  reasonably  expect  to  be  discharged.  But  what 
I  have  said  I  wish  you  to  consider  merely  as  a  state  of  my 
case  j  as  to  offering  any  thing  as  an  excuse  from  service,  that 
is  what  I  will  never  do,  so  long  as  any  officer  enlisting  troops 
shall  believe  me  fit  for  it.  What  rank  the  military  tribunes 
may  think  I  deserve,  they  themselves  can  best  determine. 
That  no  one  in  the  army  may  surpass  me,  in  a  zea^us  dis¬ 
charge  of  duty,  I  shall  use  my  best  endeavours  j  and  that  I 
have  always  acted  on  that  principle,  my  commanders  and  my 
comrades  can  testify.  And  now,  felloW-sOkliers,  you  who 
assert  your  privilege  of  appeal,  as  you  have  never,  in  your 
yqpthful  days,  done  any  act  contrary  ta  the  directions  of  the 
magistrates  and  the  senate,  so  will  it  be  h^bly  becoming  in 
you^o  show  yourselves  d^edient  to  their  orders,  and  to  think 
every  post  honourablejn  which  you  can  act'fcr  the  defence 
<rf  the  commonwealth.” 
XXXV.  Having  finished  his  speech,  Jie  was  highly  com¬ 
mended  by  the  consul,  who  led  him^  from  the  assembly,  into 
the  senate-house,  where,  by  order  of  the  senate,  he  again  re¬ 
ceived  public  thanks  ;  smd  the  military  tribupes,  in  considera* 

B,€.  1^1.]  .  moK  xm  n 
HiMofhh  miwttdri^tis  behaviour,  made  him  first 
afe  first  legion.  The  rest  of  the  centurions^  dropping  the^ 
peal,  enlisted  without  further  tkmur.  Tl&t  the  ma|g^rtraU^ 
might  the  socatfer  go  into  their  provinces,  the  Latine  festival 
was  celebrated  m  the  caknds  of  June  ;  and,  as  soon  as  that 
solemnity  was  ended,  Cains  Lucretius,  the  praetor,  after  send¬ 
ing  forward  eveiy  thing  requisite  for  the  fleet,  went  to  Brun- 
dudutn.  Besides  the  amies  which  the  consuls  were  form¬ 
ing,  Caius  Sulpiehis  Calba,  the  praetor,  w^  commisMoned  to 
raise  four  city  legions,  with  the  regular  number  of  foot  and 
horsef^  and  to  choose,  <Mit  of  the  senate,  four  military  tt^imes 
\o  comchand  them  ;  likewise,  to  require  from  the  Ladne  al¬ 
lies  fifteen  thousand  foot,  with  twelve  hundred  horse,  to  be 
held  in  readiness  to  act  wherever  the  senate  should  ord^. 
At  the  desire  of  the  consul,  Publius  Licinius,  the  foUowmg 
auxiliaries  were  ordered  to'^join  the  army  of  natives  and  al¬ 
lies  under  his  command  :  two  thousand  Ligurians  ;  a  body 
.of  Cretan  archers,  whose  number  was  not  specified,  the  order 
only  mentioning,  whatever  succours  the  Cretans,  <m  being 
applied  to,  should  send  j  likewise  the  Numidian  cavalry,  ai]d 
elephants.  To  settle  concerning  these  last,  ambassadors  were 
sent  to  Masinissa  and  the  Carthaginians, — Lucius  Fc^tumius 
Atbinus,  Quintus  Terenti us  Culleo,  and  Caius  Aburius :  also, 
to  Crete, — A  ulus  Postumius  Albinus,  Caius  Decimius,  and 
Aulus  Licinius  Nerva. 
XXXVI.  At  this  time  arrived  ambassadors  from  Perseus, 
who  were  not  suffered  to  come  into  the  city  ;  as  the  senate 
had  already  decreed,  and  the  people  had  ordered,  a  decora¬ 
tion  of  war  against  the  Macedemians.  The  senate  gave  them 
audience  in  the  temple  Of  Bellona,  when  they  spoke  to  this 
purport :  that  King  Perseus  wondered  what  could  their 
motive  for  transporting  troops  into  Macedonia ;  and  that  if 
the  senate  could  be  prevailed  on  to  recall  them,  the  King 
would  satisfactorily  account  for  any  injuries  of  which  fficir 

OS 

HISTORY  OF  ItCiiE. 

[Y.E,  sn. 

alfies  Oon^i^  hi^  hem  nmt 
heime  trmii  by  CMM  Sk^aii^  im  ^  purpo^  of 
aitleedtiig  Fi^  l»*e«stit  m  ^  scmate.  He 
clmiged  ikm  EIng  witli  llie  stomitig  of  Parharim^  the  taking 
dt  amw^  chies  of  other  enterprises^  In  whidi 
he  im  ather  dually  emph^al  or  preparing  to  enga^  ;  and 
^e  noihassa^Trs  were  ealtM^  to  answer  to  those  points* 
Tfik  fhey  daclined,  dcclarihg  that  they  had  no  /ardter  in- 
structimts*  On  whfdh  they  were  ordered  to  tell  their  King, 
diat  ^  the  eonsul  Pnblius  LIcinsnB  wotSd  soon  in  Mat^- 
donia  at  the  head  clf  an  army.  To  him  he  tmght  isesd  am¬ 
bassadors,  if  he  were  disposed  to  make  satisfaction,  but  he* 
need  send  none  to  Rome  ;  hdr  Would  they  be  ^nflfered  to  pass 
Arouj^  Italy.”  After  they  were  thus  di^issed,  a  charge 
was  given  to  Publius  Liciihis,  to  insifetnn  dielr  quitting  Italy 
within  eleven  days,  and  tb  seiid^Spuiius  Garvilius  tb  guard 
theih,  until  they  embarked.  Such  Were  the  trahsadtons  at 
Rome,  before  the  departure  of  th^  consuls  for  their  pr^inces.  • 
Cneius  Siemius,  vdio,  before  the  expiration  ©f  his  office,  had 
hem  sent  to  Brundosium  to  the  fieet  and  sirtny,  had  by  this 
time  transported  into  Epirus,  five  thousand  foot  and  three 
hundred  horse,  aiKi  was  encamped  at  Nimphaeuih,  in  the  td*- 
ritory  of  Apollonia.  From  thence  he  'sent  tribunes,  with  two 
thousand  men,  to  tal^  possession  of  die  forts  of  the  Dassa- 
retians  and  Illyrians  ;  those  people  theiitSelves  having  in¬ 
vited  him  to  establish  garrisons,  to  Secure  them'  frenn  the  in¬ 
roads  of  the  Macedonians  in  dieir  neighbourhood. 
XXXVII.  A  few  ^aya  after,  Quintus  Matcius,  Aulos 
Atilios,  PuUias  Cornelius  Lentulus,  Servius  Cornelius  Len- 
tulus,  and  Lucius  Decimius,  who  were  appointed  ambassa¬ 
dor  to  Greece,  carried  with  them  €me  thousand  soldiers  to 
Corcyra ;  where  they  divided  the  troops  among  them,  and 
settled  what  districts  they  were  to  visit,  Decimius  was  fixed 
mi  to  gO  fo  Gentius,  Kingof  Illyria,  with  imitractimis  to  sound 

93 

Ktm^  Mto  rimktet  y  regnd  for  £9Rm«  iisiMid* 
take  part  ia  ibft 'WB'. 
The  two  CefkaMts^  tlMI 
theace  they  ciew  «#«r  hrto  Iw* 
the  wtai^P  la^e  a  circuk  rovmA  tipei^eiia 
MarcHB  and  AtUhis  appoioted  t& 
and  Themly  ;  th^  were  dkected  to  take  m  vwm  afiteffirwiHnib 
of  Bceotift  and  E^kx^,  aaid  then  to  overto  Pctopaammis, 
where^  by  app^ntaiem:,  they  were  to  meet  the  Lentabw^. 
Before  they  set  oat  <hi  ^eir  severe  routes  from  Corcyra,  a 
letter  was  brought  from  Perseus^  inquiring  thorreasmi 
tte  Romans  sending  troops  into  Greece,  and  taking  posses- 
sion  of  the  cities.  They  did  not  thmk  fmqier  to  ptre  hha 
axxy  ^swer  in  writing;  but  they  trfd  his  messenger,  who 
bik>ught  the  letter^  that  the  mertive  of  the  RommiS  die 
securing  the  safety  of  the  cities  themselves.  The  JL^tuh^^^, 
going  round  the  cities  of  Peloponnesus,  cnchorted  all  the 
states,  without  distinction,  as  they  had  assts^d  Rommis 
witii  fidelity  spirit^  first  in  the  war  with  Philip,  ami  then 
in  Aat  with  Antiochus,  to  assist  them  mjw,  in  Uke  manner, 
against  Perseus.  This  c^esraioned  some  murmuring  in  the 
assemblies ;  for  tiie  Achseans  were  highly  offended,  ttet  they, 
who,  from  the  very  first  rise  ot  tte  wax  wiA  Macedemia,  had 
given  every  instance  of  friendship  to  the  Romans,  and  taken 
an  active  part  against  Philip,  should  be  treated  on  the  same 
footing  with  the  Me^esians  and  Elians,  who  had  bmiie  arms 
on  the  skLe*  of  Antiochus  against  the  Roman  people,  and  who, 
being  lately  inemporated  in  the  Aebsean  union,  made  heavy 
complaitits,  as  if  they  were  made  over  to  tthc  victorioiw 
Ach^ns  as  a  prize. 
XXXVIII.  Marcius  Atili^,  going  tip  to  Gitanie,  a 
town  of  Epirus,  tfoout  ten  miles  from  the  sea,  held  there  a 
council  of  the  Epirotes,  in  which  they  were  listened  to  with 
universal  approbation;  and  they  sent  thence  four  hundred 

94 

HISTCmY  OF  ROME.  SB%. 
yduBg  mm  of  that  counory  to  to  furot^^bw  whom 
Aey  had  freisd  from  the  domuuoii  of  ihe  MaeedcaHatia.'  Ermn 
this  place  diey  proceeded  into  ilrto^a;  where,  haying 
a  few  d^a,  tmtil  a  prs^or  was  dhosen,  in  dte  room  of  .  one 
who  bad  <Ued,  and  Ac  election  having  fallen  mi‘l.yciscw8, 
who  was  well  known  to  be  a  friend  to  Ae  interest  of  the  Ro* 
mans,  Aey  passed  over  into  Thessaly.  There  they  were  at- 
temled  by  envoys  from  the  exiled  Acamaniaos  md  Bceotisms. 
The  Acamanians  had  orders  to  represart,  Aat  whatever 
offences  Aey  had  been  guilty  of  towsorA  Ae  Romans,  firet  in 
the  war  with  Philip,  and  afterwards  in  Aat  with  Antiochus, 
in  consequence  of  being  misled  by  the  professions  of  Aose 
kings,  they  had  found  an  opportunity  tO  expiate.  As,  when 
their  demerits  were  great,  Aey  had,  experienced  the  cle¬ 
mency  of  Ac  Rcnnan  people,  so  they  wotdd  now,  by  Aeir  en¬ 
deavours  to  merit  favour,  make  trial  of  its  generosity.”  The 
Boeotians  were  upbraided  with  having  united  Aeinselves  in 
alliance  with  Perseus ;  but  they  threw  the  blame  on  Ismenea^ 
Ae  leader  of  a  party,  and  alleged,  that  several  states  were 
drawn  into  that  measure,  contrary  to  their  own  judgment;” 
to  which  Marcius  replied,  that  this  would  apj^ar,  for  it  was 
intended  to  give  to  every  one  of  the  states  the  power  of  judg* 
ing  for  itself.”  The  council  of  the  Thessalians  was  held  at 
Larissa.  At  this  meeting,  boA  parties  had  abundant  matter 
for  mutual  expressions  of  gratitude:  the  Thessalians,  for  the 
blessing  of  liberty  conferred  on  them ;  and  the  ambassadors, 
for  Ae  vigorous  assistance  afforded  by  the  Thessalians,  in 
Ae  wars  with  Philip  and  Antiochus.  Their  reciprocal  ac¬ 
knowledgments  of  past  favours  kindled  such  zeal  in  the 
breasts  of  the  assembly,  that  they  voted  every  measure  de¬ 
sired  the  Romans.  Soon  after  this  meeting,  amb^adors 
arrived  from  King  Perseus,  whose  principal  inducement  to 
this  step  was,  the  hope  he  derived  from  a  connexion  of  hos¬ 
pitality  subsisting  between  him  and  Marcius,  which  was 

£9imed  hy  iimr  fillers*  imdbassadotB  began 
milling  himnf  tl^bc^  ^ amity,  ami  requested 
to  ^ve  the  King  of  ccmfeipng  wkh  him* 
Marcius  answered,  that  ^  he  had  receiv^iircmi  hb  lather 
the  same  account  of  the  ^  fria^ship  and  hospi^ihie  cmmxicm 
betweeii  him  and  and  the  consideration  of  that  ccm- 
nexion  induced  him  to  undertake  the  pr<^ent  embassy.  Tiud 
he  had  nojt^so  long  delayed  to  give  the  King  a  meeting,  could 
it  ^faave  heen  done  without  inccmvcnience ;  and  that  now  Im 
^d  his.  colleague  would,  as  soon  as  it  should  be  in  their 
power,  come  to  the  river  Peneus,  where  the  passage  was 
from  Omotium  to  Dium;  of  whbh  diey  would  s^nd  notice 
to  the  King.”  *  .  . 
XXXIX.  Perseus,  on  this,  withdrew  from  Dium  into  the 
heart  of  the  kingdom,  haying  conceived  some  degree  of  hope 
from  the  expression  of  Marcius,  that  he  had  undertaken  the 
embassy  out  of  regard  to  him.  After  a  few  days  Ifaey  all 
met  at  the  appointed  place.  The  King  came  surrounded  by 
a  multitude  both  of  friends  and  guards.-  The  train  of  the 
ambassadors  was  not  less  nnmerous,  for  they  were  accom¬ 
panied  by  a  great  many  from  Larissa,  and  by  the  delegates 
of  many  states,  who  had  met^them  there,  wishing  to  cany 
home  information  on  the  positive  testimony  of  what  them¬ 
selves  should  h^ar.  All  men  felt  a  strong  curiosity  to  l»- 
hold  a  meeting  between  so  powerful  a  King,  and  the  ambas- 
sadors-  of  the  first  people  in  the  world.  After  they  came 
wishin  sight,  on  the  opposite  sides  of  the  river,  some  time 
was  spent  in  sending  messengers  from  one  to  the  other,  to 
settle  which  should  cross  it ;  for  one  party  thought  the  com¬ 
pliment  due  to  royal  majesty,  the  other  to  the  fame  of  the  Ro¬ 
man  people,  especially  as  Perseus  had  requested  the  confer¬ 
ence.  A  jocular  expression  of  Marcius  put  an  end  to  the 
difficulty  : — Let  the  younger,”  said  he,  cross  over  to  the 
elder  ;  the  son  to  the  father  :”for  his  own  surname  was  Philip, 

M  HISTCMIY  OW  S0ME.  fY-H.  58t, 
The  ^iag  twty  pers^ded  lo  eismfif ;  bvU  died  isi^dieir 
perplexity  aitm^dboat  the  number  l^^Bbuuld  brmg  over  witib 
^  him*  He  it  would  be  proper  to  be  attended  by  his 
wh<4o  retinue  i  but  the  ambassadors  retpdted^  thiU  he  should 
either  ^me  with  three  attendauts.tmiy  ;  if  he  brought  so 
^eat  m  baud,  dmt  he  should  give  hostages  that  mi  treael^ry 
should  be  used  dorii^  the  coufereuce.  He  accordingly  oem 
as  hono^es,  Htppias  and  Pantaucus,  two  of  hi%  ^ardcular 
friends,  and  whom  he  had  sent  as  ambassadors.  The  mtent 
of  demainiing  hostages  was,  m>t  so  much  to  get  a  pledge  of 
good  fsudi,  as  to  demonstrate  to  du^  allies,  that  die  King  did 
not  meet  ambassadors  on  a  footing  of  equal  digmty. 
Theit*  salutations  were  not  like  those  between  enemies,  but 
kind  and  friendly  ;  and  seats  being  placed  for  them,  they  sat 
down  together.  .  .. 
XL.  After  a  short  silei^,  Marcius  began  dius  ;  I  sup~ 
pose  you  expect  us  to  give  an  answer  to  your  letter,  sent  to 
Corcyra,  in  which  you  ask  the  reascm^  why  we  mnbassadm^ 
come  attended  by  s<ddiers,  and  why  we  ^nd  ^urmons  mto 
die  clues  ?  To  this  question  it  is  painful  to  me  eid^r  to  re* 
fuse  an  answer,  lest  1  should  apf^ar  too  haughty  >  nr  to  give 
a  Wue  erne,  kst,  to  your^ears,  ^  might  seem  too  harsh.  But 
smee  the  persem  who  mfidnges  a  trei^  must  be  reproved, 
either  with  words  or  with  anus,  as  1  cnol^  wi^  that  any 
odier,  rather  than  myself,  slnnddbe  employed  in  a  war  agaimH; 
you,  so  1  will  undergo  the  ver  disagr^dbk,  of  tU* 
tering  rough  langua^  against  my  feimid,  as  phymeians,  fm 
the  xecovery  of  heahb,  sometime  lapply  painftd  remedks. 
The  senate  is  of  opinion,  that,  since  you  came  to  the  tbrone, 
you  have  acted  but  in  cme  pardcular  as  you  oug^  to  have 
done,  smd  that  is,  in  sending  ambassadors  to  R<me  to  tonew 
the  treaty  made  with  your  father^ — which  yet  U  would  home 
been  better  never  to  have  renewed^  they  think,  than  afterwards 
to  violate  it.  You  expelled  from  Ms  throne  Abrupolts,  an 

sr 

^  ^  Roman  pei^*  ¥oa  ^ve  i^liign  t0  ^ 
^>r44MwtrA  of  Axtalarm,  tbei^i^  Acting  that  yon* 
at  thmt  a^,  to  aay  oozing  woi^  I  thoi^h  dtey  put 
to  death  a  pthace,  whpt  of  all  theflUyriimf » wsn  the  moat  fs^hr 
ful  to  Ae  Rommi  natiou.  You  ma^cboil  with  an  army  throng 
Tltesaa^  ai^  Ae  ti^wy  to  JOelphi,  contrary  to  Ao 
treaty.  You  Bkew^iae,  in  yk^^on  of  k,  «ent  succours  totite 
Byzamtans*  Yw  a»4  &W€a*e  to  a  separate  ^hmce 
wiA  Ae  Boeotiaim  e»r  wWch  you  had  oo  right 
todo«  As  to  EiP^a  andCsliicritinivth©  Theimn  amhassaclc»s, 
Tifho  were  slain  m  retomtng  frotfi  Rome^  I  wiA  rather  to  inr 
quire  who  were  Aeir  murdereim,  Ami  to  charge  the  fact  on 
^one.  To  whom  else  ihan  your  agents  can  Ae  civil  wm’ 
in  ^tolta,  and  deaAs  of  Ae  prind^al  inhabitmits,  be  im- 
putedi  The  country  of  the  IMopkas  was  ravaged  by  you 
in  person.  King  Euc^oes,  his  Way  from  Rome  to  hk 
own  dommi^^f  was  almosthutchereti^  as  a  vicdm^  at  Ae 
tars  m  oansecratod  groutKly  at  l>e^i,  and  it  sieves  me  to 
kn&w  Ac  person  whom  he  atcufesv  WiA  regard  to  Ae  »c* 
cret  crimes  whkh  ^  host  at  Brundumum  States  in  hU  com** 
muniGation^  i  tsAe  for  panted  tluit  you  have  received  ftdl 
accounts,  boA  by  letter  h^om  Rome,  and  th^  report  of  ytmr 
own  anAassadors.  There  was  one  way  by  which  you  might 
have  jsvoided  heark^  o(  Aese  matters  from  me,  which  was, 
by  not  inquiring  why  we  brought  dioops  into  Macedonia,  car 
sent  garrisons  into  the  ckies  of  <mr  ^aUies.  When  you  bad 
aiked  the  quesdon,  it  would  have  been  more  blame  Ale  to 
keep  silence,  ttoa  to  answer  acccmluig  to  truA.  Out  <rf  re¬ 
gard  to  the  friendship  derived  to  us  from  our  fathers,  I  am 
really  disposed  to  listen  fevouraWy  to  whatever  you  may  say, 
and  shaU  be  happy  if  you  afford  me  any  grounds  on  which  I 
may  plead  your  cause  before  the  senate*” 
XLL  To  this  Ae  King  answeredv?-"^  A  cause  which 
would  approve  itself  good,  if  tried  befoi^  impartial  judg©^,  I 
VOL.  VI. — O 

HISTORY  OF 

[Y*S.  5St. 

n 
am  to  submit  to  opinic^of  judges^  who  are^m^tlie^^Haaic 
rime,  my  accusers.  Of  the  facts  laid  to  tny  ^haig^,  mme  are 
of  suck  a  nature,  that  I  know  not  iHicthef  I  ought  not  to  glo^ 
ry  in  them  ;  others  there  are,  whkh  I  shall  confess  without 
a  blush  ;  and  others,  which^  as  they  rest  on  bare  asserrions,  k 
will  be  sufficient  to  deny.  St^posing  that  I  were  this  day'to 
smnd  a  trial,  according  to  your  laws,  what  does  either  the 
Erundusian  informer,  or  Eumenes;  allege  agmnst  nae  tha^ 
would  be  deemed  a  welUfounded  aceusari0E,-and  not  rather 
a  malicious  aspersion  i  Had  EumeneS  (although  both  in  his 
public  and  private  Capacity  he  h^  d<m€  many  grievoiM 
ries  to  so  many  people)  no  other  enemy  than  mei  Could  I 
not  find  a  better  agent  for  the  perpetration  of  wickedness  than 
Rammius,  whom  I  had  never  Seen  before,  nor  had  any  pr<^a* 
bility  of  ever  seeing  again  ?  Then,  I  must  give  an  account 
of  the  Thebans,  who,  it  is  well  known,  perished  by  shipwreck : 
and  of  the  death  of  Artetarus-^  with  regard  to  whom  nothing 
more  is  alleged  against  me,  than  ritat  the  persona  who  kiEed 
him  lived  in  exile  in  my  domit^ions.  To  such  reasoning  sut 
ritis,  unfair  as  it  is,  I  will  not  Object  on  my  part,  provided  you 
will  admit  it  on  yours  5  and  will  acknowledge  that,  whatever 
exiles  have  taken  refuge  in  Rome  or  in'  Italy,  you  are  your¬ 
selves  abettors  of  the  crimes  for  which  they  have  been  con¬ 
demned.  If  you  admit  not  this  principle,  as  other  Nations 
will  not,  neither  will* I.  In  truth,  to  what  purpose  should 
people  be  allowed  to  go  into  exile,  if  they  are  no  where  to  be 
admitted  ?  As  soon,  however,  as  I  understood  from  yoUr 
representations,  that  those  men  were  in  Macedonia,  I  ordered 
that  search  should  be  made  for  them,  and  that  they  should 
quit  the  kingdom  ;  and  I  prohibited  them  for  ever  from  set¬ 
ting  foot  in  my  domimons.  On  these  articles,  indeed,  I  stand 
accused  as  a  criminal ;  the  others  affect  me  as  a  King,  and 
must  be  decided  by  the  terms  of  the  treaty  subsisting  between 
you  and  me.  For  if  it  is  thus  expressed  in  that  treaty,  that, 

B*C.  i4ri.] 

m  cmt  of  wariieiog  ixmi^  xm  me»  .I  am  not  p^imtied  to 
j^ect  my  ki»g^^  ;  i  most  ibm  confess  1  have  infrio^d 
^  defeiidmg  mysolf  with  ani»a  ag?m^  Abropolre,  m  aUy 
of  &e  Homao  |^o]^.  .But,  on  the  crther  hand,  if  it  is  bodi 
^low^  by  trea^^  and  is  an  axiom  csmblished  by  die  iaw 
of  fo^cejuay  i3Ne^^pcUed  by  force  j  how,  I  pra]^ 
youy^^mtght  I  baire  acted,  when  Abri^poUs  had  spread  devi^- 
tatitm  over  the  frontiers  erf  js^  iong^om^  far  as  Ampbipo- 
lis^<:^icdtoff^reatniwnhersof  freepemmis,  avast  multitade 
of  slaves^  and  mmiy  thousands  of  eatUe  ?  Ought  I  ta  have 
hun  quiet,  mid  let  him  proceed  until  he  came  in  ^rms  tp 
Pella,  imo  very  palace  ?  .  iut,  allowing  the  justice  of  the 
wm*  waged  a@^t  him, -yet  he  ought  not  to  have  been  sdb- 
duedv  and  made  to  suffer  th&evils  it^dent  to  the  vanquished* 
Nay,  but  when  I,  who  was  die  person  attacked,  underweirf 
tha  haxmd^^aU  tl^se,  how  can  he,  who  was  the  cause  of  the 
ws^,«ofn|daki,  if -they  happened  to  fall  upon  himself  ?  As 
to  my  having  punished  the-  Dolqpim^  by  force  of  arms,  I 
mean  imt,  Romans,  to  use  the  sam6»  mode  of  defence ;  be* 
cause,  whether  they  deserved  that  treatment  or  not,  I  acted 
in  right  of  .  my  own  sovereign  audiority  ;  for  they  were  my 
subjects,  were  under  my  dominion,  annexed  to  my  father’s 
territories  by  your  decree.  Nor,  if  I  were  to  give  an  account 
of  my  conduct,  I  do  not  say  to  you,  nor  <^her  my  qonfeder* 
a^s,  but  even  to  such  as  disapprove  (rf  a  severe  and  unjust 
exercise  of  authority^  even  over  slaves,  would  it  appear  that 
1  have  carried  my  severity  against  them  beyond  the  limits  of 
justice  and  equity ;  for  they  slew  Euphranor,  the  governor, 
whom.  1  had  set  over  them,  after  using  him  in  such  a  man- 
i^r,  ^th^  death  was  the  slightest  of  his  sufferings. 
,  XLIL  But,  it_  seems,  when  I  proceeded  to  visit  Larissa, 
Antron,  ai^  Pteleos,  (that  I  might  be  within  a  convenient 
distance  to  pay  vows,  due  long  before,)  I  went  up  to  Delphi 
in  order  to  offer  sacrifice  ;  and  here,  with  the  purpe^e  of 

IDO 

HISTQftY  OF  KOHE. 

[Y,R.  S$i. 

jiggtavating  the  imputed  guik,  it  k  ^bjoificd,  that  I  uras  at* 
tended  by  ati  army,  with  intent  to  do  what  I  ndw  coiUpkm 
of  your  doing, — ^to  sei2ie  the  towns,  and  put  garrkotis  in 
them.  Now,  csrtl  together,  in  assembly,  the  states  of  Gre^e, 
through  which  I  marched ;  and  if  any  one  person  eomplaia 
of  ill  treatment,  offered  by  a  soldier  of  mine,  I  will  deny 
that,  under  a  pretence  of  sacrificing,  I  covered  odier  designs. 
We  sent  aid  to  the  iEtolians -and  By^iatitians,>and  made  a 
treaty  of  friendship  with  the  Bceotiansj  These  proceedings, 
of  whatever  nature  they  may  be,  have  blen  repeatedly  avow* 
ed  by  my  ambassadors  ;  and,  \^hat  is  more,  excused  before 
your  senate,  where  t  had  several  of  my  judges  not  so  favour¬ 
able  as  you,  Quintus  Marcius,  my  paternal  friend  and  guest. 
But  at  that  time,  my  accuser,  Eumcncs,  had  not  come  to 
Rolne ;  one,  who,  by  misrepresenting  and  distorting  every 
occurrence,  rendered  it  suspicious  and  odious,  and  endeavour¬ 
ed  to  persuade  you,  that  Greece  eould  not  be  free,  nor  enjoy 
the  benefit  of  your  kindness,  while  the  kingdcMU  of  Mace¬ 
donia  subsisted.  The  Vhe^l  will  come  round  ;  people  wiH 
soon  be  found  who  will  insist,  that  Antiochus  was  in  ^in  re¬ 
moved  beyond  the  mountains  of  Taurus  ;  that  Eumcties  is 
more  burthensome  to  Asia  than  was  vAntiochus*;  and  that 
your  allies  can  never  enjoy  quiet  so  long  as  there  is  a  palace 
at  Pergamus :  for  this  was  raised  as  a  citadel  over  the  heads 
of  the  neighbouring  states.  Quintus  Marcius  and  Auhis 
Atilius,  I  am  aware  that  the  charts  which  you  have  made 
against  me,  and  the  arguments  which  I  urged  in  my  defence, 
will  have  just  so  much  weight,  as  the  ears  and  the  tempers 
of  the  hearers  arc  disposed  to  allow  them  ;  and  that  the 
question  what  I  have  done,  or  with  what  intention,  is  not  of 
so  much  importance,  as  what  construction  you  may  put  on 
what  has  been* done.  I  am  conscious  to  myself,  that  I  have 
not,  knowingly,  done  wrong  5  and  that,  if  through  impru¬ 
dence  I  have  fallen  into  any  error,  the  reproofs  which  I  have 

XUL 

m 

B.C.  tri] 
fK>w^peceived  ai^  atdlckst  to  c&nteet  jukd  reborn  ns^  Siimt 
cet^idy  comfiif^ed  oo  fai^  Uiat  U  or  deserving  dF 
puttishmeot  war  and  plunder :  br^  svffely^  die  ^iie  of 
yom^  ckffiency  and  eonskteiicy  of  cc^uct,  spread  ov^  die 
worlds  is  tll4bunded,  if,  <m  such  causes  as  scarcely  ju^fy 
coxnplaiot  dr  ^po^ukdkmyyou  take  up  arms  against  Idi^  in 
alU£H:u:e  with  yoa/^ 
XLUtl.  Marcius,  fen*  the  time,  assented  to  die  reasonable^ 
ness  of  what  he  urged  ;  and  recommended  it  to  him  to  scad 
mdi^ssadors  to  Rome,  as  he  thought  it  best  to  try  every  ex^ 
pedient  to  the  last,  and  -to  omit  nothing  diat  might  afford  any 
|nos|^ct  of  peace.  It  remained  to  be  considered,  how 
^abassadors  might  travel  with  safety  ;  and  although,  to  dus 
end,  it  was  neceasaiy  that  the  King  should  ask  a  truco,  which 
Marcias  wished  for,  x  and  in  ffict  had  no  other  view  in  con¬ 
senting  to  the  conference,  yet  he  granted  it  with  apparent  re¬ 
luctance,  and  as  a  great  favour  to  the  person  requesting  iHu 
At  that  juncture,  the  Romans  had  made  few  preparation  fi^ 
war;  they  had  no  army,  no  general:  whereas  Perseus  had 
every  thing  prepared  and  ready :  and  if  a  vain  hope  of  peace 
had  not  blinded  his  judgment,  he  might  have  commenced 
hostilities  at  a  time  most  advantageous  to  himself,  and  dis¬ 
tressing  to  his  enemies.  At  the  breaking  up  of  this  c^ 
ference,  (the  truce  being  ratiiied  by  both  parties, j  the  Roman 
ambassadors  bent  their  route  towards  Beotia,  where 
commotions  were  now  beginning  ;  for  several  of  the  states 
withdrew  themselves  from  the  union  of  the  general  cos- 
federacy  of  the  Boeotians,  on  being  told  the  answer  of  the 
ambassadors,  that  it  would  appear  what  particular  states 
were  displeased  at  the  forming  of  the  alliance  with  the 
King.”  First,  deputies  from  Chaeronea  ;  then,  others  frem 
Thebes,  met  the  Romans  on  tba  road,  and  assured  them,  that 
they  were  not  present  in  the  council,  wherein  that  allismce 
was  resolved  on.  The  ambassadors  gave  them  no  answer 

102  HISTOSY  OF  [YM.  m- 
at  the  .time,  Jmt  4>rdered  that  they  sbc^  ^  with  them  to 
Chdcis*  iMiTl^bes  a  vicAent.tiisaen^icai.arose  outoCmm|he^ 
contest.  The  pmy  defeated,  in  the  election  of  pmt^ 
Bceotia,  resolving  to  revenge  the  aftont,  collected  the  multi¬ 
tude,  and  passed  a  decree  at  Thebes,  that  the  new  Bceotarchs 
should  not  be  admitted  inte  tiie  cities.  ^  .AH,  the  persons  thus 
exiled,  betook  themselves  to  Xhespise,  whero  they  were  ^ 
ceived  without  hesitation  ^  and,  the  people^s  minds  chatting, 
tiiey  were  recalled  to  Thebes.  There  they  got  a  decree  pa^- 
cd,  that  the  twelve  persons,  who,  without  being  invested  Wth 
public  authority,  had  held  an  assembly  and  council,  should 
be.  punished  by  banishment  :.apd  afterwards,  the  new^pr^ttor, 
Ismenias,  a  man  of  distinction  and  power,  prncured  apothev* 
condemning  them,  although  absent^  to.  capital  pumshment. 
They  had  fled  to  Chalcis  j  and,  from  thowe,  they  proceeded 
to  Larissa,  to  the  Romans to  whom  th^  represented,  that 
Ismenias  alone  was  to  be  blamed  for.^hn  nUiance  concluded 
n^ith  Perseus.  The  contest  originated  in  a  party-dispute  ; 
yet  ambassadors  from  both  sides  waited  <m  the  Romans,  as 
did  the  exiles,  accusers  of  Ismenias,  and  Ismenias  himself. 
XLIV.  When  they  were  all  arrived  at  Chalcis,  the  chiefe 
of  the  other  states,  each  by  a  particular  decree  of  their  own, 
renounced  the  alliance  of  Perseus,  and  joined  themselves  to 
the  Romans.  Ismenias  recommende^,  that  the  Beeotian  na* 
tion  should  be  placed  under  the  orders  of  Rome  ;  on  which 
so  violent  a  dispute  arose,  that,  if  he  had  npt  fled  for  shelter 
te  the  tribunal  of  the  ambassadors,  be  would  have  been  in 
die  most  imminent  danger  of  losing  his  life  by  the  hanck  of 
the  exiles  and  their  abettors.  Thebes  itself,  the  capital  of 
Bceotia,  was  in  a  violent  ferment,  one  party  straggling  tmd 
to  bring  the  state  over  to  the  King,  the  other  to  the  Romans ; 
and  multitudes  had  come  together,  from  Coronae  tknd  Haliar- 
tus,  to  support  the  decree  in  favour  of  Perseus,  But  the 
firmness  of  the  chiefs  (who  desired  them  to  judge,  from  the 

lOS 

B.C*  m.] 
defeats  of  Phitip  and  Aiitbc]\us^  how  ^reat  mmt  he  fhe 
^  and  fMTtui^  of  the  Rcnnan  empire)  so  far  {prevailed  on  the 
people,  that  they  not  only  i^sed  a  resolution  to  cam^l  tins 
alliance  of  the  King  ;  but  also,  m  gratify,  die  ambassadors^ 
sent  the  promoters  of  that  alliam^e  to  Chalcis  ;  and  ordered^ 
that  the  state  should  be  rec^raimendedto  the  protection  of  the 
Romans*  This  deputation  from  the  Thebans  gave  great  joy 
to  Mareius  and  Atilius,  and  they  advised  the  states  to  send 
separate  embassies  to  Rome  to  make  a  renewal  of  friendship. 
They  required,  as  an  essential  point,  that  the  exiles  should  be 
restored  ;  and  passed  a  sentence,  condemning  die  advisers  of 
die  treaty  with  the  King.  Having  thqs  chsunited  the  mem¬ 
bers  of  the  Bo&otian  council,  which  was  their  grand  object, 
they  proceeded  to  Peloptmnesus,  first  sending  for  Servius 
Cornelius  to  Chalcis.  An  assembly  was  summoned  to  meet 
them  at  Argos,  where  they  demanded  nothing  more  from  the 
A£hseans,l;han  the  furnishing  of  one  thousand  soldiers^  which 
were  sent  to  secure  Chalcis  until  a  Roman  army  should  come 
into  C^eece. 
XLV.  Mareius  and  Atilius,  having  finished  the  business 
that^was  to  be  done  in  Greece,  returned  to  Rotnc  in  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  winter.  An  embassy  had  been  dispatched  thence, 
about  the  same  time^  into  Asia,  to  the  several  islands.  The 
ambassadors  were  three ;  Tiberiu^Claudius,  Publius  ^<^tu- 
mius^  and  Marcus  Junius.  These,  msddng  a  circuit  among 
the  allies,  exhorted  them  to  undertake  the  war  against  Per¬ 
seus,  in  conjunctimi  with  the  Rommis ;  and  the  more  power- 
fid  any  stato  was,  the  more  zealous  were  they  in  their  appli- 
cadims,  jibing  that  the  smaller  states  would  follow  the  lead 
die  greats.  The  Rhodians  were  esteemed  of  the  utmost 
c^aiaequence  on^very  account ;  because  they  could  not  only 
tte  war,  \mt  support  a  great  share  of  it  by  their 
own  having,  pm^uant  to  the  advice  of  Hegesilochus, 
fmty  ships  ready  for  seau  This  man  being  chief  magistrate. 

HISTORY  OF  ^ME. 

nr,R.  mi. 

tm 
vrboto  they  cdl  Pr^^tatiis,  had,  by  mmy  argunmU,  prt^atl^ 
on  the  to  banish  those  hopes,  which  they  hs^  con¬ 
ceived  from  courting  the  favour  of  Kings,  and  which  they 
had,  in  repeated  inst£niccs,^nnd  fallacious ;  and  to  f^rish 
carefully  the  alliance  of  Rome,  the  only  one  at  that  time  in 
the  world  that  could  be  relied  on  for  stability,  whether  pow^r 
or  fidelilty  were  to  be  considered.  He  told  them,  that 
yfvtx  was  upon  the  point  of  breaking  out  with  Perseus  :  that 
the  Romsms  would  expect  the  same  naval  armament  which 
they  had  seen  lately  in  diat  with  Antiochus,  and  formerly  in 
that  with  Philip  :  that  they  wtHild  be  hurriedf  in  the  hasty 
equipment  of  a  fleet,  at  a  time  when  it  ought  to  be  at 
unless  they  immediately  set  about  the  repairing  mid  manning 
of  their  ships :  and  that  this  they  ought  to  do  widi  the  great¬ 
er  diligence,  in  order  to  refute,  by  the  evidence  of  factSy  the* 
imputations  thrown  on  them  by  Eumenes,”  Roused  by  these 
arguments,  they  rigged  and  fitted  out  a  fleet  x>f  foity  i^ips, 
which  they  showed  to  the  Roman  ambassadors  on  tl^ir  arri** 
val,  to  convince  them  they  had  not  waited  to  be  S^iciled. 
This  embassy  had  great  effect  in  conciliating  the  affectimm  of 
die  states  in  Asia.  Decimius  alone  retutned  to  Rome  with¬ 
out  effecting  any  thing,  and  under  the  scandf^ous  susincion  of 
having  t^ceived  money  from  the  I%rimi  kings.  *  . 
XliVI.  Perseus,  aftei^die  conference  on  the  bank  <he 
Peneus,  retired  into  Macedonia,  and  sent  ambassadors  to 
Rome  to  cany  on  the  negociation  for  peace  commenced  widi 
Marcius,  giving  them  letters,  to  he  delivered  at  #yzantkrm 
and  Rhodes.  The  purport  of  aU  the  letteiiB  #d5  the  same  ; 
that  he  had  conferred  with  the  Roman  ambassadors ;  whsrt 
he  had  heard  from  them,  and  what  he  had  said,  was,  how¬ 
ever,  represented  in  such  colours,  as  that  he  mig^t  seem  to 
have  had  the  advantage  in  the  debate.  In  presence  ^f  the 
Rhodians,  the  ambassadors  added,  diat  ^  diey  were  cotefi^nt 
of  a  continuance  of  peace,  for  it  was  by  the  advice  of  Mar- 

BCM>iC  XLII. 

105 

BX.  iru] 
cius  amd  diat  they  were  sent  to  Rome.  But  if  the 
Romans  should  commence  dieit  hoatiliues,  contrary  to  trea^, 
it  would  then  he  the  business  of  the  filiddians  to  labour,  widi 
all  their  power  and  all  their  interest,  for  the  re*establisbmetit 
of  peace ;  and  that^  if  liiek'  mediadcHi  should  prove  ineffectttd, 
they  ought  then  to  take  such  measures  as  would  prevent  the 
dominion  of  the  whole  world  from  coming  into  the  hands  of 
one  only  nation.  That^  as  this  was  a  matter  of  general  con¬ 
cern,  so  it  was  peculiarly  interesung  to  the  Rhodiam,  as  they 
surpassed  the  other  states  in  dignity  and  power,  whkh  namt 
be  held  on  terms  of  servility  and  dependence,  if  there  were 
no  other  resource  for  redress  than  the  Roftians.”  Both  the 
letter  and  the  discourse  of  the  ambassadors  were  received  by 
the  Rhodians  with -every  appearance  of  kindness  ;  they  had, 
however,  but  little  efficacy  towards  working  a  change  in  their 
minds,  for  by  this  time  the  best-judging  party  had  the'supe- 
rior  influence.  By  public  order  this  answer  was  given  ; — 
that  ‘‘  the  Rhodians  wished  for  peace  ;  but,  if  war  should 
take  place,  they  hoped  that  the  king  would  not  expect  or  re¬ 
quire  from  them  any  thing  that  might  break  off  their  micient 
friendship  with  the  Romans,  the  fruit  of  many  and  grei^  ser¬ 
vices  performed  on  their  part  both  in  war  and  peace.”  The 
Macedonians,  qn  their  way  home  from  Rhodes,  visited  also 
the  states  of  Boeotia,  Thd[>es,  Corona^a,  and  Hsdiartus  j  fim 
it  was  thought  that  the  measure  of  abandoiflng  the  affiance 
with  the  King,  an<f  joining  the  Romans,  was  extorted  from 
them  against  dieir  will.  The  Thebans,  though  somewhat  dis¬ 
pleased  with  the  Romans,  on  account  of  the  sentence  passed 
on  tiieir  nobles,  and  the  restoration  of  the  exiles,  yet  suffered 
not  their  sei^ments  to  be  changed  ;  but  the  Coronaeans  and 
Haliartians,  out  of  a  ktod  of  natural  attachment  to  kings,  sent 
ambassadors  to*  Macedonia,  requesting  the  aid  of  a  body  of 
troops  to  defend  them  against  the  insolent  tyranny  of  the^ 
Thebans.  To  this  application  die  King  imswered,that,  ^  on 
VOL.  VI. — P 

106 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

[YA.  581- 

accoisit  of  the  truce  conchukd  with  the  Ruinm^  k  was 
in  his  power  to  send  troops  i  inH  he  recomn^ded  to  them, 
to  ^uard  ^mselres  against  iU^U^tment  from  the  Ih^bsms^ 
2^  Car  as  diey  were  abb,  widiout  affording  the  Romans  a  pre¬ 
text  for  venting  their  resentment  on  hipi.^’ 
XLVII.  When  Marcius  and  Atilius  returned  to  Rome, 
and  reported  in  the  Capitol  the  result  of  their  ^bassy,  they 
assumed  no  greater  merit  for  any  one  matter,  than  for  having 
over»reached  the  King  by  the  suspension  of  and  the 
hope  of  peace  given  him  ;  for  ‘‘  he  was  so:  fully  provided,” 
they  said,  ‘‘  with  every  rcqmsite  for  the  immediate  cosm- 
mencenient  of  wa^,  whib  on  their  side  no  one  thing  was  m 
readiness,  that  all  the  convenient  pmts  might  be  pre^occupbd 
by  him  l^lbre  an  army  could  be  transported  into  Greece :  but, 
in  consequence  of  gaining  so  much  time  by  the  truce,  the 
Romans  would  begin  the  war  in  a  state  of  much  better  pre¬ 
paration  ;  whereas  he  would  come  into  the  field  without  any 
advantage  beyond  what  he  already  possessed,”  They  men¬ 
tioned,  also,  that  “  they  had  so  effectuaUy  disunited  the  mem¬ 
bers  of  the  Bfl&otiam  council,  that  they  could  never  again,  with 
any  degree  of  unanimity,  connect  themselves  with  the  Mace¬ 
donians.*’  A  great  part  of  the  senate  approved  of  these  pro¬ 
ceedings,  as  cwducted  with  consummate  wisdom ;  but  the 
older  mendsers,  who  retained  the  ancient /simplicity  of  man¬ 
ners,  declared,  that,  “  jua  the  conduct  of  that  embassy,  they 
could  discover  nothing  of  the  Roman  genhts*  Their  ances¬ 
tors  waged  war  not  by  su-atagems  and  attacks  in  the  night, 
nor  by  counterfeiting  fiight,  and  returning  unexpectedly  on 
mi  unguar^d  foe,  nerso  as  to  ^ly  in  cunning  more  &an  in 
real  vabur.  Their  |»ractice  was,  to  declare  thdr  intentions 
to  the  party  bcfcMT  they  entered  cm  action  ;  nay,  they  some¬ 
times  appointed  the  spot  whereon  to  fight.  Actuated  by  these 
prinoipbs  of  htmour,  they  gave  inform atiem  to  King  Pyrrhus 
of  his  physician  plotd%  s^aiast  his  life  ;  and,  from  the  same 

KX>X:  XtM. 

107 

BX*  Itl-] 

mutWt,  they  delivered,  hosuiid,  te  l4ie  FaUsciww  the 
of  their  childreD,  These  werc^,  Romm  acts^  not 
from  the  craft  of  Carth^simis  or  the  sabtilty  of  C^ck^ 
among  whom  it  is;  reckoned  more  gloricms  to  deceive  m 
enemy,  than  to  overemne  him  by  Iemtcc.  It  sometimes 
pens  that  greator  present  advam^^s  may  be  acquired  by  arti¬ 
fice  than  by  bravery.  But  mi  adversary’s  spirit  is  iiHiUy  sub¬ 
dued  for  ever,  when  the  confession  has  been  extorted  frmn 
him,  that  he  was  vanquished,  not  by  artifice,  nor  by  chance, 
but  in  a  just  and  open  war,  in  a  fair  trial  of  strength  hand  to 
hand.”  Such  were  the  sentiments  of  die  elder  members, 
who  did  not  approve  of  this  tnodem  kmd  erf  wisdom.  But 
the  majority  paid  mor^  regard  to  utility  than  to  horour,  and 
passed  a  vote  appmving  of  Marcius’s  conduct  in  his  former 
embassy,  at  the  same  time  ordering  that  he  should  b^  sent 
again  into  Greece  wiu*  some  sb^>s,  and  with  authority  to. act 
in  other  matters  as  he  sboidd  jud^  most  conducive  to  die 
public  good.  They  also  sent  Aulus  Atilius  to  keep  posses¬ 
sion  of  Lari^  in  Thessaly ;  fearing  lest,  <m  the  expiration 
of  the  armistice,  Perseus  might  send  trwps,  and  secure  to 
himself  that  metropolis.  For  the  execution  of  this  design  it 
was  ordered,  that  Atilius  should  be  furnished  by  Cneius  Si- 
cinius  with  two  thousand  foot.  Ttiblius  Lentulus,  who  had 
come  home  from  Achaia,  was  commissiof^d  to  take  the  com¬ 
mand  of  a  party  of  three  hundred  soldiers,  natives  erf  It^y, 
to  fix  his  quarters  with  them  at  Thebes,  and  to  endeavour  to 
keep  Boeotia  in  obedience. 
XL VI II.  After  these  preparatory  steps  were  taken,  the 
senate^  notwithstanding  their  determination  for  war  Was  fixed, 
yet  judged  it  proper  to  give  audience  to  the  King’s  ambassa¬ 
dor.  Their  discourse  was,  prmcjpally,  a  repetifitm  of  what 
had  been  urged  by  Perseus  ^  the  conference.  The  point 
which  they  laboured  with  the  greatest  earnestness,  was,  t\m 
exculpating  him  from  the  guilt  of  the  ambush  laid  for  Eu- 

108 

HISTC«Y  OP  ROME. 

[Y*R.  5^1. 

mtm^  I  hvA  their  argomefi^  cailried  no  degree  of  eonvi<^toD, 
the  affair  ^as  so  notorioi;®.  ^yhe  rest  consisted  of  apcdogies^ 
and  wbhes  for  the  continuance  of  amity.  But  their  hearers 
were  not  in  a  lempeV  to  be  either  convinced  or  persuaded. 
They  were  ordered  to  quit  the  city  of  Rome  instantly,  and 
Italy  within  thirty  days.  Then  Publius  Licinius,  the  consul, 
to  whose  lot  the  province  of  Macedonia  Imd  fallen,  was 
dbarged  to  appoint  the  day  for  assembling  the  army  as  early 
as  possible.  Gains  Lucretius,  the  praetor,  whose  province 
was  the  fleet,  sailed  from  the  city  with  forty  quinqueremes  ; 
for  it  was  judged  proper  to  keep  at  home,  for  other  exigencies, 
some  of  the  vessels  that  were  repaired.  The  praetor  sent 
forward  his  brother,  Marcus  Lucretiqs,  with  one  quinque- 
reme  ;  ordering  him  to  collect  from  the  allies  the  ships  due 
by  treaty,  and  to  join  the  fleet  at  Cephallenia.  He  received 
from  the  Rhegians  one  trireme,  from  the  Locrians  two,  and 
from  the  Bruttians  four ;  and  then,  coasting  along  the  shore 
of  Italy,  until  he  passed  the  farthest  promontory  of  Calabria^ 
in  the  Ionian  sea,  he  shaped  his  course  over  to  Dyrrachium. 
Finding  there  ten  barks  belonging  to  the  Dyrrachians,  twelve 
belonging  to  the  Issaeans,  and  fifty-four  to  King  Gentius,  he 
affected  to  understand  that  they  had  been  brought  thither  for 
the  use  of  the  Romans ;  and,  carrying  them  all  off,  sailed  in 
three  days  to  Corcyra,  and  thence  directly  to  Cephallenia. 
The  praetor  Caius  Lucretius  set  sail  from  Naples,  and,  pass¬ 
ing  the  straight,  arrived  on  the  fifth  day  at  the  same  place. 
There  the  fleet  halted  until  the  land  forces  should  be  carried 
over,  and  until  the  transport  vessels,  which  had  been  sepa¬ 
rated  in  the  voyage,  might  rejoin  it. 
XL  IX.  About  this  time  the  consul  Publics  Licinius,  after 
offering  vows  in  the  Capitol,  marched  out  of  the  city  in  his 
military  robes.  This  ceremtnSy,  which  is  always  conducted 
with  great  dignity  and  solemnity,  on  this  occasion  particular¬ 
ly  engaged  topic’s  eyes  and  thoughts  in  an  unusual  degree, 

mo^  JSM. 

io@ 

^at  eseofled  tiie  carntd  agaimt 
an  €^my  fmmidable  coi^pictioua  toAi  for  'abtiitieiT  a&d 
Besik,  they  were  drawn  together,  not  oaly  by 
tlieir  desire  *b  pay  hifi^  the  costomai^  respect,  biit  hy  aa 
earnest  wiidi  to  hk>ld  the  show,  and  to  hare  a  si^t  of  die 
commitiider,  to^whose  wisdom  and  conduct  they  intrusted  the 
makitetianee  flirpufalic  safety.  Hmn  occurred  such  re- 
flecdbns  ^  dieses  ^  How  v$^m  were  die^chsmces  of  war  ; 
h€w  upcertsj^  the  imm  of  the  ;  how  raBHEaMe 
success  of  arms'^'how  frequent  the  vh^itudes  c^  fossil  and 
su^esses ;  what  ksSstars  often  happened  thn^gh  d^  un* 
sldlfikesrmid  of  commanded  f  said^  on  die  am- 
tsuy,  w^t''«irjHmge8  ^accrued  from  thehr  judgment  imd 
valour^  'Whitt  hiittnan  hemg  could  yet  htmw  either  the  capa¬ 
city  or  the  fornme^  'dm  Consul  whitm  d^  were  sex^iitig 
agah^die  i  wheAer  they  wm  *k>rdy  to  see  him  at 
die  l^ad^^fr  a^vkmrious  srmy^motisdhg  the  Capitol,  in 
triumfd^,  to  rerisit  the  same  gods^from  whom  he  now  took 
his  departure or  whether  they  were  to  give  a  like  cause  of 
exultation  to  dietr  enemies.-’  Then  King  Pfmeus,  against 
whdm  he  was  going,  had  a  fai^  repu^dc»i,^erivcd"from  the 
great  martial  charsu:ter  ^  the^Maced^uan  nation,  and  from 
hfe  father  Philip  j  wlm,"^he8hles  mfaoy  prosperous  achieve- 
m^ts,  had  gained  a  laigeeluo'e  of  renown  even  in  his  war 
with  die  Romans,  r  Besides^  die  ^mo  of’  Pei^seus  himself 
was  formidaik,  haiwg  b^n,  isver^k^  hie  first  aecessitm  to 
the  throne^  the  Cc^^mm^sfdgect  of  convei^tion  and  appre¬ 
hension  on  accomtof  the^eapoclcdwar.  The  consul  was 
accompanied  by  two  military  tribunes  of  consular  rank,  Cains 
Claudius  and' Quintus  Mucins';  and  du^  ifin^otBs 
yemng  men,  Publius  Leutulus,  and  two  MmiMm;  Acidmnses, 
one  the  ami  of  Marcus  Mamlius,  die  csther  of  Lucius.  With 
these  be  went  to  Brmdusium  to  the  army  j  and  sailing  over 

HIST(»V  OF  ROME. 

ilo 

iYM.  sm. 

widi  idl  his  {c»^ces^  pkieiied  his  c^p  nt  NyiaqplMsiaii^ 
in  the  territmy  of  Apolkaiia.  %♦ 
L.  A  few  days  before  thb,  Perseu^  Imbg  leam^^  £r^ 
lus  ambassadors,  <m  their  re^ira  from  Rc^ae,  diat  every  ho|>e 
peaeci  was  cut  cS^  held  a  coimcil,  ta  aduch  a  kmg  delate 
emued.  Some  were  of  o|doion,  that  he  ought  to  psty  a  :tr^ 
bitte,  or  evea  to  cede  a  pait  of  his  dombiolM,  if  that  were 
tixsisted  ou ;  iu  shc»t,  that  he  ought  not  to  rehise  i^lmuiting, 
for  the  sake  of  peace,  to  any  hardship  whatsoever ;  md 
mo  memis  to  pm»ie.  measirrea  which  would  expose  fumself 
and  Ms  kingdm  to  such  a  perika^  fax^card.  For,  if  he 
retsused  tmdispii^ed  poss^abn  of  the  throne,  time  and  the 
revoMuon  of  affmrs  might  produce  many  conjunctures,  which 
would  .enable  him  not  oMy  to  recover  his  losses,  but  to  be- 
formidable  to  those  wbrnrhe  imw  bad  reasem  to  dread.” 
A  ccHisklerabk  majority,  however,  expressed  sentiments  of  a 
bolder  natum.  They  mskted  that  the  ceSston  of  any  part 
would  be  followed  by  that  of  the  whole  kingdom*  The  Ro¬ 
mans  were  in  want  neither  money  nor  territmy :  hot  they 
'Considered  that  all  humxm  affairs,  even  kingdoms  and  em¬ 
pires,  are  sid^ject  to  many  casualties*  They  had  themselves 
broken  the  power  of  the  Caithagbiansf  tmd  setded  in  thchr 
tieighbourbood  an  over-powerful  ,K\b^  as  a  yoke  on  their 
necks  ;  while  they  had  removed  Afttioebus,  and  his  future 
auccessors,  beyond  the  mountains  of  Taurus*  There  now  re¬ 
mained  only  the  kingdom  of  Macedonia  near  in  situatims, 
and  such  as  might,  in  case  <rf  any  shock  being  given  to  the 
power  of  Rome,  inspix^  its  IdngS'  widi  the ^ spirit  of  their 
forefsuhers*  Perseus  therefore  ought,  whde  his  affairs  were 
yet  in  a  state  of  ^idety,.to  consider  well  in  bis  own  mind, 
v^dier  it  weitj  more  adviseabk  to  give  up  one  part  of  his 
domkiions  after  anodier,  untd  at  length,  stripped  of  all  power 
and  exiled  from  his  kingdom,  he  sMmld  be  reduced  to  beg 
from  the  Romans,  either  Samothracia  or  some  other  island, 

111 

B.C.  ITl.] 
wherts  he  might  ^  m  md  t  ^ 
die  other,  haad^  to  fonh  armed  ia  viodicatkm  Iw 
fortaoerfmd  hk  hoaotM-  ^  md^  as  is  the  pmt  of  a  hrave 
eld^r^  emh^e  aa^padeace  whale  vermisfoituiie  ehaaoe 
of  war  mi^  brmg  him^  or  by  vict^ay  driver  the  wofhi 
fmm  the  tyramiy  of  Rome.  There  would  be  uothiog 
wonderful,  in  the  Romans  being  driven  out  of  Ckteece,  thi^ 
m  Hatmihars  bemg  driven  out  of  Itdlyi  nor,,  ip  Wilds 
they  eee  how  k  ^mid  eoos^  with  die  chiuwcter  of  the  prince, 
who  had  sh<»vn  the  utmost  vigoiw^  kuneststkig  the  onji^  de^ 
signs  of  his  brother,  aspiring  to  the  &roiie^  after  he  had 
fairly  obtained  it  himself,  to  surrender  it  up  to  ibreignenu 
That  war  was  the  pro^r  meem  even  for  procuring^ieace, 
was  so  generally  aftowed  by  mA  the  weu'ld,  that  nothing  was 
accounted  more  sham^ul  than  to^yieM  upadoimkucm  withma 
a  struggle,  and  sothmg  more  gl0ri<His  than  ftw  n  p^im:e.to 
have  experienced  eyexy  kind  of  fottune  in  the  defem^e  ctf  hk 
crown  and  dignity-”  s, 
jLI.  The  council  was  Judd  at  Pelk,  in  the  old  palace  of  die 
Macedonian  Kings.  In  conclusion,  Reraais  satti,  *^Let  os 
then,  with  the  help  of  the  gods,  wage  war,  ski^e  that  is  ytmr 
^  opinion  and,  dispatching  letters  to  ^  die  commm^rs  of 
the  troops,  he  drew  together  his  entire  feme  at  Cytium,  a 
town  of  Macedonia-  He  himself  ^ter  making  a  royal  offers 
ing  of  one  hundred  victims^  which  he  siK:rificed  to  Minerva, 
called  Alcide,  set  out  for  Cydum,  amended  by  a  bmid  of 
nobles  and  guards.  All  theTorces,  both  of  the  Macedonians 
and  foreign  auxiliaries,  had  assembled  here  b^re  his  arri* 
val.  He  encamped  them  before  die  city,  md  drew  them  sSl 
up,  under  arms,  in  order  of  batdc,  in  a  ^in*  The  amenmt 
of  the  whole  was  forty-tbree  tbrntsaml  armed  men }  of  whom 
about  one^half  composed  the  phalanx,  and  were  commanded  by 
Hipptas  of  Jdercea:  there  were  th^twocolmrts  selected  for 
their  superior  strength,  and  the  vigour  of  their  age,  emt  of  the 

in  |rai.a«f. 
'attnAKS*  ttf- tlieir  r  thesef  tt«y  ■  ci|He4  a 
Ac  &smtxmid  of  theai^ti^  ^ventti  t<eotia^  i»a 
Hhoteippoft  qI"  <£idy«a.  '  Aottphttos  ^ 

^  x<tMh  0  ’&6  Bhield4>eare)«,  abotft  dMMsaiii 
«im^  ttwnber,  of  Aree  raadt  ^ 
KKomMi,4«d.iteealrom  Parorea  add  PiMatiymt^a  ff^es 

tiw 

'ili^sise^l^  bc^  tiiiticd  kf 

Hidsm^  iNmUmf  t>f -ydniijg  ^Braietrib^ 
two'^m»idG^m  s(A^rSy  dit  commisriiii 
€>f  Asi^pi0d<^&  f.  liieatifi^d^mdepe^deQt  ThraciaBS| 
from  of  dte^miana^  had  a  general 
of  dleir.BwBv  cqtud  tiaiiriier  neiBiy  of  Cthtam  followed 
their  own  IfoaBs  ttf  Phdb^attia^a^  Sydus  of  Gnos- 
sus.  ^^I^f!»M^fa4ba£ed»Ei^eriian^  eoaamimdedahody  of  five 
hoi^hred:  v^ioua  descpi^eos ;  dim  a»aa  wsm  said 
to  be  of  royad  bloody  and^ad  heed  cimdemned  to  exile  hi 
a  foU  council  %ht  Achaeana  on  acccmt  xat  a  letter  to  Per* 
sens,  which  wt»  iin^ce|>md.  ^  The  i£tolians  and  Boeotians, 
inaU  not  ei^ctt^ig  die  number  of  ftvte  hundred,  were  com- 
mmi^d  by  Lycho,  an  Ach^a*  These  auxiliaries,  com* 
pcmed  of  so  and.^  hiany  nations,  made  up  about  ^ 
twelve  thousai^  fi^^kig  men.  -  Of  cavalry,  he  had  collected 
from  all  parts  of  J^focedcmk,  Aree  tlmusand  ;  and  Cotys,  son 
of  Seudia,  King  of  the  Odiy^iiati  lotion,  was  arrived  with  one 
thousand  chosm  hc^rsemen,  and  nearly  the  same  number  of 
foot.  The  to^l  nmnber  wmi  ddity*nhie  thousand  foot,  and 
fom*  thou^md  hmfse.  Mtml  n^itaiiiiy,  since  the  army  which 
Akxaiid^  tl^  led  inU^  Asht,  no  King  of  Macedonia 
Imd  ever  bimn  3^  tibe  ^ad  of  «o  powerful  aTorce. 
I4i#  It  wi»  now^w^my^te^  yew^  since  peace  had  -been 
grimted  to  the  suit  of  ;  and  Macedonia,  having  through 
all  timt  period  enjoyed  ^iel,  w«»  become  exceedingly  popu* 
loim,  and  very  many  wm  now  ^own  up,  mid  become  qu^i* 

^0OK  XLIL 

113 

B.c.  in.] 

Aed  for  th$  dkilies  of  the  field  ;  the  unimportant  wars  also, 
which  they  had  austtained  with  the  neighbouring  states  of 
Thrace,  had  given  them  exercise  rather  than  fatigue,  so  that 
they  were  in  continual  practice  of  military  service.  Besides, 
as  a  war  with  Rome  had  been  long  meditated  by  Philip,  first, 
and  afterwards  by  Perseus,  every  requisite  preparation  was 
fully  completed.  The  troops  performed  some  few  movements, 
but  not  the  regular  course  of  exercise,  only  that  they  might 
not  seem  to  have  stood  motionless  under  arms.  He  then 
called  them,  armed  as  they  were,  to  an  assembly.  He  him¬ 
self  stood  on  his  tribunal,  with  his  two  sons,  one  on  each  side 
of  him  ;  the  elder  of  whom,  Philip,  was  by  birth  his  brother, 
his  son  by  adoption  ;  the  younger,  named  Alexander,  was  his 
son  by  birth.  The  King  endeavoured  to  animate  the  troops 
to  a  vigorous  prosecution  of  the  war.  He  enumerated  the 
instances  of  injurious  treatment  practised  by  the  Romans  on 
Philip  and  himself ;  told  them,  that  ‘‘  his  father,  having  been 
compelled,  by  every  kind  of  indignity,  to  resolve  on  a  renewal 
of  hostilities,  was,  in  the  midst  of  his  preparations  for  war, 
arrested  by  fate  :  that,  when  the  Homans  sent  ambassadors  to 
himself,  they  at  the  same  time  sent  troops  to  seize  the  cities 
of  Greece:  that  then,  under  the  pretext  of  re-establishing 
peace,  they  spun  out  the  winter,  by  means  of  a  fallacious  con¬ 
ference,  in  order  to  gain  time  to  put  themselves  in  force ; 
that  their  consul  was  now  coming,  with  two  Roman  legions, 
containing  each  six  thousand  foot  and  three  hundred  horse, 
and  nearly  the  same  number  of  auxiliaries  j  and  that,  should 
they  even  be  joined  by  the  troops  of  Eumenes  and  Masinissa, 
yet  these  could  not  amount  to  more  than  seven  thousand  foot 
and  two  thousand  horse.’’  He  desired  them,  “  after  hear¬ 
ing  the  state  of  the  enemy’s  forces,  to  reflect  on  their  own 
army,  how  far  it  excelled,  both  in  number  and  in  the  qualifi¬ 
cations  of  the  men,  a  body  of  raw  recruits,  enlisted  hastily 
for  the  present  occasion  ;  whereas  themselves  had  from  child- 
YOL.  VI. — Q 

114 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

LY.R.  581. 

hood  been  instructed  in  the  mUitary  art,  and  had  been  disci¬ 
plined  and  seasoned  in  a  cout^  of  many  wars.  The  auxi¬ 
liaries  of  the  Romans  were  Lydians,  Phrygians,  and  Numi- 
dians  ;  while  his  were  Thracians  and  Gauls,  the  fiercest  na¬ 
tions  in  the  world.  Their  troops  had  such  arms  as  each 
needy  soldier  procured  for  himself :  but  those  of  the  Mace- 
ddhians  were  furnished  out  of  the  royal  stores,  and  had  been 
made  with  much  care,  at  the  expence  of  his  father,  in  a 
course  of  many  years.  Provisions  they  must  bring  from  a 
great  distance,  and  subject  to  all  the  hazards  of  the  sea  ; 
while  he,  besides  his  revenue  from  the  mines,  had  laid  up  a 
store,  both  of  money  and  food,  sufficient  for  the  consumption 
of  ten  years.  Every  advantage  in  point  of  preparation,  that 
depended  on  the  kindness  of  the  gods,  or  the  care  of  their 
sovereign,  the  Macedonians  possessed  in  abundance :  it 
would,  therefore,  become  them  to  show  the  same  spirit  which 
animated  their  forefathers  ;  who,  after  subduing  all  Europe, 
passed  over  into  Asia,  and  opened  by  their  arms  a  new  world 
unknown  even  by  report,  and  never  ceased  to  conquer  until 
they  were  stopped  by  the  Red  Sea,  and  when  nothing  remain¬ 
ed  for  them  to  subdue.  But  the  contest,  to  which  Fortune 
now  called  them,  was  not  about  the  remotest  coasts  of  India, 
but,  in  truth,  about  the  possession  of  Macedonia  itself. 
When  the  Romans  made  war  on  his  father,  they  held  out  the 
specious  pretence  of  liberating  Greece  ;  now,  they  avowedly 
aimed  at  reducing  Macedonia  to  slavery,  that  there  might  be 
no  King  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Roman  empire,  and 
that  no  nation  renewed  in  war  should  have  the  possession  of 
arms  ;  for  these  must  be  delivered  up  to  their  imperious  mas¬ 
ters,  together  with-  the  King  and  kingdom,  if  they  chose  to 
decline  a  war,  and  submit  to  obey  their  orders.” 
LIIL  During  the  course  of  his  speech,  he  was  frequently 
interrupted  by  the  exclamations  of  the  multitude  ;  but,  on  his 
uttering  the  last  expression,  their  vociferations  became  so 

BOOK  XLII. 

115 

B.c.m.] 
loud,  expressing  indication  and  menaces  against  the  foe,  and 
urging  him  to  act  with  spirit,  that  he  put  an  end  to  his  dis¬ 
course*  He  only  ordered  them  to  be  ready  to  march  j  be¬ 
cause  it  was  reported  that  the  Romans  were  quitting  Aeir 
camp  at  Nymphaeum  ;  and  then,  dismissing  the  assembly,  he 
went  to  give  audience  to  deputies  from  the  several  states  of 
Macedonia,  who  were  come  with  offers  of  money  and  com, 
in  proportion  to  the  abilities  of  each.  He  gave  thanks  to  all, 
but  declined  their  proffers ;  telling  them  that  the  royal  stores 
were  sufficient  to  answer  every  purpose.  He  only'  desired 
them  to  provide  carriages,  for  the  conveyance  of  the  engines, 
and  the  vast  quantity  of  missile  weapons  that  was  prepared, 
with  other  military  implements.  He  then  put  his  army  in 
motion,  directing  his  route  to  Eordea  ;  and,  after  encamping 
at  the  lake  Begorrites,  advanced,  next  day,  into  EUmea,to  the 
river  Haliacmon.  Then,  passing  the  mountains  through  a 
narrow  defile,  called  Cambunii,  he  marched  against  the  in¬ 
habitants  of  the  district  called  Tripolis,  consisting  of  Azoras, 
Pythios,  and  Doliche.  These  three  towns  hesitated,  for  a 
little  time,  because  they  had  given  hostages  to  the  Larissaeans ; 
but  the  view  of  immediate  danger  prevailed  on  them  to  ca¬ 
pitulate.  H«  received  them  with  expressions  of  favour,  not 
doubting  that  the  Perrhsebians  would  be  induced  to  follow 
their  example ;  and  accordingly,  on  his  first  arrival,  he  got 
possession  of  their  city,  without  any  reluctance  being  shown 
on  the  part  of  the  inhabitants.  He  was  obliged  to  use  force 
against  Cyretiae,  and  was  even  repulsed  the  first  day  by  bodies 
of  armed  men,  who  defended  the  gates  with  great  bravery  ; 
but,  on  the  day  following,  having  assaulted  the  place  with 
all  his  forces,  he  brought  them  to  a  surrender,  before  night. 
LIV.  Mylae,  the  next  town,  was  so  strongly  fortified,  that 
the  inhabitants,  from  the  hope  of  their  works  being  impregna¬ 
ble,  had  conceived  too  great  a  degree  of  confidence.  Not 
content  with  shutting  their  gates  against  the  King,  they  as- 

116 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

sailed  ium  widi  opprobrious  sauxams,  on  bim^lf  md  on  t\m 
Macedonians  ;  which  behaviour,  while  it  provoked  the  ei^ 
my  to  at^k  them  with  greater  rancour,  kindled  a  greater  ar^ 
dour  in  themselves  to  mak^  a  vigorous  defence,  as  they  had 
now  no  hopes  of  pardon.  During  three  days,  therefore,  un¬ 
common  spirit  was  displayed  both  in  the  assault  and  in  the 
defence.  The  great  number  of  Macedonians  made  it  easy 
for  them  to  relieve  each  other,  and  to  support  the  fight  by 
turns ;  but,  on  the  part  of  the  besieged,  as  the  same  persons 
were  employed  night  and  day,  they  were  quite  exhaus^d, 
not  only  by  wounds,  but  by  watching  and  incessant  labour. 
On  the  fourth  day,  the  scaling-ladders  being  raised  on  all 
sides,  and  one  of  the  gates  being  attacked  with  unusual  force, 
the  townsmen,  who  were  beaten  off  the  walls,  ran  together  to 
secure  the  gate,  by  which  they  made  a  sudden  sally.  This 
was  the  effect  rather  of  inconsiderate  rage,  than  of  a  well* 
grounded  confidence  in  their  strength :  and  the  consequence 
was,  that,  being  few  in  number,  and  worn  down  with  fatigue, 
they  were  routed  by  men  who  were  fresh  ;  and,  having  turn¬ 
ed  their  backs,  and  fled  through  the  open  gate,  they  gave  en¬ 
trance  to  die  enemy.  The  city,  thus  taken,  was  plundered, 
and  even  the  persons  of  free  condition  who  survived  the  car¬ 
nage,  were  sold.  The  King,  after  dismantling  the  place,  and 
reducing  it  to  ashes,  removed,  and  encamped  at  Phalanna  ; 
and  next  day  arrived  at  Gyrton  ;  but,  understanding  that  Ti¬ 
tus  Minucius  Rufus,  and  Hippias,  praetor  of  the  Thessalians, 
had  gone  into  the  town  with  a  body  of  troops,  without  even 
attempting  a  siege,  he  passed  by,  and  received  the  submission 
of  Elada  and  Gonnl,  whose  inhabitants  were  dismayed  by  his 
unexpected  arrival.  Both  these  towns,  particularly  Gonni, 
stand  at  the  entrance  of  the  pass  which  leads  to  Tempe  ;  he 
therefore  left  the  latter  under  an  able  guard  of  horse  and 
foot,  and  strengthened  it,  besides,  widi  a  triple  trench  and 
rampart.  Advancing  to  Sycurium,  he  determined  to  wait 

moz  XLIL 

117 

BC.  171*3 
diai'e  the  approadi  of  the  Romans  j  at  the  same  time  he  or¬ 
dered  his  troops  to  collect  corn  from  till  parts  that  owned  the 
^lemy’s  authority :  f&t  Byciirmm  stands  at  the  foot  of  Mount 
Ossa,  the  southern  side  of  which  overlooks  the  plains  Of  Thes¬ 
saly,  and  the  opposJtc  side  Macedonia  and  Ma^csia.  Be¬ 
sides  these  advsmtages  of  aituatioii,  the  place  enjoys  a  most 
healthful  air,  with  abundance  of  water^  from  numerous  and 
never-failing  springs  in  every  quarter. 
L V.  About  the  same  time  the  Roman  crnisul,  marching 
towards  Thessaly,  at  first  found  the  roads  of  Epirus  cleinr 
and  open  ;  but  afterwards,  when  he  proceeded  into  Ath^a- 
aia,  where  the  country  is  rugged,  he  aacountered  such  diffi¬ 
culties  as  to  be  obliged  to  make  very  short  inarches,  and  en¬ 
dured  much  fatigue,  before  he  could  reach  f^omphi.  If, 
while  he  was  leading  his  raw  troops  through  such  k  territory, 
and  while  bo^h  bis  men  and  horses  were  debilitated  by  con¬ 
stant  toil,  the  King  had  opposed  him  with  hh  army  in  proper 
order,  and  at  an  advantageous  place  and  time,  fhe  Romans 
themselves  do  not  deny,  that  the  battle  most  have  been  attend¬ 
ed  with  very  great  loss  on  their  side.  When  they  arrived  at 
Gomphi,  without  opposition,  as  they  fek  much  joy  at  having 
effected  their  passage  through  such  a  dangerous  road,  so  they 
conceived  great  contempt  of*  the  enemy,  who  showed  such 
utter  ignorance  of  their  own  advantages.  The  consul,  after 
duly  offering  sacrifice,  and  distributing  corn  to. the  troops, 
halted  a  few  days,  to  give  rest  to  the  men  and  hc«*8es  ;  and 
then,  hearing  that  the  Macedonians  were  over-running  Tlies- 
saly,  and  wasting  the  country  of  the  allies,  as  all  were  by  this 
time  sufficiently  refreshed,  he  marched  on  to  Larissa.  Pro¬ 
ceeding  thence,  when  he  came  within  about  three  miles  of 
Tripolis,  called  Scea,  he  encamped  on  the  river  Pencus.  In 
the  mean  time,  Eumenes  arrived  by  sea  at  Chalcis,  accom¬ 
panied  by  his  brothers  Attains  and  Athenaeus,  (bringing  with 
him  two  thousand  foot,  the  command  of  whom  he  gave  to 

118 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  581- 

the  latter,)  having  left  his  other  brother  Philetarus  at  Perga- 
mus,  to  manage  the  business  of  his  kingdom.  From  thence, 
with  Attains  ^d  four  thotisand  foot  and  one  thousand  Imrse, 
he  came  and  joined  the  consul :  whither  also  arrived  parties 
of  auxiliaries  from  every  one  of  the  states  of  Greece  j  but 
most  of  them  so  small,  that  their  numbers  have  not  been 
transmitted  to  us.  The  Apollonians  sent  three  hundred  horse 
and  one  hundred  foot.  Of  the  iEtolians  came  a  number 
equal  to  one  cohort,  being  the  entire  cavalry  of  the  nation  ; 
those  of  the  Thessalians  acted  separately.  The  Romans  had 
not  in  their  camp  above  three  hundred  horse  of  their  own. 
The  Achaeans  furnished  one  thousand  young  men,  armed 
mostly  in  the  Cretan  manner. 
LVI.  In  the  mean  time,  Caius  Lucretius  the  praetor  and 
naval  commander  at  Cephallenia,  ordered  his  brother  Mar¬ 
cus  Lucretius  to  conduct  the  fleet  along  the  coast  of  Malea 
to  Chalcis  ;  and*going  himself  on  board  a  trireme,  he  sailed 
to  the  Corinthian  gulf,  that  he  might,  as  early  as  possible,  put 
the  affairs  of  Bceotia  on  a  proper  footing  ;  but  the  voyage 
proved  tedious  to  him,  particularly  from  the  weak  state  of 
his  healths  Marcus.  Lucretius,  on  his  arrival  at  Chalcis, 
hearing  that  Haliartus  was  besieged  by  Publius  Lentulus, 
sent  a  messenger  to  him,  with  an  order,  in  the  praetor’s  name, 
to.  retire  from  the  place  :  accordingly,  the  lieutenant-general, 
who  had  undertaken  this  enterprise  with  Boeotian  troops, 
raised  out  of  the  party  that  sided  with  the  Romans,  aban¬ 
doned  the  town.  But  the  raising  of  this  siege  only  made 
room  for  a  new  one :  for  Marcus  Lucretius  immediately  in¬ 
vested  Haliartus  with  troops  from  on  board  the  fleet,  amount¬ 
ing  to  ten  thousand  effective  men,  and  who  were  joined  by 
two  thousand  of  the  King’s  forces  under  Athenaeus.  Just 
when  they  were  preparing  for  an  assault,  the  praetor  came  up 
from  Creusa,  At  the  same  time,  several  ships  sent  by  the 
allies  arrived  at  Chalcis ;  two  Carthaginian  quinqueremes, 

BOOK  XLH. 

119 

B.c.  in.] 

two  triremes  from  Hcraclea  in  Pontus,  four  from  Chal- 
cedon,  a  like  number  from  Samos,  and  also  five  quinque- 
remes  from  Rhodes,  The  praetor,  having  no  enemy  to 
oppose  at  sea,  excused  the  allies  from  this  service,  Quin¬ 
tus  Marcius  also  brought  his  squadron  to  Chalcis,  having 
taken  Alope,  and  laid  siege  to  Larissa,  called  likewise  Cre- 
maste*  While  the  aflPairs  oS  Boeotia  were  in  this  state,  Pei> 
seus,  who,  as  has  been  mentioned,  lay  encamped  at  Sycurium, 
after  drawing  in  the  com  from  all  the  adjacent  parts,  sent  a 
detachment  to  ravage  the  lands  of  the  Pheraeans  j  hoping  that 
the  Romans  might  be  drawn  away  from  their  camp  to  suc¬ 
cour  the  cities  of  their  allies,  and  then  be  caught  at  a  disad¬ 
vantage.  But  seeing  that  his  depredations  did  not  induce 
them  to  stir,  he  distributed  all  the  booty,  consisting  mostly 
of  cattle  of  all  kinds,  among  the  soldiers,  that  they  might 
feast  themselves  with  plenty.  The  prisoners  he  kept. 
LVII.  Both  the  consul  and  the  King  held  councils  nearly 
at  the  same  time,  to  determine  in  what  manner  they  should 
begin  their  operations.  The  King  assumed  fresh  confidence, 
from  the  enemy  having  allowed  him,  without  interruption,  to 
ravage  the  country  of  the  Pheraeans ;  and,  in  consequence, 
resolved  to  advance  directly  to  their  camp,  and  not  to  suffer 
them  to  lie  longer  inactive.  On  the  other  side,  the  Romans 
were  convinced  that  their  inactivity  had  created  a  meai\ 
opinion  of  them  in  the  minds  of  their  allies,  who  were  ex¬ 
ceedingly  offended  at  their  having  neglected  to  succour  the 
Pheraeans.  )Vhi!e  they  were  deliberating  how  they  should 
act,  Eumenes  and  Attains  being  present  in  the  council,  a 
messenger  in  a  violent  hurry  acquainted  them,  that  the  enemy 
were  approaching  in  a  great  body.  On  this  the  council  was 
dismissed,  and  an  order  to  take  arms  instantly  issued.  It  was 
also  resolved,  that,  in  the  mean  time,  a  party  of  Eumenes’ 
troops,  consisting  of  one  hundred  horse,  and  an  equal  num¬ 
ber  of  javelin-bearers  on  foot,  should  go  out  to  observe  the 

HISTCmy^F  ROME. 

tY.R.  saj.. 

ISO 
enemy,  Perseus,  9ho\xt  the  fourtk  hour  of  day,  being 
nearly  one  thousand  paces  from  the  Roman  camp,  ordered 
the  body  of  his  infantry  to  halt,  and  advanced  himself  in 
front,  with  the  cavalry  and  light  infantry,  accompanied  by 
Cotys  and  the  other  generals  of  the  auxiliaries.  They  were 
less  than  five  hundred  paces  distant,  when  they  descried  the 
enemy’s  horse,  which  consisted  of  two  cohorts,  mostly  Gauls, 
commanded  by  Cassignatus,  and  attended  by  about  one  hun¬ 
dred  and  fifty  light^infantry,  Mysians  and  Cretans.  The  King 
halted,  ashe  knew  not  the  force  of  the  enemy.  He  then  sent 
forward  two  troops  of  Thracians,  and  two  of  Macedonians, 
with  two  cohorts  of  Cretans  and  Thracians,  The  fight,  as 
the  parties  were  equal  in  number,  and  no  reinforcements  were 
sent  upon  either  side,  ended  without  any  decided  advantage. 
About  thirty  of  Eumenes’  men  were  killed,  among  whom 
fell  Cassignatus,  general  of  the  Gauls.  Perseus  then  led  back 
his  forces  to  Sy curium,  and  the  next  day,  about  the  same 
hour,  brought  up  his  army  to  the  same  ground,  being  follow¬ 
ed  by  a  number  of  wagons  carrying  water  ;  for,  in  a  length 
of  twelve  miles  of  the  road,  none  could  be  had,  and  the  men 
were  greatly  incommoded  by  the  dust ;  he  also  considered 
that,  if,  on  first  sight  of  the  enemy,  an  engagement  should  take 
place,  they  would  be  greatly  distressed  in  the  fight  by  thirst. 
The  Romans  remained  quiet,  and  even  called  in  the  advanced 
guards  within  the  rampart ;  on  which  the  King’s  troops  re¬ 
turned  to  their  camp.  In  this  manner  they  acted  for  several 
days,  still  hoping  that  the  Roman  cavalry  might  attack  their 
rear  on  their  retreat,  which  would  bring  on  a  battle  ;  consider¬ 
ing,  likewise,  that  when  they  had  once  enticed  the  Romans 
to  some  distance  from  their  camp,  they  could,  being  superior 
in  both  cavalry  and  light  infantry,  easily  and  in  any  spot  face 
about  upon  them. 
LVIII.  Finding  that  this  scheme  did  not  succeed,  the  King 
removed  his  camp  ;  entrenching  himself  at  the  distance  of  five 

BOOK  xm. 

121 

miles  from  the  enemy.  At  the  first  dawn  of  the  next  day, 
having  drawn  up  his  line  of  infantry  on  the  same  ground  as 
before,  he  led  up  the  whole  cavalry  and  light  infantry  to  the 
enemy’s  camp.  The  sight  of  the  dust  rising  in  greater  abun¬ 
dance,  and  nearer  than  usual,  caused  a  great  alarm,  though, 
for  some  time,  little  credit  was  given  to  the  intelligence  that 
was  brought ;  because,  during  all  the  preceding  days,  the 
Macedonians  had  never  appeared  before  the  fourth  hour,  and 
it  was  now  only  sunrise.  But  the  shouts  set  up  by  great 
numbers,  and  the  men  running  off  from  the  gates,  soon  re¬ 
moved  all  doubt  of  the  matter,  and  great  confusion  ensued. 
The  tribunes,  prefects,  and  centurions,  hastened  to  the  gene¬ 
ral’s  quarters,  and  the  soldiers  to  their  several  tents.  Per¬ 
seus  formed  his  troops  within  less  than  five  hundred  paces  of 
the  rampart,  round  a  hill,  called  Callicinus.  King  Cotys,  at 
the  head  of  his  countrymen,  had  the  command  of  the  left 
wing,  the  light  infantry  being  placed  between  the  ranks  of  the 
cavalry.  On  the  right  wing  were  the  Macedonian  horse, 
with  whose  troops  the  Cretans  were  intermixed.  Milo  of 
Bercea  had  the  command  of  these  last ;  Meno,  of  Antigone, 
that  of  the  cavalry,  and  the  chief  direction  of  the  whole  divi¬ 
sion.  Next  to  the  wings  were  posted  the  royal  horsemen, 
and  a  mixed  kind  of  troops,  selected  out  of  the  auxiliary 
corps  of  many  nations  ;  the  commanders  here  were  Patrocles 
of  Antigone,  and  Didas  the  governor  of  Paeonia.  In  the  cen¬ 
tre  was  the  King  j  and  on  each  side  of  him  the  band  called 
Agema,  with  the  consecrated  squadrons  of  horse  ;  in  his  front 
the  slingers  and  javelin-bearers,  each  body  amounting  to  four 
hundred.  The  command  of  these  he  gave  to  Ion  of  Thessa- 
lonice,  and*  Timanor,  a  Dolopian.  Such  was  the  disposition 
of  the  King’s  forces.  On  the  other  side,  the  consul,  drawing 
up  his  infantry  in  a  line  within  the  trenches,  sent  out  likewise  , 
all  his  cavalry  and  light  infantry,  which  were  marshalled  on 
the  outside  of  the  rampart.  The  command  of  the  right  wing, 
voi..  vr. — R 

122 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  5S1. 

which  consisted  of  all  the  Italian  cavalry,  with  light  infantry 
intermixed,  was  given  to  Catus  Licinius  Crassus,  the  consul’s 
brother.  On  the  left  wing,  Marcus  Valerius  Laevinua  com¬ 
manded  the  cavalry  of  the  allies,  sent  by  the  states  erf  Greece^ 
and  the  light  infantry  of  the  same  nation ;  and  the  centre,  un¬ 
der  Quintus  Mucius,  was  composed  of  a  chosen  body  of  se¬ 
lect  horsemen,  of  the  allies.  In  the  front  of  this  body  were 
placed  two  hundred  Gallic  horsemen  ;  and  of  the  smxiiiaries 
of  Eumenes,  three  hundred  Cyrtians.  Fpur  hundred  Thes¬ 
salian  horse  were  posted  at  a  little  distance,  beyond  the  left 
wing.  King  Eumenes  and  Attains,  with  their  whole  di¬ 
vision,  stood  on  the  rear,  between  the  rear  rank  and  the 
rampart. 
LIX.  Formed  in  this  manner,  and  nearly  equal  in  numbers 
of  cavalry  and  light-infantr}%  the  two  parties  encountered  ; 
the  fight  being  begun  by  the  slingers  and  javelin-bearers,  who 
preceded  the  lines.  First  of  all  the  Thracians,  ju^  like  wild 
beasts  which  had  been  long  pent  up,  rushing  on,  with  a  hide¬ 
ous  yell,  fell  upon  the  Italian  cavalry  in  the  right  wing  with 
such  fury,  that  even  those  men,  who  were  fortified  against 
fear,  both  by  experience  in  war  and  by  their  natural  courage, 
were  thrown  into  disorder.  The  footmen  struck  their  spears 
with  their  swords ;  sometimes  cut  the  hams  of  their  horse, 
and  sometimes  stabbed  them  in  the  flanks.  Perseus,  making 
a  charge  on  the  centre,  at  the  first  onset  routed  the  Greeks  ; 
and  now,  the  Thessalian  cavalry,  who  had  been  posted  in  re¬ 
serve  at  a  little  distance  from  the  left  wing,  and  from  their 
situation  had  not  been  engaged,  but  hitherto  mere  spectators 
of  the  fight,  when  affairs  took  this  unfortunate  turn,  were 
of  the  utmost  service  to  the  Greeks,  whose  rear  was  hard 
pressed  by  the  enemy.  For,  retreating  leisurely and  pre¬ 
serving  their  order  until  they  joined  the  auxiliary  troops  un¬ 
der  Eumenes,  in  concert  with  him  they  afforded  a  safe  re¬ 
treat  between  their  ranks  to  the  confederates,  who  fled  in  dis- 

BOOK  XLIL 

123 

B.c.in.] 
order;  and  as  the  enemy  did  not  follow  in  close  bodies,  they 
even  had  die  courage  to  advance,  and  by  that  means  saved 
many  of  the  flying  soldiers  who  made  towards  them.  Nor 
did  the  King’s  troops,  who,  in  the  ardour  of  the  pursuit  had 
fallen  into  confusion,  dare  to  encounter  men  regularly  formed, 
and  marching  with  a  steady  pace.  At  this  moment,  the  King, 
after  his  success  in  the  fight  of  the  cavalry,  might,  by  a  small 
degree  of  perseverance,  have  put  an  end  to  the  war.  The 
phalmix,  however,  came  up  seasonably  while" he  was  encour¬ 
aging  his  troops  ;  for  Hippias  and  Leonatus,  as  soon  as  they 
heard  of  the  victory  gained  by  the  horse,  without  waiting  for 
orders,  advanced  with  all  haste,  that  they  might  be  at  hand 
to  second  any  spirited  design.  While  the  King,  struck  with 
the  great  iniportance  of  the  attempt,  hesitated  between  hope 
and  fear,  Evander  the  Cretan,  who  had  been  employed  by 
him  to  waylay  King  Eumenes  at  Delphi,  seeing  that  body 
somewhat  embarrassed  as  they  advanced  round  their  stand¬ 
ards,  ran  up,  and  warmly  recommended  to  him,  ‘‘  not  to  suf¬ 
fer  himself  to  be  so  far  elated  by  success,  as  rashly  to  risk 
his  all  on  a  precarious  chance,  when  there  was  no  necessity 
for  it.  If  he  would  content  himself  with  the  advantage  al¬ 
ready  obtained,  and  proceed  no  farther  that  day,  he  would 
have  it  in  his  power  to  make  an  honourable  peace  ;  or,  if  he 
chose  to  continue  the  war,  he  would  be  joined  by  abundance 
of  allies,  who  would  readily  follow  fortune.”  The  King’s 
own  judgment  rather  inclined  to  this  plan  ;  wherefore,  after 
commending  Evander,  he  ordered  the  infantry  to  march  back 
to  their  camp,  and  gave  the  signal  of  retreat  to  the  cavalry. 
On  the  side  of  the  Romans  there  were  slain  that  day  two 
hundred  horsemen,  and  not  less  than  two  thousand  footmen  ; 
about  two  hundred  horsemen  were  made  prisoners  ;  but  of 
the  King’s  only  twenty  horsemen  and  forty  footmen  were 
killed. 

124 

HISTORY  OR  ROME. 

[Y.R.581. 

LX.  Whcii  the  victors  returned  to  their  camp,  all  were  full 
of  joy,  but  the  Thracians  particularly  distinguished  them¬ 
selves  by  the  intemperaftce  of  their  transports  ;  for  on  their 
way  back  they  chaunted  songs,  and  carried  the  heads  of  the 
enemy  fixed  on  spears.  Among  the  Romans  there  was  not 
cmly  grief  for  their  misfortune,  but  the  dread  of  an  immedi¬ 
ate  attack  of  the  enemy  on  their  camp.  Eumenes  advised  the 
consul  to  take  post  on  the  other  side  of  the  Peneus,  that  he 
might  have  the  river  as  a  defence,  until  the  dismayed  troops 
should  recover  their  spirits.  The  consul  was  deeply  struck 
with  tht  shame  which  would  attend  such  an  acknowledg¬ 
ment  of  fear  ;  yet  he  yielded  to  reason,  and,  leading  over  his 
troops  in  the  dead  of  the  night,  fortified  a  camp  on  the  farther 
bank.  Next  day  the  King  advanced  with  intent  to  provoke 
the  enemy  to  battle  ;  and,  on  seeing  their  camp  pitched  in 
safety  on  the  other  side  of  the  river,  admitted  that  he  had 
been  guilty  of  error  in  not  pushing  the  victory  the  day  before, 
and.  of  a  still  greater  fault,  in  lying  idle  during  the  night; 
for,  even  by  calling  forth  his  light-infantry  only,  he  might  in 
a  great  measure  ha^e  destroyed  the  army  of  the  enemy  du¬ 
ring  their  confusion  in  the  passage  of  the  river.  The  Romans 
were  delivered,  indeed,  from  any  immediate  fears,  as  they 
had  their  camp  in  a  place  of  safety  ;  but,  among  many  other 
afflicting  circumstances,  their  loss  of  reputation  affected  them 
most.  In  a  council  held  in  presence  of  the  consul,  every  one 
concurred  in  throwing  the  blam^  on  the  iEtolians,  insisting 
that  the  panic  and  flight  took  place  first  among  them  ;  and 
that  then  the  other  allied  troops  of  the  Grecian  states  followed 
dicir  cowardly  example.  It  was  asserted,  that  five  chiefs  of 
the  jfEtolians  were  the  first  persons  seen  turning  their  backs. 
LXL  The  Thessalians  were  publicly  commended  in  a  gene¬ 
ral  assembly,  and  their  cothmanders  even  received  presents 
for  their  good  behaviour.  The  spoils  of  the  enemies  who  fell 
in  the  engagement,  were  brought  to  the  King,  out  of  which 

BOOK  XLII 

B.C.  in.] 

12^ 

he  made  presents, — to  some,  of  remarkable  armour,  to  some, 
of  horses,  and  CO  others  he  gave  prisoners.  There  nrere  above 
one  thousand  five  hundred  shields ;  the  coats  of  mail  and 
breast-plates  amounted  to  more  than  oi^  thousand,  and  the 
number  of  helmets,  swords,  and  missile  weapons  of  all  smrts, 
was  much  greater.  These  spoils,  ample  in  themselves,  were 
much  magnified  in  a  speech  which  the  King  made  to  an  as¬ 
sembly  of  the  troops’ :  he  said,  “  yoii  have  anticipated  the 
issue  of  the  war  :  you  have  routed  the  best  part  of  the  ei«j- 
my’s  force,  the  Roman  cavalry,  which  they  used  to  boast  of 
as  invincible.  For,  with  them,  the  cavalry  is  the  flower  of 
their  youth  5  the  cavalry  is  the  seminary  of  their  senate  ;  out 
of  them  they  choose  the  members  of  that  body,  who  after¬ 
wards  are  made  their  consuls ;  out  of  them  they  elect  their 
commanders.  The  spoils  of  these  we  have  just  now  divided 
among  you.  Nor  have  you  a  less  evident  victory  over  their 
legions  of  infantry,  who,  stealing  away  in  the  night,  filled  the 
river  with  all  the  disorderly  confusion  of  people  shipwrecked, 
swimming  here  and  there.  But  it  will  be  easier  for  us  to 
pass  the  Peneus  in  pursuit  of  the  vanquished,  than  it  was  for 
them  in  the  hurry  of  their  fears ;  and,  immediately  on  our 
passing,  we  will  assault  their  camp,  which  we  should  have 
taken  this  morning  if  they  had  not  run  away.  If  they  should 
choose  to  meet  us  in  the  field,  be  assured  that  the  event  of  a 
battle  with  the  infantry  will  be  similar  to  that  of  yesterday’s 
dispute  with  the  cavalry,”  Those  troops  who  had  gained 
the  victory,  while  they  bore  on  their  shoulders  the  spoils  of 
the  enemies  whom  they  had  killed,  were  highly  animated  at 
hearing  their  own  exploits,  and,  from  what  had  passed,  con¬ 
ceived  sanguine  hopes  of  the  future ;  while  the  infantiy,  es¬ 
pecially  those  of  the  Macedonian  phalanx,  were  inflamed  with 
emulation  of  the  glory^  acquired  by  the  others,  wishing  impa¬ 
tiently  for  an  opportunity  to  show  their  zeal  in  the  King’s  ser¬ 
vice,  and  to  acquire  equal  glory  from  the  defeat  of  the  cne* 

126 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  581. 

my.  The  iCitig  then  dismissed  the  assembly ;  and  next  day, 
marching  thence,  pitched  his  camp  at  Mopsitis,  a  hill  situate 
half  way  between  Tempe  and  Larissa. 
LXll.  The  Romans,  without  quitting  the  bank  of  the 
Pcneus,  removed  their  camp  to  a  place  of  greater  safety, 
where  they  were  joined  by  Misagenes,  the  Numidian,  with 
one  thousand  horse,  and  a  like  number  of  foot,  besides  twen¬ 
ty-two  elephants.  The  King  soon  after  held  a  council,  on  the 
general  plan  to  be  pursued  ;  and,  as  the  presumption  inspired 
by  the  late  success  had  by  this  time  subsided,  some  of  his 
friends  ventured  to  advise  him  to  employ  his  good  fortune, 
as  the  means  of  obtaining  an  honourable  peace,  rather  than 
to  let  himself  be  so  far  transported  with  vain  hopes,  as  to 
expose  himself  to  the  hazard  of  an  irretrievable  misfortune. 
They  observed,  that  to  use  moderation  in  prosperity,  and 
not  to  confide  too  much  in  the  calm  of  present  circumstances, 
was  the  part  of  a  man  of  prudence,  who  deserved  success  ; 
ancrthey  recommended  it  to  him  to  send  to  the  consul,  to 
renew  the  treaty,  on  the  same  terms  which  had  been  granted 
to  his  father  by  Titus  Quintius,  his  conqueror  ;  for  the  war 
could  never  be  terminated  in  a  more  glorious  manner  than 
by  such  a  memorable  battle,  nor  could  any  conjuncture  alFord 
firmer  hopes  of  a  lasting  peace,  as  the  Romans,  dispirited  by 
their  defeat,  would  be  more  reasonable  in  a  negotiation.  But, 
should  they,  with  their  native  obstinacy,  refuse  to  accede  to 
reasonable  conditions,  then  gods  and  men  would  bear  witness 
both  to  the  moderation  of  Perseus,  and  to  the  stubborn  pride 
of  the  others.”  The  King’s  inclination  was  never  averse 
from  such  measures  ;  and  the  majority,  therefore,  approved 
of  the  advice.  The  ambassadors  sent  to  the  consul,  had 
audience  in  a  full  council,  summoned  for  the  purpose.  They 
requeued,  that  ‘‘  a  peace  might  be  concluded  ;  promising, 
that  Perseus  should  pay  the  Romans  the  same  tribute  which 
was  engaged  for  by  Philip,  and  should  evacuate  the  same 

BOOK  XLIi: 

B.c.in.] 

nr 

cities,  lands,  and  places,  which  Philip  had  Evacuated,”  Such 
were  the  proposals  of  the  ambassadors.  When  they  with¬ 
drew,  and  the  council  took  them  under  consideration,  the 
Roman  firmness  prevailed  in  their  determination.  The  prac¬ 
tice  of  that  time  was,  to  assume  in  adversity  the  countenance 
of  prosperity,  and  in  prosperity  to  moderate  the  temper. 
They  resolved  to  give  this  answer :  “  that  peace  should  be 
granted  on  this  only  condition  ;  that  the  King  should  refer 
himself  entirely  to  the  senate,  who  were  to  make  such  terms 
as  they  thought  proper,  and  to  determine  concerning  him, 
and  concerning  all  Macedonia.”  When  the  ambassadors 
brought  back  this  answer,  such  as  were  unacquainted  with 
their  usual  mode  of  acting,  were  astonished  at  the  obstinate 
perseverance  of  the  Romans,  and  most  people  advised  the 
King  to  make  no  farther  mention  of  peace,  for  ^  the  enemy 
would  soon  come  to  solicit  that,  which  they  now  disdained 
when  offered.”  But  this  haughtiness,  as  flowing  from  con¬ 
fidence  in  their  own  strength,  created  no  small  fears  in  the 
breast  of  Perseus,  who  continued  his  endeavours  to  prevail 
on  the  consul,  offering  a  larger  sum  of  money,  if  a  peace 
might  be  purchased.  The  consul  adhered  inflexibly  to  his 
first  answer.  The  King,  therefore,  at  length  despairing  of 
success,  determined  to  try  again  the  fortune  of  war,  and 
marched  back  to  Sycurium. 
LXIII.  When  the  news  of  this  battle  of  the  cavalry  spread 
through  Greece,  it  produced  a  discovery  of  the  wishes  of  the 
people.  For,  not  only  those  who  professed  an  attachment  to 
the  Macedonians,  but  the  generality,  who  were  bound  to  the 
Romans  under  the  weightiest  obligations,  and  some  who  had 
even  felt  the  power  and  haughty  behaviour  of  the  Macedo¬ 
nians, — all  received  the  account  with  joy  ;  and  that,  for  no 
other  cause,  than  out  of  an  unaccountable  passion,  whiidt 
actuates  the  vulgsfr,  even  in  contests  of  sports,  of  favourmg^ 
the  worse  and  weaker  party.  Meanwhile,  iniBoeotia,  the 

128 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  581, 

prsBtor  Lucretius  pushed  the  siege  of  Haliartus  with  all  im¬ 
aginable  vigour.  The  besieged,  though  destitute  of  foreign 
aid,  excepting  some  young  Corinaeans,  who  had  come  into 
the  town  at  the  beginning  of  the  siege,  and  without  hope  of 
relief,  yet  maintained  the  defence  with  courage  beyond  their 
strength.  They  made  frequent  irruptions  against  the  works  ; 
when  the  ram  was  applied,  they  crushed  it  to  the  ground  by 
dropping  on  it  a  mass  of  lead  ;  and  whenever  those  who  di¬ 
rected  the  blows,  changed  their  position,  they  set  all  hands  to 
work,  and,  collecting  stones  out  of  the  rubbish,  quickly  erect¬ 
ed  a  new  wall  in  the  room  of  that  which  had  been  demolish¬ 
ed.  The  praetor,  finding  that  he  made  but  little  progress  by 
means  of  his  machines,  ordered  scaling-ladders  to  be  distri¬ 
buted  among  the  companies,  resolving  to  make  a  general  as¬ 
sault  on  the  walls.  -He  thought  the  number  of  his  men  suf¬ 
ficient  for  this  ;  beside,  that  on  one  side  of  the  city,  which  is 
bounded  by  a  morass,  it  would  neither  be  useful  nor  practi¬ 
cable  to  form  an  attack.  Lucretius  himself  led  two  thousand 
chosen  men  to  a  place  where  two  towers,  and  the  wall  be¬ 
tween  them,  had  been  thrown  down  ;  hoping  that,  while  he 
endeavoured  to  climb  over  the  ruins,  and  the  townsmen 
crowded  thither  to  oppose  him,  some  part  or  other  might  be 
left  defenceless,  and  open  to  be  mastered  by  scalade.  The 
besieged  were  not  remiss  in  preparing  to  repel  his  assault  ; 
for,  on  the  ground,  overspread  with  the  rubbish,  they  placed 
faggots  of  dry  bushes,  and  stood  with  burning  torches  in 
their  hands,  in  order  to  set  them  on  fire  ;  that,  being  covered 
from  the  enemy  by  the  smoke  and  flames,  they  might  have 
time  to  fence  themselves  with  a  wall.  But  this  plan  was  ren¬ 
dered  abortive  ;  for  there  fell  suddenly  such  a  quantity  of 
rain,  as  hindered  the  faggots  from  being  kindled  ;  so  that  it 
was  not  difficult  to  clear  a  passage,  by  drawing  them  aside. 
Thus,  while  the  besieged  were  attending  to  the  defence  of 
one  particular  spot,  the  walls  were  mounted  by  scalade  in 

BOOK  XLIL 

129 

B.C.  171.3 

many  plates  at  once.  In  the  first  tumult  of  storming  the 
town,  the  old  men  and  children,  whom  chance  threw  in  the 
way,  were  pat  to  the  sword  indiscriminately,  while  the  men 
who  carried  arms  filed  into  the  citadel.  Next  day,  these, 
having  no  remaining  hope,  surrendered,  and  were  sold  by 
public  auction.  Their  number  was  about  two  thousand  five 
hundred.  The  statues  and  pictures,  with  all  the  valuable 
booty,  were  carried  off  to  the  ships,  ^and  the  city  was  rased 
to  the  ground.  The  prsetor  then  led  his  army  into  Thebes, 
which  fell  into  his  hands  without  a  dispute  ;  when  he  gave  the 
city  in  possession  to  the  exiles,  and  the  party  that  sided  with 
the  Romans  ;  selling,  as  slaves,  the  families  of  those  who  were 
of  the  opposite  faction,  and  favoured  the  King  and  the  Ma¬ 
cedonians.  As  soon  as  he  had  finished  this  business  in  Boeo- 
I 
tia,  he  marched  back  to  the  sea-coast  to  his  fleet. 
LXIV,  During  these  transactions  in  Bceotia,  Perseus  lay 
a  considerable  time  encar^ped  at  Sycurium.  Having  learned 
there,  that  the  Romans  were  busily  employed  in  collecting 
com  from  all  the  adjacent  grounds,  and  that,  when  it  was 
brought  .in,  they  cut  off  the  ears  with  sickles,  each  before  his 
own  tent,  in  order  that  the  grain  might  be  the  cleaner  when 
threshed,  and  had  by  this  means  formed  large  heaps  of  straw 
in  all  quarters  of  the  camp,  he  conceived  that  he  might  set 
it  on  fire.  Accordingly,  he  ordered  torches,  faggots,  and 
bundles  of  tow,  dipped  in  pitch,  to  be  got  ready  ;  and,  thus 
prepared,  he  began  his  march  at  midnight,  that  he  might 
make  the  attack  at  the  first  dawn,  and  without  discovery. 
But  his  stratagem  was  frustrated  :  the  uproar  among  the  ad¬ 
vanced  guards,  who  were  surprised,  alarmed  the  rest  of  the 
troops :  orders  were  given  to  take  arms  with  all  speed,  and 
the  soldiers  were  instantly  drawn  up  on  the  rampart  and  at 
the  gates  in  readiness  to  defend  the  camp.  Perseus  imme¬ 
diately  ordered  his  army  to  face  about ;  the  baggage  to  go 
foremost,  and  the  battalions  of  foot  to  follow,  while  himself, 
VOL.  VI. — S 

ISO 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  581, 

with  the  cavalry  and  light  infantry,  kept  behii^,  in  order  to 
cover  the  rear  ;  for  be  expected,  what  indeed  happened,  that 
the  enemy  woidd  pursue,  and  harass  the  hindmost  of  his 
troops.  There  was  a  short  scuffle  between  the  light  infantry, 
mostly  in  skirmishing  parties.  The  infantry  and  cavalry  re¬ 
lumed  to  their  camp,  without  any  disturbance.  After  reap* 
ing  all  the  corn  in  that  quarter,  the  Romans  removed  into 
the  territory  of  Cranno,  which  was  yet  untouched.  While 
they  lay  there,  without  any  apprehension  of  danger,  from 
which  they  thought  themselves  secured  by. the  distance  be* 
tween  the  camps,  and  by  the  difficulty  of  the  march,  through 
a  country  destitute  of  water,  as  was  that  between  Sycurium 
and  Cranno,  the  King’s  cavalry  and  light  infantry  appeared 
suddenly,  at  the  dawn  of  day,  on  the  nearest  hills,  and  caused 
a  violent  alarm.  They  had  marched  from  Sycurium  at  noon, 
the  preceding  day,  and  had  left  their  body  of  fijot  in  tl^  iK:xt 
plain,  Perseus  stood  a  short  time  on  the  hills,  in  expectatiem 
that  the  Romans  might  be  tempted  to  come  out  with  their 
cavalry  ;  but  seeing  that  they  did  not  move,  he  sent  a  horse¬ 
man  to  order  the  infantry  to  return  to  Sycurium,  and  he  him¬ 
self  soon  followed.  The  Roman  horse  pursued  at  a  small 
distance,  in  expectation  of  being  able  to  pick  up  apy  scattered 
parties  that  might  separate  from  the  rest ;  but,  seeing  them 
retreat  in  close  order,  and  attentive  to  their  standards  and 
ranks,  they  desisted,  and  returned  to  their  camp. 
LXV.  King,  disliking  such  long  marches,  removed 
his  camp  to  Mopsium  ;  and  the  Romans  having  cut  down  aU 
the  com  about  Cranno,  marched  into  the  lands  of  Phaianna. 
Perseus,  being  informed  by  a  deserter,  that  they  carried  on 
their  reaping  there,  without  any  armed  guard,  straggling  at 
random  through  the  fields,  set  out  with,  one  thousand  horse¬ 
men  and  two  thousand  Thracians  and  Cretans,  and,  hasten¬ 
ing  his  march  with  all  possible  speed,  fell  on  the  Romans 
while  quite  unprepared.  Nearly  a  thousand  carts,  with  horses 

BOOK  XLII. 

131 

B.C.  171.] 
harnessed  to  &em,  most  of  them  loaded,  irere  seized,  and 
about  six  hundred  men  were  taken.  The  charge  of  guarding 
this  booty,  and  conducting  it  to  the  camp,  he  gave  to  a  party 
of  three  hmidred  Cretans,  and  calling  in  the  rest  of  his  infan-^ 
try  and  the  cavaliy  who  were  spread  about,  killing  the  ene¬ 
my,  he  led  them  against  the  nearest  station,  where  any  of  their 
troops  were  posted,  which  he  supposed  might  be  overpower¬ 
ed  without  much  difficulty.  The  commanding  officer  there 
was  LuciOs  Pompeius,  a  military  tribune  ;  who,  wbUe  his 
men  were  dismayed  by  the  sudden  approach  of  the  enemy, 
led  them  off  to  a  hill  ^  a  little  distance,  hoping  to  defend 
himself  by  means  of  the  advantage  of  the  ground,  as  he  was 
inferior  in  number  and  strength.  There  he  collected  his  men 
in  a  circulm*  body,  that,  hy  closing  their  shields,  they  might 
guard  themselves  from  arrows  and  javelins  ;  on  which,  Per¬ 
seus,  surrounding  the  hill,  ordered  a  party  to  strive  to  climb 
it  on  all  sides,  and  come  to  close  fighting,  and  the  rest  to 
throw  missile  weapons  against  them  from  a  distance.  The 
Hom^s  were  environed  with  dangers,  in  whatever  manner 
they  acted  ;  for  they  could  not  fight  in  a  body,  on  account  of 
the  enemy  who  endeavoured  to  mount  the  hill  ;  and,  if  they 
broke  their  ranks  in  order  to  skirmish  with  these,  Aey  were 
exposed  to  the  arrows  and  javelins.  What  gaHed  them  mc^t 
severely  was,  a  new  kind  of  weapon  invented  in  that  war,  and 
called  Cestrophendanon.  A  dart,  two  palms  in  length,  was 
fixed  to  a  shaft,  half  a  cubit  long,  and  of  the  thickt^ss  of  a 
man’s  finger,  round  which,  as  is  commonly  done  with  arrows, 
three  feathers  were  tied,  to  balance  it.  To  throw  this,  they 
used  a  sling,  which  had  two  beds,  unequal  in  size,  and  in  the 
length  of  the  strings.  When  the  weapon  was  balanced  in 
these,  and  the  slinger  whirled  it  mund  by  the  longer  string 
and  discharged  it,  it  flew  with  the  rapid  force  of  a  leaden  bul¬ 
let.  When  one  half  of  the  soldiers  had  been  wounded  by 
these  and  other  weapons  of  all  kinds,  and  the  rest  Were  so 

132 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  581. 

fatigued  that  they  could  hardly  bear  the  weight  of  their  arms, 
the  King  pressed  them  to  surrender,  assured  them  of  safety, 
and  sometimes  promised  them  rewards ;  but  not  one  could  be 
prevailed  on  to  yield.  Just  at  this  juncture,  when  they  had 
determined  to  hold  out  till  death,  they  were  unexpectedly 
cheered  by  the  enlivening  prospect  of  relief.  For  some  of 
the  foragers,  having  made  their  escape,  and  got  back  to  the 
camp,  acquainted  the  consul  that  the  party  was  surrounded  ; 
whereupon,  alarmed  for  the  safety  of  such  a  number  of  his 
countrymen,  (for  they  were  near  eight  hundred,  and  all  Ro¬ 
mans,)  he  set  out  with  the  cavalry  and  light  infantry,  joined 
by  the  newly-arrived  Numidian  auxiliaries,  horse,  foot,  and 
elephants,  leaving  orders  with  the  military  tribunes,  that  the 
battalions  of  the  legions  should  follow.  He  himself,  having 
strengthened  the  light-armed  auxiliaries  with  his  own  light 
infantry,  hastened  forward  at  their  head  to  the  hill.  He  was 
accompanied  by  Eumenes,  Attains,  and  the  Numidian  prince 
Misagenes. 
LX VI.  The  first  sight  of  the  standards  of  their  friends 
raised  the  distressed  Romans  from  the  lowest  depth  of  des¬ 
pair,  and  inspired  them  with  fresh  spirits.  Perseus’s  best 
plan  would  have  been  to  have  contented  himself  with  his  ac¬ 
cidental  good  fortune,  in  having  killed  and  taken  so  many  of 
the  foragers,  and  not  to  have  wasted  time  in  besieging  this 
detachment  of  the  enemy  ;  or,  after  he  had  engaged  in  the 
attempt,  as  he  was  sensible  that  he  had  not  a  proper  force 
with  him,  to  have  gone  olF,  while  he  might,  with  safety  ;  in¬ 
stead  of  which,  intoxicated  with  success,  he  waited  for  the 
arrival  of  the  enemy,  and  sent  people  in  haste  to  bring  up  the 
phalanx.  But  it  must  have  come  too  late  for  the  exigency. 
From  its  rapid  celerity,  too,  the  men  must  have  engaged  in 
all  the  disorder  of  a  hurried  march,  against  troops  duly  form¬ 
ed  and  prepared.  The  consul,  arriving  first,  proceeded  in¬ 
stantly  to  action.  The  Macedonians,  for  some  time,  made 

BOOK  XLII. 

13S 

B.C.  171.] 
resistance ;  but  finding  themselves  overmatched  in  eveiy  res-- 
pect,  and  having  lost  three  hundred  foot,  and  twenty-four  o£ 
the  best  of  their  horse,  of  what  they  call  the  sacred  cohort, 
(among  whom  fell  Antimachus,  who  commanded  that  body,) 
they  endeavoured  to  retreat:  but  this  was  ccmducted  in  a 
immner  more  disorderly  and  confused  than  the  battle  itself. 
As  the  phalanx,  after  receiving  the  hasty  order,  was  march¬ 
ing  at  full  speed,  it  met  first,  in  a  narrow  pass,  the  carts  la¬ 
den  with  com,  with  the  mass  of  prisoners.  These  they  put 
to  the  sword,  and  both  parties  suffered  by  this  encounter 
abundance  of  trouble  and  perplexity :  but  none  waited  till  the 
troops  might  pass  in  some  sort  of  order,  but  the  soldiers  tum¬ 
bled  the' loads  down  a  precipice,  which  was  the  only  possible 
way  to  clear  the  road,  and  the  horses  being-  goaded,  pushed 
furiously  through  the  crowd.  Scarcely  had  they  disentangled 
themselves  from  the  disorderly  throng  of  the  prisoners,  when 
they  met  the  King’s  party  and  the  discomfited  horsemen. 
And  now  the  shouts  of  the  men,  calling  to  their  comrades  to 
go  back,  raised  a  scene  of  consternation  and  tumult,  not  un¬ 
like  a  total  rout ;  insomuch,  that  if  the  enemy  had  ventured 
to  enter  the  defile,  and  carry  the  pursuit  a  little  farther,  they 
might  have  done  them  very  great  damage.  But  the  consul, 
when  he  had  relieved  his  party  from  the  hill,  content  with 
that  moderate  share  of  success,  led  back  his  troops  to  the 
camp.  Some  authors  affirm,  that  a  general  engagement  took 
place  that  day,  in  which  eight  thousand  of  the  enemy  were 
killed,  among  whom  were  Sopater  and  Antipater,  two  of  the 
King’s  generals,  and  about  two  thousand  eight  hundred 
taken,  with  twenty-seven  military  standards  ;  that  the  victory 
was  not  without  loss  on  the  side  of  the  Romans,  for  that  above 
four  thousand  three  hundred  fell,  and  five  standards  of  the 
left  wing  of  the  allies  were  lost. 
LX VII.  The  event  of  this  day  revived  the  spirits  of  the 
Romans,  and  greatly  disheartened  Perseus ;  insomuch  that. 

HISTORY  OF  B0ME.  [Y,R.  581. 

134 
after  staying  at  Mopsium  a  few  days,  which  were  employed 
chiefly  in  burying  his  dbad,  he  kft  a  very  strong  garrison  at 
Gomius,  and  led  back  his  army  into  Macedonia.  He  left 
Timotl^is,  one  of  his  generals,  with  a  sm^  party  at  Phila, 
ordering  h&m  to  endeavour  to  gain  the  aflocdon  of  the  Mag- 
nesums,  other  neighbouring  states.  On  his  mrival  at 
Pella,  he  sent  his  m>op8  to  their  winter  quarters,  and  pro¬ 
ceeded  with  Cotys  to  Thessatonica.  There  an  accoui^  was 
received,  that  Atlesbis,  a  petty  prince  of  Thrace,  and  Corra- 
gus,  an  officer  belonging  to  Eun^nes,  had  made  an  inroad 
into  the  dominions  of  Cotys,  and  seized  on  the  district  called 
Marene.  Seeing,  therefore,  the  necessity  of  letting  Cotys 
go  home  to  defend  his  own  terrritories,,  he  honoured  him,  at 
his  def^rture,  with  very  magnificent  presents,  and  paid  to  his 
cavalry  two  hundred  talents,*  wl^h  was  but  half  a  year’s 
pay,  though  he  had  agreed  to  give  them  the  pay  of  a  whole 
year.  The  consul,  hearing  that  Perseus  had  left  die  country, 
marched  bis  army  to  Gonnus,  in  hopes  of  being  able  to  take 
that  town.  It  stands  directly  opposite  to  the  pass  of  Tempe, 
and  close  to  the  entrance  of  it;  so  that  it  serv^  as  the  safest 
harrier  to  Macedonia,  and  renders  a  descent  into  Thessaly 
easy.  But  the  city,  from  the  nature  of  its  situation,  and  the 
strength  of  the  garrison,  was  impregnable ;  he  therefore  gave 
up  the  design,  and  turning  his  route  to  Pelrhaebia,  took 
Malkea  at  the  first  assault,  and  demolished  it ;  and,  after  re¬ 
ducing  Tri^lis,  and  the  rest  of  Perrbaebia,  returned  toEa- 
rissa.  From  that  place  he  sent  home  Eumenes  and  Attains, 
and  quartered  Misagencs  and  his  Numidians,  for  the  winter, 
in  the  nearest  towns  of  Thessaly.  One  half  of  his  army  he 
distributed  through  Thessaly,  in  such  a  manner,  that  while 
all  had  commodious  winter  quarters,  they  served,  at  the  same 
time,  as  a  defence  to  the  cities.  He  sent  Quintus  Mucius, 

»  38,7501. 

BOOK  XLII. 

135 

lieutenaat-general,  with  two  thousand  men,  to  secure  Am- 
dracia,  and  dismissed  all  the  allied  troops  belonging  to  the 
Grecian  states,  except  the  Achseans.  With  the  other  half  of 
his  army  be  marched  .into  the  Ach^an  Phthiotis^  where, 
finding  Ptekum  deserted  by  the  inhabitants,  he  levelled  it  to 
the  ground*  The  people  of  Antron  made  a  voluntary  sur¬ 
render,  and  be  then  marched  against  Larissa  :  this  city  was 
likewise  deserted,  the  whole  multitude  taking  refuge  in  the 
citadel,  to  which  he  laid  siege*  First,  the  Macedonian  gar¬ 
rison,  belonging  to  the  King,  withdrew  through  fear ;  and 
then  the  townsmen,  on  being  abandoned  by  them,  surrender¬ 
ed  immediately*  He  then  hesitated  whether  he  should  first 
attack  Demetrius,  or  take  a  view  of  affairs  in  Boeotia.  The 
Thebans,  being  harassed  by  the  Coronseans,  pressed  him  to 
go  into  Besotia ;  wherefore,  in  compliance  with  their  entrea¬ 
ties,  and  because  that  country  would  afford  beUer  winter 
quarters  dtan  Ma^esia,  he  led  his  army  thither. 

THE 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

BOOK  XLIII. 
Several  praetors  punished  for  cruelty  and  avarice  in  the  administrarion  of 
their  provinces,  Publius  Licinius  Crassus,  proconsul,  takes  several  cities 
in  Greece,  which  he  plunders,  and  treats  the  inhabitants  with  great  cru« 
elty ;  the  captives,  which  he  had  sold  as  slaves,  restored  to  their  free* 
dom  by  a  decree  of  the  senate.  Successful  operations  of  King  Perseus 
in  Thracfe  and  Illyricum,  Commotions  excited  in  Spain  by  Olonicus ; 
suppressed. 
I.  DURING  that  summer,  in  which  the  Romans  were 
worsted  in  Thessaly  in  one  battle  of  the  cavalry, 
B  C  *171  successful  in  another,  the  lieutenant  general, 
sent  by  the  consul  to  Illyricum,  having  reduced, 
by  force  of  arms,  two  opulent  cities,  gave  the  inhabitants  all 
their  effects,  in  hopes,  by  the  reputation  of  his  clemency,  to 
allure  to  submission  the  inhabitants  of  Camus,  a  city  strongly 
fortified,  put  he  could  neither  persuade  them  to  surrender, 
nor  hope  to  get  the  better  of  them  by  a  siege.  That  the 
fatigue,  therefore,  which  his  soldiers  had  undergone  in  the 
two  sieges,  might  not  be  quite  fruitless,  he  sacked  those  ci¬ 
ties,  which  he  had  spared  before.  The  other  consul,  Caius 
Cassius,  performed  nothing  worth  mention  in  Gaul,,  the  pro- 

BOOK  lOLlJi. 

137 

BX.171.] 
vince  that  fell  to  his  lot  x  but  made  an  ill-judged  a^mpt  to 
lead  his  army  Amugh  IHyHcum  to  Macedonia.  His  having 
undertaken  that  march  the  senate  learned  from  deputies  of 
Aquileians,  who  came  to  represent,  that  their  colony,  whkh 
was  new,  weak,  and  but  indifferently  fortified,  lay  in  the  midst 
of  hostile  states,  Istrians  and  Illyrians ;  and  to  beg  the  soiate 
to  take  into  jjonsideration  some  method  of  strengthening  it. 
These,  being  asked  whether  they  wished  that  matter  to  be 
given  in  charge  to  the  consul,  Cains  Cassius,  replied,  that 
Cassius,  after  assembling  his  forces  at  Aquileia,  had  set  out 
on  a  march  through  Illyricum  into  Macedonia.  The  fa<^ 
was  at  first  deemed  incrtdible,  and  it  was  generally  supposed 
that  he  had  gone  on  an  expedition  against  the  Camians,  or  per¬ 
haps  the  Istrians.  The  Aquileians  then  said,  that  all  that  they 
knew,  or  could  take  upon  them  to  affirm  was,  that  the  soU 
diers  had  been  furnished  with  com  for  thirty  days,  and  that 
guides,  who  knew  the  roads  from  Italy  to  Macedonia,  had 
been  sought  for,  and  carried  with  him.  The  senate  were 
highly  displeased  that  the  consul  should  presume  to  act  so 
improperly,  as  to  leave  his  own  province,  and  remove  into 
that  of  another  ;  leading  his  army  through  unknown  and  dan¬ 
gerous  roads,  through  foreign  states,  thereby  opening,  for  so 
many  nations,  a  passage  into  Italy.  It  was  unanimously  de¬ 
creed,  that  the  praetor  Caius  Sulpicius  should  nominate  out 
of  the  senate  three  deputies,  who  should  set  out  that  very 
day,  make  all  possible  haste  to  overtake  the  consul,  and 
charge  him  not  to  engage  in  any  war  e^tcept  that  authorized 
by  a  vote  of  the  senate.  The  three  deputies  acccwdingly  left 
the  city;  they  were  Marcus  Cornelius  Ccthegus,  Marcus 
Fulvius,  and  Publius  MarciusHex.  The  fears  entertained 
for  the  ccmsul  and  his  army  caused  the  business  of  fortifying 
Aquileia  to  be  postponed  for  that  time. 
II,  Then  were  introduced  to  the  senate  ambassadors  from 
several  states  of  both  the  Spains ;  who,  after  complaining  of 
VOL.  VI. — T 

138 

HISTORY  OP  ROME. 

[Y.H,  arsi. 

the  avarice  and  pidc  of  the  Roman  magistratea,  fell  on  their 
knees,  and  implored  the  senate  not  to  suffer  them,  who  were 
their  allies,  to  be  more  cruelly  plundered  and  ill-treated  thsm 
their  enemies.  Among  other  hardships,  it  was  clearly  prov¬ 
ed,  that  considerable  sums  of  mcmey  had  been  extorted  from 
them*  A  charge  was  therefore  given  to  Lucius  Canuleius, 
the  praetor  to  whom  Spain  was  allotted,  to  appoint,  out  of  the 
body  of  the  senate,  five  judges  delegate,  to  try  each  person 
against  whom  demands  of  money  might  be  made  by  the  Spa¬ 
niards  ;  and  that  they  should  give  the  latter  power  to  choose 
their  patrons.  The  ambassadors  were  then  called  into  the 
house  ;  the  decree  of  the  senate  wa^  read  to  them,  and  they 
were  ordered  to  select  their  protectors  ;  on  which  they  named 
four, — Marcus  Porcius  Cato,  Publius  Cornelius  Scipio,  son 
of  Cneius,  Lucius  iEmilius  Paullus,  son  of  Lucius,  and  Caius 
Sulpicius  Gallus.  Their  first  application  to  the  judges  was 
against  Marcus  Titinius,  who  had  been  praetor  in  Hither 
Spain  in  the  consulate  of  Aulus  Manlius  and  Marcus  Junius, 
The  cause  was  twice  adjourned,  and  on  the  third  hearing  the 
accused  was  acquitted.  A  separation  took  place  between  the 
ambassadors  of  the  two  provinces  ;  and  the  states  of  Hither 
Spain  chose  for  their  patrons,  Marcus  Cato  and  Scipio  ;  those 
of  Farther  Spain,  Lucius  Paullus  and  Sulpicius  Gallus.  The 
states  of  the  hither  province  brought  to  trial,  before  the 
judges,  Publius  Furius  Philus  :  those  of  the  farther,  Marcus 
Matknus  ;  the  former  of  whom  had  been  praetor,  three  years 
before,  in  the  consulate  of  Spurius  Postumius  and  Quintus 
Mucius  ;  and  the  latter,  two  years  before,  when  Lucius  Pos¬ 
tumius  and  Marcus  PopiEius  were  consuls.  Both  were  ac¬ 
cused  of  most  heinous  crimes,  and  the  causes  were  adjourned ; 
but,  upon  the  re-hearing,  it  was  represented  on  their  beh^f, 
that  they  had  quitted  the  country,  and  were  gone  into  volun¬ 
tary  exile, — Furius  to  Praeneste  ;  Matienus  to  Tibur.  There 
was  a  report,  that  the  complainants  were  not  suffered,  by 

BOOK  XLIIL 

139 

B.c.  in.] 

their  patrons,  to  bring  cl«i^es  against  people  of  high  birth 
and  power ;  a  suspicion  that  was  strengthened  by  the  beha¬ 
viour  of  the  praetor  Canuleius  ;  for  he  neglected  that  business, 
and  applied  himself  to  the  enlisting  of  soldiers  ;  and  then 
suddenly  went  off  to  his  province,  lest  more  accusations 
might  be  brought  by  the  Spaniards.  Although  past  transac¬ 
tions  were  thus  consigned  to  silence,  yet  the  senate  took  some 
care  of  the  interest  of  the  Spaniards  in  future  ;  they  passed 
an  order,  that  the  Roman  magistrates  should  not  have  the 
valuation  of  the  corn  ;  nor  should  they  compel  the  Spaniards 
to  compound  for  their  twentieths,  at  such  prices  as  they  were 
pleased  to  impose  ;  and  that  officers  should  not  be  placed  in 
command  of  their  towns  for  the  purpose  of  exacting  money. 
III.  There  came  also  from  Spain,  an  extraordinary  em¬ 
bassy,  from  a  body  of  men  who  had  never  before  been  heard 
of.  They  represented,  that  they  were  the  offspring  of  Ro¬ 
man  soldiers  and  Spanish  women,  who  had  not  been  joined 
in  marriage ;  that  their  number  amounted  to  more  than  four 
thousand ;  and  they  petitioned  for  a  grant  of  some  town  to 
be  allotted  to  them  for  their  residence.  The  senate  decreed, 
that  “  they  should  exhibit  their  pretensions  before  Lucius 
Canuleius  ;  and  that  as  many  as  he  should  judge  deserving 
of  freedom,  should  be  settled  as  a  colony  at  Carteia,  on  the 
ocean.  That  such  of  the  present  inhabitants  of  Carteia,  as 
wished  to  remain  there,  should  have  the  privilege  of  being 
considered  as  colonists,  and  should  have  lands  assigned  them  ; 
that  this  should  be  deemed  a  Latine  settlenient,  and  be  called 
a  colony  of  freedraen.”  At  this  time  arrived  from  Africa, 
Gulussa,  son  of  King  Masinissa,  as  ambassador  from  his 
father ;  and  likewise  ambassadors  from  Carthage.  Gulussa 
was  first  introduced  to  the  senate,  where  he  gave  a  detail  of 
the  succours  sent  by  his  father  to  the  maintenance  of  the  war 
in  Macedonia,  and  assured  them,  that  if  they  chose  to  lay 
any  farther  commands  on  him,  he  would  cheerfully  execute 

140 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y*R.  582. 

them,  in  gratitude  for  the  many  favours  conferred  on  him  by 
the  Roman  people.  He  warned  the  Conscript  Fathers  to  be 
on  their  guard  against  the  treachery  of  the  Carthaginians, 
who  had  formed  the  design  of  fitting  out  a  powerful  fleet, 
in  favour,  as  they  pretended,  of  the  Romans,  and  against  the 
Macedonians ;  but  when  it  should  be  equipped,  and  ready 
for  action,  they  would  have  it  in  their  power  to  make  their 
own  option  which  party  they  would  treat  as  a  friend,  and 
which  as  a  foe.^’  #  #  *  *  *  #  # 
########  #  # 
***#*##*  #  # 

IV.  During  the  following  year^  m  which  Aulus  Hostu 
Y  R  582  Mancinus  and  Aulus  Atilius  Serranm  were 
b'c*170*  Celtiberians  raised  disturbances  in 
Spain^  being  instigated  by  a  strange  kind  oj 
^  leader  named  Olonicus,  He  was  a  man  of  great  cunning 
and  boldness  ;  and  showing  himself  to  the  people^  brandish^ 
ing  a  silver  spear ^  which  he  pretended  was  senf  to  him 
from  Heaven^  with  the  agitation  of  a  person  inspired^  he 
had  attracted  universal  attention.  Having  formed  the  mad 
design  of  destroying  the  Roman  general.^  he  came  to  the 
camp  with  a  single  accomplice  in  the  dusk  of  the  evenings  and 
was  killed  by  a  centinel  with  a  javelin.  His  attendant  met 
with  the  same  fate.  The  prcetor  immediately  ordered  both 
their  heads  to  be  cut  off  and  fixed  on  spears.^  and  to  he  sent 
thus  to  their  camp  by  some  of  their  prisoners.  When  these 
arrived  with  their  charge,  such  a  panic  ensued,  that  if  the 
Romans  had  instantly  advanced  to  the  camp,  they  might  have 
taken  it :  as  it  was,  a  general  flight  took  place.  Many,  on 
this,  advised  to  send  ambassadors,  and  supplicate  for  peace  ; 
.while  a  great  number  of  states,  on  hearing  of  the  affair,  made 
their  submission.  These  all  asserted  their  innocence,  laying 
the  entire  blame  on  the  two  who  had  suffered  for  their  in¬ 
tended  crime  ;  on  which  the  prsetor  granted  them  pardon. 

BOOK  XLIIL 

1441 

B.C.  IfO.] 
and  proceeded  immediately  to  the  other  states,  every  one  of 
which  acknowledged  his  authority  ;  so  that  in  traversing  all 
that  tract  of  country,  \vhere,  a  short  time  before,  the  flames 
of  war  had  raged  with  the  greatest  violence,  he  had  not 
once  occasion  to  employ  his  arms,  but  found  every  thing  in 
a  state  of  peace  and  quietness.  This  le^nity  shown  by  the 
praetor,  was  the  more  pleasing  to  the  senate  and  people,  as 
the  conduct  of  the  consul  Licinius,  and  the  praetor  Lucre¬ 
tius,  in  the  war  in  Greece,  had  been  marked  with  uncommon 
avarice  and  cruelty.  The  plebeian  tribunes,  daily,  in  their 
speeches  to  the  people,  censured  Lucretius  for  being  absent, 
though  it  was  alleged  in  his  favour,  that  he  was  abroad  on 
the  business  of  the  public.  But  so  little  was  then  known  of 
what  passed,  even  in  the  vicinity  of  Rome,  that  he  was,  at 
that  very  time,  at  his  own  estate  near  Antium  ;  and,  with 
money  amassed  in  his  expedition,  was  bringing  water  thither 
from  the  river  Locrina ;  for  the  execution  of  which  work,  it 
is  said,  he  had  agreed  to  pay  one  hundred  and  thirty  thou¬ 
sand  asses^.  He  also  decorated  the  temple  of  iEsculapius 
with  pictimes  taken  from  among  the  spoils.  But  the  current 
of  the  public  displeasure,  and  of  disgrace,  was  diverted  from 
Lucretius  and  turned  on  his  successor,  by  ambassadors  who 
came  from  Abdera.  These  stood  weeping  at  the  door  of  the 
senate-house,  and  complained,  that  “  their  town  had  been 
stormed  and  plundered  by  Hortensius.  His  only  reason,” 
they  said,  ‘‘  for  destroying  their  city  was,  that,  on  his  de¬ 
manding  from  them  one  hundred  thousand  denari usesf,  and 
fifty  thousand  measures  of  wheat,  they  had  requested  time 
until  they  could  send  ambassadors  on  the  subject,  both  to  the 
consul  Hostilius,  and  to  Rome  ;  and  that  they  had  scarcely 
reached  the  consul,  when  they  heard  that  the  town  was  storm¬ 
ed,  their  nobles  beheaded,  and  the  rest  sold  for  slaves.”  At 

4191. 15s.  lOd. 

•K  3.2?9L  5s,  4d. 

142 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  582. 

this  the  senate  expressed  tnudi  indignation,  and  passed  a  de¬ 
cree  respecting  the  people  of  Abdera,  of  the  same  purport 
with  that  which  they  had  passed  concerning  the  Coronseans. 
They  also  ordered  Quintus  Msenius,  the  praetor,  to  publish 
notice,  as  had  been  done  the  year  before,  in  a  general  assem¬ 
bly.  Two  ambassadors,  Caius  Sempronius  Blaesus  and  Sex¬ 
tus  Julius  Caesar,  were  sent  to  restore  the  Abderites  to  liber¬ 
ty  ;  and  were  likewise  commissioned  to  deliver  a  message 
from  the  senate  to  the  consul  Hostilius,  and  to  the  praetor 
Hortensius,  that  the  senate  judged  the  war  made  on  the  Ab¬ 
derites  to  be  unjust,  and  had  directed  that  all  those  who  were 
in  servitude  should  be  sought  out  and  restored  to  liberty. 
V.  At  the  same  time,  complaints  were  made  to  the  senate, 
by  ambassadors  from  Cincibilus,  a  King  of  the  Gauls,  against 
Cains  Cassius,  who  had  been  consul  the  year  before,  and  was 
thai  a  military  tribune  in  Macedonia,  under  Aulus  Hostilius, 
His  brother  made  a  speech  to  the  senate,  saying,  that  Caius 
Cassius  had  entirely  wasted  the  country  of  the  Alpine  Gauls, 
their  allies,  and  carried  off  into  slavery  many  thousands  of 
their  people.  Ambassadors  came  likewise  from  the  Carnians, 
Istrians,  and  lapidians,  who  represented,  that  “  the  consul 
Cassius,  at  first,  after  obliging  them  to  furnish  him  with 
guides  to  conduct  his  army,  which  he  was  leading  into  Ma¬ 
cedonia,  had  gone  away  in  a  peaceable  manner,  as  if  to  carry 
war  elsewhere  ;  but  that,  when  he  had  proceeded  half  way, 
he  returned,  and  overran  their  country,  committing  every 
act  of  hostility,  and  spreading  depredations  and  fires  through 
every  quarter ;  nor  had  they  been  yet  able  to  discover  for 
what  reason  the  consul  treated  them  as  enemies,”  The  ab¬ 
sent  prince  of  the  Gauls,  and  the  states  present,  were  an¬ 
swered,  that  ‘‘  the  senate  had  no  previous  knowledge  of  those 
acts  of  which  they  complained  ;  nor  did  they  approve  of 
them.  But  that  it  would  still  be  unjust  to  condemn,  unheard 
and  absent,  a  man  of  consular  rank,  especially  as  he  was  em- 

BOOK  XLIIL 

143 

i 
B.c.  iro.] 
ployed  abroad  in  the  business  erf  the  public.  That,  when 
Caius  Cassius  should  cmne  home  from  Macedonia,  if  they 
chose  then  to  prosecute  their  complaints  against  him,  face 
face,  the  senate,  after  examining  the  matter,  would  endeavour 
to  give  them  satisfaction.’’  It  was  farther  resolved,  that  am¬ 
bassadors  should  be  sent  to  those  nations,  (two  to  the  transal¬ 
pine  chieftain,  and  three  to  the  other  states,)  to  notify  to 
them  the  determinations  of  the  senate.  They  voted,  diat 
presents,  to  the  amount  of  two  thousand  asses shoidd  be 
sent  ;  and  to  die  prince,  and  his  teidier, 
some" of  extraormimry  value;  two  chains,  containing  five 
pounds  weight  of  ;  five  silver  vases,  amountingto  twen¬ 
ty  pounds  ;  two  horses,  fully  caparisoned,  with  grooms  to 
attend  them,  and  horsemen’s  armour  and  cloaks,  besides 
suits  of  apparel  to  their  attendants,  both  freemen  and  slaves. 
These  were  presented  to  them  ;  and,  on  their  request,  they 
were  indulged  with  the  liberty  of  purchasing  ten  horses  each, 
and  carrying  them  out  of  Italy.  Caius  Laelius  and  Marcus 
iEmilius  were  sent  ambassadors  with  the  Gauls,  to  the  north¬ 
ern  side  of  the  Alps  ;  and  Caius  Sicinius,  Publius  Cornelius 
Blasio,  and  Titus  Memmius,  to  the  other  states. 
VI.  Embassies  from  many  states  of  Greece  and  Asia 
arrived  at  Rome  at  the  same  time.  The  first  that  had 
audience  of  the  senate  were  the  Athenians,  who  repre¬ 
sented,  that  ‘‘they  had  sent  what  ships  and  soldiers  th^h^ 
to  Ihe  consul  Publius  Licxnius,and  the  prsetor  Caius  Lucre¬ 
tius,  who  did  not  think  proper  to  employ  theirforces,  but  or¬ 
dered  the  state  to  furnish  one  hundred  thousand  measures  of 
com;  and,  notwithstanding  the  sterility  of  the  soil,  and  that 
they  fed  even  the  husbandmen  with  imported  grain,  yet,  that 
they  might  not  appear  deficient  in  their  duty,  they  had  made 
up  that  quantity,  and  were  ready  to  perform  any  other  service 

♦  61.  9s. 

144 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  582. 

that  might  be  required  of  th^.”  The  Milesians  pretended 
not  to  any  past  service,  but  promised  readily  to  sfford  any 
assistance  in  the  war  which  the  senate  should  think  proper  to 
demand.  The  Alabandians  said,  that  they  had  erected  a 
temple  to  the  city  of  Rome,  and  instituted  anniversary  games 
to  her  divinity  ;  that  they  had  brought  a  golden  crown^  of 
fifty  pounds  weight,  to  be  deposited  in  the  Capitol,  as  an  of¬ 
fering  to  Jupiter  supremely  good  and  great ;  also  three  hun¬ 
dred  horsemen’s  bucklers,  which  they  were  ready  to  deliver 
to  any  person  appointed  to  receive  them  ;  and  they  requested 
permission  to  lodge  the  said  offering  as  intended,  and  to  per¬ 
form  sacrifice^'  The  same  request  was  made  by  ambassadors 
from  Lampsacus,  who  brought  a  crown,  of  eighty  pounds 
weight,  and  represented  to  the  senate,  that  they  had  re¬ 
nounced  the  party  of  Perseus  as  soon  as  the  Roman  army  ap¬ 
peared  in  Macedonia,  though  they  had  been  under  the  do¬ 
minion  of  that  monarch,  and  formerly  of  Philip.  In  return 
for  which,  and  for  their  having  contributed  every  assistance 
in  their  power  to  the  Roman  commanders,  they  only  request¬ 
ed  to  be  admitted  into  the  friendship  of  the  Roman  people  j 
and  that,  if  peace  should  be  made  with  Perseus,  there  might 
be  a  special  clause  in  their  favour,  to  prevent  their  falling 
again  into  his  power.”  The  rest  of  the  ambassadors  receiv¬ 
ed  gracious  answers,  and  the  praetor,  Quintus  Maenius,  was 
ordered  to  enrol  the  people  of  Lampsacus  as  allies.  Presents 
were  made  to  all,  two  thoirsand  mses  to  each.  The  Alsbsm- 
dians  were  desired  to  carry  l^ck  the  bucklers  into  Macedonia, 
to  the  consul  Aulas  Hostilius.  At  the  same  time  came  am¬ 
bassadors  from  Africa ;  those  of  the  Carthaginians  acquaint¬ 
ed  the  senate,  that  they  had  brought  down  to  the  sea  cemst 
a  million  of  measures  of  wheat,  and  five  hundred  thousand 
of  barley,  to  be  transported  to  whatever  place  the  senate 
should  order.  They  were  sensible,”  they  said,  that  this 
offer,  and  act  of  duty,  were  very  inferior  to  the  deserts  of  the 

mmm  xlwl 

14$ 

iroj 
Rtmkm  to  their  own  1  bi:^lAti^'^ 
many  other  occfmioss^  wh^  the  adUrs  both  BsilibwIMi* 
mhed,  they  had  performed  foe  duties  oS  Irifoiid  and  g^lefol 
allies/’  In  like  miHmer^  aiidmsadkm  frmn  Mashiissa  t^fered 
foe  same  ^owtitp  of  thou^d  two  himfoed  horses 
men,  nod  twelvefelepbaii^  ;  d^iring,  duit  if  he  could  be  oi 
service  in  mf  other  pardcular,  foe  saaate  would  by  dmit^ 
commands  on  him,  which  he  would  execute  wifo  as 
2eal  as  what  he  had  pioposed  himself.  Thanks  imre  retun^ 
ed  hofo  to  foe  Carthaginians  and  to  foe  King  ;  and  they  were 
requested  to  ^nd  foe  sOpplies,  which  they  promisi^,  into 
Macedmiia,  to  foe  consul  Hostilius.  A  present  of  two  dmu- 
sand  asses  was^  made  to  each  of  the  ambassadors. 
VU.  Aml^sadors  of  the  Cretans  mentioned,  that  du^ 
had  sent  into  Macedonia  foe  archers  demanded  by  foe 
sul  Publius  Licinius ;  but,  being  interrogated  they  did  noi 
deny,  that  a  greater  number  of  these  were  in  foe  army  of 
Perseus  than  in  that  of  foe  Romans  :  on  which  they  received 
this  m^swer  ;  that  if  foe  Cretans  were  candidly  and  smt^r^ 
ly  resolved  to  prefer^  the  friendship  of  the  Roman  people 
to  foat  of  King  Perseus,  foe  Roman  senate,  on  their  pairt, 
would  ans;Wer  them  as  aUtes  who  could  l^^lied  on/’  In  the 
mean  dme,  focy  were  desired  to  tell  their  countiymen,  foat 
foe  senate  required  that  foe  Cretans  should  endeavour  to 
call  home,  as  sopp  as  possible,  sfo  the  soldiers  wfb>  were  in 
the  ^rviceof  King  Pemeus.”  The  Cretans  beings  dimniased, 
the  ambassadors  from  Chalcb  were  called,  foe  chief  of  whoii^ 
by  name  Miction,  having  l<^t  foe  use  of  his  limbs,  was  car¬ 
ried  on  a  litter :  which  demomm'ated  foat  foeir  business  was 
a  matter  of  extreme  necessity  ;  since,  either  a  man,  in  foat 
infirm  state,  had  not  foought  proper  to  ple^  iH  faedith  in  ex¬ 
cuse  from  being  employed,  or  the  plea  had  not  been  admitted. 
After  premising,  foat  no  other  part  was  alive  but  his  tongue, 
which  served  him  to  deplore  the  calamities  of  his  country,  he 
VOL.  vr. — U 

m 

msrrom  of  mmiE. 

[Y.a.  sm. 

r^rteseoted,  fin^  die  iHeactty  assb^ce  gwm  by  stale  ta 
tke  HonaM  eismaianders  md  Crimes,  bodi  on  ^mer 
iioas,  mui  ^  die  war  with  Persei^ ;  and  thaa,  the  ins^ces 
trf  ^ide,  mvaitcc,  airf  crudty,  wWch  Ms  eoimtryimn  had  suf¬ 
fered  from  the  Roman  pmtor,  Cains  Luonetius^  and  Wf»e^ 
ftiat  very  time,  sufferitig  from  Lucius  Hort^nslUs  ;  nc^wi^- 
standing  which,  they  were  resolved  to  enckure  all  hardships, 
should  they  be  even  more  grievous  than  Aey  underwent  at 
present,  radier  than  give  themselves  up  to  the  power  of  Ma- 
cedem,  **  With  regard  to  Lucretius  and  Hortensius,  dicy 
knew  that  it  had  been  safer  to  have  diut  dieir  gates  agamst 
them,  than  to  receive  them  inm  the  city.  For  those  cities, 
which  had  so  done,  remained  in  safety,  as  Emathea,  Amphi* 
pMis,  Marofiea,  and  iEnus  ;  whereas,  in  Chalcis,  the  temples 
rrare  rt^bed  of  all  their  ornaments.  Caius  Lucretius  had 
carried  c^in  ships,  to  Atitium,the  plunder  amassed  by  such 
sacrilege,  and  dragged  per^m  of  free  condition  into  slavery ; 
the  property  the  sdUes  of  the  Roman  pec^le  was  subjected 
to  rapine,  mjdauffered  daily  depredations.  For,  pursumg  the 
practice  of  Caius  Lucretius,  Hor^nsius  kept  the  crews  his 
ships  in  lodgings  both  in  summer  and  winter  alike  ;  so  tMit 
their  houses  were  filled  with  a  crowd  of  seamen,  and  those 
men,  who  showed  no  regard  to  propriety,  either  in  tiieir 
words  or  actions,  lived  among  the  inhabitants,  tf^ir  wives, 
and  children.*’ 
VIM.  The  senate  resolved  to  call  Lucretius  before  tiiem, 
^  that  he  might  argue  the  matter  in  person,  and  eac^pate  him- 
self.  But  When  he  appeared,  he  heard  many  more  crinws 
stteged  against  him  than  had  been  meimoned  in  his  absence  | 
dfed  iwo  tsore  weij^^ty  and  powerful  accusers  stood  forA  in 
Bupport  tS the  charges,  Marcus  juventius  Thalna  and  Cneius 
Aufidius,  plebeian  tribunes,  'fhe^  not  only  arraigned  him 
fritterly  In  the  senate,  but  dragged  him  out  into  the  assembly 
wf  the  pe<^le ;  and  there,  reproaching  him  with  many  heinous 

oider  111  die  d^i«^  ^  palor, 
9amfm  le  die  mi^masdim  Omlcmi  iSm  ^ 
]i^wlei%«d#Mdr  mc&mt  die  d<»^  by  tfaeiil 
10  the  Ees^s^fwc^y  beidi  o»  ^Oidoes  loid  dii^iig 
a]^pf«»at  fi^,l0  betme  i  and  dbs^  d^  retted  8 
of  ^ei^  frimily  ecmdiiiet :  tb^  as  ^  0t  trefMd»^ii% 
vdikb^d^y  comfAsiiied  hairiiig  reeled  fenn^ly  lieM 
Cauis  Z^ien^ns^  and  now  kem  JUicii^  Mo^mimt  Bmmi 
paatoiSy  k  ccatld  not-  pc^sdMy  ;^be  suppexsed  tluet  such  dpaugs 
wwe  dc^  widi  die  aj^irobadon  of  d»  iKfuate,  Ii  sbumld  bs 
cmisidefed  that  the  Rouiiui  people  had  made  war  on 
sraSf  and,  before  that,  on  his  father  Plulip,  for  the.  tiwptesB 
{mrpcm  of  Mserttng  the  libertks  of  Greece,  and  not  of  adb* 
jeccing  frknds  and  idliea  to  such^t^tment  from  diek  ma|^ 
trates»^  that  they  wouW  'give  th^m  a  l^ter  to  the,  pra^^ 
ciUB  Hoitensius,  informing  him^ths^  the  proce<^ii]|^,  which 
the  peofde  of  Chalcis  complained,  were  highly  djkpieastiig  lO 
sen^e  ;  charging  him  to  take  care  diiU,  all  free  pmstms, 
wim  had  been  reduced  to  slavery^  should  be  sought  out  as 
soon  as  possible,  and  restored  to  liberty ;  and  commanding 
that  no  seamen,  except  the  masters  of  vessels,,  shmild  be  per« 
mined  to  lodge  on  shore.”  Pursuant  to  the  senators  order,  a 
lett^,  to  this  purport,  was  written  to  Hortendus.  A  prai^t 
of  two  thousand  us^es  was  made  to  each  of  the  ambassadors, 
and  carriages  were  hired  for  Miction,,  at  nhe  public  ej^i^ce, 
to  carry  him  ccmimodiously  to  Brui^usium.^  When  the  day 
of  Caius  Lucretiuses  trial  came,  the  tribunes  pleaded  ag^iiwu 
him  before  the  people,  and  demanded  that  be  should  be  fin^ 
in  the  sum  of  one  million  of  <mes  y*  and  the  Uibes 
ing  to  vote,  every  cme  of  the  duity*4ve  pronounced  Iw 
guilty,  and  confinx^d  the  fine. 

3,02^.  Is.  4<L 

m  HISTORY  W  rfJk.sm 
IX«  In  Ligmia,  notiihig  t>f  nioment  oecnired  m  tliift 
year;  tlie  enemy  made  no  koatile  Mtempt,  nor  did  thr 
ctesnl  xaareh  hie  legions  imo  tlvelr  country ;  on  Ae  ecrnmnyf 
seeing  a  certain  prospect  of  pea^^  he  dhschm*ged  s<A^' 
diers  of  the  two  Roman  legioiM  within  shcty  days  idter  his 
arrival  in  the  province,  sent  the  troops  bi  die  l^dne  con^ 
federates  esady  into  winter«quatters  at  Luna  mid  Pii^,  and 
himself,  with  the  cavalry,  visited  mc^  of  the  towtis  in  ^ 
Gallic  province;  Although  there  was  no  open  war  any  where 
but  in  Macedonia,  yet  there  was  retison  to  suspect  tlle<dc« 
signs  trf  Gentius,  King  of  Illyria,  The  senate,  Aerefore, 
voted  th^  eight  ships,  fully  equipped,  should  be  sent  from 
Brundnsium  to  lssa,to  Caius  Furius,  lieutenant-general,  who, 
with  only  two  vessels  belonging  to  the  tnhs^itants,  held  the 
government  of  that  island.  In  this  squadron  were  embarked 
four  thousand  soldiers,  whom  the  prastor,  Quintus  Msenius, 
in  pursuance  of  a  decree  of  the  senate,  had  raised  in  the 
quarter  of  Italy  opposite  Illyria  ;  and  the  consul  Hostilius 
sent  Appius  Claudius,  with  four  thousand  foot,  into  I%ria, 
to  protect  the  neighbouring  states.  But  Appius  Claudius, 
not  content  with  the  force  which  he  brought  with  him,  col¬ 
lected  aid  from  the  allies,  until  he  made  up  the  number  of 
eight  thousand  men  ;  and,  after  overrunning  all  that  country, 
took  post  at  Lychnidus  in  the  territory  of  the  Dassaretians. 
X.  Not  far  from  hence  was  Uscana,  a  town  generally  deem¬ 
ed  part  of  the  dominions  of  Perseus.  It  contained  ten  thou- 
smid  inhabitants,  and  a  small  party  of  Cretans,  who  served 
ze  a  garrison.  From  this  place  messengers  came,  secretly, 
to  Claudius,  telling  him,  that  if  he  brought  his  army  nearer, 
there  would  be  peojde  ready  to  put  the  town  into  his  hands  ; 
imd  that  it  would  be  well  worth  his  while  ;  for  he  would  find 
booty  suiicient  to  satisfy  the  utmost  wishes,  not  only  of  his 
friends,  but  of  iits  soldiers.”  Such  alluring  hopes  blinded 
his  understandbg  to  that  degree,  that  he  neither  detained 

my  of  those  trbo  nor  requiied  hk  seeiirltf  ^ 
in  ft  business  whtdi  wfts  be  tmtisiic^ 
tMicbmmAf  i  b«  send  sccuits  to  tmmkm  nmt* 
tors,  isft  <»idi  &om  mess^igers  $  but^  <ai 
di^  ft^o^iedf  be  4efi  fti^  pitidied  -his  oftiip 
twelve  mUei  hem  ^  wUch  was  the  ol^ec^  of  1^  de^ 
sigp.  At  ^  fourdi  wft^^  he  mt  leaving  iri^mt  me 
diousftfd  man  to  goatd  ^e  oiHip;*  His  fearces^  otenc^^ 
themsekes  in  a  Icmg  H^rogular  md  in  loefte  dkmtor, 
were^jKMnsted,  by  mistsdeti^  ^sr  way  in  the  ni|^  and 
arrive  in  thisftlate  the  cito.  'il^ir  carelessness  ^areased 
when  d^y  saw  not  a  soMier  on  the  walls.  But,  as  mem  xm 
th^  s^^oaehed  within  a  weapon’s  ca^  a  sidly  was  ma^ 
fromiwo  gates  at  once.  Besides  the  steut  mi^  by 
ft  Wemmdous  noise  was  beard  oft  wsdk,  compo^ed^  dbe 
yells  of  women  and  die  sound  of  brazen  ii^m&ents,  wink 
the  n^ble  of  the  place,  mixed  widi  a  muteiu^  o£  daves, 
made  the  ait  resound  with  various  ams.  Struck  by  smh  ^ 
Oimd^r  of  tetTif3dng  circumstaroes,  the  Romms  w^e  tm- 
able  to  support  the  iirst  onset ;  so  that  a  greater  miniher  of 
them  were  killed  flying  than  fighting,  and  m:arcely  two 
sand,  with  the  lieutenant-general  himself,  eff^ctod  their  es* 
cape.  The  distance  from  the  camp  beii^  numters 
sunk  under  fatigfue,  and  were  overtaken  by  the  enemy^  Ap- 
plus,  without  even  halting  in  the  camp  to  collet  hk  sftiiag- 
gters,  which  would  have  been  the  means  of  saving  numy,kd 
back,  directly,  to  Lychnidus,  the  remains  of  bis  anfottmmto 
army. 
XI.  Hiese,  and  other  unfavourable  occmvei^ces  in  Idkce- 
dotiia  were  learned  from  Sextus  Digidtm,  a  military  tribmto^  * 
who  came  to  Rome  to  perform  a  sacrifice.  These  mlviji^ 
having  rendered  the  senate  appreb^isive  of  some  greator 
disgrace  ensuing:,  they  deputed  Mmeus  FulvUis  Flacciis 
Marcus  Cantnius  Rebilus  to  ^  to  Macedonia,  and  bring 

tm 

HISTORY  m  mME. 

el  lA  iberi^l  M  fwe 
tl]»t  dM  eeewl  dbedd 
TOm^^^ppsinbly  for  tl^e  ^ecd#a  itf 
asightbe  Jpld  in  tto  of  J^npry,  and  4^^  4:00110 
boMie  to  the  city  i»  soon,  ns  pos4t&f  In  tho  R 
v{»  Halved,  ti^t  die  ptieicor  Biareue  Heei^  4ipd4 
home  to  {>y  prpdamatio&^id  die  si^aKn%&Epi  ev^ 
inert  of  Itsdy9.^xe€;pt  sftch  s^  were  whm^  00;^!;^^  Ipranopi 
that  siach  as  were  in  Eome  fbenaid  go  Joe^Aeir  dntn 
one  miktfrom  the  city^  ^ddthU  waa^  d^ie  pursuant  to  4^ 
votes  ci  the  aenote*  I^^eedon^ cmsiila  ws^hddon 
fisiirdiday  be&nre  thectdends  of  Fi^rnpyiuTbe^pi^Machospt 
QniQtus  Mamnsi^^ppos,  a  s^onddme^aiuijCnem 
S^rviHus  Cmpio^  Three  after,  were  appointed 
Caiua  De4<ntii$,  MareiP  Claudius  vMareellus^  C4i»  Sn4* 
Indus.  Gallns,  Cains  Marcias  Fignk»i,  Servile  Comdim 
LenUdus,  and  FuUius  Fonteios  Capin>*  To  the  pratom 
dect  were  assigned,,  besides  the  two  dty  provinces,  these 
foio' :  Spain^  Sardinia,  SicHyr^tid  the  fieet.  Towards  die  end  id 
Fel^^ary  the  deputies  retscmed  from  Macedonia,  and  gave 
sm  aix^Hint  of  the  succes^d  ^terprises  of  Persens  during  d^ 
precedii^  suipner,  pid  of  die  great  fears  which  had^  tak^ 
possession  of  die  aHieS  of  ^  Roman  people,  on  account  of 
so  many  cities  bdng  reduced  under  the  King^s  powers  Tli^y 
rep^ed^  thi^  the  ccmsuFs  troops  were  very  thin,  in  con* 
tequc^e  of  leave  of  absence  being  granted  to  great  num* 
bers,  ^ith  the  view  of  gaining  the  good  will  of  the  men  | 
the  blame  of  which  the  consul  laid  upon  the  military  di«- 
bums,  and  they,  on  the  odier  hand,  m  the  consd«  The  dis«> 
grace  sustained  dirough  the  rashness  of  Claudius,”  they  re¬ 
presented  as  not  so  cwsiderable  as  was  suppt^ed  ^  becau^, 
of  the  men  who  were  lost  very  few  were  natives  of  Italy,  the 
greatest  part  being  the  soldiers  rdsed  in  that  countey  by  am 
irregular  levy.”  The  c^*ds  elect  received  orders,  itmne^ 

me. 

m 

mk  to  proj^o^^  $Skam  ^  Mace* 
to  ilie  i^nmidefmdoii^  Uie  umme  $  imd  Iialf 
domm  vK^e  tq^cmted^ieir  {JTOVtdco$«  A^  ifiteredbiE^io  MU 
made  ia  d«e  calefidsa*  dT  this  year^  calemtsbelsg 
reckmied  <m  datd  day  after  the  feast  of  Termtuos^ 
died  of  the  prm^  duttiog  this  year,  Lacimi  FlaoimHiS, 
imd  two  poatifl^  jLocitis  Forius  Fhiitm,  ai^  Cains  Lt<rius 
Salinuftor.  fa  the  room  ^  Faiius,  tho  pcmtHls  chose  Titus 
Manlifa  Tor^atus,  aad  m  that  of  Livius,  Marais  Sorrilius. 
Xii*  la  the  begtoiting  of  the  ensuiag  year,  tl^  new  con* 
auts,  Quintus  Marcius  and  Cneias  ^rvilius,  ha^* 
ing  proposed  the  disti&udon  of  the  provinces  for 
t^nsideration,  the  senate  voted  that  they  should, 
wtdiout  dday,  eidier  settle  between  themselves  about  Mace* 
donia  and  It^y,  or  cast  lots  for  them  ;  and  that,  before  the 
lot  should  decide  this  matter,  and  while  the  destination  of 
each  was  uncertain,  lest  interest  might  have  any  tnfiuence, 
the  supplies  of  men,  requisite  for  each  province,  shouhl  be 
o^^ed.  For  Macedonia  weire  voted  six  thousand  Roman 
feot  md  six  diotmand  of  the  Latine  allies,  two  hundred  and 
fifty  Roman  horse,  tmd  three  hundred  of  the  alHes.  The  old 
soldiers  were  to  be  discharged,  so  that  there  should  be  in  each 
Roman  legion  no  more  than  six  themsand  foot  and  diree  hun¬ 
dred  horse.  The  number  of  Roman  citizens,  which  the  other 
consid  was  to  eidist  for  a  reinforcement,  was  not  precisely  de- 
termmol  j  there  was  only  this  limitation  mentioned,  that  he 
should  raise  two  legions,  each  of  them  to  contain  five  diou- 
sand  two  hundred  foot,  and  three  hundred  horse.  Of  Latine 
inftmtry,  a  larger  number  was  decreed  to  tnm  than  to  his  col¬ 
league  ;  no  less  than  ten  diousand  foot,  with  six  hundred 
hm^.  An  ortter  was  g^ven  for  raising  four  other  legions,  to 
serve  wherever  occasitm  might  nsquire.  The  consuls  were 
IKH  allov^  the  apporntmait  of  the  mtlimiy  tribunes  ;  they 
were  created  bf  the  votes  of  foe  people.  The  Latine  c<m* 

m  mSTOm  OF  HOME*  [YA.sm. 
federates  wm  ordered  to  fundib  idx^era  tb>u8aiid^foot  md 
one  ihousaod  Wse. ,  Thk  force  inteiui^  only  to  be  kept 
ia  readtnesS)  to  march  should  any  esdgeiicy  demaad  it. 
Macedcaua  engrossed  the  greatest  share  of  the  senate^s  at- 
lendmi ;  tl^y  ordered^that  one  thousand  Roman  cidzeii^,  <rf 
the^rank  of  freedmen,  should  enlisted  in  Italy,  as  seamen, 
to  mm  the  fie^,  and  the  same  number  in  Sicily  ^  and  that 
the  prsemr,  to  whose  lot  the  govemment  of  the  latter  province 
fell,  should  take  care  to  carry  these  over  to  Maceddhia,  tP 
whatever  place  the  fl^et  should  bo  stationed  at.  To  recruit 
the  army  in  Spain,  three  ^ousand  Roman  foot  and  three 
hundred  horse  were  voted.  With  regard  to  that  army,  too, 
the  number  of  men  in  each  legion  was  limited  to  five  thou¬ 
sand  foot  and  three  hundred  and  thirty  horse.  Besides  these, 
the  praetor,  to  whose  lot  Spain  should  fall,  was  ordered  to 
levy  from  the  allies  four  thousand  foot  and  three  hundred 
horse. 
XIII.  I  am  weU  aware,  that,  through  the  same  disregard 
to  religion,  which  has  led  men  into  the  present  prevailing 
c^imon,  of  the  gods  never  giving  portents  of  any  future 
events,  no  prodigies  are  now  either  reported  to  government, 
or  recorded  in  historms.  But  for  my  part,  while.  I  am  wri¬ 
ting  the  transactimis  of  smcient  times,  my  sentiments,  1  know 
not  how,  become  antique  ;  and  I  feel  a  kind  qf  religious  awe, 
which  compels  me  to  consider  that  events,  which  the  men  of 
diose  days,  renowned  for  wisdom,  judged  deserving  of  the 
attention  of  the  state  and  of  public  expiation,  must  certainly 
be  worthy  of  a  place  in  my  history.  From  Ana^ia  two  pro- 
d%ies  were  reported  this  year:  that  a  blaming  torch  was  seen 
in  the  air^  and  that  a  cow  spoke,  and  was  maintained  at  the 
pubiic  expence.  About  the  same  time^  at  Mlntumse,  the  sky 
appearj^d  as.  in  a  blaze  of  fire.  AtReate,  a  shower  <^f  stones 
felL  A^  Cumae,  the  image  of  Apollo,  in  the  citadel,  sh^ 
tears  dturing  three  days  and  three  nights.  In  the  city  of  Rome, 

BOOK  XLIIL 

153 

BiC.  169.] 
the  keeper  of  a.tem{4e  fmerled,  that  in  tlmt  of  Fmtitiie,  a 
snake,  with  a  mane  like  that  dF  a  horse,  had  bem  seen  by 
many ;  and  another,  that,  hi  the  temple  oi  Fortuna  Primige- 
nia,  on  die  htU,  a  palm  sjmiag  up  in  the  court,  and  ths^a 
shower  of  blood  fell  in  the  hitddie  of  the  day.  There  were 
two  others  dot  attended  to :  cme,  because  it  happened  in  a 
place  belonging  to  a  private  person  j  Titus  Marcias  Figulus 
having  reported,  that  a  palna  sprung  up  in  the  inner  court  of 
his  house  :  tlK  other,  because  it  occurred  in  a  foreign  place, 
Fregellse,— where,  in  the  house  of  Lucias  Atreus,  a  spear, 
which  he  had  bought  for  his  son,  who  was  a  soldier,  burned, 
as  was  said,  for  more  than  two  hours,  yet  no  part  of  it  was 
consumed.  The  decemvirs,  having  consulted  the  books, 
with  regm'd  to  the  public  prodigies,  directed,  that  the  consuls 
should  sacrifice  forty  of  the  larger  victims  to  the  deities, 
whom  they  pointed  out ;  that  a  supplication  should  be  per¬ 
formed  ;  and  that  all  the  magistrates  should  sacrifice  victims 
of  the  larger  kinds,  in  all  the  temples,  and  the  people  wear 
garlands.  All  this  was  performed  accordingly. 
XIV.  Then  was  held  an  assembly,  for  the  creation  of  cen¬ 
sors,  which  office  was  canvassed  for  by  several  of  the  first 
men  in  the  state  ;  Caius  Valerius  Laevinus,  Lucius  Postu- 
mius  Albinus,  Publius  Mucius  Scsevola,  Marcus  Junius  Bru¬ 
tus,  Caius  Claudius  Fulcher,  and  Tiberius  Sempronius  Grac¬ 
chus.  The  two  last  were  created  censors  by  the  Roman 
people  in  assembly.  As,  on  account  of  the  Macedonian  war, 
the  business  of  levying  troops  was  deemed  of  more  import¬ 
ance  than  usual^  the  consuls  made  a^^omplaint  to  the  senate 
against  the  plebeians,  that  even  the  younger  men  did  not 
obey  their  summons.  But,  in  opposition  to  diem,  Caius  Sul- 
picius  and  Marcus  Claudius,  tribunes  of  the  people,  pleaded 
in  favour  of  the*  plebeians;  asserting,  that  ‘‘the  levying  of 
soldiers  proved  difficult,  not  to  the  consuls  in  general,  but  to 
such  consuls  as  affected  popularity  ;  that  these  enlisted  no 
VOL.  VI. — X 

154 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y*R.  583. 
man  against  his  inclmation  ;  and  that,  to  convince  the  Con* 
script  Fathers  of  the  truth  of  this,  the  prsetors,  who  in  their 
office  had  less  power  and  authority,  would,  with  their  appro* 
baticm^  complete  the  levies.^^  That  business  was  accordingly 
committed  to  the  care  of  “the  prsefors  by  an  unanimous  vote  of 
the  ^senate,  not  without  great  murmuring  on  the  part  of  the 
consuls.  The  censors,  in  order  to  forward  it,  published,  in 
a  general  assembly,  the  following  notice  :  that  they  would 
make  it  a  rule  in  conducting  the  survey,  that,  besides  the 
common  oath  taken  by  all  citizens,  the  younger  part  should 
swear,  when  challenged,  in  this  manner,— You  are  younger 
than  forty-six  years,  and  yon  shall  attend  at  the  levy,  pursu¬ 
ant  to  the  edict  of  Caius  Claudius  and  Tiberius  Sempronius, 
censors  ;  and  this,  too,  as  often  as  there  shall  be  a  levy  held 
by  any  magistrate  during  the  aforesaid  censors’  continuance 
in  office,  if  you  shall  not  have  been  already  enlisted.”  Also, 
as  there  was  a  report,  that  many  men,  belonging  to  ihe  le¬ 
gions  in  Macedonia,  were  absent  from  the  army,  on  leave 
granted  by  the  commanders,  without  any  time  limited  for 
their  return  ; — in  order  to  ingratiate  themselves  with  the  sol¬ 
diers,  they  issued  a  proclamation  concerning  ail  who  had 
been  drafted  for  that  country  in  the  consulate  of  Publius 
wfilius  and  Caius  Popillius,  or  since  that  period  ;  that  such 
as  were  in  Italy  should,  after  being  first  registered  by  them 
in  die  survey,  repair  to  Macedonia  within  thirty  days  ;  and 
that,  if  any  were  under  the  power  of  a  father  or  grand-father, 
the  names  of  such  should  be  notified  to  them.  That  they 
woidd  also  make  inquify  into  the  cases  of  the  -soldiers  who 
had  been  discharged  j  and  if  any  discharge  should  appear  to 
have  been  obtained  through  favour,  before  the  regular  num¬ 
ber  of  campaigns  were  served,  they  would  order  the  persons 
so  discharged  to  be  enlisted  again.”  In  consequence  of  this 
proclamation,  and  letters  from  the  censors  being  dispersed 
through  the  market-towns  and  villages,  such  multitudes  of 

BOOK  XLIH. 

155 

BX.  169.] 
young  men  flocked  to  Rome,  that  the  ^  extiliordinaiy  crowd 
was  even  inconvenient  to  the  city.  Beside  the  rehrf^rcc- 
ments  for  the  armies,  four  legions  were  raised  by  the  prseU)r 
Cams  Sulpicius,  and  the  levies  were  comple^d  within  elevra 
days. 
XV.  TTie  consuls  then  cast  lots  for  their  provinces  j  Ae 
praetors,  in  order  to  provide  for  the  civil  jurisdiction,  havin|^ 
determined  theirs  before.  The  civil  jurisdiction  had  fallen 
to  Caius  Sulpicius  ;  the  foreign  tcs  Gains  Decimius  ;  Spain, 
to  Marcus  Claudius  Marcellas  ;  Sicily,  ta  Servius  Cornelius 
Lentulus ;  Sardinia,  to  Publius  Fonteius  Capito ;  and  the 
fleet  to  Caius  Marcius  Figulus.  Of  the  consuls,  Servius  ob¬ 
tained  Italy  for  his  province  ;  Quintus  Marcius,  Macedonia; 
and,  as  soon  as  the  Latine  f^tival  could  be  celebrated,  the 
latter  set  out.  Ceepio  then  desired  the  senate  to  direct  which 
two  of  the  new  legions  he  should  take  with  him  into  Gaul ; 
when  they  ordered,  that  the  praetors,  Caius  Sulpicius  and 
Marcus  Claudius,  should  give  the  consul  such  of  the  legions, 
which  they  had  raised,  as  they  should  think  fit.  The  latter, 
highly  offended  at  a  consul  being  subjected  to  the  will  of  • 
praetors,  adjourned  the  senate  ;  and,  standing  at  the  tribunal 
of  the  praetors,  demanded,  that,  pursuant  to  the  decree,  they 
should  assign  him  two  legions;  but  the  praetors  left  tkie  cj^ke 
of  them  to  the  consul.  The  censors  then  called  over  the  list 
of  the  senate.  Marcus  iEmilius  Lepidus  was,  now,  by  the 
third  censors,  chosen  prince  of  the  senate.  Seven  were  ex¬ 
pelled  that  body.  In  making  the  survey  of  the  people,  they 
discovered  how  many  of  the  soldiers  belonging  to  the  army 
in  Macedonia  were  absent,  and  obliged  them  all  to  return  to 
that  province.  They  inquired  into  the  cases  of  the  men  who 
bad  been  discharged  ;  and,  when  any  of  their  discharges  ap¬ 
peared  irregular  in  respect  of  time,  they  put  an  oath  to  them 
to  this  effect :  ‘‘  Do  you  sincerely  swear,  that  you  will,  with¬ 
out  deceit  or  evasion,  return  into  the  province  of  Macedonia, 

156  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R-  586. 
according  to  the  edict  of  the  censors  Cains  Claudius  axnl 
Tiberius  Sempronius 
XVI.  In  the  review  of  the  knights  they  acted  with  much 
harshness  and  severity,  depriving  many  of  their  horses ;  and, 
after  giving  this  offence  to  the  equestrian  order,  they  inflamed 
the  general  displeasure  to  a  higher  degree  by  an  edict,  which 
grdered,  that  no  person  who  had  farm^  of  the  public  re¬ 
venues  or  taxes  from  the  censors  Quintus  Fulvius  and  A  ulus 
Postumius,  should  again  propose  for  them,  nor  should  have 
any  partnership  or  connexion  in  the  farms  then  to  be  made.” 
Although  the  former  farmers  made  many  complaints  '  to  the 
senate,  yet  they  could  not  prevail  oil  that  body  to  interfere, 
and  check  the  power  of  the  censors  ;  but  at  last,  they  found 
a  patron  of  their  cause  in  Publius  Rutilius,  a  plebeian  tri¬ 
bune,  who  was  incensed  against  the  censors  in  consequence 
of  a  dispute  about  a  private  concern.  They  ordered  a  client 
of  his,  a  freed  man,  to  throw  down  a  wall,  which  stood  op¬ 
posite  to  a  public  building  in  the  sacred  street,  as  being  built 
on  ground  belonging  to  the  public.  The  citizen  appealed  to 
the  tribunes  ;  but  none  of  them  would  interfere  except  Ru- 
tilius  ;  when  the  censors  sent  to  seize  his  goods^  and  imposed 
a  line  on  him  in  a  public  assembly.  When  the  present  dis- 
pu^ broke  out,  and  the  old  revenue  farmers  had  recourse  to 
the  tribunes,  a  publication  suddenly  appeared,  in  the  name  of 
Qne  tribune,  of  a  proposed  order  of  the  people,  that  all 
leases  made  of  the  public  revenues  and  taxes  by  Caius' Clau¬ 
dius  and  Tiberius  Sempronius  should  be  void:  that  they 
should  all  be  let  anew,  and  that  eveiy  person,  without  dis- 
tinctiem,  should  be  at  liberty  to  bid  for  and  take  them.”  The 
tribune  appointed  the  day  for  an  assembly  to  consider  this 
matter.  When  the  day  came,  and  the  censors  stood  forth  to 
argue  against  the  order,  Gracchus  was  heard  with  silent  at¬ 
tention  ;  but  when  Claudius  began  to  speak,  his  voice  was 
drowned  in  noi^  ;  on  which  he  directed  the  crier  to  cause 

BOOK  XLllh 

157 

B.C.  149.] 
silence,  that  he  might  be  heard.  This  was  done ;  and  dte 
tribune,  then,  complaining  that  the  assembly  which  he  had 
summoned  was  taken  out  of  his  rule,  and  that  he  was  strip* 
ped  of  the  privilege  of  his  office,  retired  from  the  Capi^, 
where  the  assembly  met.  Next  day  he  raised  a  violent  com* 
motion.  In  the  first  place,'  he  declared  the  property  of  Ti¬ 
berius  Gracchus  forfeited  to  the  gods,  for  having  fined  and 
seized  the  goods  of  a  person  who  had  appealed  to  a  tribune ; 
and  for  refusing  to  admit  his  right  of  protest.  He  mstit^ed 
a  criminal  process  against  Cakis  Claudius  for  the  same,  de¬ 
claring  his  intention  to  prosecute  both  the  censors  for  treason ; 
and  he  demanded  of  Cains  Sulpicius,  the  city  praetm*,  that  he 
would  fix  a  day  for  an  assembly  to  *tiy  them.  The  censbrs 
declared,  that  they  had  no  (Ejection  to  the  people  passing 
their  judgment  on  them  as  soon  as  they  pissed;  and  the 
days  for  trial  of  the  treason  were  fixed  for  the  eighth  smd 
seventh  before  the  caknds  of  October.  The  censors  went 
up  Immediately  to  the  temple  of  Liberty,  where  they  sealed 
the  books  of  the  public  accounts,  shut  up^he  c^ce,  and  dis¬ 
missed  the  clerks  ;  affirming,  that  they  would  do  no  kind  of 
public  business,  until  the  judgment  of  the  people  was  passed 
on  them.  Claudius  was  first  brought  to  trial ;  and,  after  eight 
out  of  the  eighteen  centuries  of  knights,  and  many  others  of 
the  first  class,  had  given  sentence  against  him,  the  principal 
men  in  the  state,  immediately  taking  off  their  gold  rings,  in 
the  sight  of  the  people,  put  on  mourning ;  and,  in  that  sup¬ 
pliant  manner,  solicited  the  commons  in  his  favour.  Yet,  it 
is  said,  that  Gracchus  Was  the  chief  means  of  making  a  change 
in  their  sentiments  ;  for,  on  the  commons  crying  out,  on  all 
sides,  that  Gracchus  was  in  no  danger,  he  took  a  formal  oath, 
that,  If  his  colleague  were  condemned,  he  would  not  wait  for 
their  sentence  on  himself,  but  *would  accompany  him  into 
exile.  After  all,  the  Case  of  the  accused  was  so  near  being 
desperate,  that  the  votes  of  eight  centuries  more  would  have 

458  HISTOHY  OF  ROME,  [Y.R,  585, 
condemned  him.  When  Claudius  acquitted,  the  tribune 
said,  diat  he  had  nothing  to  do  with  Gracchus, 
XVII.  This  year,  on  the  Aquileians  petitioning,  by  their 
ambassadors,  for  an  addition  to  the  number  of  their  settlers, 
the  senate  ordered  one  thousand  five  hundred  families  to  be 
enrolled  for  the  pinrpose  ^  and  Titus  Annius  Luscus,  Pubhus 
Decius  Subulo,  and  Marcus  Cornelius  Cethegus,  were  ap¬ 
pointed  commissioners  to  conduct  them.  During  the  same 
year,  Caius  Popilius  and  Cneius  Octavius,  who  had  been 
sent  ambassadors  ipto  Greece,  read,  first  at  Thebes,  and  af¬ 
terwards  carried  about  to  all  the  other  states  of  Peloponne¬ 
sus,  a  decree,  ordering,  that  no  person  should  furnish  the 
Roman  magistrates  with  any  tbmg  for  the  use  of  the  war, 
except  what  should  be  directed  by  a  vote  of  the  senate.” 
This,  besides  present  satisfaction,  afforded  the  allies  a  plea- 
ing  confidence,  with  regard  to  the  future,  of  being  relieved 
from  the  heavy  burdens  and  essences,  in  consequence  of  the 
various  demands  of  those  magistrates.  In  the  council  of 
Achaia,  held  at  Argos,  the  ambassadors  spoke,  and  were 
heard  with  sentiments  of  mutual  esteem  and  afiection  ;  and 
then,  leaving  that  faithful  nation  in  confident  assurance  of 
lasting  prosperity,  they  crossed  over  to  -£tolia.  No  civil  war 
had  yet  broke  out  in  that  countty  ;  but  mistrust  and  jealousy 
universally  prevailed,  and  nothing  was  heard  but  reciprocal 
accusations  and  recriminations.  To  put  a  stop  to  these^  the 
ambassadors  demanded  hostages,  and,  without  waiting  to  cure 
the  evil  effectually,  passed  on  to  Acamania.  The  Acarna- 
nians  held  a  council  at  Thyrium  to  give  Aem  audience.  Here, 
too,  there  was  a  struggle  between  opposite  factions  ;  some  of 
the  nobles  requiring  that  garrisons  might  be  placed  in  their 
cities,  to  protect  them  against  the  madness  ol  those  who  la- 
boureito  engage  the  nation  in  favour  of  the  Macedonians; 
and  others,  objecting  to  the  measure,^  as  throwing  such  an 
affront  on  peaceful  and  allied  cities,  as  was  practised  only  4^ 

BOOK  XLIIL 

159 

B.C.  169,] 
towns  taken  in  war,  or  engaged  in  libosttlities.  Their  objec¬ 
tion  was  reckpned  reasonable.  #From  thence  the  ambassa¬ 
dors  returned  to  Larissa,  to  Hostilius,  for  by  him  they  had 
been  aent.  He  kept  Octavius  with  him,  and  sent  Popilltus, 
with  about  a  thousand  soldiers,  into  winter  quarters  in 
Ambracia. 
XVIII.  Perseus  ventured  jaot  to  go  out  of  Macedonia,  lest 
the  Romans  might  make  an  irruption  into  the  kingdom  by 
some  unguarded  quarter  ;  but,  on  the  approach  of  the  winter 
solstice,  when  the  depth  of  the  snow  renders  the  mountains 
between  that  and  Thessaly  impassable,  he  thought  the  season 
favourable  for  crushing  the  hopes  and  spirits  of  his  neigh¬ 
bours,  so  as  to  relieve  himself  from  all  apprehension  of  dan¬ 
ger  from  them,  while  he  was  employed  elsewhere.  As  Cotys 
and  Cephalus,  by  their  sudden  defection  from  the  Romans, 
aflForded  him*  security  on  that  part  of  the  kingdom  which  lay 
next  to  Thrace  and  Epirus,  and  as  he  had  lately  subdued  the 
Dardanians  by  arms,  he  considered  that  Macedonia  was  only 
exposed  on  the  side  next  to  Illyria,  the  Illyrians  themselves 
being  in  motion,  and  having  offered  a  free  passage  to  the  Ro¬ 
mans.  He  hoped,  however,  that  in  case  of  reducing  the 
nearest  part  of  Illyria,  Gentius  himself,  who  had  long  been 
wavering,  might  be  brought  into  alliance  with  him.  Setting 
out,  therefore,  at  the  head  of  ten  thousand  foot,  the  greater 
part  of  whom  were  soldiers  of  the  phalanx,  two  thousand 
light  infantry,  and  five  hundred  horse,  he  proceeded  to  Stu- 
bera.  Having  there  supplied  himself  with  com,  sufficient  for 
many  days,  and  ordered  every  requisite  for  besieging  towns  to 
be  sent  after  him,  he  continued  his  march,  and  on  the  third 
day  encamped  before  Uscana,  the  largest  city  in  the  Penestian 
countiy.  Before  he  employed  force,  he  sent  emissaries  to 
sound  the  dispositions,  sometimes  of  the  ccunmanders,  some¬ 
times  of  the  inhabitants ;  for,  besides  some  troops  of  Illyrians, 
there  was  a  Roman  garrison  in  frie  place.  Perceiving  no  pros- 

160 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  563. 

pect  of  succeeding  by  negociation,  he  resolved  to  attack  the 
town,  and  made  an  attemptilo  take  it  by  storm ;  but  though 
his  men,  relieving  one  another,  a}nunued  without  intermis^ 
sion,  either  by  day  or  night,  some  to  apply  ladders  to  the 
walls,  ethers  to  attempt  setting  fire  to  the  gates,  yet  the  be¬ 
sieged  withstood  ail  the  fury  of  the  assault ;  for  they  had 
hopes  that  the  Macedonisms  wquld  not  be  able  to  endure  long 
the  violence  of  the  winter  in  the  open  field ;  and  besides,  that 
the  Homan  army  would  not  give  the  King  so  long  a  respite 
as  should  allow  him  to  stay  there.  But,  when  they  saw  the 
machines  in  motion,  and  towers  erec^^,  their  resolution 
failed  ;  for,  besides  that  they  were  unequal  to  a  contest  with 
his  force,  they  had  not  a  sufficient  store  of  com,  or  any  other 
necessary,  as  they  had  not  expected  a  siege.  Wherefore,  des¬ 
pairing  of  being  able  to  hold  out,  the  Roman  garrison  sem 
Caius  Carvilius  Spoktinus  and  Caivis  Afranius  to  desire  Per¬ 
seus,  first,  to  allow  the  troops  to  march  out  with  their  arms, 
and  to  carry  their  effects  with  them  and  then,  if  they  could 
not  obtain  that,  to  receive  his  promise  of  their  lives  and  liberty. 
The  King  promised  more  generously  than  he  performed  ;  for, 
after  desiring  them  to  march  out  with  their  effects,  the  first 
thing  he  did  was  to  take  away  their  arms.  As  soon  as  they 
left  the  city,  both  the  cohort  of  IHyrians,  five  hundred  in 
number,  and  the  inhabitants  of  Uscana,  immediately  surren¬ 
dered  themselves  and  the  city. 
XIX.  Perseus,  placing  a  garrison  in  Uscana,  carried  away 
to  Stubera  the  whe^e  multitude  of  prisoners,  almost  equal  to 
his  army  in  number.  He  then  distributed  the  Romans,  who 
amounted  to  four  thousand,  besides  officers,  among  several 
cities,  to  be  kept  in  custody ;  and,  having  sold  the  Uscanians 
and  Illyrians,  led  back  his  army  to  Panestia,  with  design  to 
reduce  the  city  of  Oseneus  ;  which,  besides  other  advantages 
of  its  situation,  affords  a  passage  into  the  country  of  the  La- 
heariass,  where  Gentius  was  King.  As  he  passed  by  a  fort, 

m 

BX. 
rnmied  Drmi^um4mhkh  wm  f«di  a-fiei^ii%^ll|li| 
acquaiv)^  with  ^  txmntry^  told  him^ 
use  in  taUcing  3^eus  unless  he  h^  Ofuudufum  In 
far  tbei«^r  was  aitu^d  more 
pcct-”  His  army  no  nppem^ed^Mria^.^  thm  al|l.5(te 
inbalHtaats  agreed  to  capitulates -iwm^fediately.i  Eneo^^gprf 
by  the  early  surr^ider  of  this  |^ase,  iKid^r©dK^ing^i^.^i^ 
tws  his  mmrch  diffused^  by  tfdri^ng advantage  of  the  like  Jeai^ 
he  reduced  eleven  other  forts  to  submission.  Against  AM€$y 
few  he  had  occasma  to  use  ftarce  j,  the  rest  subinitted 
tarily  ;  among  whom  were  one  thousand  five  bumhed  .std*- 
diers,  wIki  had  teen  stationed  there,  in, garrison.  .  Caryiftli 
Spalednus  was  very  serviceaye’ to  him  in  his ,  i^nferen<M^ 
with  the  garrison,  by-  d^teiisg  '  dbat  TO;  severity  had  teen 
rimwQ  to  him  and  his  party.  At  k||gth  teimrivedatQsim^i^ 
which  could  not  be  taks»  wtthout  4^  regym^  sk^t  ^hari^  a 
much  gremer  number  of  mmi  item  tbs'  otters*  w^^strmjg 
fortifications.  It  was  inclos#^  cm  one  side  by  ajrivei:  ea0^ 
Artatus,  and  cm  smother  by  a  very  hi^  #%alt 
access;  circun^tances,  which  gave  the  inb^ili^ts  eou^n^ 
to  malce  resistaiice.  Perseus,  bavteg  oficircumr 
vallatkHi,  began,  on  the  higher  grot^*  to  raise  a  mmuad* 
which  he^llltellded  shouM  eaceed  the  inheight.  By  tte 
time  titat  this  ^wc^ic  w^  ^com^deicd* -the  diwcg^,  in  .tiieir 
many  actiom,  when  saHying  out  to  def^d  their  works*  or  ^ 
te^uct  those  of  the  enemy,  had  test  great  ami^is  fay  vari¬ 
ous  chants  }  whde  the  survivoi^  ws^e  ^msdered  usetesa  Ity 
W4%w&,  mid  by  ecmtinmil  laboiir  the  -  day  and 
As  soon  as  the  mound  was  broi^^  jctese  %0t^K  w^i^ 
royri  edtert-^the  men  of  wtech  si^e  Hi^itots) 
from  it  into^  towa^^  wl^  m  awult  waa^Mitelty  a^tete 
in  many  ^aoes  tW-mice.  •  All  tte  had  rtsacb^^  As 
age  etf  puberty,  were  put^  to  tii^  swu«dythmf<iriytJS  and  cb|}»** 
ch^  wmse  thrown 
VOL.  VI. - Y 

^  HIST^^  OP^^^E.  tT3ft,  m. 
I^eti  it  to  ^  soldiers.  thcice  idctmoits 
la  Stiiberav  ^e  ai  wk^hmmSLo^  tio  Geiitii^,«<^Flearatc^9 
^  fiSyrian,  who  lived  tti  eicik  at  faia  court,  mA  Afmteus,  a 
Mtcedoulati,  from  Beraar;  Th^  mstroctiotis  were,  to  re* 
pretcM  hfe  exploits  agah^  the  Rontaos  and  Darchmians  dur¬ 
ing  the  preceding  summer  and  winter,  and  to  mid  die  recent 
opemtions  of  his  winter  campaign  in  Illyria,  and  to  exhort 
Gentiils  to  unite  with  him  and  the  Macedonim^  in  a  tres^ 
of  kiendship. 
XX.  They  crossed  over  the  top  of  Mmxnt  SeonA»,  md 
throu^  desert  tracts  of  Illyria,  which  the  Ms^dmsians  had 
Wd  waste,  for  the  purpose  of  preventing  Am  Dardankm 
from  passing  easily  into  Illyria  or  Macedonia  ^and,  at  lei^flh, 
rftcr  undetgoiOg  prodigious  fatij^e,  arrived  at  Scodm.  King 
Gehtius  was  at  Lissus,  to  which  place  he  invited  Am  ambas- 
Sadoii^  dnd  knt  a  favourable  ear  to  their  rein-esentatiosis,  but 
pivt  them  an  indecimve  miswer :  that  he  warned  not  iimh- 
mdem  to  go  to  war  with  the  Romans,  but  was  in  extreme 
warn  df  mcmey  to  enable  him  to  enter  on  such  an  under- 
lai&Rg.’’  This  answer  they  bron^t  to  the  King,  while  he 
was  busy  at  Stubera  in  selling  the  prisoners  from  IU}rria.  He 
immediately  sent  back  the  same  ambassadors,  to  whom  he 
added  Olauciasi  one  of  his  body  guards,  but  without  any 
mention  of  money  ;  the  only  thkig  that  could  indm^e  the 
i^edy  baibarian  to  take  a  part  in  the  war.  Then  Perseus, 
after  ravaging  Ancyra,  led  back  his  army,  once  more,  into 
Penestia ;  and,  having  strengthened  the  garrisons  of  Uscana, 
and  the  other  fortresses  which  he  had  taken  in  diat  quamr, 
he  retired  tnio  Macedemia. 
XXi.  Lucius  Cseltus,  a  Roman  Ueutenant^g^neral,  com- 
mamh^,  at  dim  time,  in  Illyria.  While  thtf  King  was  in  that 
coumry,  he  did  not  venture  to  stir  ;  but,  m  his  dcfmrtiwe,  he 
made  m,  attempt  to  recover  Um^ana,  in  Penestia ;  ki^which, 
being  repidscd,  with  great  by  the  Macedtmmn^giuiismi, 

B.c.m3  m 
ke  kd  t»ck  |si  ^  $korl  low 
he  sei^  JA9tmi»  TitlidMiiB  jpx«i§elhpu9^  with  a  veiy 
m(Exiw'hmts^g^  die  ci^cai^^h 
had  vewmmt^  ib  Cmadalup*  He  i^rdered 
t/9:mms^  ^  to  the  ¥93kkikimi&^  who  had  Ukewiae 
«Q|^vehmi^9  a^  he  received  them  from  b<^ 
wibout  mj  trpubk  t  d^se  of  die  Penc^bas  ii;ere 
4p(dkffiw  I  $h^  <rf  the  .Paithmhttia  ta  Dyiraiduuio^ 
more  generally  called  by  d»  Greeks  Ef^mai^  ^^uis 
Claudim  wishi^  to  repair  the  disg^ce  wluch  had 
ed'in  Ul^ia,  imbe  an  attack  on  Pbanote^  a  hntress  of  ]l|pi- 
tm  I  with  hlto,  Insides  the  Rommi  troc^ia,  Athpi* 
n^mm  md  Th^protian  auxiliaries,  to  die  amount  oP  six 
duiasaiid  meni  but  ho  gained  no  advantage  ;  for  ClevM^who 
had  bem  left  there  widi  a  strong  garrison,  effectual^ 
ed  die  jimo.  .  Perseusjnarched  to  EHmea,  and^ 
ftbag  his  apny,  led  it  to  Stratus,  in  compliance  wilft.^ 
tadem  of  the  uEtolians*  Strips  was  then  the 
HI  i^Ua.  It  stands  on  the  Ambracian  gulph,  near  ^ 
Achdous.  Thither  he  marched  with  ten  thousand  foot, ^bd 
^ee  hundred  horse  ;  for  he  di4  not  choose  to  bring  a  la^r 
party  of  the  latter,  on  account  of  the^n^rowness  and  ruggged* 
ness  of  the  roads.  On  the  third  day  he  came  to  Mount 
Citium,  which  he  could  scarcely  climb  ovar,  by  reason  of  the 
depth  of  the  snow  ;  and,  afterwards,  witih  difficulty  fcmi^ 
even  a  .{dace  for  hk  camp.  Leaving  that  spot,  raber  because 
he  could  not  conveniently  stay,  thsm  that  eidier  the  road,  or 
the  weather,  was  toleiable^  the  army,  after  sulTering  severe 
hankhips,  which  fell  heaviest  on  Ac  beasts  of  burden, 
encamped  on  the  second  day  at  the  temple  of  Jupiter,  called 
Niaei^-  After  a  very  long  marcl^  theiK^e,  he  airived  at  the 
river  Aracthus,  where  the  depth  of  the  wat^  obliged  him  to 
halt  until  a  bridge  could  be  made. .  As  so<m..  as  this  was 
finished,  he  led  over  bis  army ;  and,  having  proceeded  one 

m  HISTORY  OF  HOME.  [Y.R.  58S. 
march,  met*Arch5<iainus;i^  -£toHatiof  dktttsctioh^who 
proprmed  dclivetitig  Stratus  into  his  hattds. 
TUSttl.  On  that  day  Persrus  encamped  at  the  bounds  of 
dfe  !£tolian  teiritory  ;  and,  on  the  next,  arrived  Injfore  Stra- 
ttSKi,  trhere,  pitching  his  camp  near  the  river  A^hclous,*he 
eitpected  that  the  jEtolians  would  come  in  cro#lfe,  to  put 
themaelves  under  bis  protection  ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  he 
found  die  ^ut,  and  discovered  that,  the  very  night  be* 
fore  he  arrived,  a  Homan  garrison,  under  Caius  Popillius, 
lieutenant-general,  had  been  received  into  the  town.  Hie 
nd^les,  who,  while  Archidamus  was  present,  had,  out  of  de¬ 
ference  to  his  authority,  submitted  to  invite  the  King,  sui  soon 
as  he  went  out  for  that  purpose,  had  become  less  zealous, 
and  had  pven  an  opportunity  to  the  opposite  faction  to  call 
hi  Popillius,  with  one  thousand  foot,  from  Ambracia.  At 
diC  aame  juncture  came  also  Dixiarchus,  general  of  the  dEu>* 
Uim  cai^^dry,  with  sis:  hundred  foot  and  one  hundred  horse* 
It  was  well  known  that  he  came  lx>  Stratus  intending  to  act 
with  Perseus  ;  but  that,  with  the  change  of  fortune,  he  had 
cl^mged  his  mind,  and  joined  the  Romans.  Nor  was  Popil- 
lius  less  on  his  guard  than  was  requisite  among  people  of 
such  fickle  tempers.  Henmmediately  took  into  his  own  keep¬ 
ing  the  keys  of  the  gates,  with  the  direction  of  the  guard  of 
the  walls,  removing  Dinarchus  and  the  iEtolians,  together 
with  the  young  men  of  Stratus,  into  the  citadel,  under  pre¬ 
tence  of  garrisoning  it.  Perseus  semnded  the  garrison,  by 
addressing  them  from  the  eminences  that  hung  over  the  up¬ 
per  part  of  the  city,  and  finding  that  they  were  d>stinate,  and 
even  kept  him  at  a  distance  with  weapons,  removed  his  camp 
to  the  other  side  of  the  river  Petitarus,  about  five  miles  from 
the  town  ;  drere  he  held  a  council;  wherein  Archidamus  and 
the  refugees  from  Epirus  advised,  that  he  should  remain 
there  ;  but  the  Macedonian  nobks  argued,  that  it  would  be 
wrong  to  fight  against  the  severity  of  the  season  without 

i ' ^  ms 
whkSI  «i^k 
u^t^dyi  b 
qt^fUre  Mn^sI  iuNt  bftuiiie^  #Mch^  Afetil^Mis 
p0ss^si(ed  tlEkib%  ibb,  stri>b%^^%l^eisais,  m 
eoftsttit  $  and^  Af%hldil0it^:Mf)9^  irts  ^^cteed^ 
vernor,  widi  a  body  of  eight  hondted-^)!^^  ^ 
XXIII.  The*  King  then  m^ched  into  Macedonm^^is  siw 
and  hoF&es  auifering,  on  the  way,  hardships  ik>  less  severe 
tiban  they  had  encountered  o^  leaving*  home.  However,  Ac 
report  of  Perseus^s  march  to  S&atua  (Miged  Appius  to  rabe 
the  siege  of  Phanote,  Clevas,  wiA  a  body  of  active  young 
men,  pursued  him  to  the  foot  of  a  motmtain,  in  a  detie^  id* 
sni^  impassable,  killed  one  thousaml  men  of  his  disordered 
tioo{^,  and  took  two  hundred  primineta.  Appius,  when  li^ 
got  clear  of  the  defile,  encamped  in  a  plaki  named  £iecat, 
where  he  remained  for  some  days.  Meanwhile  Ckvas,  be* 
ing  joined  by  Philostratus,  governor  rf  Epirus,  pro<^dcd 
over  the  mounmins  into  the  lands  of  AnUgmiea.  The  Ma* 
cedonians  setting  out  to  plunder,  Phrh^atus,  with  his  ^rty^ 
posted  himself  in  ambush.  The  trc»?^  at  Anti^nea  hasten* 
cd  out  against  the  straggling  plunderers,  but,  on  Aeir  fiying, 
pumued  Aem  wiA  too  great  eagerness,  until  Aey  precipitated 
themselves  into  the  valley  which  was  beset  by  the  enemy, 
who  killed  one  thousand,  and  made  about  one  hundred  furi- 
soners.  Being  thus  successful  every  where,  Acy  encamped 
near  Ae  post*of  Appius,  in  order  to  prevent  Ae  Romim 
anny  from  offering  violence  to  any  of  their  allies.  Appit^, 
findmg  that  he  wasted  time  there  to  no  purpose,  dismis^d 
Ae  Chaonian  and  other  Epirotes,  and  wiA  his  Italian  sol* 
diers  marched  back  to  Illyria ;  then,  sending  the  troops  So 
their  severd  winter-quarters,  in  the  confederate  cities  of  Ae 

166  HISTORY  OR 
^  «fe»*  hpme  to  R<w»  to  po4w  » 
Pencils  J»cid^  ham  Pea^ia  one  thoosa^  foot  aad  tmp 
to  HU 
retorned  from  Gortius  with  the  aaa«  «aw«r  w 
b^loKt.  StiUhfrdKliK>t|p¥eitphUd^gn,bot»^etBi»^ 
after  «md»a»y,  to  edicit  i  yet,  iiotwidMt*ndi%  that  te 
WM  eemildc  cS  the  powerful  eupp«rt  he  w(^  fiad  in  G*»- 
liukfoe  aiae«toiMtt»ddnotpievaaoBh»Metf  tooqpeffld 
niQ^y  cm  tiac  business, 
W  .#  •#*,*****. 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

BOOK  XLIV. 

rnmAm  Phmppo^  cohsiil,^wi«i  macb  dfftculty,  pemtmies  into 
Macedaa^  takes  aeversd  clti^  The  Rhodians  send  an  ernbaa^  to 
Rome,  threatening  to  aid  Perseus,  unless  the  Bcmuuis  made  fieace  irlth 
him.  Lucias  .SmiUus  Paullus,  consul,  sent  against  Perseus,  defeats  him, 
mid  reduces  all  Macedonia  to  subjection.  BeRire  the  engs^men^  Cains 
Sulpitius  GaBus,  a  miKtaiy  trBiune,  foretells  an  ecEpse  of  the  moon,  and 
warns  the  siddicrs  not  to  be  afermed  at  pheimmenon  Geidlms, 
Kii^  of  Rlyiia,  Tanq^udied  by  Amcios,  {meter,  ami  sent  prismier,  to- 
gethm*  with,  his  wife  and  <^uMren,  to  Home.  Ambasssulors  fiom  Ptolemy 
and  Cleopatra,  King  and  Queen  of  Egypt,  complsdn  of  Antiochus  making 
war  upon  them.  Perseus,  not  paying  Eumenes,  King  of  Pergamus,  and 
Gentitts,  King  of  Bly^  fte  money  he  had  promised  ^em  for  ^ir  as- 
idstance, »  decreed  by  t^m. 
I.  EARLY  ia  the  foUowiag  spring,  the  orisuI  Quintus 
Marcius  Phtlippus  set  out  fmm  Rome,  wiA  five 
ma^  whma  he  was  to  tarry  ova*  to  rein-  g  Q 
face  his  kgtmis,  and  arrived  at  Brut^usium. 
Marcos  PofdUii^  of  cmsular  rank,  and  young  men  of 
^ual  dignity,  accompanied  hhn,  in  qindiiy  erf  military  u4- 
buncs,  for  the  legiems  in  Mmedoam.  fiealy  at  the  emme 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

[Y.R.  5SS. 

Caius  Marcius  Figuliis,  the  prie^,  whose  |a*oviiicc 
vfm  Ute  fleet,  came  to  Brundo^um  ;  and,  bod^  sailtag  from 
Italy,  made  Corcyra  on  the  seccmd  day,  mni  Ac^um,  a  peat 
o£  Acamama,  on  the  third.  The  Cjcmsol,  then,  disembarking 
at  Ambracia,  proceeded  towards  Thessaly  by  land.  The 
praetor,  doubling  Cape  Leucate,  sailed  into  the  guiph  of  Co* 
riiuh  ;  then,  leaving  his  ships  at  Creusa,  he  went  by  land  also 
through  the  middle  of  Baei^ia,  and,  ^  a  %vmk  journey  of  one 
day,  came  to  the  fleet  at  Chalcis.  Aulus  Hostilius  at  that 
time  lay  encamped  in  Thessaly,  near  Pakepharsalus ;  and 
though  he  had  performed  no  warlike  act  of  smy  consequence ; 
yet  he  had  reformed  his  troops  from  a  state  of  dissolute  li¬ 
centiousness,  and  brought  them  to  exact  military  discipline  j 
had  faithfully  -consulted  the  interest  of  the  allies,  and  de¬ 
fended  them  from  every  kind  of  injury.  On  hearing  of  his 
successor -s  approach,  he  carefuUy  inspected  the  arms,  mei^, 
and  horses  j  and  tlmi,  with  the  army  m  complete  order,  he 
marched  out  to  greet  the  consul.  The  meeting  mm  such  as 
became  their  own  dignity  and  the  Roman  character  j  and,  in 
transacting  business  afterwards,'  they  preserved  the  greaiest 
harmony  and  propriety.  The  proconsul,  addressing  himseff 
to  the  tmops,  exhorted  them  to  behave  with  courage^  and  with 
due  respect  to  the  orders  of  their  commander.  He  then  re- 
commended  Mem,  in  warm  terms^  to  the  consul^  and^  as  soon 
as  he  had  dispatched  the  necessary  aff^airs^  set  off*  for  Rome, 
A  few  days  after,  the  consul  made  a  speech  to  Ins  sokiters, 
which  began  with  the  unnatural  murder  which  Perseus  had 
perpetrated  on  his  brother,  and  meditated  against  his  father ; 
he  then  mentiemed  his  surquisition  of  the  kingdom  hf  die 
most  nefarious  practices ;  his  poisonnrgs  and  murdeta ;  his 
abominable  attempt  to  assassinate  Eumcnes  ;  the  in^tfries  he 
had  committed  a^insi  the  Roman  people  ;  md  hit  plunder¬ 
ing  the  cHies*  of  their  aUtes,  m  violadon  of  die  treaty.  How 
detestable  such  |m>ceedmgs  were  in  the  sight  of  the  gods. 

-WBOtL  'imm.  m 

.-'in  -¥h  « V  ■  5 -.  f  v/i\ itT^  i ;  I « .  >  M  y '  v  H  ^ 

.  ^inemB <it  ]i*S-<i4«9a'^ 
f^  wbow  i«^(a%  1ra»  «(dmoin4e#^  #c 
ii^oie  ici^^ijtt'0f  }  «Mi  ^  ttnAln  «f ‘^tai 
me  with  Aose  of  Ae  other ;  and  'Aen  he  nlwd,'^  WW(W9t 
the  power^i*W%^«^dhitof  Awdo(hmjWiW^S8petlw^^ 
tOid  jet  botli  ef  titem  had  bees  miqaered.  -  •;.•■•' 
,  II.  Hava^  ana»t^  his  seidiers  b7sadi.eAorts^«»^ha 
bagaar«»we«s^<Bi  a  gen^td  {dm  eS  ofendons  tor  Idth  eeas* 
peigof  bmigjeimd.  b^^the  pnetor  <}idas  Mandna,  wheyato 
Moehring-ilce  #eety  came  dndtor  Irme  Clait 
cis..  fc  anttfOBaived  wot  towa^dme,  hj^lw^ag  Im^^eeht 
Thessaly  j  hat  to  decamp  imaieduariy^  Mid  advasKe  'hsto 
Macedoam  t^rmd^dhat  the  jamtor  ^ndd  curt  hiiaa^  to  the 
Mamtty  that^  ^et might i^cary  at  &e  aaase  daacy  aa  &e 
eaeo^awcasis.  The  pmt<w  tlmB  mdk  hk  leave  j.  aad  ^ihe 
ccamolordceh^  ^  sdi^ems  to«catxj  a.Bua&’efwoiramciaii^ 
struck  hao-teaftiy  tm  the  day  afiM  he  recMmai  tim  mma- 
&mdof^e  anafy  at^  ptMtmg^  the  troops  at  BmdmtrSBiBvhad 
ttatS.-Ed|^.  B^rae  lm  praee^ed,  Jar  cahed  togeiker  iMe 
giHdedyjBtMt ^wiered  d^B  to  ezph^  at  dw^weamHte  of  the 
CQUBi^i^.  wlHaroad:mM^<d^  dwm  |Hopoaed  to  lead  hha; 
theoyideMiit^^mro  wi]&draw,4eaBked.^  ofioifloofthe 
cooncSy  aa  to  whM  rmxte  he  riK»ddps«£gr.  Some  Mdriaed 
the.road  throu^  Pythkim ;  etben^-A^emer  Ae  C^mbmam 
mmeatmm,  where  the  coerol  fiostaiae  had'  astwebedithe  yalw 
b^MW^t  whUe  adiaiy  agakiy  preferred  that-  w^di  puaed  hy 
fee  feiie<^fee\Mm  Aecmia.  Th«e  waa  yet  hefem  }fea^a 
omndMwhb  toigth  of  wayy  w^dt  led  t^ke  towards  att 
these  {  feehwfeer  ©^idem^ooK^dUs  mister -mm  ^etteSme 
|>oe^WBed  4m»til^fe(^  eoromparor  fee  place  a^re  fee 
roads  dwetgai:  Ife-feen  Blal«hed  iatoPerrb■dfe^aBd■p(^ 
VOL.  VI. — Z 

msrmr  m  mouE. 

Ito 

irm.  m. 

td  tolireen  Atxmm 
^  p^kmMe  to^.  la  l^  »t^4ii«ie, 
%iyaXi  to  wln^  roate  i^  tai^  take,  fimk¥0d 
pi^isea.  top  of  the  Caaiiwlanmmui- 
Unta#,  tidied  hjr  die  aadt^  Vdhistana,  he  ^t  tm  dioasaad 
%lit  kifaatry,  the  commaad  of  Asckpkaic^t ;  ordbr- 
kig  Hipphm,  widi  a  detaehment  of  tveelve  dtoa^»id  MlKredb- 
aians,  to  guard  the  pass  called  JUapadios,  miisr  ^  fert  whkh 
tftoodover  tl^  lake  Ascuds.  He  hiia^etf,  Widi  dk  mt  e^his 
‘4aFees,  !ay  for  soesethm^  in  taasp  «t  Dios;  1^  afterwards, 
as  If  he  had  Ic^t  die  use  ^  hk  md  vfm  ineapidAe 
-of  laraaiog  aoy  ^a,he  used  to  gallop  idtmg  the  cowst,  with  a 
of  ^ght  borae,  aomettoies  to  Heracle^  wmetimes  to 
iMiila,  aad  thett  return  with  the  sawie  speed  ^  Dius« 
^  Itl,  Bf  dik  da^  the  eonstd  had  determhi^  to  march 
dtrough^^fhe  pass  near  Oemlopht^,  td^re,  bmi  nueii* 
the  ^omip  erf  Philip  formeiiy  stood.  Bm  he  deetaaed 
kpredent  to db^tch  before  hitn  four  dtou^^  mex^  %o  «e^ 
tme  iiuch  places  as  nvlghl  he  usefol :  the  tmmmsd  of  dik 
pwr^  W2m  gk^  to  Marcus  Claudios,  aisd 
die  e^iistil^s  am.  Hie  fitam  body  followed  close  after^fmt 
the  i^ad  was  so  sleep,  rough,  and  craggy,  that  the  advm^d 
fmty  of  li^t  troops,  with  great  dl^Ekuky,  edect^  in  two 
a  march  of  lifoeen  miles ;  th^  thetimesmped  on  a 
tl^  tower  of  Endhm*  Mext  day  they  ^dr^ced  seven 
Imvkig  seized  on%  htli,  at  a  small  dis^ce  from 
eimmy  Vmmip,t^^  back  a  mewige  to  the  om^/that 
^  Imd  wxdipod  widtki  of  the  enemy;  and  hadtsd^ 
post  mo  tdikli  was^  safe  mid  cottvmient  tit  every  les- 
peOt^  arging  hkn  to  join  diem  w^  vM  possibfc  speid.'^ 
Thk  mei^ge  c^e  to  the  cmwiil  at  lake  Asenris,  at  a 
dme  vdsen  he  vhm  ^1  of  anakty,  <m  mremmt  erf  the  badne^ 
(rf  the  it^  into  which  he  hml  brought  the  army,  smd  for  die 

tn 

0f  Ac  ^memf  ^  Ji^i^iits  immt  Aemskm  f^eady 

-oimp  im  the  tide  id  fiie  a^tre^te 
gfotmd mosi  eoaisiodkm*  w 
toMss^  a  vkic*^id«aded  pn^ped,  pre^tnuda^  to  ^ir 
doae  dse  ^Miey’a  K^mais 
ihm  »m3&iliati»Ei^  tl^^vhdb  «i^d  of  ^a^tary  ab  £^s 
i^  Phiia,  Oritb  a  koge .Uadof  ^  aea cii^ 
cos^tsmc^ -^hkh  gr<^ly  enM^aed  ^e  c^^E^ge  df  i^ 
^eT%  gbriog  them  so  nmr  a^vkw  of  the  gr»^  Aoaareof^^ 
war,  of  Kiag’s  forces,  md  d*  the  cmntty  ioi  the 
my*  Sohi^y  were  they  ^aimated,  they  pressed 
cosksui  lo  <fead  tk^tm  em  direody  ^  dst,  a&er  Aat 
they  had  siiieied  <m  ,  das  toad,  i^e.  day  was  set  apai^ic^  x^ 
fme*  Oa^ie  ^Lrdgdi^^  the  coasid^  lea^tag  one  half  of  ids 
Uoops  to  g^ard  tl^  camp,  marched  ag^iai^  the  eaemy*  ^ 
.  IV*  jyyppm  had  been  mm  hy  the  ILmg,  a  idmrt  time  W# 
fore,  to  mamutn  tfas^  ^ss  f  and  haivhtg  eo^loy^  himself, 
smce  he  fir^  mm  the  ihoonan  cmaf  on  the  hili,'  in  pr^saing 
his  mauls  fear  a  irntde,  he  now  went  fcadi  to  meet  Ae 
amsuPs  army  as  it  advanced.  The  Rmn^nis^c^asemit  to  bat* 
de  with  ii^t  mmour,  as  did  tibe  Mi^eckadai^ ;  1^^  tro&tp» 
l^ing  tl^  fittest  for  the  Idndof  fig^in  which  they  were  ah^ 
to  engage*  As  soom.  ^  they  met^  diere£^e,  diey  insm^^ 
discluaged  dietr  javelm,and  many  woia^s  ^von  wd 
r^:eived  tm  tx^  dides  in  a  dwwdeily  kind  cdimnfiict  i  jmt 
few  of  etdier  par^  were  kilkd.  This  only 
mge  for  du^  ScSiomn^  day,  when  diey  would  hnve  cngi^^ 
with  more  numerous  forces,  and  with  gicater  mptinaostey,  Imd 
there  been  room  to  form  a  line  %  but  the  summit  of  tfa^  mx»m* 
tain  was  cmxtrac^d  into  a  rid^  so  narr4>w^  m  steely  to  id- 
low  iq>ace  for  three  film  in  froim  i  that  dm  gret^  part, 
especially  such  as  ouried  heavy  mms,  atood  mens  spectrum’s 

172 

HISTORY  OF  SOME. 

[Y,S.  583^ 

erf  the  fight.  The  light  troe^  even  ran  ^ronj^  the  hoEoars 
of  the  hill,  and  attacked  the  fliaiks  of  the  enemy ;  never  con¬ 
sidering  either  advantage  or  di^dvantage  of  die  ground, 
provided  they  could  bat  come  to  actmn.  That  day,  too, 
greater  numbers  were  wounded  than  killed,  and  mght  put  a 
stop  to  the  dispute.  The  Roman  general  was  greatly  at  a 
loss  how  to  proceed  on  the  third  day  ;  for  to  remam  on  that 
naked  hill  was  impossible,  and  be  could  xmt  return  withcmt 
^sgrace,  and  even  danger,  if  the  Macedonian,  with  the  ad¬ 
vantage  of  the  ground,  should  press  on  his  troops  in  their  re¬ 
treat  :  he  had,  therefore, ►no  other  plan  left  than  to  persevere 
in  his  bold  attempt,  which  sometimes,  in  the  issue,  proves 
the  wisest  course.  He  had,  in  fact,  brought  himself  into  such 
a  situation,  that  if  he  had  had  to  deal  with  an  enemy,  like  the 
ancient  kings  of  Macedon,  he  might  have  suffered  a  very  se¬ 
vere  defeat.  But  while  the  King,  withdiis  horsemen,  ran  up 
and  down  the  shore  at  Dius ;  smd,  though  almost  within 
hearing  of  the  shout  and  noise  of  twelve  thousand  of  his 
forces,  who  were  engaged,  neither  sent  up  fresh  men  to  re¬ 
lieve  the  weary,  nor,  what  was  most  material,  appeared  him¬ 
self  in  the  action  ;  the  Roman  general,  notwithstanding  that 
he  was  above  sixty  years  dd,  and  unwieldy  through  corpu¬ 
lency,  performed  actively  every  duty  of  a  commander.  He 
persisted  with  extraordinary  resolution  in  his  bold  under¬ 
taking  ;  and,  leaving  PopilHus  to  guard  tiie  summit,  marched 
across,  through  places  which  would  have  been  impassable,  if 
he  had  not  sent  forward  a  party  to  open  a  road.  Attains  and 
Misagenes,  with  the  auxiliary  troops  of  their  own  nations, 
were  ordered  to  protect  them,  while  clearing  the  way  through 
the  forests.  He  himself,  keeping  the  cavalry  and  baggage 
before  him,  closed  the  rear  with  the  legions. 
V.  In  descending  the  mountain,  the  men  suffered  inexpres¬ 
sible  fatigue,  besides  the  frequent  falling  of  the  cattle  and 
tiietr  loads,  so  that,  before  they  had  advanced  quite  four 

B.C.  mj  i«0N&8?iXLIV.  m 
tbsit  n^o^^ligftle  jkmwfnM 
he  ^  re^nm/if  by  die  wmy  dtey  ome^.  The  eb* 
l^lii^  caused  daaost  as  much  fxmimion  amcmgd^  troojfm  as 
m  emmy  ceuM  i  £or,  ^adien  they  came  to  impamabk  ateq^^ 
diey  threar  dieir  rhkrs^  aad  set  up  suck  a  htdeot^  tmar^ 
as  spresai  terror  ^rwgh  espectsdly  amcmg  the  homes, 
uadi  a  mediod  srae  eoMtwed  for  bnugiug  diem  down.  They 
fastened  in  the  earth,  sems^way  fiomtheaop,t9iro4cmgsutmg 
posts,  distant  frasn  <»ch  o^r  a  little  more  than  the  hrea^th 
of  the  animal,' on  whidi  were  fastened  beim»dmty  long, 
which  stretched  across  ^eeipioe,  by  mesm  rd  which  diey 
formed  a  tcind  of  luid^  mid  covered  it 'with  emth  ;  a  little 
lower,  miotfaer  i  then  a  third  bridge,  with  several  others  one 
after  another,  where  steeps  were  founds  The  dephaat  walked 
forward  on  solid  footing ;  but,  before  he  oune  to  the  end,  the 
pt^ts  undemeadi  were  cut,^  and  the  bridge  biling,  obliged 
him  to  slide  down  gently  m  th&  beginning  of  die  next  bridge, 
which  some  of  diem  performed  ^tandmg,  odiers  on  their 
haunches.  When  di^  anived  at  the  level  of  another  bridge, 
they  were  again  carried  ^wn,  by  its  falling  in  like  manner ; 
and  this  operation  was  repeated  undl  th^  came  to  more  level 
ground.  The  Romans  advanced  that  day  scarcely  more  than 
seven  miles;  and  even  of  this  jouitiey  liule  was  performed 
on  foot.  Their  method  of  proceeding  in  general  was  rolling 
themselves  down,  together  with  their  arms  and  baggage,  by 
which  they  were  severely  hurt ;  in^nnuch,  that  even  their 
commmKler,  who  led  them  such  a  match,  did  not  deny,  but 
that  the  whole  army  mig^t  have  been  cut  off  by  a  small  party. 
During  the  night,  they  arrived  at  a  small  plain  ;  but,  as  it 
was  hemmed  in  on  every  side,  they  could  not  immediately 
discover  whether  it  was  a  place  of  danger  or  not. ,  However, 
as  they  had,  beyond  their  expecta^on;,  at  length  found  ^od 
footing,  they  judged  it  necessary  to  wait,  during  the  next 
day,  in  that  deep  valley  for  Popillius,  and  die  forces  left  be- 

174 

HISTORy  OF  ROME. 

[Y*R.  sm. 

bind  with  him ;  who^  tbcmgh  iht  ei^my  thtm  n^ 
turbance,  at:tfered  severely  from  thedifficul^s  of  ground, 
«^aliiiost,  imked,  as  if  they  ha^  been  hmmcd  by  en  enen^« 
These  having  joined  the  main  body,  the  whole  procee^d,  <m 
the  third  day,  through  a  pass  caUed  by  the  natives  CailU 
peuce*  The  road  before  them  was  not  more  easy  dian  what 
they  had  passed ;  but  experience  had  tau^t  them  to  smr« 
mount  the  di£cultie&,  while  thcyi  were  supported  by  mmrc 
comfoit£d>le  hopes,  as  they  saw  no  enemy  any  where,  and  as 
they  were  coming  nearer  to  the  sea.  On  tiie  fourth  day,  Aey 
marched  down  into  the  pl^m,  where  they  pitched  their 
camp  of  iirfamry  between  Heracleus  and  Libethros,  the 
greater  part  being  posted  on  hills,  the  rest  occupying  a  vaUey 
and  part  of  the  plain  where  the  cavalry  encamped. 
VI.  The  King,  it  is  said,  was  bathing,  when  he  was  in¬ 
formed  of  the  enemy’s  approach  ;  on  hearing  which,  be  started 
up  from  his  aeat,  in  a  fright,  crying  out,  that  he  was  con¬ 
quered  without  a  battle  ;  he  then  rudied  out,  and  afterwards 
continued  in  a  state  of  such  perturbation,  that  he  could 
neither  give  any  orders,  nor  form  any  plan,  but  what  his  fears 
dictated,  and  even  these  he  frequently  altered.  Of  his  two 
most  intimate  friends,  he  sent  Nicias  to  PcUa,  where  his  trea¬ 
sure  was  lodged,  with  orders  to  throw  all  that  he  found  there 
into  the  sea,  and  Andronicus  to  Thes^lonica,  to  bum  the 
dock-yards.  At  the  same  tijne  he  recalled  Hippias  and  As- 
clepiodotus  from  the  places  which  drey  had  been  appointed  to 
guard,  and  opened  every  pass  to  the  Romans.  He  went 
himself  to  Dius,  where,  collecting  all  the  golden  statues, 
that  they  might  not  fall  a  prey  to  the  enemy,  he  put  them  on 
board  she  fleet,  which  he  ordered  to  remove  with  all  speed  to 
Pydna.  This  behaviour  of  Perseus  was  the  cause,  that  the 
conduct  of  the  consul,  in  venturing  into  a  situation  out  of 
which  he  could  not  retreat  without  the  enemy’s  permission, 
although  it  might  have  been  deemed  rash  and  inconsiderate, 

weont  xLiv. 

B.C,  t69.] 

m 

yet  carried,  m  £act,  ^  s^earamre  of  jn^cknis  baldn^. 
For  there  were  ooly  two  pastes  dirongh  which  the  Rofeans 
o^ild  remove  ifrom  titeir  present  situation :  one  thrtai^ 
Tempo  mto  Thessaly,  the  other  by  Dius  into  Macedonia  ^ 
and  lK3fth  these  were  occupied  by  parties  of  the  King’s  troops. 
So  that  if  an  intrepid  cmnmander  had,  only  for  ten  days, 
maintained  his  ground,  without  yielding  to  the  first  appear¬ 
ance  of  the  Romans^  approach,  they  couki  neither  have  re¬ 
treated  by  Tcrope,  nor  have  had  any  rcmd  open  for  the  con¬ 
veyance  of  provisions  from  thence.  For  Tempe  is  a  pass  of 
suck  a  nature,  that,  supposing  no  obstructicm  given  by  an  ei^- 
ray,  it  is  difiicult  to  get  through  it ;  being  so  narrow,  £or  the 
lei^th  of  five  miles,  that  there  is  barely  room  for  a  loaded 
horse  to  pass :  the  precipices,  also,  on  both  sides  are  so  ab¬ 
rupt,  that  is  scarcely  possible  to  look  down  from  them,  with¬ 
out  a  degree  <d‘  dizziness  of  the  eyes  and  head  ;  while  the 
horror  of  the  $cene  is  increased  by  the  roaring  and  depth  dF 
the  river  Peneus  flowing  through  the  middle  of  the  glen. 
This  defile,  in  its  nature  so  dangerous,  had,  for  its  security, 
four  parties  of  the  King’s  troops,  stationed  in  diflerent 
places :  one  near  Gomms,  at  the  first  entramxe  ;  another  in  m 
impregnable  fortress  at  Condyios ;  a  diird  near  Lapathus,  in 
a  pbure  adkd  Charaz :  and  the  feurth  on  the  road  itself, 
about  midway,  where  the  valley  is  narrowest,  and  which 
might  have  b^n  easily  defiuided,  even  by  half  a  score  men. 
All  possiWlity  either  of  retreating,  or  of  receiving  provisions 
through  Tempe,  being  cut  off,  the  Romans,  in  order  to  return, 
must  have  crossed  over  the  same  mountains  fromrwhich  they 
came  down  j  but,  even  tlmugh  diey  might  have  been  able 
to  effect  ihh  by  passing  unobserved,  they  never  could  have 
accomplished  it  openly,  and  while  the  enemy  kept  possession 
of  the  heists ;  and,  besides,' the  difficultiefs  which  they  had 
already  experienced  would  have  precluded  every  hope  of  the 
kind.  In  this  situation,  to  which  want  of  cautiou  had  brought 

m 

HISTORY  OF  ROME .  [Y.R.  SBS. 
them,  they  hare  kft  dtaa  t^for^  thesr 
way  ii^  Macedonia,  througk  Amidst  of  the  ei^my  peeled 
at  Dias  ;  and,  if  the  gods  had  iK)t  deprived  the  King  pf  his 
understffisding,  this  would  have  been  extremely  dfSkailt«  For 
die  space  between  the  fobt  of  Mount  Olympus  and  the 
is  not  much  more  than  a  mile  in  breadth  ;  one  imLf  of  which 
is  taken  up  by  the  moi^  of  the  nv^  Raphiru8,^hich  foi»s 
a  large  mm-ass,  asid,  of  die  remainmg  {dmn/a  great  share  is 
occupied  by  the  town  and  the  temple  of  Jupiter  ;  the  rast, 
being  a  very  smaU  space,  might  have  be^  shi^  up  with  a 
trench  and  rampart  of  no  great  length ;  or,  so  g^eat  was  die 
plenty  of  stones  and  timber  on  the  spot,  that  a  Widl  ini^t  have 
been  drawn  acr^s,  and  towers  erected.  But  die  King’s 
judgment  was  so  entirely  blinded  by  die  sudden  fright,  that 
he  reflected  not  upon  any  one  of  these  circtm^tan^s  ;  on  the 
contrary  he  evacuated  sfll  bis  strong  posts,  leaving  d^m  open 
to  the  enemy,  and  fled  back  to  Pydna. 
VII.  The  consid,  perceiving  that  the  enes^’s  total  want 
of  courage  and  conduct  presented  him  a  most  favourable 
prospect,  not  only  of  safety,  but  of  success,  sent  back  a  mes¬ 
senger  to  jLarissa,  with  orders  to  Sptmiis  X^ucretius  to  seize 
on  the  deserted  forts  about  Tempe  j  tlien^  sending  forward 
Popillius,  to  examine  all  the  passes  rosrnd  .  Bins,  and  learning 
that  all  was  clear,  he  marched  in  two  days  to  that  town,  or¬ 
dering  the  camp  to  be  pitched  under  the  walls  of  the 
pie,  that  no  violation  might  be  offered  to  diat  saeml  place . 
He  went  himself  into  the  city;  and  seeing  it,  though  not 
large,  yet  yghly  ornamented  with  pi:^tc  buddings  and  abun¬ 
dance  of  statues,  and  remarkably  well  fortified,  he  cmdd 
scarcely  believe  that  a  place  of  .  such  importance  had  been 
abandoned,  without  a  design  to  cover  some  ^ratagem*  He 
waited,  therefore;  <mc  day,  to  examine  the  country  roemd  ; 
then  he  decamped  ;  and,  supposing  that  he  shooki  find  plenty 
of  corn  in  his  way,  advanced  to  a  river  ca&ed  the  Mitys. 

BOOK  XLIV. 

177 

B.C.  169.J 
On  the  day  following,  continuing  his  march,  he  received  the 
voluntary  surrender  of  the  city  of  Agassa  ;  whereupon,  in 
order  to  gain  the  good  opinion  of  the  rest  of  the  Macedo¬ 
nians,  he  contented  himself  with  receiving  hostages,  assuring 
the  inhabitants,  that  he  would  leave  them  their  city  without 
a  garrison,  and  that  they  should  live  free  from  taxes,  and  un¬ 
der  their  own  laws.  Proceeding  thence  one  day's  march, he 
encamped  at  the  river  Ascordus ;  but,  finding  that  the  far¬ 
ther  he  removed  from  Thessaly,  the  greater  was  the  scarcity 
of  every  thing,  he  returned  to  Dius  ;  which  clearly  demon¬ 
strated  how  much  he  must  have  suffered  if  he  had  been  shut 
out  from  an  intercourse  with  Thessaly,  since  he  found  it  un¬ 
safe  to  go  to  any  great  distance  from  it.  Perseus,  having 
drawn  all  his  forces  into  one  body,  and  assembled  all  his 
generals,  reprimanded  severely  the  commanders  of  the  gar¬ 
risons,  and  particularly  Hippias,  and  Asclepiodotus :  assert¬ 
ing,  that  they  had  betrayed  to  the  Romans  the  keys  of  Ma¬ 
cedonia  ;  although,  in  fact,  no  one  deserved  .more  justly  to 
be  blamed  for  it  than  himself.  The  consul,  on  seeing  the 
fleet  at  sea,  conceived  hopes  that  they  were  coining  with  pro¬ 
visions,  for  every  article  had  now  become  very  dear  and  very 
scarce  ;  but  when  the  ships  came  into  harbour,  he  was  in¬ 
formed,  that  the  transports  had  been  left  behind  at  Magnesia. 
He  was  then  under  great  perplexity  to  determine  what  mea¬ 
sures  to  take  ;  »o  hard  did  he  find  it  to  struggle  with  the  dif¬ 
ficulties  of  his  situation,  though  not  aggravated  by  any  effort 
of  the  enemy  ;  when,  very  seasonably,  letter  arrived  from 
Lucretius,  acquainting  him  that  he  was  in  possession  of  all 
the  forts  about  Tempe  and  Phila,  and  had  found  in  them 
great  plenty  of  corn  and  other  necessaries. 
VIIL  This  news  highly  rejoiced  the  consul  ;  and  he  im¬ 
mediately  removed  his  quarters  from  Dius  to  Phila,  in  order 
to  strengthen  that  post,  and,  at  the  same  time,  to  distribute 
torn  to  the  soldiers,  on  the  spot,  as  the  carriage  of  it  thence 
VOL.  A  f. — ^  A 

178 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  583. 

would  be  tedious.  That  march  gave  rise  to  opinions  not  at 
all  favourable  to  his  reputation :  some  said  that  he  retired 
from  the  enemy  through  fear  j  because,  if  he  had  staid,  he 
must  have  risked  a  battle  ;  others,  that,  not  considering  the 
daily  changes  produced  by  fortune  in  the  affairs  of  war,  he 
had  let  slip  out  of  his  hands,  advantages  which  threw  them¬ 
selves  in  his  way,  and  which,  in  all  probability,  he  could 
never  regain.  For,  by  giving  up  the  possession  of  Dius,  he 
at  once  roused  the  enemy  to  action  ;  who  at  length  saw  the 
necessity  of  endeavouring  to  recover  what  he  had  lost  before, 
through  his  own  fault.  On  hearing  of  the  consul’s  departure, 
therefore,  Perseus  marched  back  to  Dius,  repaired  whatever 
had  been  destroyed  by  the  Romans,  rebuilt  the  battlements 
which  they  had  thrown  down,  strengthened  the  fortifications 
all  around,  and  then  pitched  his  camp  within  five  miles  of  the 
eity,  on  the  hither  bank  of  Enipeus,  making  use  of  the  rivei\ 
the  passage  of  which  was  extremely  difficult,  as  a  defence  to 
his  post.  The  Enipeus,  which  rises  in  a. valley  of  Mount 
Olympus,  is  a  small  stream  during  the  summer,  but  is  raised 
by  the  winter  rains  to  a  violent  torrent,  when,  as  it  runs  over 
the  rocks,  it  forms  furious  eddies,  and,  by  sweeping  away  the 
earth  at  the  bottom  into  the  sea,  makes  very  deep  gulphs, 
while  the  sinking  of  the  middle  of  the  channel  renders  the 
banks  both  high  and  steep.  By  the  help  of  this  river,  Per¬ 
seus  thought  tha|^he  might  impede  the  march  of  the  enemy, 
and  perhaps  prevent  his  proceeding  any  farther  during  the 
remainder  of  the  summer.  In  the  mean  time,  the  consul  sent 
Popillius,  with  two  thousand  men,  against  Heracleus,  about 
five  miles  from  Phila,  midway  between  Dius  and  Tempe,  and 
which  stands  on  a  steep  rock  hanging  over  the  river. 
IX.  Popillius,  before  he  attacked  the  town,  sent  to  recom¬ 
mend  to  the  magistrates,  rather  to  try  the  honour  and  cle¬ 
mency  of  the  Romans  than  their  power  ;  but  this  advice  was 
totally  disregarded,  the  fires  in  the  King’s  camp  on  the 

BOOK  XLIV. 

B.C.  169.] 

ir9 

Enipeus  being  now  within  their  sight.  The  attack  was  then 
commenced  by  assaults,  and  with  works  and  machines,  as 
well  on  the  side  facing  the  sea  (for  the  ships  had  been  brought 
up  close  to  the  shore),  as  on  land.  A  party  of  Roman  youths 
actually  gained  possession  of  the  lowest  part  of  the  wall,  by 
turning  to  the  purposes  of  war  a  kind  of  sport  which  they 
were  accustomed  to  practise  in  the  circus.  In  those  times, 
when  the  present  extravagant  fashion  of  filling  the  area  with 
beasts  of  every  kind  w’as  yet  unknown,  it  was  customary  to 
contrive  various  kinds  of  amusements  ;  for  when  one  chariot 
race  and  one  set  of  tumblers  were  exhibited,  both  the  per¬ 
formances  scarcely  filled  up  the  space  of  an  hour.  Among 
other  diversions,  the  directors  of  the  games  used  to  intro¬ 
duce  about  sixty  young  men  in  arms,  sometimes  more,  whose 
performances  were  partly  a  representation  of  troops  going 
through  the  military  exercise,  and  partly  a  display  of  more 
accurate  skill  than  appeared  in  the  practice  of  soldiers,  and 
which  approached  nearer  to  the  mode  of  fighting  used  by 
gladiators.  After  performing  various  evolutions,  they  formed 
in  a  square  body,  with  their  shields  raised  over  their  heads, 
and  closed  together,  the  foremost  standing  upright,  the  next 
stooping  a  little,  the  third  and  fourth  lines  more  and  more, 
and  so  on,  until  the  hindmost  rested  on  their  knees,  thus 
composing  a  covering  in  the  shape  of  a  tortoise-shell,  and 
sloping,  like  the  roof  a  house.  Then  two  armed  men,  who 
stood  at  the  distance  of  about  fifty  feet,  ran  forward,  and  af¬ 
ter  some  menacing  flourishes  of  their  arms,  mounted  over 
the  closed  shields,  from  the  bottom  to  the  top  of  this  roof ; 
and,  treading  as  steadily  as  if  on  solid  ground,  sometimes 
paraded  along  the  extreme  edges  of  it,  as  if  repelling  an 
enemy,  and  sometimes  engaged  each  other  on  the  middle  of 
It.  On  the  present  occasion  they  raised  the  like  against  a 
part  of  the  wall,  and  the  soldiers,  standing  thereon,  mounted, 
until  they  were  as  high  as  the  defendants  on  the  battlements^. 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  58o. 

iso 
these  they  soon  beat  off,  and  the  soldiers  of  two  companies 
climbed  over  into  the  town.  The  only  difference  between 
this  and  the  playful  contrivance  was,  that  here  the  outside 
men  in  the  front  and  in  the  two  flanks,  did  not  raise  their 
shields  over  their  heads,  lest  they  should  expose  their  bodies, 
but  held  them  before  them,  as  in  battle  ;  so  that  the  weapons 
thrown  at  them,  from  the  walls,  as  they  advanced,  did  them 
no  injury,  while  those  that  were  poured  in  showers  on  the 
roof  slided  down  the  smooth  slope  to  the  bottom,  without 
doing  any  mischief.  When  Heracleus  was  taken,  the  consul 
removed  his  quarters  thither,  as  if  he  intended  to  besiege 
Dius  ;  andj  after  driving  the  King  thence,  to  advance  to  Pi- 
eria.  But  seeing  it  time  to  prepare  quarters  for  the  winter, 
he  ordered  roads  to  be  made  for  the  conveyance  of  provisions 
from  Thessaly,  and  proper  places  to  be  chosen  for  store¬ 
houses  ;  also  huts  to  be  built,  where  the  people  employed  in 
bringing  the  provisions  might  lodge. 
X.  Perseus,  having  at  length  recovered  his  spirits,  after 
the  panic  with  which  he  had  been  seized,  began  to  wish  that 
obedience  had  not  been  paid  to  the  orders  which  he  had  given 
in  his  fright,  to  throw  the  treasures  at  Pella  into  the  sea,  and 
to  burn  the  naval  arsenals  at  Thcssalonica.  Andronicus,  in¬ 
deed,  whom  he  had  sent  to  Thcssalonica,  deferred  the  exe¬ 
cution  of  his  order,  leaving  him  time  for  repentance,  which 
accordingly  took  place  ;  but  Nicias,  less  provident,  threw 
into  the  sea  what  treasure  he  found  at  Pella :  his  error,  how¬ 
ever,  turned  to  be  not  without  remedy,  inasmuch  as  the 
greatest  part  of  that  treasure  was  brought  up  again  by  divers. 
Nevertheless,  Perseus  was  so  vei*y  much  ashamed  of  his  ter¬ 
ror  on  the  occasion,  that  he  caused  the  divers  to  be  privately 
put  to  death,  together  with  Andronicus  and  Nicias,  that  there 
might  be  no  living  witness  of  such  dastardly  conduct.  In  the 
mean  time,  Caius  Marcius,  with  the  fleet,  sailed  from  Hera- 
deus  to  Thessalonica.  Landing  his  men,  he  made  wide  de- 

BOOK  XLIV. 

181 

169.] 
predations  on  the  country  ;  and,  when  the  troops  from  the 
city  came  out  against  him,  he  defeated  them  in  several  ac¬ 
tions,  and  drove  them  back  in  dismay  within  their  walls.  He 
even  alarmed  the  city  itself ;  but  the  townsmen,  erecting  en¬ 
gines  of  every  kind,  wounded,  with  stones  thrown  from  them, 
not  only  such  as  straggled  carelessly  near  the  walls,  but  even 
those  who  were  on  board  the  ships.  He  therefore  re-embark¬ 
ed  his  troops  ;  and,  giving  up  the  design  of  besieging  Thes- 
salonica,  proceeded  thence  to  ^nia,  fifteen  miles  distant,  si¬ 
tuated  opposite  to  Pydna,  in  a  fertile  country.  After  ravaging 
the  lands  in  that  quarter,  he  coasted  along  the  shore  until  he 
arrived  at  Antigonea.  Here  his  troops  landed,  and  for  some 
time  carried  their  depredations  through  all  the  country  round, 
putting  a  great  deal  of  booty  on  board  the  ships  ;  but  after¬ 
wards,  a  party  of  Macedonians,  consisting  of  foot  and  horse 
intermixed,  fell  upon  them  as  they  straggled,  put  them  to  a 
precipitate  flight,  and,  pursuing  them  to  the  shore,  killed  near 
•five  hundred,  and  took  as  many  prisoners.  Extreme  neces¬ 
sity,  on  finding  themselves  hindered  from  regaining  their  ves¬ 
sels,  roused  the  cborage  of  the  Roman  soldiers,  filling  them 
with  despair  of  any  other  means  of  safety  than  by  resistance, 
and  with  indignation  at  their  disgrace.  They  renewed  the 
fight  on  the  shore,  assisted  by  the  seamen  ;  and  here  about 
two  hundred  Macedonians  were  killed,  and  a  like  number 
taken.  From  Antigonea  the  fleet  sailed  on  to  the  district  ol 
Pallene,  where  a  descent  was  made  for  the  purpose  of  plun¬ 
dering.  This  district  belonged  to  the  territory'  of  Cassandrea, 
and  was  by  far  the  most  plentiful  of  any  at  which  they  had 
yet  touched  on  the  coast.  There  they  were  met  by  King 
Eumenes,  who  came  from  Elea  with  twenty  decked  ships  ; 
and  King  Prusias  also  sent  five  of  the  like  kind  thither. 
XL  Such  a  large  accession  of  strength  encouraged  the 
praetor  to  lay  siege  to  Cassandrea.  This  city  was  built  by 
King  Cassander,  in  the  pass  which  connects  the  territory  of 

182 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  583, 
Pallene  with  the  rest  of  Macedonia.  It  is  washed  on  one  side 
by  the  Toronsean,  on  another  by  the  Macedonian  sea  ;  for  it 
stands  on  a  neck  of  land  which  stretches  into  the  ocean,  and 
rises  in  the  part  opposite  Magnesia,  to  a  height  equal  to  that 
of  Mount  Athos,  forming  two  unequal  promontories,  the 
larger  called  Posideum,  the  smaller  Canastraeum.  The  be¬ 
siegers  formed  their  attacks  on  two  dilferent  sides  ;  the  Ro¬ 
man  general,  at  a  place  called  Clitse,  drew  a  trench  from  the 
Macedonian  to  the  Toronaean  sea,  to  which  he  added  pointed 
palisades,  to  cut  off  the  communication  ;  while,  on  the  other 
side,  next  to  the  Euripus,  Eumenes  carried  on  his  attack. 
The  Romans  underwent  a  va«t  deal  of  labour  in  filling  up  a 
trench,  which  Perseus  had  dug  in  the  way  ;  and,  on  the  prae¬ 
tor  inquiring  where  the  -earth  that  had  been  taken  out  of  it 
was  thrown,  as  he  saw  no  heaps  of  it  any  where,  Some  arches 
were  shown  him  that  were  closed  up  with  it,  not  of  equal 
thickness  with  the  old  wall,  but  with  a  single  row  of  brick. 
On  this,  he  formed  the  design  of  opening  a  way  into  the  city, 
by  breaking  through  that  wall ;  and  he  hoped  to  be  able  to 
effect  this  before  it  should  be  discovered^,  if,  by  assaulting 
another  part  by  scalade,  and  raising  a  tumult  there,  he  could 
divert  the  attention  of  the  besieged  to  the  defence  of  the  place 
attacked.  There  were  in  garrison  at  Cassandrea,  besides  the 
younger  inhabitants,  who  formed  no  contemptible  body,  eight 
hundred  Agrians  and  two  thousand  Illyrians  from  Peneslia, 
sent  thither  by  Pleuratus,  and  the  men  of  both  countries  were 
remarkably  warlike.  While  these  were  busy  in  defending 
the  walls,  and  the  Romans  using  their  utmost  efforts  to  scale 
them,  in  an  instant  of  time  the  arches  were  broken  down,  and 
the  city  laid  open  ;  and  if  those  who  effected  this  had  been 
armed,  they  must  have  immediately  become  masters  of  the 
town.  When  the  soldiers  were  told  that  this  work  was  ac¬ 
complished,  they  were  so  elated  with  joy,  that  they  raised  a 

B,C.  169.] 

BOOK  XLIV. 

18$ 

sudden  shout,  expecting  to  force  their  way  in  at  several  dif¬ 
ferent  places. 
XII.  At  first  the  enemy  wondered  what  this  sudden  shout 
could  mean  ;  but  when  Pytho  and  Philip,  the  commanders 
of  the  garrison,  were  told  that  the  city  was  laid  open,  they 
concluded  that  every  advantage  resulting  from  that  event 
would  be  in  favour  of  whichever  party  should  make  the  first 
charge  ;  and^  therefore,  they  sallied  out,  with  a  strong  body 
of  Agrians  and  Illyrians,  who,  while  the  Romans  were  com- 
ing  together  from  various  parts,  and  endeavouring  to  form 
their  battalions  to  march  into  the  city,  attacked  them  thus 
disordered  and  irregular  :  and,  quickly  routing  them,  drove 
them  to  the  trench,  into  which  they  were  tumbled,  in  heaps, 
one  over  another.  About  six  hundred  were  killed  in  this 
action,  and  almost  every  one  that  was  found  between  the  wall 
and  the  trench  was  wounded.  The  blow  meditated  by  the 
praetor,  having  thus  recoiled  on  himself,  damped  his  spirit 
for  any  other  attempts  ;  and,  as  Eumenes  made  little  or  no 
progress,  though  he  carried  on  his  operations  both  by  land 
and  sea,  they  concurred  in  a  resolution  to  strengthen  their 
guards,  in  order  to  prevent  the  introduction  of  any  reinforce¬ 
ment  from  Macedonia  ;  and,  since  they  had  not  succeeded  by 
assault,  to  carry  on  the  siege  by  regular  approaches.  While 
they  were  adjusting  matters,  according  to  this  plan,  ten  barks, 
belonging  to  Perseus,  sent  from  Thessalonica,  with  a  chosen 
body  of  Gallic  auxiliaries,  observing  the  enemy’s  ships  lying 
at  anchor  in  the  road,  took  advantage  of  the  darkness  of  the 
night,  and,  keeping  as  close  to  the  shore  as  possible,  in  a  single 
line,  effected  their  passage  to  the  city.  Intelligence  of  this 
new  addition  of  force  obliged  both  the  Romans  and  Eumenes 
to  raise  the  siege.  They  then  sailed  round  the  promontory, 
and  brought  the  fleet  into  the  harbour  of  Toron.  This  town, 
also,  they  intended  to  besiege  ;  but,  perceiving  that  it  had  a 
strong  garrison  to  defend  it,  they  dropped  the  design,  and 

184 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  58J. 
proceeded  to  Demetrias.  When  they  approached  this  place, 
they  saw  the  fortifications  fully  manned,  they  therefore  sailed 
on,  and  brought  the  fleet  into  harbour  at  loicos,  intending, 
after  ravaging  the  country  there,  to  proceed  to  the  siege  of 
Demetrias. 
XIIL  In  the  meantime,  the  consul,  not  to  lie  inactive, sent 
Marcus  Popiilius,  with  five  thousand  men,  to  reduce  the  city 
of  Meliboea.  This  city  stands  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Ossa, 
where  it  stretches  out  into  Thessaly,  and  is  very  advantage¬ 
ously  situated  for  commanding  Demetrias.  The  towns-peo- 
ple  were  terrified  by  the  approach  of  the  enemy  ;  but,  soon 
recovering  from  the  fright  occasioned  by  the  unexpectedness 
of  the  event,  they  ran  hastily  in  arms  to  the  gates  and  walls, 
to  those  parts  where  they  apprehended  an  attack  ;  so  as  to 
cut  off  from  the  enemy  all  hope  of  taking  the  place  by  an 
immediate  assault.  The  Romans,  therefore,  made  prepara¬ 
tions  for  a  siege,  and  began  their  works  for  making  the  ap¬ 
proaches.  When  Perseus  was  informed  of  this,  and  that  the 
fleet  lay  at  lolcos,  intending  to  proceed  thence  to  attack  De- 
metrias,  he  sent  Euphranor,  one  of  his  generals,  with  two 
thousand  chosen  men,  to  Meliboea.  His  orders  were,  that,  if 
he  could  compel  the  Romans  to  retire  from  before  the  place, 
he  should  then  march  secretly  into  Demetrias,  before 
enemy^  should  bring  up  their  troops  from  lolcos.  As  soon 
as  the  force  employed  against  Meliboea  beheld  him  on  the 
high  grounds,  they  abandoned  their  works  in  great  conster¬ 
nation,  and  set  them  on  fire.  Thus  was  Meliboea  relieved, 
and  Euphranor  marched  instantly  to  Demetrias.  His  arrival 
gave  the  townsmen  full  confidence  that  they  should  be  able, 
not  only  to  defend  their  walls,  but  to  protect  their  lands,  also, 
from  depredations  ;  and  they  made  several  irruptions  on  the 
straggling  parties  of  the  plunderers,  not  without  success. 
However,  the  praetor  and  the  King  rode  round  the  walls  to 
view  the  situation  of  the  city,  and  try  whether  they  might 

BOOK  XLIV. 

185 

BX.  169.] 
attempt  it  on  any  side,  either  by  storm  or  works.  It  was 
reported,  that  some  overtures  of  friendship  between  Eumenes 
and  Perseus  were  here  agitated,  through  Cydas,  a  Cretan, 
and  Antimachus,  governor  of  Demetrias.  It  is  certain,  that 
the  armies  retired  from  Demetrias.  Eumenes  sailed  to  the 
consul ;  and,  after  congratulating  him  on  his  success  in  pene¬ 
trating  into  Macedonia,  went  home  to  Pergamus.  Marcus 
Figulus,  the  praetor,  sent  part  of  his  fleet  to  winter  at  Scia- 
thus,  and  with  the  remainder  repaired  to  Orenm  in  Euboea  ; 
judging  that  the  most  convenient  place  for  sending  supplies 
to  the  armies  in  Macedonia  and  Thessaly.  There  are  very 
different  accounts  given  respecting  King  Eumenes  :  if  Va¬ 
lerius  Antias  is  to  be  believed,  he  neither  gave  any  assistance 
with  his  fleet  to  the  praetor,  though  often  solicited  by  letters ; 
nor  did  he  part  with  the  consul  in  good  humour,  being  of¬ 
fended  at  not  being  permitted  to  lie  in  the  same  camp  with 
him  ;  he  says,  too,  that  he  could  not  be  prevailed  on  even  to 
leave  the  Gallic  horsemen  that  he  had  brought  with  him. 
But  his  brother  Attains  remained  with  the  consul,  and  in 
the  constant  tenor  of  his  conduct  evinced  a  sincere  attach¬ 
ment  and  an  extraordinar}^  degree  of  zeal  and  activity  in  the 
service. 
XIV.  While  the  war  was  proceeding  thus  in  Macedonia, 
ambassadors  came  to  Rome,  from  a  chieftain  of  the  Gauls 
beyond  the  Alps,  whose  name  is  said  to  have  been  Balanos, 
but  of  what  tribe  is  not  mentioned.  They  brought  an  offer 
of  assistance  towards  the  war  in  Macedonia.  The  senate 
i^turned  him  thanks,  and  sent  him  presents, — a  golden  chain 
of  two  pounds  weight,  golden  bowls  to  the  amount  of  four 
pounds,  a  horse  completely  caparisoned,  and  a  suit  of  horse- 
man^s  armour.  Afterwards,  the  Gauls,  ambassadors  from 
Pamphylia,  brought  into  the  senate-house  a  golden  crown,  of 
the  value  of  twenty  thousand  Philippics,  and  requested  per¬ 
mission  to  deposit  it,  as  an  offering,  in  the  shrine  of  Jupiter 
VOL.  VI. — 2  B 

186 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  583. 

supremely  good  and  great,  and  to  offer  sacrifice  in  the  Capi¬ 
tol,  which  was  granted.  The  said  ambassadors  having  ex¬ 
pressed  a  wish  to  renew  the  treaty  of  friendship,  a  gracious 
answer  was  given,  and  a  present  was  made  to  each  of  two 
thousand  asses^.  Then  audience  was  given  to  the  ambassa¬ 
dors  of  King  Prusias  ;  and,  a  little  after,  to  those  of  the 
Rhodians.  The  subject  of  both  these  embassies  was  the 
same,  but  their  manner  of  treating  it  was  widely  different. 
The  purpose  of  both  was,  to  effect  a  peace  with  King  Per¬ 
seus.  The  address  of  Prusias  consisted  of  intreaties  rather 
than  demands  ;  for  he  declared,  that  ‘‘  he  had  hitherto  sup¬ 
ported  the  cause  of  the  Romans,  and  would  continue  to  sup¬ 
port  it.  But,  on  Perseus  sending  ambassadors  to  him,  on 
the  subject  of  putting  an  end  to  the  war  with  Rome,  he  had 
promised  them  to  become  a  mediator  with  the  senate and 
he  requested  that,  “  if  they  could  prevail  on  themselves  to 
lay  aside  their  resentment,  they  would  a^low  him  «ome  share 
of  merit  in  the  re-establishment  of  peace.”  Such  was  the 
discourse  of  the  King’s  ambassadors.  The  Rhodians,  after 
ostentatiously  recounting  their  many  services  to  the  Roman 
people,  and  arrogating  to  themselves  rather  the  greater  share 
of  its  successes,  particularly  in  the  case  of  King  Antiochus, 
proceeded  in  this  manner  ;  that,  “  at  a  time  when  peace  sub¬ 
sisted  between  the  Macedonians  and  Romans,  they  likewise 
commenced  a  friendship  with  King  Perseus,  which  they  had, 
since,  unwillingly  broken,  without  having  any  reason  to  com¬ 
plain  of  him,  but  merely  because  it  was  the  desire  of  the  Ro¬ 
mans  to  draw  them  into  a  confederacy  in  the  war.  For  three 
years  past,  they  felt  many  inconveniencies  from  the  war.  In 
consequence  of  the  interruption  of  commerce,  and  the  loss 
of  their  port  duties  and  provisions,  their  island  was  distress-- 
ed  by  a  general  scarcity.  When  their  countrymen  could  no 

*  61.  9s.  2d. 

BOOK  XLIV, 

187 

B.C.  169.] 
longer  suffer  this,  they  had  sent  other  ambassadors  into  Ma¬ 
cedonia,  to  Perseus,  to  warn  him  that  it  was  the  wish  of  the 
Khodians  that  he  should  conclude  a  peace  with  the  Romans, 
and  had  sent  them  to  Rome  with  the  same  message.  The 
Khodians  would  afterwards  consider  what  measures  they 
should  judge  proper  to  be  taken  against  either  party  that 
should  obstruct  a  pacification.’’  I  am  convinced  that  no  per¬ 
son,  even  at  the  present  time,  can  hear  or  read  such  expres¬ 
sions  without  indignation  ;  we  may,  then,  easily  judge  what 
emotions  they  produced  in  the  minds  of  the  senators. 
XV.  According  to  the  account  of  Claudius,  no  answer  was 
given  ;  and  the  senate  only  directed  a  decree  to  be  read,  by 
which  the  Roman  people  ordered  that  the  Carians  and  Ly- 
cians  should  enjoy  independence  ;  and  that  a  letter  should  be 
sent  immediately  to  each  of  those  nations,  acquainting  them 
therewith.  On  hearing  which,  the  principal  ambassador, 
whose  arrogant  demeanour,  just  before,  seemed  to  hold  the 
senate  in  contempt,  sunk  into  abject  despondency.  Other 
writers  say,  that  an  answer  was  given  to  this  effect :  ‘‘  That, 
at  the  commencement  of  the  present  war,  the  Roman  people 
had  learned,  from  unquestionable  authority,  that  the  Rho¬ 
dians,  in  concert  with  King  Perseus,  had  formed  secret 
machinations  against  their  commonwealth  ;  and  that,  if  that 
matter  had  been  doubtful  hitherto,  the  words  of  their  ambas¬ 
sadors,  just  now,  had  reduced  it  to  a  certainty ;  as,  in  gene¬ 
ral,  treachery,  though  at  first  sufficiently  cautious,  yet,  in  the 
end,  betrays  itself.  The  Rhodians,  by  their  messengers,  had 
acted  the  part  of  arbiters  of  war  and  peace  throughout  the 
world  :  at  their  nod  the  Romans  must  take  up  arms  and  lay 
them  down  ;  and  must  soon  appeal,  not  to  the  gods,  but  to 
the  Rhodians,  for  their  sanction  of  treaties.  And  was  this 
indeed  the  case  ;  that,  unless  their  orders  were  obeyed,  and 
the  armies  withdrawn  from  Macedonia,  they  would  consider 
what  measures  they  should  take  ?  What  the  Rhodians  might 

188 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  Y.R.  58S. 

determine,  they  themselves  knew  best ;  but  the  Roman  peo¬ 
ple,  as  soon  as  the  conquest  of  Perseus  should  be  completed, 
gn  event  which  they  hoped  was  at  no  great  distance,  would 
most  certainly  consider  how  to  make  due  retribution  to  each 
state,  according  to  its  deserts  in  the  course  of  the  war.”  Ne¬ 
vertheless  the  usual  presents  of  two  thousand  asses  each  were 
sent  to  the  ambassadors,  which  they  did  not  accept. 
XVI.  Then  were  read  letters  from  the  consul  Quintus 
Marcius,  informing  the  senate,  that  ‘‘  he  had  passed  the 
mountains,  and  penetrated  into  Macedonia  ;  that  the  praetor 
had  collected  there,  and  procured  from  other  places,  stores  of 
provisions  for  the  approaching  winter ;  and  that  he  had 
bought  from  the  Epirots  twenty  thousand  measures  of  wheat, 
ten  thousand  of  barley,  the  price  of  which  he  desired  might 
be  paid  to  their  ambassadors  in  Rome  :  that  clothing  for  the 
troops  must  be  sent  from  Rome  ;  and  that  he  wanted  about 
two  hundred  horses,  which  he  wished  to  be  Numidianj 
where  he  waS,  he  could  procure  none.”  The  senate  decreed, 
that  every  thing  should  be  done  as  desired  in  the  consul’s 
letter.  The  praetor,  Caius  Sulpicius,  agreed  with  contractors 
for  conveying  into  Macedonia  six  thousand  gowns,  thirty 
thousand  tunics,  and  the  horses,  all  which  were  to  be  approved 
by  the  consul ;  and  he  paid  the  Epirot  ambassadors  the  price 
of  the  corn.  He  then  introduced  to  the  senate,  Onesimus^ 
son  of  Pytho,  a  Macedonian  of  distinction.  He  had  always 
advised  the  King  to  peaceable  measures,  and  recommended 
to  him,  that,  as  his  father  Philip  had,  to  the  last  day  of  his 
life,  made  it  an  established  rule  to  read  over,  twice  every  day, 
the  treaty  concluded  with  the  Romans,  so  he  should,  if  not 
daily,  yet  frequently,  observe  the  same  practice.  Finding 
that  he  could  not  dissuade  him  from  war,  he  at  first  absented 
himself  on  various  pretences,  that  he  might  not  be  present  at 
proceedings  which  he  could  not  approve.  But  at  last,  hav¬ 
ing  discovered  that  suspicions  were  harboured  against  him. 

B.C, 169. 

BOOK  XLIV. 

169 

and  hints  thrown  out  of  charging  him  with  treason,  he  went 
over  to  the  Romans,  and  was  of  great  service  to  the  consul. 
When  he  was  introduced  into  the  seriate-house,  he  mentioned 
these  circumstances*,  and  the  senate  thereupon  decreed  that 
he  should  be  enrolled  in  the  number  of  their  allies  ;  that  am¬ 
ple  accommodations  should  be  provided  for  him  ;  also,  a 
grant  of  two  hundred  acres  of  land,  in  that  part  of  the  Ta- 
rentine  territory  which  was  the  public  property  of  the  Roman 
people  ;  with  a  house  in  Tarentum.  The  charge  of  executing 
all  which  was  committed  to  Cains  Decimius,  the  praetor.  On 
the  ides  of  December,  the  censors  performed  the  general  pur¬ 
vey  with  more  severity  than  usual.  A  great  many  were  de¬ 
prived  of  their  horses,  among  whom  was  Publius  Rutilius, 
who,  when  tribune  of  the  people,  had  carried  on  a  violent 
prosecution  against  them ;  he  was,  besides,  degraded  from 
his  tribe,  and  disfranchised.  In  pursuance  of  a  decree  of  the 
senate,  one  half  of  the  taxes  of  that  year  was  paid  by  the 
quaestors  Irilo  the  hands  of  the  censors,  to  defray  the  expen¬ 
ses  of  public  works,  Tiberius  Sempronius,  out  of  the  money 
assigned  to  him,  purchased  for  the  public,  the  house  of  Pub¬ 
lius  Africanus,  behind  the  old  house,  near  the  statue  of  Ver- 
tumnus,  with  the  butchers’  stalls  and  shops  adjoining  ;  where 
he  built  the  public  court-house,  afterwards  called  the  Scnn- 
pronian. 
XVII,  The  end  of  the  year  now  approached,  and  people V 
thoughts  were  so  deeply  engaged  by  the  war  in  Macedonia, 
that  the  general  topic  of  their  conversation  was,  what  con¬ 
suls  they  should  choose,  to  bring  that  war,  at  length,  to  a  con¬ 
clusion.  The  senate,  therefore,  passed  an  order,  that  Cncius 
Servilius  should  come  home,  to  hold  the  elections.  Sulpicius^ 
the  praetor,  sent  the  order  of  the  senate  to  the  consul ;  and, 
in  a  few  days  after,  read  his  answer  in  public,  wherein  he 
promised  to  be  in  the  city  before  the  *  *  day  of  *  * 
The  consul  came  in  due  time,  and  the  election  was  finished 

190 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

Y.R. 583. 

on  the  da)'  appointed.  The  consuls  chosen  were,  Lucius 
iEmilius  Paullus,  a  second  time,  fourteen  years  after  his  first 
consulship,  and  Caius  Licinius  Crassus.  Next  day,  the  fol¬ 
lowing  were  appointed  prsetors ;  Cncius  Bsebius  Tamphilus, 
Lucius  Anicius  Gallus,  Cneius  Octavius,  Publius  Fonteius 
Balbus,  Marcus  iEbutius  Elva,  and  Caius  Papirius  Carbo. 
The  senate’s  anxiety  about  the  Macedonian  war  stimulated 
them  to  more  than  ordinary  expedition  in  all  their  proceed¬ 
ings  ;  they  therefore  ordered,  that  the  magistrates  elect 
should  immediately  cast  lots  for  their  provinces,  that  it  might 
be  known  which  consul  was  to  have  the  command  in  Mace¬ 
donia,  and  which  praetor  that  of  the  fleet  ;  in  order  that  they 
might,  without  loss  of  time,  consider  and  prepare  whatever 
was  requisite  for  the  service,  and  consult  the  senate  on  any 
point  where  their  direction  was  necessary.  They  voted,  that, 
‘‘  on  the  magistrates  coming  into  office,  the  Latine  festival 
should  be  celebrated  as  early  as  the  rules  of  religion  permit¬ 
ted  ;  and  that  the  consul,  who  was  to  go  into  'Macedonia, 
should  not  be  detained  on  account  of  it.”  When  these  orders 
were  passed,  Italy  and  Macedonia  were  named  as  the  pro¬ 
vinces  for  the  consuls  ;  and  for  the  prsetors,  besides  the  two 
jurisdictions  in  the  city,  the  fleet,  Spain,  Sicily,  and  Sardinia. 
As  to  the  consuls,  Macedonia  fell  to  iEmilius,  Italy  to  Li¬ 
cinius.  Of  the  praetors,  Cneius  Biebius  got  the  city  juris¬ 
diction  ;  Lucius  Anicius  the  foreign,  under  a  rule  to  go 
wherever  the  senate  should  direct;  Cneius  Octavius,  the 
fleet;  Publius  Fonteius,  Spain;  Marcus  A!,butius,  Sicily; 
and  Caius  Papirius,  Sardinia. 
XVIII.  It  immediately  became  evident  to  all,  that  the 
conduct  of  Lucius  iEmilius,  in  the  prosecution  of  the  war, 
would  not  be  deficient  in  vigour  ;  for,  besides  the  well-known 
energy  of  his  character,  his  thoughts  were  turned,  with  un¬ 
remitting  attention, solely  on  the  business  relative  to  that  war. 
In  the  first  place,  he  requested  the  senate  to  send  commis.- 

B.C.  169. 

BOOK  XLIV, 

191 

sioners  into  Macedonia,  to  review  the  armies  and  the  fleet, 
and  to  bring  authentic  information  respecting  the  wants  both 
of  the  land  and  sea  forces ;  to  make  what  discoveries  they 
could  respecting  the  state  of  the  King’s  forces  5  and  to  learn 
how  much  of  the  country  was  in  our  power,  how  much  in 
that  of  the  enemy ;  whether  the  Romans  were  still  encamped 
among  the  woods  and  mountains,  or  had  got  clear  of  all  the 
difficult  passes,  and  were  come  down  into  the  plains  ;  who 
were  faithful  allies  to  us,  who  were  doubtful,  and  ready  to 
join  either  party  that  fortune  favoured,  and  who  were  avowed 
enemies  ;  what  store  of  provisions  was  prepared,  and  whence 
new  supplies  might  be  brought  by  land  carriage,  whence  by 
the  fleet ;  and  what  progress  had  been  made  during  the  last 
campaign,  either  on  land  or  sea.  For  he  thought,  that,  by 
gaining  a  thorough  knowledge  of  all  these  particulars,  the 
plans  for  future  proceedings  might  be  constructed  on  sure 
grounds.  The  senate  directed  the  consul  Cneius  Servilius  to 
send  as  commissioners,  into  Macedonia,  such  persons  as 
should  be  approved  of  by  Lucius  iEmilius.  Cneius  Domi- 
tius  Ahenobarbus,  Aulus  Licinius  Nerva,  and  Lucius  Bae- 
bius,  were  commissioned  accordingly,  and  they  began  their 
journey  two  days  after.  Towards  the  close  of  this  year  it 
was  reported  that  two  showers  of  stones  had  fallen,  one  in 
the  territory  of  Rome,  the  other  in  that  of  Veil ;  and  the 
nine  days  solemnity  was  performed.  Of  the  priests,  died 
this  year,  Publius  Quintilius  Varus,  flamen  of  Mars,  and 
Marcus  Claudius  Marcellus,  decemvir,  in  whose  room  was 
substituted  Cneius  Octavius.  It  has  been  remarked,  as  an 
instance  of  the  increasing  magnificence  of  the  times,  that,  in 
the  Circensian  games,  exhibited  by  Publius  Cornelius  Sci- 
pio  Nasica  and  Publius  Lentulus,  curule  aediles,  sixty«three 
panthers,  with  forty  bears  and  elephants,  made  a  part  of  the 
show. 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  584. 

192 

XIX.  At  the  beginning  of  the  following  year,  Lucius 
^  iEmilius  Paullus  and  Caius  Licinius,  consuls, 
B  €*168  commenced  their  administration  on  the 
ides  of  March,  the  senators  were  impatient  to 
hear  what  propositions  were  to  be  laid  before  them,  particu¬ 
larly  with  respect  to  Macedonia,  by  the  consul  to  whose  lot 
that  province  had  fallen  ;  but  Paullus  said,  that  he  had  a‘s 
yet  nothing  to  propose  to  them,  the  commissioners  not  being 
returned  :  that  “  they  were  then  at  Brundusium,  after  having 
been  twice  driven  back  to  Dyrrachium  in  attempting  the  pas¬ 
sage  :  that  he  intended,  shortly,  to  propose  the  business  of 
his  province  to  their  consideration,  when  he  should  have  ob¬ 
tained  the  information  which  was  previously  necessary,  and 
which  he  expected  within  very  few  days.’’  He  added,  that, 
in  order  that  nothing  should  delay  his  setting  out,  the  day 
before  the  calends  of  April  had  been  fixed  for  the  Latine  fes¬ 
tival  ;  after  finishing  which  solemnity,  he  and  Cneius  Octa¬ 
vius  would  begin  their  journey  as  soon  as  the  senate  should 
direct:  that,  in  his  absence,  his  colleague  Caius  Licinius 
would  take  care  that  every  thing  necessary  to  b^  provided, 
or  sent  to  the  army,  should  be  provided  and  sent ;  and  that, 
in  the  mean  time,  audience  might  be  given  to  the  embassies 
of  foreign  nations.”  The  usual  sacrifice  being  duly  offered, 
the  first  introduced  were  ambassadors  from  Alexandria,  sent 
by  King  Ptolemy  and  Queen  Cleopatra.  They  came  into 
the  senate-house  dressed  in  mourning,  with  their  hair  and 
beard  neglected,  holding  in  their  hand^branches  of  olive  ; 
there  they  prostrated  themselves,  and  their  discourse  was 
even  more  piteous  than  their  dress.  Antiochus,  King  of 
Syria,  who  had  formerly  been  a  hostage  at  Rome,  had  lately, 
under  the  honourable  pretext  of  restoring  the  elder  Ptolemy 
to  the  throne,  made  war  on  his  younger  brother,  then  in  pos¬ 
session  of  Alexandria  j  and  having  gained  the  victory,  in  a 
sea-fight  off  Pelusium,  and  thrown  a  temporary  bridge  across 

BOOK  XLIV. 

193 

BX.  168.] 
the  Nile,  he  led  over  his  army,  and  laid  siege  to  Alexandria 
itself,  to  the  great  terror  of  the  inhabitants  ;  so  that  he  seem* 
ed  almost  cm  the  point  of  taking  possession  of  that  very 
opulent  kingdom.  The  ambassadors,  after  complaining  of 
these  proceedings,  besought  the  senate  to  succour  those 
princes,  the  faithful  friends  of  their  empire.  They  said,  that 
such  had  been  the  kindness  of  the  Roman  people  to  Anti¬ 
och  us,  such  its  influence  over  all  kings  and  nations,  that,  if 
they  only  sent  ambassadors,  to  give  him  notice  that  the  senate 
were  displeased  at  war  being  made  with  princes  in  alliance 
with  them,  he  would  instantly  retire  from  the  walls  of  Alex¬ 
andria,  and  lead  his  army  home  into  Syria.  But,  if  this  were 
not  done,  Ptolemy  and  Cleopatra  would  soon  come  to  Rome 
in  the  character  of  dethroned  exiles,  which  must  excite  some 
degree  of  shame  in  the  Roman  people,  for  having  neglected 
to  succour  them  in  their  extreme  distress.”  The  senate  were 
so  much  affected  by  the  supplications  of  the  Alexandrians, 
that  they  immediately  sent  Caius  Popillius  Laenas,  Caius 
Decimius,  and  Caius  Hostilius,  ambassadors,  to  put  an  end 
to  the  dispute  between  those  kings.  Their  instructions  were, 
to  go  first  to  Antiochus,  then  to  Ptolemy ;  and  to  acquaint 
them,  that,  unless  hostilities  were  stopped*  whichever  party 
should  give  cause  to  their  continuance,  must  expect  to  be 
considered  by  the  senate  as  neither  a  friend  nor  an  ally. 
XX.  These  ambassadors  set  out,  within  three  days,  in 
company  with  those  of  Alexandria  ;  and,  on  the  last  day  of 
the  feast  of  Minerva,  the  commissioners  arrived  from  Ma¬ 
cedonia.  Their  coming  had  been  so  impatiently  wished  for, 
that,  if  it  had  not  been  very  late  in  the  day,  the  consuls  would 
have  assembled  the  senate  immediately.  Next  day  the  senate 
met,  and  received  the  report  of  the  commissioners.  They  stat¬ 
ed,  that  ‘‘  the  army  had  been  led  through  pathless  and  difficult 
wilds  into  Macedonia,  with  more  risk  than  advantage  :  that 
Pieria,  to  which  its  march  had  hern  directed,  was  then  pos- 
VOL,  VI. — 2  C 

194 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  584 

sessed  by  the  King  ;  and  the  two  camps  so  close  to  each 
other,  as  to  be  separated  only  by  the  river  Enipeus  :  that  the 
King  was  not  disposed  to  fight,  nor  was  our  general  strong 
enough  to  compel  him  ;  and,  besides,  that  the  severity  of  the 
winter  had  interrupted  all  military  operations  :  that  the  sol¬ 
diers  were  maintained  in  idleness,  and  had  not  corn  sufficient 
for  more  than  six  days  :  that  the  force  of  the  Macedonians 
was  said  to  mount  to  thirty  thousand  effective  men  ;  that  if 
Appius  Claudius  had  a  sufficient  force  at  Lychnidus,*  the 
King  might  be  perplexed  by  his  standing  between  two 
enemies ;  but  that,  as  the  case  stood,  both  Appius,  and  the 
troops  under  his  command,  were  in  the  utmost  danger,  un¬ 
less  either  a  regular  army  were  speedily  sent  thither,  or  they 
were  removed  thence.  From  the  camp,”  they  stated  that 
they  had  gone  to  the  fleet ;  where  they  learned,  that  many 
of  the  seamen  had  perished  by  sickness  ;  that  others,  par¬ 
ticularly  such  as  came  from  Sicily,  had  gone  off  to  their  own 
homes  ;  and  that  the  ships  were  in  want  of  men,  while  those 
who  were  on  board  had  neither  pay  nor  clothing ;  that 
Eumenes  and  his  fleet,  as  if  driven  thither  accidentally,  had 
both  come  and  gone  away  without  any  apparent  reason  ;  nor 
did  the  intentions  of  that  King  seem  to  be  thoroughly  set¬ 
tled.”  While  their  report  stated  every  particular  in  the  con¬ 
duct  of  Eumenes  as  dubious,  it  represented  Attalus  as  steady 
and  faithful  in  the  highest  degree. 
XXI.  After  the  commissioners  were  heard,  Lucius  iEmi- 
iius  said,  that  he  then  proposed  for  consideration  the  busi¬ 
ness  of  the  war  ;  and  the  senate  decreed,  that  tribunes  for 
eight  legions  should  be  appointed,  half  by  the  consuls,  and 
half  by  the  people  ;  but  that  none  should  be  named  for  that 
year  who  had  not  held  some  office  of  magistracy  ;  that,  out 
of  all  the  military  tribunes,  Lucius  iEmilius  should  select 
such  as  he  chose  for  the  two  legions  that  were  to  serve  in 
Macedonia  ;  and  that,  as  soon  as  the  Latine  festival  should 

BOOK  XLIV. 

B.C.  168.] 

be  finished,  the  said  consul,  with  the  praetor  Cneius  Octavius, 
to  whose  lot  the  fleet  had  fallen,  should  repair  to  that  pro¬ 
vince.”  To  these  was  added  a  third,  Lucius  Anicius,  the 
praetor  who  had  the  foreign  jurisdiction  j  for  it  was  resolved 
that  he  should  succeed  Appius  Claudius  in  the  province  ol 
Illyria,  near  Lychnidus.  The  charge  of  raising  recruits  was 
laid  on  the  consul  Caius  Licinius,  who  was  ordered  to  enlist, 
of  Roman  citizens,,  seven  thousand  foot  and  two  hundred 
horse,  and  to  demand,  from  the  Latine  confederates,  seven 
thousand  foot  and  four  hundred  horse  ;  and  also  to  write  to 
Cneius  Servilius,  governor  of  Gaul,  to  raise  there  six  hun¬ 
dred  horse.  This  force  he  was  ordered  to  send,  with  all  ex¬ 
pedition,  into  Macedonia,  to  his  colleague.  It  was  resolved, 
that  thejre  should  be  no  more  than  two  legions  in  that  pro¬ 
vince,  but  that  their  numbers  should  be  filled  up  so  as  that 
each  should  contain  six  thousand  foot  and  three  hundred 
horse ;  and  that  the  rest  of  the  foot  and  horse  should  be 
placed  in  the  different  garrisons  ;  that  such  men  as  were  unfit 
for  service  should  be  discharged,  and  that  the  allies  should 
be  obliged  to  raise  another  body  of  ten  thousand  foot,  and 
eight  hundred  horse.  These  were  assigned  as  a  reinforce¬ 
ment  to  Anicius,  in  addition  to  the  two  legions  which  he  was 
ordered  to  carry  into  Illyria,  consisting  each  of  five  thousand 
two  hundred  foot,  and  three  hundred  horse  j  and  five  thou¬ 
sand  seamen  were  raised  for  the  fleet.  The  consul  Licinius 
was  ordered  to  employ  two  legions  in  the  service  of  his  pro¬ 
vince,  and  to  add  to  them  ten  thousand  foot  and  six  hundred 
horse  of  the  allies. 
XXIL  When  the  senate  had  passed  these  decrees,  the  con¬ 
sul  Lucius *iEmilius  went  out  from  the  senate-house  into  the 
assembly  of  the  people,  whom  he  addressed  in  a  discourse  to 
this  effect :  ‘‘  Romans,  I  think  I  have  perceived  that  your 
congratulations,  on  my  obtaining,  by  lot,  the  province  of  Ma- 
-'edonia,  were  warmer  than  either  when  I  was  saluted  consul. 

19b 

HISTORY  OF  HOME. 

LY,R.584. 

or  on  the  day  of  my  commencement  in  office  ;  for  which  1 
can  assign  no  other  reason,  than  your  hav  ing  conceived  an 
opinion,  that  I  shall  be  able  to  bring  the  war  with  Perseus, 
which  has  been  long  protracted,  to  a  conclusion  becoming  the 
majesty  of  the  Roman  people.  I  trust,  that  the  gods  also 
have  favoured  this  disposal  of  the  lots,  and  will  give  me  their 
aid.  That  some  of  these  consequences  will  ensue,  I  have 
reason  to  believe  ;  that  the  rest  will,  I  have  grounds  to  ex¬ 
pect.  One  thing  I  know,  and  take  upon  me  to  affirm,  with 
certainty  ;  which  is,  that  I  will  endeavour,  by  every  exertion 
in  my  power,  that  the  hope  which  you  have  conceived  of  me 
may  not  be  frustrated.  Every  thing  necessary  for  the  ser¬ 
vice,  the  senate  has  ordered  ;  and,  as  it  has  been  resolved, 
that  I  am  to  go  abroad  immediately,  and  I  do  not  .wish  to 
delay  ;  my  colleague,  Caius  Licinius,  whose  excellent  cha¬ 
racter  you  well  know,  will  forward  every  measure  with  as 
much  zeal,  as  if  he  himself  were  to  carry  on  that  war,  I  re¬ 
quest,  that  full  credit  may  be  given  to  whatever  I  shall  write 
to  you,  or  to  the  senate  ;  but  that  you  will  not  encourage  the 
propagation  of  rumours  unsupported  by  authority.  For,  as 
the  practice  is  at  present,  (and  I  have  observed  it  to  be  un¬ 
commonly  frequent,  since  this  year  began,)  no  man  can  so  en¬ 
tirely  divest  himself  of  all  regard  to  common  fame,  as  not  to 
let  his  spirits  be  damped.  In  every  circle,  and,  truly,  at  every 
table,  there  are  people  who  lead  armies  into  Macedonia  ;  who 
know  where  the  camp  ought  to  be  placed  ;  what  posts  ought 
to  be  occupied  by  troops  ;  when  and  through  what  pass  that 
territory  should  be  entered  ;  where  magazines  should  be 
formed  j  how  prov  isions  should  be  conveyed  by  land  and 
sea  ;  and  when  it  is  proper  to  engage  the  enemy,  when  to  lie 
quiet.  And  they  not  only  determine  what  is  best  to  be  done, 
but,  if  any  thing  is  done,  in  any  other  manner  than  what  they 
have  pointed  out,  they  arraign  the  consul,  as  if  he  were  on 
trial  before  them.  These  are  great  impediments  to  those  who 

BOOK  XLIV. 

B,C.  168.] 

I9r 

have  the  management  of  affairs ;  for  every  one  cannot  en¬ 
counter  injurious  reports  with  the  same  constancy  and  firm¬ 
ness  of  mind  as  Fabius  did,  who  chose  to  let  his  own  ability 
be  questioned  through  the  folly  of  the  people,  rather  than  to 
mismanage  the  public  business  with  a  high  reputation.  I  am 
not  one  of  those  who  think  that  commanders  ought  at  no 
time  to  receive  advice ;  on  the  contrary,  1  should  deem  that 
man  more  proud  than  wise,  who  regulated  every  proceeding 
by  the  standard  of  his  own  single  judgment.  What  then  is 
my  opinion  ?  That  commanders  should  be  counselled,  chiefly, 
by  persons  of  known  talent ;  by  those  who  have  made  the  art 
of  war  their  particular  study,  and  whose  knowledge  is  de¬ 
rived  from  experience ;  from  those  who  are  present  at  the 
scene  of  action,  who  see  the  country,  who  see  the  enemy  ; 
who  see  the  advantages  that  occasions  offer,  and  who,  like 
people  embarked  in  the  same  ship,  are  sharers  of  the  danger. 
If,  therefore,  any  one  thinks  himself  qualified  to  give  advice 
respecting  the  war  which  I  am  to  conduct,  which  may  prove 
advantageous  to  the  public,  let  him  not  refuse  his  assistance 
to  the  state,  but  let  him  come  with  me  into  Macedonia.  He 
shall  be  furnished  with  a  ship,  a  horse,  a  tent ;  even  his  tra¬ 
velling  charges  shall  be  defrayed.  But  if  he  thinks  this  too 
much  trouble,  and  prefers  the  repose  of  a  city  life  to  the  toils 
of  war,  let  him  not,  on  land,  assume  the  office  of  a  pilot. 
The  city,  in  itself,  furnishes  abundance  of  topics  for  conver¬ 
sation  ;  let  it  confine  its  passion  for  talking  within  its  own 
precincts,  and  rest  assured,  that  we  shall  pay  no  attention  to 
any  councils,  but  such  as  shall  be  framed  within  our  camp.’ 
Soon  after  this  speech,  the  Latine  festival  being  celebrated  on 
the  day  before  the  calends  of  April,  and  the  sacrifice  on  the 
mount  affording  favourable  omens,  the  consul,  and  Cneius 
Octavius,  the  praetor,  set  out  directly  for  Macedonia.  Some 
writers  mention,  that  the  consul,  at  his  departure,  was  cg^- 
rorted  by  multitudes  unusually  numerous ;  and  that  people. 

19B  HISTORY  OF  ROME,  [Y.R.  5B4. 
with  confident  hope,  presaged  a  conclusion  of  the  Mace¬ 
donian  war,  and  the  speedy  return  of  the  consul,  to  a  glori¬ 
ous  triumph, 
XXIII.  During  these  occurrences  in  Italy,  Perseus,  though 
he  could  not,  at  first,  prevail  on  himself  to  complete  the  de¬ 
sign  which  he  had  projected,  of  attaching  to  his  party  6en- 
tius,  King  of  Illyria,  on  account  of  the  money  which  would 
be  demanded  for  it ;  yet,  when  he  found,  that  the  Romans 
had  penetrated  through  the  difficult  passes,  and  that  the  final 
determination  of  the  war  drew  near,  resolved  to  defer  it  no 
longer,  and  having,  by  his  ambassador  Hippias,  consented  to 
pay  three  thousand  talents  of  silver, provided  hostages  were 
given  on  both  sides ;  he  now  sent  Pantauchus,  one  of  his 
most’^trusty  friends,  to  conclude  the  business.  Pantauchus 
met  the  Illyrian  King  at  Medeo,  in  the  province  of  Labeas, 
and  there  received  his  oath  and  the  hostages.  Gentius  like¬ 
wise  sent  an  ambassador,  named  Olympio,  to  require  an  oath 
and  hostages  from  Perseus.  Together  with  him,  came  per¬ 
sons  to  receive  the  money  ;  and,  by  the  advice  of  Pantauchus, 
to  go  to  Rhodes,  with  ambassadors  from  Macedonia.  For 
this  purpose,  Parmenio  and  Morcus  were  appointed.  I'heir 
instructions  were,  first,  to  receive  the  King’s  oath,  the  hosta¬ 
ges,  and  money  ;  and  then  to  proceed  to  Rhodes  ;  and  it  was 
hoped,  that,  by  the  joint  influence  of  the  two  Kings,  the  Rho¬ 
dians  might  be  prevailed  upon  to  declare  war  against  Rome, 
and  that,  if  they  were  joined  by  that  state,  which  was  acknow¬ 
ledged  to  hold  the  first  rank  as  a  maritime  power,  the  Ro¬ 
mans  would  be  precluded  from  every  prospect  of  success, 
cither  on  land  or  sea.  On  hearing  of  the  approach  of  the  Il¬ 
lyrians,  Perseus  marched  at  the  head  of  all  his  cavalry,  from 
his  camp  on  the  Enipeus,  and  met  them  at  Dias.  There  the 
articles  agreed  on  were  executed  in  the  presence  of  the 

58,t25h 

BOOK  XLIV. 

194) 

B.C.168.] 
troops,  who  were  drawn  up  in  a  circle  for  the  purpose  ;  for 
the  King  chose  that  they  should  be  witness  to  the  ratification 
of  the  treaty  with  Gentius,  supposing  that  this  event  would 
add  greatly  to  their  confidence  of  success.  The  hostages 
were  given  and  taken  in  the  sight  of  all ;  those  who  were  to 
receive  the  money,  were  sent  to  Pella,  where  the  King’s  trea*- 
sure  lay  ;  and  the  persons  who  were  to  go  to  Rhodes,  with 
the  Illyrian  ambassadors,  were  ordered  to  take  ship  at  Thes- 
salonica.  There  was  present  one  Metrodoriis,  who  had  lately 
come  from  Rhodes,  and  who,  on  the  authority  of  Dinon  and 
Polyaratus,  two  principal  members  of  that  state,  affirmed,  that 
the  Rhodians  were  ready  to  join  in  the  war  ;  he  was  set  at 
the  head  of  the  joint  embassy. 
XXIV.  At  this  time  Perseus  sent  ambassadors  to  Eumenes 
and  Antiochus,  charged  with  the  same  message  to  both, 
which  was  such  as  the  state  of  affairs  might  seem  to  suggest : 
that  “  a  free  state,  and  a  king,  were,  in  their  natures,  hostile 
to  each  other.  That  the  practice  of  the  Roman  people  was. 
to  attack  kings,  singly,  one  after  another  ;  and,  what  was 
more  shameful,  to  work  the  destruction  of  them,  by  the 
power  of  other  kings.  Thus,  his  father  was  overpowered  b\" 
the  aid  of  Attalus ;  and  by  the  assistance  of  Eumenes,  and 
of  his  father  Philip,  in  part,  Antiochus  was  vanquished  ;  and 
now,  both  Eumenes  and  Prusias  were  armed  against  himself 
If  the  regal  power  should  be  abolished  in  Macedonia  ;  the 
next,  in  their  way,  would  be  Asia,  ^vhich  they  had  alreadv 
rendered,  in  part,  their  own,  under  the  pretence  of  liberating 
the  states  ;  and  next  to  that  lay  Syria.  Already  Prusias  was 
honoured  by  them  far  beyond  Eumenes  ;  and  already  Anti¬ 
ochus,  in  the  moment  of  victory,  was  forbid  to  touch  Egypt, 
the  prize  of  his  arms.”  He  desired  each  of  them  to  con¬ 
sider  these  matters  seriously  ;  and  to  guard  against  future 
contingencies,  either  by  compelling  the  Romans  to  make  peace 
with  him,  or,  if  they  should  persist  in  such  an  unjust  war,  b^' 

200 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

l'Y.H.  584, 

treating  them  as  common  enemies.”  The  message  to  Anti« 
ochus  was  sent  openly  ;  the  ambassador  to  Eumenes  went 
under  the  pretence  of  ransoming  prisoners.  But  some  more 
secret  business  was  transacted  between  them,  which,  in  ad¬ 
dition  to  the  jealousy  and  distrust  already  conceived  by  the 
Romans  against  Eumenes,  brought  on  him  charges  of  a 
heavier  nature.  For  they  considered  him  as  a  traitor,  and 
nearly  as  an  enemy,  while  the  two  Kings  laboured  to  over¬ 
reach  each  other  in  schemes  of  fraud  and  avarice.  There 
was  a  Cretan,  Called  Cydas,  an  intimate  of  Eumenes  ;  this 
man  had  formerly  conferred,  at  Amphipolis,  with  one  Chi- 
marus,  a  countryman  of  his  own,  serving  in  the  army  of  Per¬ 
seus  ;  and  he,  afterwards,  had  one  meeting  with  Menecrates, 
and  another  with  Arch  i  dam  us,  both  officers  under  the  King 
at  Demetrias,  close  under  the  wall  of  the  town.  Gryphon, 
too,  who  was  sent  on  that  business,  had,  before  that,  executed 
two  embassies  to  the  same  Eumenes.  These  conferences  and 
embassies  were  notorious  ;  but  what  the  subject  of  them  was, 
or  what  agreement  had  taken  place  between  the  Kings,  re¬ 
mained  a  secret. 
XXV.  Now  the  truth  of  the  matter  was  this  :  Eumenes 
neither  wished  success  to  Perseus,  nor  intended  to  employ 
his  arms  against  him  ;  and  his  ill-will  arose,  not  so  much 
from  the  enmity  which  they  inherited  from  their  fathers,  as 
from  the  personal  quarrels  which  had  broken  out  between 
themselves.  The  jealousy  of  the  two  Kings  was  not  so 
moderate,  that  Eumenes  could,  with  patience,  have  seen  Per¬ 
seus  acquiring  so  vast  a  share  of  power  and  of  fame  as  must 
fall  to  his  lot,  if  he  conquered  the  Romans,  Besides  which, 
he  saw  that  Perseus,  from  the  commencement  of  the  war, 
had  tried  every  means  which  he  could  devise  to  bring  about 
a  peace  ;  and  every  day,  as  the  danger  approached  nearer, 
Ills  wishes  for  it  grew  stronger  ;  insomuch,  that  all  his 
tbouchts  and  anions  were  directed  to  that  alone.  He  con- 

BOOK  XLIV. 

201 

B.C.  I68.j 
sidered  too,  that  as  the  war  had  been  protracted  beycmd  the 
expectations  of  the  Romans,  their  commanders  and  senate 
would  not  be  averse  from  putting  an  end  to  it,  attended  as  it 
was  with  so  great  inconvenience  and  difficulty.  Having  dis¬ 
covered  this  mclination  in  both  parties,  be  concluded,  that, 
from  the  disgust  of  the  stronger  party,  and  the  fears  of  the 
weaker,  a  pacification  would  probably  ensue  in  the  ordin^y 
course  of  things ;  and  therefore  he  wished  to  act  in  such  a 
manner,  as  might  him  to  assume  to  himself  the  merit 
of  having  effected  a  reconciliation.  He  therefore,  sometimes, 
laboured  to  stipulate  for  a  consideration  for  not  affording  as¬ 
sistance  to  the  Romans,  either  on  sea  or  land  ;  at  other  times, 
for  bringing  about  a  peace  with  them.  He  demanded,  for 
not  interfering  in  the  war,  one  thousand  talents*  ;  for  effect¬ 
ing  a  peace,  one  thousand  five  hundredf  ;  and  for  his  sincerity 
in  either  case,  he  professed  himself  willing,  not  only  to  make 
oath,  but  to  give  hostages  also.  Perseus,  stimulated  by  his 
fears,  showed  the  greatest  readiness  in  the  beginning  of  the 
negotiation,  and  treated  on  the  article  respecting  the  hostages  j 
when  it  was  agreed,  that,  on  their  being  received,  they  should 
be  sent  to  Crete.  But  when  the  sum  required  came  to  be 
mentioned,  there  he  hesitated  ;  remarking  that,  in  the  case  of 
kings  of  their  high  character,  one,  at  least,  of  the  considera¬ 
tions  was  too  mean  and  sordid,  both  with  respect  to  the  giver, 
and  still  more  so  with  respect  to  the  receiver.  He  was  suf¬ 
ficiently  inclined  to  purchase  a  peace  with  Rome,  but  declined 
paying  the  money  until  the  business  should  be  concluded  ; 
proposing  to  lodge  it,  in  the  mean  time,  in  the  temple  of  Sa- 
mothrace.  As  that  island  was  under  his  own  dominion, 
Eumenes  said,  that  the  money  might  as  well  be  at  Pella  ;  and 
he  struggled  hard  to  obtain  some  part  of  it  at  the  present, 
*  193,r50K 
voi.  VI. — 2  D 

202  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  584 
Thus,  after  all  their  endeavours  to  circumvent  each  other, 
they  gained  nothing  but  disgrace. 
XX  VI.  This  was  not  the  only  business  which  Perseus  left 
unfinished  from  motives  of  avarice.  It  is  seen  that,  for  a 
small  sum  of  money,  he  might  have  procured,  through  Eu- 
menes,  a  secure  peace,  well  purchased  even  with  half  of  his 
kingdom  ;  while,  if  defrauded,  he  might  have  exposed  him 
to  public  view,  as  an  enemy  laden  with  the  hire  of  treachery, 
and  drawn  upon  him  the  just  resentment  of  the  Romans.  It 
was  from  the  same  disposition  that  the  alliance  of  King  Gen- 
tius,  when  just  brought  to  a  conclusion,  with  the  assistance  of 
a  large  army  of  Gauls,  who  had  penetrated  through  Illyria, 
and  offered  themselves  to  him,  were  lost :  of  these,  came  ten 
thousand  horsemen,  and  the  same  number  of  footmen.  The 
practice  of  the  latter  was  to  keep  pace  with  the  horses  in  their 
movements,  and  when  any  of  the  riders  fell  to  mount  in  their 
place  and  carry  on  the  fight  They  had  stipulated,  that  each 
horseman  should  receive,  in  immediate  payment,  ten  golden 
philippick^  each  footman  five,  and  their  commander  one 
thousand.  Perseus  went  from  his  camp  on  the  Enipeus  with 
half  of  his  forces  to  meet  them  ;  and  issued  orders  through 
the  towns  and  villages  near  the  road,  to  prepare  provisions, 
so  that  they  might  have  plenty  of  corn,  wine,  and  cattle.  He 
brought  with  him  some  horses,  trappings,  and  cloaks,  for 
presents  to  the  chiefs ;  and  a  small  quantity  of  gold  to  be 
divided  among  a  few  ;  for  the  multitude,  he  supposed,  might 
be  amused  with  hopes.  He  advanced  as  far  as  the  city  of 
Almana,  and  encamped  on  the  bank  of  the  river  Axius,  at 
which  time  the  army  of  the  Gauls  lay  near  Desudaba,  in 
Maedica,  waiting  for  the  promised  hire.  Thither  he  sent 
Antigonus,  one  of  his  nobles,  with  directions,  that  the  said 
army  should  remove  their  camp  to  Bylazor,  a  place  in  Paeonia, 
and  that  their  chiefs  should  come  to  him.  They  were  at  this 
lime  seventy-five  miles  distant  from  the  river  Axius,  and 

BOOK  XLIV, 

203 

B.C.  168.] 
the  King’s  camp.  Antigonus,  in  his  message,  told  them 
what  great  plenty  of  every  thing,  was  provided  on  the  road 
by  the  King’s  directions,  and  what  presents  of  apparel, 
money,  and  horses  he  intended  for  them  on  their  arrival. 
They  answered,  that  they  would  judge  of  those  things 
when  they  saw  them  ;  at  the  same  time  asking  him,  whether, 
according  to  their  stipulation  for  immediate  payment,  he 
had  brought  with  him  the  gold  which  was  to  be  distributed 
to  each  footman  and  horseman  ?  To  this  no  direct  answer 
was  given,  on  which  Clondicus,  their  prince,  said,  Go 
back,  then,  and  tell  your  King,  that,  until  they  receive  the 
gold  and  the  hostages,  the  Gauls  will  never  move  one 
step  farther.”  The  King,  on  receipt  of  this  declaration, 
called  a  council :  and,  as  it  was  very  plain  what  advice  all 
the  members  would  give  ;  he,  being  a  better  guardian  of  bis 
money  than  of  his  kingdom,  began  to  descant  on  the  perfidy 
and  savage  behaviour  of  the  Gauls.  The  disasters,”  he 
said,  of  many  states  demonstrated,  that  it  would  be  dan¬ 
gerous  to  admit  such  a  multitude  into  Macedonia,  lest  they 
might  feel  such  allies  more  troublesome  than  their  Roman 
enemies.  Five  thousand  horsemen  would  he  enough  for  them 
to  employ  in  the  war,  and  that  number  they  need  not  be 
afraid  to  receive.” 
XXVII.  Every  one  understood  him  ;  but  as  none  had  the 
courage  to  declare  their  opinion,  when  asked,  Antigonus  was 
sent  again,  with  a  message,  that  the  King  chose  to  employ  only 
five  thousand  horsemen,  and  set  no  value  on  the  rest  of  their 
number.  When  the  Barbarians  heard  this,  they  began  to 
murmur,  and  show  a  great  deal  of  anger  at  being  brought  so 
far  from  home  ;  but  Clondicus  again  asked  him,  whether  he 
would  pay  even  the  five  thousand,  the  hire  agreed  on.  To 
this  question,  too,  he  received  only  evasive  answers  ;  on 
which  the  Gauls,  dismissing  the  insidious  envoy  unhurt, 
which  was  what  he  himself  had  scarcely  hoped,  returned 
home  to  the  Danube,  after  utterly  wasting  such  lands  of 

204 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  584, 

Thrace  as  lay  near  their  road.  Now,  had  this  body  of  troops^ 
while  the  King  lay  quiet  on  the  Enipeus,  been  led,  through 
the  passes  of  Perrhaebia,  into  Thessaly,  it  might  not  only 
have  stripped  that  country  so  bare,  that  the  Romans  could 
not  expect  supplies  from  thence  ;  but  might  even  have  des- 
troyed  the  cities  themselves,  while  Perseus,  by  detaining  his 
enemy  at  the  river,  would  have  put  it  out  of  their  power  to 
succour  their  allies.  This  done,  the  Romans  had  even  found 
it  difEcult  enough  to  take  care  of  themselves,  since  they  could 
neither  stay  where  they  were,  after  losing  Thessaly,  whence 
their  army  drew  sustenance,  nor  move  forward,  as  the  camp 
of  the  Macedonians  stood  in  their  %vay^  By  this  err  or  ^  Per^ 
sens  enlivened  the  hopes  of  the  Romans^  and  damped  not  a 
little  those  of  the  Macedonians^  who  had  placed  much  of  their 
dependence  on  the  prospect  of  that  reinforcement.  Through 
the  same  love  of  riches,  he  alienated  King  Gentius  from  his 
interest.  When  he  paid,  at  Pella,  three  hundred  talents  to 
the  persons  sent  by  Gentius,  he  allowed  them  to  seal  up  the 
money.  He  then  ordered  the  talents  to  be  carried  to  Pan- 
tauchus,  and  which  he  desired  should  be  given  immediately 
to  the  King.  His  people,  who  had  charge  of  the  money, 
sealed  with  the  seals  of  the  Illyrians,  had  directions  to  pro¬ 
ceed  by  short  journies,  and  when  they  should  come  to  the 
bounds  of  Macedonia  to  halt  there,  and  wait  for  a  message 
from  him.  Gentius,  having  received  this  small  portion  of 
the  money,  and  being  incessantly  urged  by  Pantauchus  to 
commence  hostilities  against  the  Romans,  threw  into  custody 
Marcus  Perperna,  and  Lucius  Petillius,  who  happened  to 
come  at  that  time  as  ambassadors.  As  soon  as  Perseus 
heard  this,  thinking  that  the  Illyrian  had  now  laid  himself 
under  a  necessity  of  waging  war  with  the  Romans  at  least, 
he  sent  to  recall  .his  money-carriers,  as  if  to  make  a  saving 
for  the  Romans,  and  that  their  booty,  on  his  being  conquered, 
might  be  as  great  as  |K>ssible.  Gryphon,  too,  returned  from 

BOOK  XLIV. 

B.C.  I68.3 

20:9 

Eumeues,  without  having  si^ceeded  in  any  of  bis  secret  nego- 
ciaiioBs.  The  parties  ^mselvts  mentioned  publicly, 
that  the  business  of  the  {nrisosiers  Was  concluded,  and  £u*> 
menes,  to  elude  suspicicm,  informed  the  consul  that  it  was  so« 
XXVIIIt  Upon  the  return  of  Gryphon  from  Eumenes, 
Perseus,  disappointed  in  his  hopes  from  that  quarter,  sent 
Antenor  and  Callippus,  tl^  commanders  of  his  fleet,  with 
forty  barks,  to  which  were  added  five  heavy  gallies,  to  Tene- 
dos,  that,  spreading  among  the  islands  of  the  Cyclades,  they 
might  protect  the  vessels  sailing  to  Macedonia  with  com. 
This  squadron,  setting  sail  from  Cassandrea,  steered,  first,  to 
the  harbour  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Athos,  and  crossing  over 
thence,  with  mild  weather,  to  Tenedos,  found  lying  in  the 
harbour  a  number  of  Rhodian  undecked  ships,  under  the 
command  of  Eudamus  j  these  they  did  not  offer  to  molest, 
but,  after  conversing  with  their  officers  in  friendly  terms,  suf¬ 
fered  them  to  pursue  their  course.  Then,  learning  that,  on 
the  other  side  of  the  island,  fifty  transports  of  their  own  were 
shut  up  by  a  squadron  of  Eumenes,  commanded  by  Damius, 
which  lay  in  the  mouth  of  the  harbour,  they  sailed  round 
with  all  haste  ;  and  the  enemy’s  ships  retiring,  through  fear, 
they  sent  on  the  transports  to  Macedonia,  under  convoy  of 
ten  barks,  which  had  orders  to  return  to  Tenedos  as  soon  as 
they  saw  them  safe.  Accordingly,  on  the  ninth  day  after, 
they  rejoined  the  fleet,  then  lying  at  Sigeum.  From  thence 
they  sailed  over  to  Subota,an  island  between  Elea  and  Athos. 
The  next  day,  after  the  fleet  had  reached  Subota,  it  happened 
that  thirty -five  vessels,  of  the  kind  called  horse-transports, 
sent  by  Eumenes  to  Attains,  and  which  had  sailed  from  Elea, 
with  Gallic  horsemen  and  their  horses,  were  steering  towards 
Phanae,  a  promontory  of  Chios,  from  whence  they  intended 
to  cross  over  to  Macedonia.  A  signal  being  given  to  An¬ 
tenor,  from  a  post  of  observation,  that  these  ships  were  pass¬ 
ing  along  the  main,  he  left  Subota,  and  met  them  between 

206 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  584, 

Cape  Erythrae  and  Chios,  where  the  strait  is  narrowest. 
Eumenes’  officers  could  with  difficulty  believe,  that  a  Mace¬ 
donian  fleet  was  cruising  in  that  sea  ;  they  imagined  that  they 
were  Romans,  or  that  Attains,  or  some  people  sent  home  by 
him  from  the  Roman  camp,  were  on  their  way  to  Pergamus, 
But  when,  on  their  nearer  approach,  the  shape  of  the  vessels 
was  plainly  perceived,  and  when  the  briskness  of  their  rowing, 
and  their  prows  being  directed  straight  against  the  others, 
proved  that  they  were  enemies,  dismay  seized  all  on  board  ; 
for  they  had  no  hope  of  being  able  to  make  resistance,  their 
ships  being  of  an  unwieldy  kind,  and  the  Gauls,  even  when 
left  quiet,  ill  able  to  live  at  sea.  Some,  who  were  nearest  to 
the  shore  of  the  continent,  swam  to  Erythrse  ;  some,  crowding 
all  their  sail,  ran  the  ships  aground  near  Chios  ;  and,  leaving 
their  horses  behind,  fled  thither  in  haste.  The  barks,  how¬ 
ever,  effected  a  landing  nearer  to  the  city,  where  the  access 
was  more  convenient,  but  the  Macedonians  overtook  and  put 
to  the  sword  the  flying  Gauls,  some  on  the  road,  and  some 
before  the  gate,  where  they  were  refused  entrance  ;  for  the 
people  had  shut  it,  not  knowing  who  they  were  that  fled,  or 
who  that  pursued.  About  eight  hundred  Gauls  were  killed, 
and  two  hundred  made  prisoners.  Of  the  horses,  some  were 
lost  in  the  sea,  by  the  ships  being  wrecked,  and  others  were 
ham -strung  by  the  Macedonians  on  the  shore.  Antenor  or¬ 
dered  the  same  ten  barks,  which  he  had  employed  before,  to 
carry  twenty  horses  of  extraordinary  beauty,  with  the  pri¬ 
soners,  to  Thessalonica,  and  to  return  to  the  fleet  as  speedily 
as  possible  ;  saying,  that  he  would  wait  for  them  at  Phanae. 
The  fleet  staid  three  days  at  Chios,  and  then  proceeded  to 
Phanae;  where  being  joined  by  the  ten  barks,  sooner  than 
was  expected,  they  set  sail,  and  crossed  the  iEgean  sea  to 
Delos. 
XXIX.  About  this  time  the  Roman  ambassadors,  Caius 
Popillius,  Caius  Decimius,  and  Caius  Hostilius,  having  sail- 

.BOOK  XLIV. 

207 

B.C.  168.J 
ed  from  Chalcis  with  three  quinqueremes,  arrived  at  Delos, 
and  found  there  forty  Macedonian  barks,  and  five  quinque- 
remes  belonging  to  Eumenes.  The  sacred  character  of  the 
island  secured  all  parties  from  any  kind  of  violence  ;  so  that 
the  Roman  and  Macedonian  seamen,  and  those  of  Eumenes, 
used  to  meet  promiscuously  in  Apollo’s  fane.  Antenor,  the 
commander  of  Perseus’s  fleet,  having  learned,  by  signals 
from  his  watch-posts,  that  several  transport  ships  were  pass¬ 
ing  by  at  sea,  went  himself  in  pursuit  with  one  half  of  his 
barks,  (sending  the  other  half  to  cruise  among  the  Cyclades,) 
and  sunk  or  plundered  every  ship  he  met  with.  Popillius 
and  Eumenes  assisted  as  many  as  they  were  able  during  the 
day  ;  but,  in  the  night,  the  Macedonians,  sailing  out,  gene¬ 
rally  with  two  or  three  vessels,  passed  unseen.  About  this 
time,  ambassadors  from  Macedonia  and  Illyria  came  together 
to  Rhodes.  The  attention  paid  to  them  was  the  greater,  in 
consequence  of  their  squadron  cruising  freely  among  the 
Cyclades,  and  over  all  the  iEgean  sea,  and  likewise  on  ac¬ 
count  of  the  junction  of  Perseus  and  Gentius,  and  of  the 
report  of  a  great  body  of  Gauls,  both  horse  and  foot,  being 
on  their  march,  in  aid  of  those  Kings.  Dinon  and  Polyara- 
tus,  the  warm  partizans  of  Perseus,  now  took  fresh  courage, 
and  the  Rhodians  not  only  gave  a  favourable  answer  to  the 
ambassadors,  but  declared  publicly,  that  “  they  would  put  an 
end  to  the  war  by  their  own  influence  ;  and,  therefore,  de¬ 
sired  the  Kings  to  dispose  themselves  to  accede  to  an  ac¬ 
commodation,” 
XXX.  It  was  now  the  beginning  of  spring,  and  the  new 
commanders  had  arrived  in  their  provinces  ;  the  consul 
iEmilius  in  Macedonia,  Octavius  at  Oreum,  where  the  fleet 
lay,  and  Anicius  in  Illyria,  to  carry  on  the  war  against  Gen¬ 
tius.  This  prince,  who  was  the  son  of  Pleuratus,  King  of 
Illyria,  ^d  his  Queen  Eurydice,  had  two  brothers,  one  called 
Plator,  by  both  parents,  the  other  Caravantius,  by  the  same 

i08 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  584, 

mother  only.  From  the  latter,  as  descended  of  ignoble  an¬ 
cestors,  on  his  father’s  side,  he  apprehended  no  compctiuon  ; 
but,  in  order  to  secure  himself  on  the  throne,  he  had  put  to 
death  Plator,  and  two  of  his  most  active  friends,  Etritusand 
Epicadus.  It  was  rumoured,  that  he  was  actuated  by  jealousy 
towards  his  surviving  brother,  who  had  concluded  a  treaty 
of  marriage  with  Etula,  the  daughter  of  Honurius,  prince  of 
the  Dardanians,  supposing  him  to  intend,  by  that  match,  to 
engage  that  nation  in  his  interest ;  and  this  supposition  was 
rendered  the  more  probable  by  Gentius  marrying  her,  after 
the  death  of  Plator.  From  this  time,  when  he  was  delivered 
from  the  fear  of  his  brother,  his  treatment  of  his  subjects 
became  highly  oppressive,  and  the  natural  violence  of  his 
temper  was  inflamed  by  an  immoderate  use  of  wine.  Hav¬ 
ing  been  prevailed  on,  as  was  mentioned  above,  to  go  to  war 
with  the  Romans,  he  collected  all  his  forces,  amounting  to 
fifteen  thousand  men,  at  Lissus.  From  thence,  detaching  his 
brother,  with  one  thousand  foot  and  fifty  horse,  to  reduce, 
either  by  force  or  terror,  the  province  of  Cavia,  he  marched 
himself  to  Bassania,  a  city  five  miles  distant  from  Lissus. 
As  the  inhabitants  were  in  alliance  with  Rome,  he  first  sent 
emissaries  to  sound  their  intentions,  who  found  them  deter¬ 
mined  rather  to  endure  a  siege  than  surrender.  In  Caira, 
the  people  of  the  town  of  Burnium  cheerfully  opened  their 
gates  to  Caravantius,  on  his  arrival ;  but  another  town,  call¬ 
ed  Caravantis,  refused  him  admittance.  He  spread  depreda¬ 
tions  over  their  lands,  but  many  of  his  straggling  soldiers 
were  killed  by  parties  of  the  peasants.  By  this  time  Appius 
Claudius,  having  joined  to  his  forrner  force  some  bodies  of 
auxiliaries,  composed  of  Bulinians,  Apollonians,  and  Dyrrha- 
chians,  had  left  his  winter  quarters,  and  was  encamped  near 
the  river  Genusus.  Having  heard  of  the  treaty  between 
Perseus  and  Gentius,  and  being  highly  provoked  at  the  ill 
treatment  offered  by  the  latter  to  the  ambassadors,  he  de- 

209 
few  detcrmiatttfen  to  employ  >fef8  afmy  agai^t  THim, 
The  praetor  Anicius,  who  was  now  at  Apollonia,  being  hi-' 
Ibtmed  of  wteit  passed  in  Illyfta,  dispaf^fecd  a  letter  to  Atp- 
pius,  desiring  him  to  wait  for  him  aft  the  Xxenusus  j  and,  in 
three  days  after,  he  arrived  in  the  camp.  added  to 
the  auxiliary  troops,  whieh  he  then  had,  two  thousand  foot 
and  two  hundred  horse  of  the  Parthfnians,  (the  foot  com¬ 
manded  by  Epicadus,  and  the  horse  by  Agalsus,)  he  pre¬ 
pared  to  mari:h  into  Ulyriai  where  his  principal  object  at 
present  was,  the  raising  the  siege  of  Basahta.  '  But  his  en¬ 
terprise  was  retarded  by  an  account  brought  him,  of  the  sea- 
edast  .  being  ravaged  by  a  number  of  the  enemy’s  barks- 
These  were  eighty  vessels,  which,  by  die  advice  of  Pan- 
tauchus,  Gentius  had  sent  to  waste  the  lands  of  the  Dyrra- 
chians  and  ApoIIonians.  '  The  Roman  fleet  was  then  hfing 
near  Apollonia.  Anicius  hastily  repaired  thither^  soon  over* 
took  the  Illyrian  plunderers^  brought  them  to  an  engagement^ 
and^  defeating  them  with  very  Hitle  trouble^  many  of  their 
ships^  and  compelled  the  rest  to  retire  to  Illyria.  Returning 
thence  to  the  camp  at  the  Genusus^  he  hastened  to  the  relief  of 
Bassania.  Gentius  did  not  wait  the  prmtor^^  coming;  huty 
raising  the  siege ^  retired  to  Scodra  with  such  precipitate 
haste y  that  he  left  part  of  his  army  behind.  This  was  a  large 
body  of  forcesy  whichy  if  their  courage  had  been  supported 
by  the  presence  of  their  commander y  might  have  given  some 
check  to  the  Romans  ;  buty  as  he  had  forsaken  themy  they  sur¬ 
rendered, 
XXXI.  The  cities  of  that  country,  one  after  another,  fol¬ 
lowed  the  example  *;  their  own  inclinations  being  encouraged 
by  die  justice  and  clemency'  which  the  Roman  pwetor  show¬ 
ed  to  all.  The  army  then  advanced  to  Scodra,  which  was 
the  most  important  place  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  not 
merely  because  Gentius  had  chosen  it  for  the  metropolis  of 
his  kingdom,  but  because  it  has  bv  far  the  strongest  fortifica- 
VOL.  VI. - 2  E 

210 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

Y;R.  5B4. 

tions  of  any  in  the  territory  of  the  Labeadans,  and  is  of  very 
dUScult  access.  Two  sides  of  it  are  defended  by  two  rivers  ; 
the  eastern  side,  by  the  Clausula  ;  and  the  western,  by  the 
Barbana,  which  rises  out  of  the  lake  Labeatus.  Tliese  two 
rivers,  uniting  their  stmiams,  Ml  into  the  river  Oriuns,  which, 
running  down  from  Mount  Scodrus,  and  being  augmented  by 
many  others,  empties  itself  into  the  Adriatic  sea.  Mount 
Scodrus  is  much  the  highest  hiU  in  all  that  country  ;  at  its 
foot,  ^towards  the  east,  lies  Dardania  ;  towards  the  south, 
Macedonia  ;  and  towards  the  west,  Illyria.  Notwithstanding 
that  the  town  was  so  strong,  from  the  nature  of  its  situation, 
and  was  garrisoned  by  the  whole  force  of  the  Illyrian  natidn, 
with  the  King  himself  at  their  head,  yet  the  Roman  praetor, 
encouraged  by  the  happy  success  of  his  Erst  enterprises,  and 
hoping  that  things  would  proceed  in  the  same  train  in  which 
they  had  hitherto  gone,  and  thinking  also  that  a  sudden  alarm 
might  have  a  powerful  effect,  advanced  to  the  walls  with  his 
troops  in  ordef  of  battle.  But,  if  the  garrison  had  kept  their 
gates  shut,  and  manned  the  walls  and  the  towers  of  the  gates 
with  soldiers,  they  might  have  repulsed  the  Romans,  and 
baffled  all  their  attempts  ;  instead  of  which  they  marched 
out  of  the  town,  and,  on  equal  ground,  commenced  a  battle 
with  more  courage  than  they  supported  it :  for,  being  forced 
to  give  way,  they  crowded  on  one  another  in  their  retreat, 
and  above  two  hundred  having  fallen  in  the  very  entrance  ol 
the  gate,  the  rest  were  so  terrified,  that  Gentius  immediately 
dispatched  Teuticus  and  Belius,  two  of  the  first  men  of  the 
nation,  to  the  pfaetor,  to  beg  a  truce,  in  order  to  gain  time  to 
deliberate  on  the  state  of  his  affairs.  He  was  allowed  three 
days  for  the  purpose,  and,  as  the  Roman  camp  was  about  five 
hundred  paces  from  the  city,  he  went  on  board  a  ship,  and 
sailed  up  the  river  Barbana,  into  the  lake  of  Labeatus,  as  if 
in  search  of  a  retired  place,  where  he  might  hold  his  coun¬ 
cils  j  but,  as  afterwards  appeared,  he  was  led  by  a  groundless 

B.C.  168.] 

BOOK  XLIV. 

211 

report^  that  his  brother  Caravantius  was  coming,  with  msmy 
thousands  of  soldiers  collected  in  the  country,  to  whith  he 
had  been  sent.  This  rumour  dying  away,  on  the  third  day 
he  sailed  down  the  river  to  Scodfa  ;  and,  after  sending  fpi*- 
ward  messengers,  to  request  an  interview  with  the  praetor, 
and  obtaining  his  consent,  came  into  the  camp.  He  began 
his  discourse  with  reproaches  against  himself,  for  the  fc^y 
of  his  conduct ;  then  descended  to  tears  and  prayers,  and 
falling  at  the  praetor’s  knees,  gave  himself  up  into  his  power. 
He  was  at  first  desired  to  keep  up  his  spirits,  and  was  even 
invited  to  supper  ?  he  was  allowed  to  go  back  into  the  city  to 
his  people,  and,  for  that  day,  was  entertained  by  the  praetor 
with  every  mark  of  respect.  On  the  day  following,  he  was 
delivered  into  custody,  to  Caius  Cassius,  a  military  tribune, 
to  which  unhappy  situation  he  had  let  himself  be  reduced  £or 
a  consideration  of  ten  talents,  scarcely  the  hire  of  a  party  of 
gladiators. 
]^XX1I.  The  first  thing  Anicius  did,  after  taking  posses¬ 
sion  of  Scodra,  was,  to  order  the  ambassadors  Petillius  and 
Perperna,  to  be  sought  for  and  brought  to  him ;  and  he 
enabled  them  to  appear  again  with  a  proper  degree  of  splen¬ 
dour.  He  then  immediately  dispatched  Perperna  to  seize 
the  King’s  friends  and  relations  ;  who,  hastening  to  Medeo, 
a  city  of  Labeatia,  oonducted^  to  the  camp  at  Scodra,  Etkva, 
the  King’s  consort ;  his  brother  Caravantius ;  with  his  two 
sons,  Scerdiletus  and  Pleuratus.  Anicius,  having  brought 
the  Illyrian  war  to  a  conclusion  within  thirty  days,  sent  Per- 
pema  to  Rome  with  the  news  of  his  success ;  and,  in  a  few 
days  after.  King  Gcntius  himself,  with  his  mother,  queen, 
children,  and  brother,  and  other  Illyrians  of  distinction.  It 
was  a  singular  circumstance  respecting  this  war,  that  people 
in  Rome  received  an  account  of  its  being  finished,  before  they 
knew  it  was  begun.  Perseus,  in  the  mean  time,  laboured 
under  dreadful  apprehensions,  on  account  of  the  approach. 

213 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

584* 

both  of  the  oew  coostd  whose  thieatenings,  as  he 
heard,  were  higUy  aianning,  and  abo  of  the  prs^or  Octavius  i 
far  he  dreaded  the  Roman  fleet,  and  die  danger  which  threat¬ 
ened  the  sea  coast,  no  less  than  he  did  the  army.  Emnenes 
and  Athenagoras  commanded  at  Thessalonica,  wkh  a  small 
gamson  of  two  thousand  targeteers.  Thither  he  sent  An- 
drocles,  as  governor,  and  ordered  him  to  keep  the  trcKips  en¬ 
camped  close  by  the  naval  arsenals.  He  ordered  one  thou¬ 
sand  horse,  under  Antigonus,  to  iEnia,  to  guard  the  sea- 
coast  5  directing  them,  whenever  they  should  hear  of  the  ene¬ 
my’s  fleet  approaching  the  shore  in  any  part,  instantly  to  has¬ 
ten  diither,  to  protect  the  country  people.  Five  thousand 
Macedonians  were  sent  to  garrison  the  mountains  Pythium 
smd  Petra,  commanded  by  Histiseus,  Thec^enes,  and  Milo. 
After  making  these  detachments,  he  set  about  fortifying  the 
bank  of  the  river  Enipeus,  for  the  channel  being  nearly  dry, 
the  passage  was  practicable ;  and,  in  order  that  att  the  men 
might  apply  themselves  to  this  work,  the  women  were  obliged 
to  bring  provisions  from  the  neighbouring  cities  into  the  camp. 
He  ordered  the  soldiers  to  fetch  timber  from  the  woods  which 
were  not  far  distant,  and  erected  on  the  bank  such  formidable 
works ^  strengthened  with  towers  and  engines^  as  he  trusted 
would  effectually  bar  the  passage  against  any  effort  of  the 
Romans.  On  the  other  side^  thp  more  diiigence  and  caution 
Paullus  saw  the  Macedonians  wse,  the  more  assiduously  did 
he  study  to  devise  some  means  of  frustrating  those  hopes^ 
which  the  enemy  had  not  without  reason  conceived.  But  he 
suffered  immediate  distress  from  the  scarcity  of  water ^  the 
rher  furnishing  but  little.^  and  that  putrid.^  in  the  part  con* 
tiguom  to  the  sea. 
XXXIII.  The  consul^  after  searching  in  every  place  in  the 
neighbourhood  for  water ^  and  being  told  that  none  could  be 
foundy  at  last  ordered  the  water-carriers  to  attend  him  to  the 
shore,  which  was  not  three  hundred  paces  distant,  and  there 

BOOK  XLIV. 

213 

BX.  168.] 
to  dig  holes  in  several  places,  not  far  from  each  other*  The 
great  height  of  the  mountains  gave  him  reason  to  suppose 
that  they  contained  in  their  bowels  several  b<»lies  of  water, 
the  branches  of  which  made  their  way  under  ground  to  the 
sea,  and  mixed  with  its  waters  ;  and  this  appeared  the  more 
probable,  as  they  discharged  no  streams  above  ground. 
Scarcely  was  the  surface  of  the  sand  removed,  when  springs 
began  to  boil  up,  small  at  first  and  muddy,  but  in  a  little  time 
they  threw  out  clear  water  in  great  plenty,  as  if  through  the 
favourable  interference  of  the  gods.  This  circumstance  added 
greatly  to  the  reputation  and  influence  of  the  general  in  the 
minds  of  the  soldiers.  He  then  ordered  them  to  get  ready 
their  arms  ;  and  went  himself,  with  the  tribunes  and  first  cen¬ 
turions,  to  examine  the  river,  in  hopes  of  finding  a  passage, 
where  the  descent  would  be  easy,  and  where  the  ascending 
the  other  bank  would  be  least  difficult.  After  taking  a  suffi¬ 
cient  view  of  these  matters,  he  made  it  his  first  care  to  pro¬ 
vide,  that,  in  the  movements  of  the  army,  every  thing  should 
be  done  regularly,  and  without  noise,  at  the  first  order  and 
beck  of  the  general.  Though  notice  was  proclaimed  of  what 
was  to  be  done,  every  one  did  not  distinctly  hear  ;  and,  as 
the  orders  received  were  not  clear,  some  did  more  than  was 
ordered,  while  others  did  less  ;  while  dissonant  shouts  were 
raised  in  every  quarter,  insomuch  that  the  enemy  knew 
sooner  than  the  soldiers  themselves,  what  was  intended.  He 
therefore  directed,  that  the  military  tribune  should  comma- 
i^ate,  secretly,  to  the  first  centurion  of  the  legion,  then  he  to 
the  next,  and  that  so  on,  in  order  that  each  should  tell  the 
next  to  him  in  rank,  what  was  requisite  to  be  done,  whether 
the  instructions  were  to  be  conveyed  from  front  to  rear,  or 
from  rear  to  front.  According  to  a  practice  lately  introdu¬ 
ced,  the  centinels  carried  shields  to  their  posts  ;  this  he  for¬ 
bade  ;  for  as  a  centinel  did  not  go  to  fight,  but  to  watch,  he 
had  no  occasion  for  arms  ;  it  was  his  duty,  when  he  perceived 

214 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  584. 

an  enemy  approaching,  to  retire,  and  to  give  the  alarm.  They 
used  to  stand  with  their  helmets  on,  and  their  shields  erected 
OB  the  ground  before  them  ;  when  tired,  they  leaned  on  their 
spears  ;  or  laying  their  heads  on  the  edge  of  their  shields, 
stood  dosing  in  such  a  manner,  that  from  the  glittering  of 
their  arms  they  Could  be  seen  afar  olF  by  the  enemy,  while 
themselves  could  see  nothing.  He  likewise  altered  the  prac¬ 
tice  of  the  advanced  guards.  Formerly,  the  guards  were 
kept  on  duty  through  the  whole  day,  all  under  arms,  the 
horsemen  with  their  horses  bridled  ;  and  when  this  happen¬ 
ed  in  summer,  under  a  continual  s^rching  sun,  both  men 
and  horses  were  so  much  exhausted  by  die  heat  and  the 
languor  contracted  in  so  many  hours,  that  very  often,  when 
attacked  by  fresh  troops,  a  small  number  was  able  to  get  the 
better  of  a  much  superior  one.  He  therefore  ordered,  that 
the  party  which  mounted  guard  in  the  moitiing,  should  be 
relieved  at  noon  by  another,  which  was  to  do  the  duty  for 
the  rest  of  the  day  ;  by  which  means  they  woiUd  never  be  in 
danger  of  the  like  easy  defeat. 
XXXIV.  iEmilius,  after  publishing,  in  a  general  assembly, 
his  orders  for  these  regulations,  added  observations,  of  the 
same  purport  with  those  contained  in  the  speech  which  he  had 
made  in  the  city,  that  ‘‘  it  was  the  business  of  the  commander, 
alone,  to  consider  what  was  proper  to  be  done,  sometimes  singly, 
sometimes  in  conjunction  with  those  whom  he  should  call  to 
council ;  and  that  such  as  were  not  called,  ought  not  to  pro¬ 
nounce  judgment  on  affairs  either  in  public  or  in  privaWv 
That  it  was  a  soldier’s  business  to  attend  to  these  three 
things,— -his  body,  that  he  may  keep  it  in  perfect  strength  and 
agility  ;  his  armour,  that  it  may  be  always  in  good  order ; 
with  his  stores  of  all  kinds,  so  as  to  be  ready  in  case  of  a 
sudden  order ;  and  to  rest  assured,  that  all  other  matters  re¬ 
lating  to  him  will  be  directed  by  the  immortal  gods  and  his 
captain.  That  in  any  army>  where  the  soldiers  formed  plans, 

215 

BOpK  XLIV. 
and  that  the  chief  was  called,  first  one  way,  then  another,  by 
the  voice  of  the  idle  multitude,  nothing  could  ever  succeed. 
For  his  part,”  he  declared,  that  ‘‘  he  would  take  care,  as 
was  the  duty  of  a  general,  to  afford  them  occasion  of  acting 
with  success.  On  their  part,  they  were  to  make  no  inquiries 
whatever  as  to  his  designs  ;  but  when  the  signal  was  given, 
to  discharge  the  duty  of  a  soldier.”  Having  thus  admonish* 
ed  them,  he  dismissed  the  assembly,  while  the  veterans  them¬ 
selves  acknowledged,  that  on  that  day,  for  the  first  time,  they 
had,  like  recruits,  been  taught  the  business  of  ^  soldier.  Nor 
did  they,  by  such  expressions  only,  demonstrate  their  high 
approbation  of  the  consul’s  discourse  ;  but  the  effect  of  it  on 
their  behaviour  was  immediate.  In  the  whole  camp,  not  one 
person  was  to  be  seen  idle  ;  some  were  employed  in  sharpen¬ 
ing  their  weapons  ;  others  in  scouring  their  helmets  and 
cheek-pieces,  their  shields  and  breast-plates ;  some  fitted 
their  armour  to  their  bodies,  and  tried  how  well  they  could 
move  their  limbs  under  it ;  some  brandished  their  spears, 
others  flourished  their  swords,  and  tried  the  points  ;  so  that 
it  could  be  easily  perceived  that  their  intention  was,  when¬ 
ever  they  should  come  to  battle,  to  finish  the  war  at  once, 
either  by  a  glorious  victory,  or  an  honourable  death.  On  the 
other  side,  when  Perseus  saw  that,  in  consequence  of  the 
arrival  of  the  consul,  and  of  the  opening  of  the  spring,  all 
was  motion  and  bustle  among  the  Romans  ;  and  that  their 
general  had  pitched  his  camp  on  the  opposite  bank  of  the 
Enipeus,  where  he  employed  himself  busily,  sometimes  in 
going  round  and  examining  all  his  works,  with  a  view  of 
finding  some  place  where  he  might  pass  the  river ;  and  some¬ 
times  in  preparing  every  thing  requisite  for  attack  or  de¬ 
fence;  he  exerted  himself  no  less  diligently  on  his  part^  to 
rouse  the  courage  of  his  soldiers ^  and  add  strength  to  his  de^ 
fences^  as  if  he  expected  an  immediate  engagement.  Hoxv^ 

HISTORY  OF  IIOME. 

216 

[Y,Ili  584, 

€V€r^  though  both  parties  were  full  of  ardour  ^  they  lay  a  long 
time  very  near  each  other  without  any  action^ 
XXXV.  Jn  the  mean  time^  news  was  received  that  'King 
Gentius  had  been  defeated^  in  Illyria^  by  the  praetor  Anicius 
and  that  himself  his  family^  and  his  whole  kingdom^  were  in 
the  hands  of  Ihe  commonwealth  ;  which  event  greatly  raised 
the  spirits  of  the  Romans,  and  struck  no  small  degree  of 
terror  into  the  Macedonians  and  their  King.  At  first,  Per^ 
sens  endeavoured  to  suppress  the  intelligence,  and  sent  mes* 
sengers  to  Pantauchus,  who  was  on  his  way  from  that  coun¬ 
try,  forbidtflng  him  to  come  near  the  camp  ;  but  some  of  his 
people  had  already  seen  certain  boys  carried  away  among  the 
Illyrian  hostages  ;  and  it  is  certain  that  the  more  pains  there 
are  used  to  conceal  any  circumstances,  the  more  readily  they 
are  divulged,  through  the  talkative  disposition  of  people  em¬ 
ployed  in  the  courts  of  kings.  About  this  time,  ambassa¬ 
dors  came  to  the  camp  from  Rhodes,  with  the  same  message 
which  had  excited  so  much  resentment  in  the  Roman  senate. 
It  was  now  heard  by  the  council  with  much  greater  indigna¬ 
tion  than  at  Rome  ;  some  even  advised  that  they  should  be 
instantly  driven  out  of  the  camp  ;  but  the  consul  said,  that 
he  would  give  them  an  answer  in  fifteen  days.  But  still,  to 
show  how  little  regard  was  paid  to  the  mediation  of  the 
Rhodiams,  he  began  to  consult  on  the  plan  of  his  future 
operations.  Some,  particularly  the  younger  officers,  advised 
to  force  their  way  across  the  Enipeus,  and  through  the  ene¬ 
my’s  works.  “  When  they  should  advance  in  close  order 
and  make  an  assault,  the  Macedonians,”  they  said,  would 
never  be  able  to  withstand  them.  They  had  been,  last  year, 
beaten  out  of  many  fc^resses  much  higher  and  better  for¬ 
tified,  and  furnished  with  much  stronger  garrisons,”  Others 
recommended,  that  Octavius,  with  the  fleet,  should  sail  to 
Thessalonica  ;  and,  by  committing  depredations  on  the  sea- 
coast,  make  it  necessary  for  the  King  to  divide  his  forces  ; 

BOOK  XLIV. 

217 

B.C.168,] 
so  that,  when,  on  the  appearance  of  another  enemy  behind 
him,  he  should  turn  about  to  protect  the  interior  part  of  the 
kingdom,  he  would  be  forced  to  leave  a  passage  over  the 
Enipeus  open  in  some  place  or  other.  The  consul  himself 
was  of  opinion,  that  the  nature  of  the  bank,  and  the  works 
erected  on  it,  presented  insuperable  difficulties  ;  and,  besides 
its  being  every  where  furnished  with  engines,  he  had  been 
informed,  that  the  enemy  were  remarkable  for  using  missile 
weapons  with  uncommon  skill,  ahd  that  their  aim  was  almost 
certain.  The  consul’s  judgment  leaned  quite  another  way  j 
as  soon,  therefore,  as  the  council  broke  up^he  sent  for  Schoe- 
nus  and  Menophilus,  Perrhaebian  merchants,  whom  he  knew 
to  be  men  of  probity  and  good  sense,  and  examined  them  in 
private  about  the  nature  of  the  passes  leading  into  Perrhsebia. 
They  told  him,  that  the  places  themselves  were  not  difficult; 
but  that  they  were  occupied  by  parties  of  the  King’s  troops ; 
from  which  he  conceived  hopes  of  being  able  to  beat  off  those 
parties,  by  making  a  sudden  attack  with  a  strong  force  in  the 
night,  when  they  were  off  their  guard.  For  he  considered 
that  “javelins,  and  arrows,  and  other  missile  weapons,  were 
useless  at  such  a  season  ;  since,  when  combatants  closed  to¬ 
gether  in  a  throng,  the  business  must  depend  on  the  sword, 
in  the  exercise  of  which  the  Romans  had  a  decided  supe¬ 
riority.”  He  resolved  to  employ  those  two  men  as  guides  ; 
and,  sending  for  the  prfetor  Octavius,  explained  to  him  what 
he  intended,  ordering  him  to  sail  directly  with  the  fleet  to 
Heracleus,  and  to  have  in  readiness  there,  ten  days’  provi¬ 
sions  for  one  thousand  men.  He  then  sent  Publius  Scipio 
Nasica,  and  Quintus  Fabius  Maximus,  his  own  son,  with  five 
thousand  chosen  men,  to  Heracleus,  as  if  they  were  to  em¬ 
bark  in  the  fleet,  to  ravage  the  coast  of  the  interior  parts  of 
Macedonia,  as  had  been  proposed  in  the  council.  He  told 
them,  in  private,  that  there  were  provisions  prepared  for 
them  on  board,  so  that  they  should  have  no  delay.  He  then 
VOT  .  VT. — 2  F 

21S 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  584. 

ordered  the  guides  to  divide  the  road  in  such  a  manner,  that 
they  might  attack  Pythium  at  the  fourth  watch  on  the  third 
dav.  He  himself,  on  the  day  following,  in  order  to  confine 
the  King’s  attention  from  the  view  of  distant  matters,  attack¬ 
ed  his  advanced  guards  in  the  middle  of  the  channel  of  the 
river,  where  the  fight  was  maintained  by  the  light  infantry  on 
both  sides,  for  the  bottom  was  so  uneven,  that  heavy  arms 
could  not  be  used.  The  slope  of  each  bank  was  three  hun¬ 
dred  paces  long,  and  the  breadth  of  the  channel,  which  was 
of  various  depths,  somewhat  more  than  a  mile.  In  this  mid¬ 
dle  space  the  fight  was  carried  on,  while  the  King  on  one 
side,  and  the  consul,  with  his  legions  on  the  other,  stood 
spectators  on  the  ramparts  of  their  camps.  At  a  distance,  the 
King’s  troops  had  the  advantage  in  fighting  with  missile 
weapons  ;  but  in  close  fight  the  Roman  soldier  was  more 
steady,  and  was  better  defended,  either  with  a  target  or  a 
Ligurian  buckler.  About  noon,  the  consul  ordered  the  sig¬ 
nal  of  retreat  to  be  given,  and  thus  the  battle  ended  for  that 
day,  after  considerable  numbers  had  fallen  on  both  sides. 
Next  morning  at  sunrise,  the  fight  was  renewed  with  greater 
fury,  as  their  passions  had  been  irritated  by  the  former  con¬ 
test  ;  but  the  Romans  were  dreadfully  annoyed,  not  only  b} 
those  with  whom  they  were  immediately  engaged  ;  but  much 
more  by  the  multitudes  that  stood  posted  in  the  towers,  with 
missiles  of  every  sort,  particularly  stones  ;  so  that  whenever 
they  advanced  towards  the  enemy’s  bank,  the  weapons  thrown 
from  the  engines  reached  even  the  hindmost  of  their  men. 
The  consul’s  loss  on  this  occasion  was  much  greater  than  be¬ 
fore  ;  and,  somewhat  later  in  the  day,  he  called  off  his  men 
from  the  fight.  On  the  third  day  he  declined  fighting,  and 
moved  down  to  the  lowest  side  of  the  camp,  as  if  intending 
to  attempt  a  passage  through  an  intrcnchnvent  which  stretch¬ 
ed  down  to  the  sea. 

BOOK  XLIV. 

219 

B.C.  16a.] 

XXXVI.  Perseus,  who  did  not  extend  his  cares  beyond  the 
objects  that  lay  before  bis  eyes,  bent  all  his  thoughts  and  ex^ 
ertions  to  stop  theprogress  of  the  enemy  in  the  quarter  where 
he  lay.  In  the  mean  ttmcy  Publius  Nasica^  with  the  detach* 
ment  under  his  command,^ punctually  executed  the  consuls  or* 
ders.  Arriving  at  the  appointed  hour  at  Pythium^  he  soon 
dislodged  the  guards  which  was  commanded  by  Milo^  Histim* 
iis^  and  Theogenes^  and  pursued  them  down  into  the  plains. 
This  event  threw  Perseus  into  the  greatest  perplexity for  a5 
the  road  was  now  open,^  he  had  reason  to  fear  being  surround* 
ed.  After  long  deliberation,^  he  determined  to  give  battle ; 
and,,  drawing  back  to  Pydna^  chose  a  very  advantageous  post* 
tion^  and  made  the  most  prudent  dispositions  for  ensuring  sue* 
cess.  jEmilius^  being  rejoined  by  the  party  under  Nasica,, 
marched  dhxctly  against  the  enemy  y  and,,  on  coming  within 
sight,,  was  not  a  little  surprised  at  the  formidable  appearance 
of  their  army,,  in  respect  of  their  numbers^  and  the  strength  of 
the  men,,  as  well  as  the  judicious  order  in  which  it  xvas  formed. 
The  season  of  the  year  was  a  little  after  the  summer  solstice  j 
the  time  of  the  day  was  approaching  towards  noon  ;  and  his 
march  had  been  incommoded  by  great  quantities  of  dust,  and 
the  increasing  heat  of  the  sun.  Lassitude  and  thirst  were  al¬ 
ready  felt,  and  both  would  certainly  be  aggravated  by  mid¬ 
day  coming  on.  He  resolved,  therefore,  not  to  expose  his 
men  in  that  condition  to  an  enemy,  fresh  and  in  full  vigour  ^ 
but  so  great  was  the  ardour  for  battle  on  both  sides,  that  the 
general  had  occasion  for  as  much  art  to  elude  the  wishes  ol 
his  own  men,  as  those  of  the  enemy.  He  urged  the  tribunes 
to  hasten  the  forming  of  the  troops,  went  himself  round  the 
ranks,  and  wdth  exhortations  inflamed  their  courage.  At  first, 
they  called  to  him  for  the  signal,  briskly  ;  but  afterwards,  as 
the  heat  increased,  their  looks  became  less  lively,  and  their 
voices  fainter,  while  many  stood  resting  on  their  shields,  ov 
leaning  on  their  javelins.  He  then,  without  farther  disguise, 

220 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  584. 

ordered  the  foremost  ranks  to  measure  out  the  front  of  a 
camp,  and  store  the  baggage  ;  on  seeing  which,  the  soldiers 
openly  showed  themselves  rejoiced  at  not  having  been  com¬ 
pelled  to  fight,  when  they  were  wearied  with  marching,  and 
with  the  scorching  heat.  Immediately  about  the  general, 
were  the  lieutenants-general,  and  the  commanders  of  the  for¬ 
eign  troops  ;  among  others  Attains,  who  when  they  thought 
that  the  consul  intended  to  fight,  (for  even  to  them  he  did  not 
disclose  his  intention  of  delaying,)  had  all  approved  the  mea¬ 
sure.  On  this  sudden  alteration  of  his  plan,  while  all  the 
rest  were  silent,  Nasica  alone  ventured  to  advise  the  consul, 
not  to  let  slip  from  his  hands,  by  shunning  a  battle,  an  enemy, 
who  had  baffled  former  commanders  in  the  same  way. 
“  There  was  reason  to  fear,’’  he  said,  that  he  would  march 
off  in  the  night ;  and  then  he  must  be  pursued  with  extreme 
toil  and  danger,  into  the  heart  of  Macedonia  ;  and  the  troops 
must  be  led  about,  as  under  former  generals,  wandering 
through  the  glens  and  forests  of  the  Macedonian  mountains. 
He  therefore  earnestly  recommended  to  attack  the  enemy 
while  he  had  him  in  an  open  plain,  and  not  to  lose  so  fair  an 
opportunity,  of  obtaining  a  victory,  as  now  presented  Itself,” 
The  consul,  not  in  the  least  offended  at  the  liberty,  taken  by 
a  youth  of  his  distinguished  character,  in  offering  his  advice, 
answered  ;  “  Nasica,  I  once  thought  as  you  do  now  ;  here¬ 
after  you  will  come  to  think  as  I  do.  By  long  experience  in 
war,  I  have  learned  when  it  is  proper  to  fight,  when  to  ab¬ 
stain  from  fighting.  It  would  not  be  right  in  me,  at  present, 
standing  at  the  head  of  the  troops,  to  explain  to  you  the 
causes  that  render  it  better  to  rest  to-day.  Ask  my  reasons 
some  other  time.  At  present  you  will  acquiesce  in  the  judg¬ 
ment  of  an  old  commander.”  The  youth  was  silent,  con¬ 
cluding  that  the  consul  certainly  saw  some  objections  to 
fighting,  which  did  not  appear  to  him. 

BOOK  XLIV. 

221 

B.C.  168.] 
XXXVII.  Paullus,  as  soon  as  he  saw  the  camp  marked 
out,  and  the  baggage  laid  up,  drew  off,  first,  the  veterans 
from  the  rear  line,  then  the  first-rank  men,  while  the  spear¬ 
men  stood  in  the  front,  lest  the  enemy  might  make,  any  at¬ 
tempt  ;  and  lastly,  the  spear-men,  beginning  at  the  right  wing, 
and  leading  them  away,  gradually,  by  single  companies. 
Thus  were  the  infantry  drawn  off  without  tumult ;  and,  in 
the  mean  time,  the  cavalry  and  light  infantry  faced  the  enemy  ; 
nor  were  the  cavalry  recalled  from  their  station,  until  the 
rampart  and  trench  were  finished.  The  King,  though  he 
was  disposed  to  have  given  battle  that  day,  was  yet  satisfied  ; 
since  his  men  knew,  that  the  delay  was  owing  to  the  enemy  ; 
and  he  led  back  his  troops  to  their  station.  When  the  forti¬ 
fications  of  the  Roman  camp  were  finished,  Cams  Sulpicius 
Callus,  a  military  tribune  of  the  second  legion,  who  had’been 
praetor  the  year  before,  with  the  consul’s  permission  collected 
the  soldiers  in  assembly,  and  gave  them  notice,  lest  they 
should  any  of  them  consider  the  matter  as  a  prodigy,  that, 
on  the  following  night,  the  moorr  would  fee  eclipsed,  from 
the  second  hour  tothe  fourth.”  He  mentioned  that,  **  as  this 
happened  in  the  course  of  nature,  at  stated  times,  it  could  be 
known,  and  foretold.  As^  therefore,  they  did  not  wonder  at 
the  regular  rising  and  setting  of  the  sun  and  lUoon,  or  at  the 
moon’s  sometimes  shining  with  a  full  orb,  and  sometimes  in 
its  wane,  showing  only  small  horns,  so  neither  ought  they  to 
construe  as  a  portent,  its  being  obscured,  when  eOvered  with 
the  shadow  of  the  earth.”  On  the  night  preceding  the  day 
before  the  nones  of  September,  at  the  hour  meUtioned,^  the 
eclipse  took  plaCe.  The  Roman  soldiers  thought  the  wisdom 
of  Callus  almost  divine  ;  but  the  Macedonians  were  shocked, 
as  at  a  dismal  prodigy,  foreboding  the  fell  of  their  kingdom 
and  the  ruin  of  their  nation ;  nor  did  their  soothsayers  ex¬ 
plain  it  otherwise.  Their  camp  was  filled  with  shouting  and 
yelling,  until  the  moon,  emerging,  sent  forth  its  light.  Both 

222 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[YJR.  4^84. 

aroiks  had  been  so  eager  for  an  engagement^  that^  next  day, 
both  the  King  and  the  consul  were  censored  by  many  of  their 
respective  men  for  having  separated  without  a  battle.  The 
King  could  readily  excuse  himself,  not  only  as  the  enemy  had 
led  back  his  troops  into  camp ;  but,  also,  as  he  had  posted 
his  men  on  groumi  of  such*  a  nature,  that  the  phalanx  (which 
even  a  smsdi  inequaUty  of  surface  renders  useless)  could  not 
advance  on  it.  The  consul,  besides,  appearing  to  have  ne¬ 
glected  an  opportunity  of  fighting,  and  to  have  given  the  ene¬ 
my  room  to  go  oflp  in  the  night,  if  he  were  so  inclined,  was 
thought  to  waste  time  at  the  present,  under  pretence  of  offer¬ 
ing  sacrifice,  though  the  signal  had  been  displayed,  at  the 
first  light,  for  going  out  to  the  field.  At  last,  about  the  third 
hour,  ihe  sacrifices  being  duly  performed,  he  summoned  a 
council,  and  there,  too,  he  was  deemed  by  several  to  spin  out 
in  talking,  and  unseasonaye  consultation,  the  time  that  ought 
to  be  employed  in  action  ;  but,  after  many  discourses  of  this 
sort  had  passed,  the  consul  addressed  them  in  a  speech  of  the 
following  purport, 
XXXVIII.  ^  Publius  Nasica,  a  youth  of  uncommon  merit, 
was  the  only  one  of  those  who  were  for  immediate  fight,  that 
disclosed  his  sentiments  to  me  ;  and  even  he  was  afterwards 
silent,  appearing  to  have  come  over  to  my  opinion.  Some 
others  have  thought  proper,  rather  to  cavil  at  their  general’s 
con4uct  in  his  absence,  than  to  offer  advice  in  his  presence. 
Now  I  shall,  without  the  least  reluctance,  make  known  to 
you,Tublius  Nasica,  and  to  any  who,  with  less  openness,  en¬ 
tertained  the  same  opinion  with  you,  my  reasons  for  defer¬ 
ring  an  engagement.  For,  so  far  am  I  from  "being  sorry  for 
having  rested  yesterday,  that  I  am  convinced  that  by  that  means 
I  preserved  the  army.  Whoever  now  thinks  otherwise,  let 
him  come  forward,  if  he  pleases,  and  take  with  me  a  review 
of  the  numerous  advantages  that  were  on  the  enemy’s  side, 
and  the  disadvantages  on  ours.  In  the  first  place,  how  far 

BOOK  XLIV. 

223 

B.C.  166.] 
they  surpass  us  in  numbers,  I  am  sure  not  one  of  you  was  at 
any  time  ignorant ;  and  yesterday  you  had  ocular  demon¬ 
stration,  when  their  line  was  drawn  out.  Of  our  small  force, 
a  fourth  pmrt  h^  been  left  to  guard  the  baggage ;  and  you 
know  that  they  are  not  the  worst  of  the  soldiers  who  are  left 
on  that  duty.  But  can  we  believe  it  a  matter  of  little  mo¬ 
ment,  that,  with  the  blessing  of  the  gods,  we  shall  this  day, 
if  judged  proper,  or  to-morrow  at  farthest,  march  to  battle 
out  of  this  our  own  camp,  where  we  have  lodged  last  night  ? 
Is  there  no  difference,  whether  you  order  a  soldier  to  take 
arms  in  his  own  tent,  when  he  has  not  suffered  any  fatigue, 
either  from  a  long  march  or  laborious  work  ;  after  he  has  en¬ 
joyed  his  natural  rest,  and  is  fresh  ;  so  as  to  lead  him  into 
the  field  vigorous  both  in  body  and  mind  ;  or  whether,  when 
he  is  wearied  by  such  a  march,  or  fatigued  with  carrying  a 
load  ;  while  he  is  wet  with  sweat,  and  while  his  throat  is 
parched  with  thirst,  and  his  mouth  and  eyes  filled  with  dust, 
you  expose  him,  under  a  scorching  noon-day  sun,  to  an  ene¬ 
my  who  has  had  full  repose,  and  who  brings  into  the  battle 
his  strength  unimpaired  by  any  previous  cause  ?  Is  there  any 
(I  appeal  to  the  gods)  so  dastardly,  that,  if  matched  in  this 
manner,  he  would  not  overcome  the  bravest  man  ?  We  must 
consider,  that  the  enemy  had,  quite  at  their  leistu*e,  formed 
their  line  of  battle  ;  had  recruited  their  spirits,  and  were 
standingin  regular  order ;  whereas  we  must  have  formed  oar 
line  in  hurry  and  confusion,  and  have  engaged  before  the 
proper  dispositions  were  completed. 
XXXIX.  But,  to  drop  the  consideration  of  the  unavoid¬ 
able  irregularity  and  disorder  of  our  line,  should  we  have 
had  a  camp  fortified,  a  watering-place  provided,  and  the  pas¬ 
sage  to  it  secured  by  troops,  with  a  thorough  knowledge  of 
all  the  country  round  ;  or  should  we  laave  been  without  any 
one  spot  of  our  own,  except  the  naked  field  on  which  wc 
fought?  Your  fathers  considered  a  fortified  camp  &s  a  har- 

^24 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y,R.  584. 

boar  of  safety,  in  all  emergencies  ;  out  of  which  they  w^rc 
to  march  to  battle,  and  in  which,  after  being  tossed  in  the 
storm  of  the  fight,  they  had  a  safe  retreat.  For  that  reason, 
besides  inclosing  it  with  works,  they  stren§||hened  it  farther 
with  a  numerous  guard  ;  for  any  general  who  lost  his  camp, 
though  he  should  have  been  victorious  in  the  field,  yet  was 
deemed  vanquished.  A  camp  is  a  residence  for  the  victo¬ 
rious,  a  refuge  for  the  conquered.  How  many  armies,  aft^r 
being  worsted  in  the  field,  and  driven  within  their  ramparts, 
have,  at  their  own  time,  and  sometimes  the  nesJt  moment, 
sallied  out  and  defeated  their  victors  ?  This  military  settle¬ 
ment  is  another  native  country  to  the  soldier :  the  rampart  k 
as  the  wall  of  his  city,  and  his  own  tent  his  habitation  ^d  his 
home.  Should  we  have  fought,  while  in  that  unsettled  state, 
and  without  quarters  prepared ;  4o  what  place,  in  case  of 
being  beaten,  were  we  to  retire  ?  In  opposition  to  these  con¬ 
siderations  of  the  difficulties  and  impediments  to  the  fighting 
at  that  time,  one  argument  is  urged.  ,  What,  if  the  enemy 
had  marched  off  in  the  course  of  last  night  ?  What  immense 
fatigue,  it  is  observed,  must  have  been  undergone  in  pursuing 
him  to  the  remotest  parts  of  Macedonia  t  But,  for  my  part, 
I  take  it  as  a  certainty,  that  if  he  had  had  any  intention  of 
retreating,  he  would  neither  have  waited,  nor  drawn  out  his 
troops  to  battle.  For,  how  much  easier  could  he  have  gone 
off,  while  we  were  at  a  great  distance,  than  now,  when  we  are 
close  at  his  back  ?  Nor  could  he  go  unobserved  either  by 
day  or  by  tiight.  What  could  be  more  desirable  to  us,  who 
were  obliged  to  attack  their  camp,  defended  as  it  was  by  a 
very  high  bank  of  a  river,  and  inclosed  likewise  with  a  ram¬ 
part  and  a  . number  of  towers,  than  that  they  should  quit  their 
fortifications*,  and,  marching  off  with  haste,  give  us  an  op¬ 
portunity  of  attacking  their  rear  in  an  ^open  plain  ?  These 
were  my  reasons  for  deferring  a  battle  from  yesterday  to  this 
day.  For  I  am  myself  as  much  inclined  to  fight  as  any  ; 

B.C.  168.J 

BOOK  XLIV. 

225 

and  for  that  reason,  as  the  way  to  come  at  the  enemy  over 
the  river  Enipeus  was  stopped,  I  have  opened  a  new  way,  by 
dislodging  the  enemy’s  guards  from  another  pass.  Nor  will  I 
rest  until  the  war  is  ended.” 
XL.  When  he  ceased  speaking,  all  remained  silent ;  for 
some  were  convinced  by  his  arguments,  and  the  rest  were 
unwilling  to  find  any  fault  with  the  proceeding,  since  any  ad- 
xantage  then  overlooked  could  not  now  be  regained.  Even 
on  that  day,  neither  the  King  nor  the  consul  was  desirous  of 
engaging  ;  not  the  King,  because  he  had  not  the  same  pros¬ 
pect  as  the  day  before,  of  fighting  men  who  were  fatigued 
after  their  march,  were  hurried  in  forming  their  line,  and  not 
completely  marshalled  ;  nor  the  consul,  because,  ki  his  new 
camp,  no  collection  was  yet  made  of  wood  or  forage,  to  bring 
which  from  the  adjacent  country  a  great  number  of  his  men 
had  been  sent  from  the  camp.  But,  though  it  was  not  the 
wish  of  either  of  the  commanders,  fortune,  tvhose  power  is 
not  to  be  controlled  by  human  schemes,  brought  about  a  bat¬ 
tle.  Somewhat  nearer  to  the  Macedonian  than  the  Roman 
camp  was  a  river,  not  very  large,  from  wdiich  both  parties 
supplied  themselves  with  water ;  and  that  this  might  be  dor.e 
with  safety,  guards  were  stationed  on  each  bank.  On  the 
Roman  side  were  two  cohorts,  a  Marucinian  and  a  Pelignian., 
with  two  troops  of  Samnite  horse,  commanded  by  a  lieuten¬ 
ant-general,  Marcus  Sergius  Silus  ;  and  in  the  front  of  the 
camp  there  was  posted  anotltcr  guard,  under  Caius  Cluviiis^ 
lieutenant-general,  composed  of  three  cohorts,  a  Firmian,  a 
Vestinian,  and  a  Cremonian  ;  besides  two  troops  of  horse,  a 
Placentinc  and  an^sernian.  While  all  was  quiet  at  the  river, 
neither  partv  disturbing  the  other,  about  the  fourth  hour,  a 
horse,  breaking  loose  from  those  who  had  the  care  of  him, 
ran  oif  towards  the  farther  bank,  and  three  l^oman  soldiers 
followed  him  through  the  water,  which  reached  as  high  as 
their  knees.  At  the  same  time  two  Thracians  endeavoured 
VOL.  VI. — 2  G 

226 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  584, 

to  bring  the  horse  from  the  mi  (Idle  of  the  channel  to  their 
own  bank  ;  but  the  Romans  slew  one  of  them,  and,  having 
recovered  the  animal,  retired  to  their  post.  On  the  enemy’s 
bank  there  was  a  body  of  eight  hundred  Thracians,  of  whom 
a  few,  at  first  enraged  at  their  countryman  being  killed  be¬ 
fore  their  eyes,  crossed  the  river  in  pursuit  of  his  slayers  ;  in 
a  little  time  some  more,  and  at  last,  all  of  them  passed  over^ 
and  attacked  the  Roman  guard  on  the  other  side.  Reinforce^ 
ments  hastened  to  both  parties.^  and  the  affair  soon  became  sc 
serious.^  that  the  commanders  -were  obliged  to  risk  a  general 
engagement .  In  the  army  of  the  Macedonians  there  xvere  tuoc 
phalanxes  ;  the  men  oj  one  were  called  Leucaspides^  those  of 
the  other  Aglaspides.^  or  Chalcaspides  ;  there  was  also  a  body 
of  targeteers.,  formed  in  the  same  manner ^  and  carrying  the 
same  kind  of  long  spears.,  but  lighter  armed  in  other  respects. 
These  three  bodies  withstood.^  for  a  long  time.,  cilery  effort  oj 
fJie  Romans;  the  targeteers  even  compelled  the  Pelignian 
battalions  to  retire.^  which  alarmed  and  provoked  Mmilius  to 
such  a  degree  that  he  tore  his  robe.  At  length.,  observing  that 
the  compact  order  of  the  phalanx  xvas  not  every  where  un- 
broken.,  the  variation  of  the  ground  and  of  their  motions  ne-^ 
cessarily  causing  some  intervals  in  their  raiiks.,  he  ordered  his 
men  to  xuatch  attentively.,  and  xvherever  they  could  discern  the 
least  opening  in  the  phalanx.,  to  force  themselves  xvith  all 
their  might.,  and  strive  to  divide  it  as  much  as  possible.  As 
soon  as  he  had  issued  this  order.,  he  put  himsvf  at  the  head  oj 
one  of'  the  legions.,  and  led  it  on  to  battle. 
XL  I.  The  troops  were  deeplv  impressed  with  sentiments 
of  respect,  when  they  considered  the  high  dignity  of  his  of¬ 
fice,  his  own  personal  renown,  and,  above  all,  his  age ;  for, 
though  more  than  sixty  years  old,  he  discharged  every  obli¬ 
gation  of  youth,  taking  on  himself  the  principal  share  both  of 
the  labour  and  danger.  His  legion  filled  up  the  space  between 
the  targeteers  and  another  phalanx,  and  thus  disunited  the 

BOOK  XLIV. 

B.C.  168.] 

22  r 

enemy’s  line.  Behind  him  were  the  targe teers,  and  his  front 
faced  the  shielded  phalanx  of  Aglaspides.  Lucius  Albinus, 
a  man  of  consular  rank,  was  ordered  to  lead  on  the  second 
legion  against  the  phalanx  of  the  Leucaspides,  which  formed 
the  centre  of  the  Macedonian  line.  On  the  right  wing,  where 
the  fight  began,  at  the  river,  the  elephants  were  brought  for¬ 
ward,  with  a  cohort  of  allied  cavalry  ;  and  these  latter  were 
the  first  who  made  any  of  the  Macedonians  turn  their  backs. 
For  as  new  contrivances  make  an  important  figure  in  w^ords, 
but  on  being  put  in  practice  ofttimes  prove  vain  and  ineffectual, 
so  on  that  occasion  the  elephants  in  the  line  of  battle  w'ere  a 
mere  name,  without  the  least  use.  Their  attack  was  followed 
by  the  Latine  allies,  who  forced  the  enemy’s  left  wing  to  give 
way.  In  the  centre,  the  second  legion  dispersed  the  phalanx, 
nor  was  there  any  more  evident  cause  of  the  victory  that  fol¬ 
lowed,  than  there  being  many  distinct  fights,  which  first  dis¬ 
ordered  that  body,  by  throwing  it  into  irregular  motions,  and 
at  last  quite  broke  it.  For,  while  it  preserves  its  compact 
order,  and  presents  a  front  bristled  with  extended  spears,  its 
strength  is  irresistible  ;  but  if,  by  separate  attacks  on  various 
parts  of  it,  the  men  are  once  forced  to  turn  about  their  spears, 
which,  on  account  of  their  length  and  weight,  are  too  un¬ 
wieldy  to  be  easily  moved,  they  are  embarrassed  ;  and,  if 
they  are  alarmed  by  any  assault  on  the  flank  or  rear,  fall  into 
irretrievable  disorder.  This  was  the  case  now,  when  they 
w^^re  obliged  to  oppose  the  Romans,  who,  in  small  parties, 
and  with  their  line  broken  into  numerous  divisions,  assailed 
them  in  many  places  at  once  ;  and,  when  any  opening  was 
made,  worked  themselves  into  the  vacant  spaces.  But  had 
they  advanced  with  their  entire  line,  straight  against  the  pha¬ 
lanx,  when  in  its  regular  order,  the  fate  of  the  Pelignians 
would  have  been  theirs,  who,  in  the  beginning  of  the  battle, 
incautiously  engaged  the  targeteers  j  being  run  through  by 
the  spears,  and  unable  to  witiistand  such  a  firm  body. 

228 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  584. 

XLIL  But  though  the  Macedonian  infantry  were  cut  to 
pieces  on  all  sides,  except  those  who  threw  away  their  arms 
and  fled,  the  cavalry  quitted  the  field  with  scarcely  any  loss. 
The  King  himself  was  the  first  in  flight.  With  the  sacred 
squadrons  of  horse  he  took  the  road  to  Pella,  and  was  quickly 
followed  by  Cotys  and  the  Odrysian  cavalry.  The  rest  of 
the  cavalry,  likewise,  went  off  with  full  ranks  ;  because,  as 
the  line  of  infantry  stood  in  the  way,  the  enemy  remained  to 
put  them  to  the  sword,  and  did  not  think  of  pursuing  the 
others.  For  a  long  time,  the  men  of  the  phalanx  were  cut 
off,  in  front,  on  the  flanks,  and  on  the  rear  ;  at  last,  such  as 
could  avoid  the  enemy’s  hands,  fled  unarmed  towards  the 
sea  ;  some  even  ran  into  the  water,  and,  stretching  out  their 
hands  to  those  on  board  the  fleet,  humbly  begged  their  lives. 
Boats  coming  from  all  the  ships,  they  supposed  that  it  was 
meant  to  take  them  in  ;  whereupon,  advancing  farther  into  the 
water,  so  that  some  of  them  even  swam,  they  supplicated  aid. 
But  they  soon  found  themselves  treated  as  enemies  by  the 
boats  ;  on  which  such  as  were  able  regained  the  land,  where 
they  met  their  death  in  a  more  dreadful  way ;  for  the  ele¬ 
phants,  which  their  riders  had  driven  down  to  the  shore,  trod 
them  under  foot,  and  crushed  them  in  pieces.  It  was  gene¬ 
rally  acknowledged,  that  the  Macedonians  never  lost  so  great 
a  number  of  men  in  any  battle  ;  for  their  killed  amounted  to 
twenty  thousand  ;  six  thousand,  who  made  their  escape  from 
the  field  to  Pydna,  fell  alive  into  the  hands  of  the  Romans, 
and  five  thousand  were  taken  straggling  through  the  country. 
Of  the  victorious  army  there  fell  not  more  than  one  hundred ; 
the  greater  part  of  whom  were  Pelignians  ;  but  a  much 
greater  number  were  wounded.  If  the  battle  had  been  be¬ 
gun  earlier,  so  that  the  conquerors  might  have  had  daylight 
enough  for  a  pursuit,  all  the  troops  of  the  vanquished  must 
have  been  utterly  destroyed.  As  it  happened,  the  approach 

BOOK  XLIV, 

229 

B.C.  168.] 
of  night  both  screened  the  fugitives,  and  made  the  Romania 
unwilling  to  follow  them  through  an  unknown  country. 
XLIII.  Perseus,  in  his  flight  as  far  as  the  Pierian  wood, 
kept  up  a  military  appearance,  being  attended  by  a  numerous 
body  of  horse,  together  with  his  royal  retinue  ;  but,  when 
he  came  into  the  thicket,  and  when  darkness  came  on,  he 
turned  out  of  the  main  path,  with  a  very  few*  in  whom  he 
placed  the  greatest  confidence.  The  horsemen,  abandoned  by 
their  leader,  dispersed,  and  returned  to  their  respective 
homes  ;  some  of  whom  made  their  way  to  Pella,  quicker 
than  Perseus  himself,  because  they  went  by  the  straight  and 
open  road.  The  King,  embarrassed  by  his  fears,  and  the 
many  difficulties  which  he  met  with  on  the  way,  did  not  ar¬ 
rive  till  near  midnight.  He  was  met  at  the  palace  by  Euctus* 
governor  of  Pella,  and  the  royal  pages  ;  but  of  all  his  friends, 
who  had  escaped  from  the  battle  by  various  chances,  not  one 
would  come  near  him,  though  they  were  repeatedly  sent  for. 
Only  three  persons  accompanied  him  in  his  flight ;  Evander* 
a  Cretan  ;  Neon,  a  Boeotian  ;  and  Archidamus,  an  iEtolian. 
With  these  he  continued  his  retreat,  at  the  fourth  'watch  ;  for 
he  began  to  fear,  lest  those  who  had  refused  to  obey  his  sum¬ 
mons,  might,  presently,  attempt  something  more  audacious. 
He  had  an  escort  of  about  five  hundred  Cretans.  He  took 
the  road  to  Amphipolis ;  leaving  Pella  in  the  night,  and 
hastening,  to  get  over  the  river  Axius  before  day,  as  he 
thought  that  the  difficulty  in  passing  it  would  deter  the  Ro¬ 
mans  from  farther  pursuit. 
XLIV.  The  consul  returned  victorious  to  his  camp  ;  but 
his  joy  was  much  allayed  by  concern  for  his  younger  son. 
This  was  Publius  Scipio,  who  afterwards  acquired  the  title 
of  Africanus  by  the  destruction  of  Carthage  ;  he  was,  by 
birth,  the  son  of  the  consul  Paullus,  and,  by  adoption,  the 
grandson  of  the  elder  Africanus.  He  was  then  only  in  the 
seventeenth  year  of  his  age,  which  circumstance  heightened 

230 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  584. 

his  lather’s  anxiety  ;  for,  pursuing  the  enemy  with  eagerness, 
he  had  been  carried  away  by  the  crowd  to  a  distant  part.  He 
returned  late  in  the  evening,  however ;  and  then,  the  consul 
having  received  him  in  safety,  felt  unmixed  joy  for  the  very 
important  victory.  When  the  news  of  the  battle  reached 
Amphipolis,  the  matrons  ran  together  to  the  temple  of  Diana, 
whom  they  style  Tauropolos,  to  implore  her  aid.  Diodorus, 
who  was  governor  of  the  city,  fearing  lest  the  Thracians,  of 
whom  there  were  two  thousand  in  garrison,  might,  during  the 
confusion*,  plunder  the  city,  contrived  to  receive  in  the  mid¬ 
dle  of  the  Forum  a  letter,  from  the  hands  of  a  person  whom 
he  had  employed  for  the  purpose,  and  instructed  to  personate 
a  courier.  The  contents  of  it  were,  that  the  Romans  had 
put  in  their  fleet  at  Emathia,  and  were  ravaging  the  territory 
round  ;  and  that  the  governors  of  Emathia  besought  him  to 
send  a  reinforcement,  which  might  enable  them  to  repel  the 
ravagers.”  After  reading  this,  he  desired  the  Thracians  to 
march  to  the  relief  of  the  coast,  telling  them,  as  an  encourage¬ 
ment,  that  the  Romans  being  dispersed  through  the  country, 
they  might  easily  kill  many  of  them,  and  gain  a  large  booty. 
Fie  affected  not  to  believe  the  report  of  the  defeat, '  alleging 
that,  if  it  were  true,  many  would  have  come  from  the  place 
of  action.  Having,  on  this  pretence,  sent  the  Thracians  out 
of  the  town,  he  no  sooner  saw  them  pass  the  river  Strymon, 
than  he  shut  the  gates. 
XLV.  On  the  third  day  after  the  battle,  Perseus  arrived 
at  Amphipolis,  and  sent  thence  to  Paullus  suppliant  ambas¬ 
sadors,  with  the  wand  of  peace.  In  the  mean  time,  Hippias, 
Milo,  and  Pantauchus,  whom  the  King  esteemed  his  best 
friends,  went  themselves  to  the  consul,  and  surrendered  to 
the  Romans  the  city  of  Berosa,  to  which  they  had  fled  after 
the  battle  ;  and  several  other  cities,  struck  wdth  fear,  pre¬ 
pared  to  follow  the  example.  The  consul  dispatched  to 
Rome,  with  letters  and  the  news  of  his  victory,  his  son 

B,C. 168. 

BOOK  XLIV. 

X 

Quintus  Fabius^  Lucius  Lentulus,  and  Quintus  Metellus. 
He  gave  to  his  infantry  the  spoils  of  the  enemy  who  were 
slain,  and  to  his  cavalry,  the  plunder  of  the  circumjacent 
country,  provided,  however,  that  they  did  not  stay  out  of  the 
camp  longer  than  two  nights.  He  then  removed  towards 
Pydna.  Berosa,  Thessalonka,  and  Pella,  and  indeed  almost 
every  city  in  Macedonia,  successively  surrendered  within 
two  days.  From  Pydna,  which  was  the  nearest,  no  deputation 
had  yet  been  sent  ;  the  confused  multitude,  made  up  of  many 
different  nations,  wdth  the  numbers  who  had  been  obliged  to 
fly  thither  from  the  field,  put  it  out  of  the  power  of  the  in¬ 
habitants  to  form  or  unite  in  any  design  ;  the  gates,  too,  were 
not  only  shut,  but  closed  up  with  walls.  Milo  and  Pantauchus 
were  sent  to  confer,  under  the  wall,  with  Solon,  who  com¬ 
manded  in  the  place.  By  his  means  the  crowd  of  military 
people  were  sent  away,  the  town  was  surrendered,  and  given 
up  to  the  soldiers  to  be  plundered.  Perseus,  after  making  a 
single  effort  to  procure  assistance,  by  sending  an  embassy  to 
the  Bisaltians,  but  without  effect,  came  forth  into  a  general 
assembly,  bringing  with  him  his  son  Philip,  in  order  to 
encourage  the  Amphipolitans  themselves,  and  to  raise  the 
spirits  of  those  horse  and  foot  soldiers  who  had  either  con¬ 
stantly  accompanied  him,  or  had  happened  to  fly  to  the  same 
place.  But,  though  he  made  several  attempts  to  speak,  he 
was  always  stopped  by  his  tears  ;  so  that,  finding  himself  un¬ 
able  to  proceed,  he  told  Evander,  the  Cretan,  what  he  wished 
to  have  laid  before  the  people,  and  came  down  from  the  tri¬ 
bunal.  Although  the  multitude,  on  seeing  the  King  in  so 
melancholy  a  situation,  and  observing  him  weep  in  that  af¬ 
fecting  manner,  had  joined  their  plaints  with  his,  yet  they 
refused  to  listen  to  the  discourse  of  Evander  j  and  some, 
from  the  middle  of  the  assembly,  had  the  assurance  to  inter¬ 
rupt  him,  exclaiming,  Depart  to  some  othtr  place  ;  that 
the  few  of  us,  who  are  left  alive,  may  not  be  destroyed  on 

HISTORY  OF  ROMK. 

[Y.R.  584 

your  account.'’  Their  daring  opposition  stopped  Evander's 
mouth.  The  King  retired  to  his  palace  ;  and,  causing  his 
treasures  to  be  put  on  board  some  barks  which  lay  in  the 
Strymon,  went  down  himself  to  the  river.  The  Thracians 
would  not  venture  to  trust  themselves  on  board,  but  went  off 
to  their  own  homes,  as  did  the  rest  of  the  soldiers ;  the  Cre¬ 
tans  only  following  the  money,  in  hopes  of  a  share  :  But,  as 
anv  distribution  of  it  among  them  would  probably  raise  more 
discontent  than  gratitude,  fifty  talents*  were  laid  on  the  bank, 
for  them  to  seize  as  each  might  be  able.  After  this  scram¬ 
ble,  they  w^cnt  on  board  j  yet  in  such  hurry  and  disorder, 
that  they  sunk  one  of  the  barks  in  the  mouth  of  the  river  by 
the  weight  of  the  numbers  which  crowded  into  it.  They  ar¬ 
rived  that  day  at  Galepsus,  and  the  next  at  Samothrace,  to 
-which  they  were  bound.  I’hither,  it  is  said,  the  king  carried 
with  him  two  thousand  talents ..f 
XL  VI,  Paullus  sent  officers  to  hold  the  government  of  the 
several  cities  which  had  surrendered  ;  lest,  at  a  time  W'hen 
peace  was  but  newly  restored,  the  conquered  might  suffer  any 
ill  treatment.  He  detained  the  ambassadors  of  Perseus  ;  and, 
as  he  had  not  yet  been  informed  of  his  flight,  detached  Pub¬ 
lius  Nasica,  with  a  small  part}  of  horse  and  foot,  to  Amphi- 
polis,  both  that  he  might  lay  waste  the  country  of  Sintice, 
and  be  ready  to  obstruct  every  effort  of  the  King.  In  the 
mean  time,  Meliboia  w  as  taken  and  sacked  by  Cneius  Octa¬ 
vius.  At  jEginium,  w^hich  Cneius  Anicius,  a  lieutenant-ge¬ 
neral,  had  been  ordered  to  attack,  tw  o  hundred  men  were 
lost  by  a  sally  made  from  the  towm  ;  for  it  w  as  not  known 
that  the  W'-ar  w^as  at  an  end.  The  consul,  quitting  Pvdna.  ar¬ 
rived,  with  his  whole  arm}  ,  on  the  second  day  at  Pella  ;  and, 
pitching  his  camp  at  tiie  distance  of  a  mile  from  it,  remained 
in  that  station  for  several  Uays.  These  he  employed  in  taking 

*  10. 

BOOK  XLIV. 

235 

jB.C.168.] 
a  full  view  of  the  situation  of  the  city ;  and  he  perceived  that 
it  was  chosen  to  be  the  capital  of  the  kingdom,  not  without 
good  reason.  It  stands  on  a  hill  which  faces  the  south-west, 
and  is  surrounded  by  morasses,  formed  by  stagnant  waters 
from  the  adjacent  lakes,  so  deep  as  to  be  impassable  either  in 
winter  or  summer.  In  the  part  of  the  morass  nearest  to  the 
city  the  citadel  rises  up  like  an  island,  beingbuilt  on  a  mound 
of  earth  formed  with  immense  labour,  so  as  to  be  capable  of 
supporting  the  wall,  and  secure  against  any  injury  from  the 
surrounding  moisture.  At  a  distance  it  seems  to  join  the 
city  rampart,  but  is  divided  from  it  by  a  river,  and  which  has 
a  bridge  over  it ;  so  that  if  the  King  chooses  to  confine  any 
person  within  it,  there  is  no  way  for  an  escape  except  by  that 
bridge,  which  can  be  guarded  with  great  ease.  This  was  the 
depository  of  the  royal  treasure  ;  but,  at  that  time,  there  was 
nothing  found  there  but  the  three  hundred  talents  which 
had  been  sent  to  King  Gentius,  and  afterwards  brought  back. 
While  the  consul  halted  at  Pella,  he  gave  audience  to  a  great 
number  of  embassies,  which  came  with  congratulations,  espe¬ 
cially  out  of  Thessaly.  Then,  receiving  intelligence  that  Per¬ 
seus  had  passed  ovxr  to  Samothrace,  he  left  Pella,  and  aftei 
four  days’  march,  arrived  at  Amphipolis.  Here  the  whole 
multitude  poured  out  of  the  town  to  meet  him  ;  a  plain 
demonstration  that  the  people  considered  themselves  not  as 
bereft  of  a  good  and  just  king  ^  but  as  delivered  from  a  haugh¬ 
ty  overhearing  tyrant.  The  consul.^  after  a  short  delay y  pro- 
ceededy  in  pursuit  of  Perseus  ^  into  the  province  of  Odomantire^ 
and  encamped  at  Sirce. 

VOL.  VI.— -2  H 

THE 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

BOOK  XLV. 
Perseus  taken  prisoner  in  Samothrace,  by  ^milius  Paullus.  Antiochus, 
on  the  peremplorj'  requisition  of  the  Roman  ambassadors,  ceases  hostili¬ 
ties  against  ^gypt.  The  Rhodians  apologize  for  their  conduct  during 
the  war  ,  their  apologies  not  deemed  satisfactorJ^  Macedonia  reduced 
to  the  form  of  a  province.  Prusias  comes  to  Rome  with  congratulations, 
on  occasion  of  the  conquest  of  Macedonia.  Recommends  his  son,  Ni^ 
comedes,  to  the  protection  of  the  senate ;  his  mean  and  despicable* 
behaviour. 
I.  NOTWITHSTANDING  that  Quintus  Fabius,  Lu^ 
^  cius  Lentulus,  and  Quintus  Metellus,  who  were 
B*C  168  news  of  the  victory,  made  all  possi¬ 
ble  haste  to  Rome,  yet  they  found  rejoicings  for 
that  event  anticipated  there.  The  fourth  day  after  the  dis¬ 
comfiture  of  Perseus,  and  while  games  were  exhibiting  in  the 
Circus,  a  faint  rumour  spread  itself,  suddenly,  among  the 
people  through  all  the  seats,  that  a  battle  had  been  fought 
in  Macedonia,  and  that  the  King  was  entirely  defeated.’’ 
The  rumour  gathered  strength,  until  at  last  they  shouted  and 
clapped  their  hands,  as  if  the  same  had  been  confirmed  to 

BOOK  XLV. 

235 

B.C.  168.] 
them.  The  magistrates,  being  surprised,  caused  enquiry  to 
be  made  for  the  author  of  the  account  which  occasioned  this 
sudden  rejoicing  ?  but,  none  being  found,  the  joy  of  course 
vanished.  Although  the  matter  was  uncertain,  yet  the  flat¬ 
tering  belief  still  remained  impressed  on  their  minds ;  and 
when,  on  the  arrival  of  Fabius,  Lent  ulus,  and  Me  tell  us,  the 
fact  was  established  by  authentic  information,  they  rejoiced 
on  a  twofold  account, — on  that  of  the  victory,  and  their  happy 
presage  of  it.  This  exultation  in  the  Circus  is  related  in 
another  manner,  with  equal  appearance  of  probability  ;  that, 
on  the  tenth  day  before  the  calends  of  October,  being  the  se¬ 
cond  day  of  the  Roman  games,  as  the  consul  Licinius  was 
going  down  to  give  the  signal  for  the  race,  a  courier,  who 
said  he  came  from  Macedonia,  delivered  to  him  a  letter,  de¬ 
corated  with  laurel.  As  soon  as  he  had  started  the  chariots, 
he  mounted  his  own,  and,  as  he  rode  back  to  the  seats  of  the 
magistrates,  showed  to  the  people  the  embellished  tablets,  at 
the  sight  of  which,  the  multitude,  regardless  of  the  games,  ran 
down  at  once  into  the  middle  of  the  area.  The  consul  held  a 
meeting  of  the  senate  on  the  spot ;  and,  after  reading  the  letter 
to  them  by  their  direction,  he  told  the  people,  from  the  seats 
of  the  magistrates,  that  “  his  colleague  Lucius  ALmilius  had 
fought  a  general  engagement  with  Perseus ;  that  the  Mace¬ 
donian  army  was  totally  defeated  ;  that  the  King  had  fled 
with  few  attendants  ;  and  that  all  the  cities  of  Macedonia  had 
submitted  to  the  Romans.’’  On  hearing  this,  they  testified 
their  joy  by  an  universal  shouting  and  clapping  of  hands  ; 
and  most  of  them,  leaving  the  sport,  hastened  home  to  com¬ 
municate  the  joyful  tidings  to  their  wives  and  children.  This 
was  the  thirteenth  day  after  the  battle. 
11.  On  the  following  day  the  senate  voted  a  general  sup¬ 
plication,  and  ordered,  that  the  consul  should  disband  all  his 
troops,  excepting  the  regulars  and  seamen  ;  and  that  the  dis¬ 
bandment  should  be  taken  into  consideration  as  soon  as  the 

236 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  584. 

deputies  from  the  consul  iEmilius,  who  had  sent  forward  the 
courier,  should  arrive  in  town.  On  the  sixth  day  before  the 
calends  of  October,  about  the  second  hour,  the  deputies  came 
into  the  city,  and  proceeded  directly  to  the  tribunal  in  the 
Forum,  drawing  an  immense  crowd,  who  went  forth  to  meet 
and  escort  them.  The  senate  happened  to  be  then  sitting, 
and  the  consul  introduced  the  deputies  to  them.  They  were 
detained  there  no  longer  than  to  give  an  account,  how  very 
numerous  the  King’s  forces  of  horse  and  foot  had  been  ;  how 
many  thousands  of  them  were  killed,  how  many  taken  ;  with 
what  a  small  loss  of  men  the  Romans  had  made  such  havoc 
of  the  enemy,  and  with  how  poor  an  attendance  Perseus  had 
fled  ;  that  it  was  supposed  he  would  go  to  Samothrace,  and 
that  the  fleet  was  ready  to  pursue  him  ;  so  that  he  could  not 
escape,  either  by  sea  or  land.”  They  were  then  brought  out 
into  the  assembly  of  the  people,  where  they  repeated  the 
same  particulars,  and  renewed  the  general  joy  in  such  a  de- 
gree,  that  no  sooner  had  the  consul  published  an  order,  that 
all  the  places  of  worship  should  be  opened,  and  that  they 
should  proceed  directly  to  return  thanks  to  the  immortal  gods, 
than  every  temple  in  the  city  was  filled  with  vast  crowds,  not 
't)nly  of  men  but  of  women.  The  senate,  being  re-assembled, 
ordered  thanksgivings  in  all  the  temples,  during  five  days,  for 
the  glorious  successes  obtained  by  the  consul  Lucius  iEmi- 
lius,  with  sacrifices  of  the  larger  kinds  of  victims.  They  also 
voted,  that  the  ships,  which  lay  in  the  Tiber  fit  for  sea,  and 
ready  to  sail  for  Macedonia,  in  case  the  King  had  been  able 
to  maintain  the  dispute,  should  be  hauled  up,  and  placed  in 
the  docks,  and  the  seamen  belonging  to  them  paid  a  year’s 
wages,  and  discharged  ;  and,  together  with  these,  all  who  had 
taken  the  military  oath  to  the  consul ;  that  all  the  soldiers  in 
Corcyra  and  Brundusium,  on  the  coast  of  the  upper  sea,  and 
in  the  territory  of  Larinum,  should  be  disbanded  ;  for  in  all 
these  places  had  troops  been  cantoned,  in  order  that  the  con- 

BOOK  XLV. 

237 

B.C.  168.] 
sul  Licinius  might,  if  occasion  required,  take  them  over  to 
reinforce  his  colleague.  The  thanksgiving  was  fixed,  by 
proclamation  in  the  assembly,  for  the  fifth  day  before  the 
ides  of  October. 
III.  Two  deputies,  Caius  Licinius  Nerva  and  Publius  De- 
cius,  likewise  arrived  at  this  time,  who  brought  intelligence 
that  the  arm>  of  the  Illyrians  was  defeated,  their  King  Gen- 
tins  taken  prisoner,  and  all  Illyria  reduced  under  the  dominion 
of  the  Roman  people.  On  account  of  these  services,  under 
the  conduct  and  auspices  of  the  prietor  Lucius  Anicius,  the 
senate  voted  a  supplication  of  three  days’  continuance,  and  it 
was  accordingly  appointed,  by  proclamation,  to  be  performed 
on  the  fourth,  third,  and  second  days  of  the  ides  of  Novem¬ 
ber.  Some  writers  tell  us,  that  the  Rhodian  ambassadors 
had  not  yet  been  admitted  to  an  audience ;  and  that,  when 
the  news  of  the  victory  was  received,  they  were  called  before 
the  senate  in  order  to  expose  their  absurdity  and  arrogance. 
On  this  occasion,  Agesipolis,  their  principal,  spoke  to  this 
effect :  that  they  had  been  sent  by  the  Rhodians,  with  a 
commission,  to  effect  an  accommodation  between  the  Ro¬ 
mans  and  Perseus;  the  war  then  subsisting  being  injurious 
and  burdensome  to  all  Greece,  and  expensive  and  detrimen¬ 
tal  to  the  Romans  themselves  ;  but  that  the  kindness  of  for¬ 
tune,  terminating  the  war  after  another  manner,  had  afforded 
them  an  opportunity  of  congratulating  the  Romans  on  a  glo¬ 
rious  victory.”  To  this  discourse  of  the  Rhodians,  the  senate 
returned  the  following  answer  ;  that  the  Rhodians,  in  send¬ 
ing  that  embassy,  had  not  been  actuated  by  concern  either  foi 
the  interests  of  Greece,  or  for  the  expenses  of  the  Romaic 
people,  but  merely  by  their  wishes  to  serve  Perseus.  For, 
if  their  concern  had  been  such  as  they  pretended,  the  time 
for  sending  ambassadors  would  have  been,  when  that  mo¬ 
narch,  leading  an  army  into  Thessaly,  had  continued,  for  twe 
years,  to  besiege^some  of  the  cities  of  Greece,  and  to  terriO 

238 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

[Y.R.584. 

others  with  denunciations  of  vengeance.  All  this  time  not 
the  least  mention  of  peace  was  made  by  the  Rhodians ;  but 
when  they  heard  that  the  Romans  had  passed  the  defiles^  and 
penetrated  into  Macedonia,  and  that  Perseus  was  held  in¬ 
closed  by  them  ;  then  they  sent  an  embassy,  from  no  other 
motive  whatever,  but  a  wish  to  rescue  Perseus  from  the  im¬ 
pending  danger.’’  With  this  answer  the  ambassadors  were 
dismissed. 
IV.  About  the  same  time  Marcus  Marcellus,  coming 
home  from  Spain,  where  he  had  taken  Marcolica,  a  city  of 
note,  brought  into  the  treasury  ten  pounds  weight  of  gold, 
and  a  quantity  of  silver,  amounting  to  a  million  of  sesterces.* 
While  the  consul  Paullus  iEmilius  lay  encamped  at  Sirse,  in 
Odom  anti ce,  as  mentioned  above,  a  letter  from  King  Per¬ 
seus  was  brought  to  him  by  three  ambassadors  of  mean  ap¬ 
pearance,  the  sight  of  whom,  as  we  are  told,  excited  in  his 
mind  such  reflections  on  the  instability  of  human  affairs,  as 
caused  him  to  shed  tears ;  that  a  prince,  who,  a  short  time 
before,  not  content  with  the  kingdom  of  Macedonia,  had  in¬ 
vaded  Dardania  and  Illyria,  and  had  called  out  to  his  aid  the 
whole  Bastarnian  nation,  should  now,  after  having  lost  his  ar¬ 
my,  be  expelled  his  kingdom,  and  forced  to  take  refuge  in  a 
little  island,  where,  as  a  suppliant,  he  was  protected  by  the 
sanctity  of  the  place,  not  by  any  strength  of  his  own,  occa¬ 
sioned  him  something  like  pain  :  but  when  he  read  the  ad¬ 
dress,  King  Perseus  to  the  consul  Paullus,  greeting,”  the 
seeming  insensibility  of  his  condition  did  away  all  com¬ 
passion  ;  so  that,  notwithstanding  the  letter  consisted  of  en¬ 
treaties  couched  in  terms  ill  suited  to  royalty,  yet  the  em¬ 
bassy  was  dismissed  without  any  answer.  Perseus,  perceiv¬ 
ing  that  it  was  expected  he  should,  in  his  vanquished  state, 
forget  his  pompous  titles,  sent  another  letter,  inscribed 

-  8,072].  18s.  4d. 

BOOK  XLV. 

239 

B.C.  168.] 
simply  with  his  name^  in  which  he  made  a  request,  which 
was  readily  complied  with,  that  some  persons  should  be  sent 
to  him,  with  whom  he  might  confer  on  the  present  condition 
of  his  affairs.  Three  ambassadors  were  accordingly  dis¬ 
patched,  Publius  Lentulus,  Aulus  Postumius  Albinus,  and 
Aulus  Antonius;  but  their  embassy  effected  nothing.  For 
Perseus  struggled  with  all  his  might  to  retain  the  regal  title, 
while  Paullus  insisted  on  an  absolute  submission  of  himself, 
and  every  thing  belonging  to  him,  to  the  honour  and  clemency 
of  the  Roman  people. 
V.  In  the  mean  time,  Cneius  Octavius,  with  his  fleet,  put 
in  at  Samothrace  ;  and  presenting  immediate  danger  to  Per¬ 
seus’s  view,  he  endeavoured,  at  one  time  by  menaces,  at 
another  by  hopes,  to  prevail  on  him  to  surrender.  In  this 
design,  he  was  greatly  assisted  by  an  occurrence,  which  it  is 
uncertain  whether  it  were  accidental  or  designed.  Lucius 
Atilius,  a  young  man  of  good  character,  observing  that  the 
people  of  Samothrace  were  met  in  a  general  assembly,  asked 
permission  of  the  magistrate  to  address  a  few  words  to  them  ; 
which  being  granted,  he  said, — People  of  Samothrace,  our 
good  hosts  ;  is  the  account  which  we  have  heard  true  or 
false,  that  this  island  is  sacred,  and  the  country  holy  and  in¬ 
violable  They  all  agreed  in  asserting  the  supposed  sanc¬ 
tity  of  the  place  ;  whereupon  he  proceeded  thus  :  Why, 
then,  has  a  murderer,  stained  with  the  blood  of  King  Eu- 
menes,  presumed  to  profane  it  ?  And  though,  previous  to 
every  sacrifice,  a  proclamation  forbids  all  who  have  not  pure 
hands  to  assist  at  the  sacred  rites,  will  you,  nevertheless,  suf¬ 
fer  your  holy  places  to  be  polluted  by  the  approach  of  an  as¬ 
sassin  The  story  of  King  Eumenes  having  been  nearly 
murdered  by  Evander  at  Delphi,  was  now  well  known 
through  all  the  cities  of  Greece.  The  Samothracians,  there¬ 
fore,  besides  the  consideration  of  their  being  themselves,  as 
well  as  the  temple  and  the  whole  island,  in  the  power  of  tht 

240 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  584. 

Romans,  were  convinced,  that  the  censure  thrown  on  them 
was  not  understood ;  they,  therefore,  sent  Theondas,  their 
chief  magistrate,  whom  they  style  King,  to  Perseus,  to  ac¬ 
quaint  him,  that  Evander  the  Cretan  was  accused  of  mur¬ 
der  ;  that  they  had  a  mode  of  trial  established  among  them, 
by  the  practice  of  their  ancestors,  concerning  such  as  were 
charged  with  bringing  impure  hands  into  the  consecrated 
precincts  of  the  temple.  If  Evander  was  confident,  that  he 
was  innocent  of  the  capital  charge  made  against  him,  let  him 
come  forth,  and  stand  a  trial  ;  but,  if  he  would  not  venture 
to  undergo  an  inquiry,  let  him  free  the  temple  from  profa¬ 
nation,  and  take  care  of  himself,  as  well  as  he  could.’’  Per¬ 
seus,  calling  out  Evander,  told  him,  that  he  would  by  no 
means  advise  him  to  stand  a  trial,  because  he  was  no  match 
for  his  accusers,  either  in  the  merits  of  the  cause,  or  in  influ¬ 
ence.  He  had  secret  apprehensions,  that  Evander,  on  being 
condemned,  would  expose  him,  as  the  instigator  of  that  abo¬ 
minable  act.  What  then  remained,  he  said,  but  to  die  bravely  ? 
Evander  made,  openly,  no  objection  ;  but,  telling  the  King 
that  he  chose  to  die  by  poison  rather  than  by  the  sword,  took 
measures  in  secret  for  effecting  his  escape.  When  this  was 
told  to  the  King,  he  was  alarmed,  lest  the  anger  of  the  Samo- 
thracians  should  be  turned  against  himself,  as  accessary  to 
the  escape  of  a  guilty  person,  and  he  ordered  Evander  to  be 
put  to  death.  No  sooner  was  this  rash  murder  perpetrated, 
than  his  mind  was  immediately  stung  with  remorse.  He 
considered  that  he  had  now  drawn  on  himself  the  whole  of 
the  guilt,  which  before  had  affected  Evander  only  ;  that  the 
latter  had  wounded  Eumenes  at  Delphi,  and  he  had  slain 
Evander  in  Samothrace  ;  and  thus  the  two  most  venerable 
sanctuaries  in  the  world  had,  through  his  means  alone,  been 
defiled  with  human  blood.”  He  contrived,  however,  to 
avoid  the  imputation  of  this  deed,  by  bribing  Theondas,  to 

241 

B.C.  168.]  BOOK  XLV. 
tell  the  people,  that  Evander  had  laid  violent  hands  on  him¬ 
self. 
VI.  But  such  an  atrocious  act,  committed  on  his  only  re¬ 
maining  friend,  on  one  whose  fidelity  he  had  experienced  on 
so  many  trying  occasions,  and  who,  in  return  for  not  proving 
a  traitor,  was  himse^if  betrayed,  disgusted  every  one.  A 
general  defection  and  going  over  to  the  Romans  ensued,  so 
that  he  was  left  almost  alone,  and  obliged,  in  that  condition, 
to  meditate  the  means  of  escaping.  He  applied  to  a  Cretan, 
called  Oroandes,  who  was  acquainted  with"  the  coast  of 
Thrace,  having  carried  on  traffic  in  that  country,  to  take  him 
on  board  his  vessel  and  convey  him  to  Cotys.  At  one  of 
the  promontories  of  Samothrace  is  a  harbour  called  Deme- 
trium  ;  there  the  vessel  lay.  About  sunset,  every  thing  ne¬ 
cessary  for  the  voyage  was  carried  thither,  together  with  as 
much  money  as  could  be  transported  with  secrecy  ;  and  at 
midnight  the  King  himself,  with  three  persons,  who  were 
privy  to  his  flight,  going  out  through  a  back  door  into  a  gar¬ 
den  near  his  chamber, and  having  with  much  difficulty  climbed 
over  the  w^l<  went  down  to  the  shore.  Oroandes  had  set 
sail,  at  die  first  dusk,  as  soon  as  the  money  arrived,  and  was 
now  s^ering  for  Crete.  Perseus,  not  finding  the  ship  in  the 
harbour,  wandered  about  for  a  long  time  on  the  coast ;  but, 
at  last,  fearing  the  approach  of  day,  and  not  daring  to  return 
to  his  lodging,  he  hid  himself  in  a  dark  corner  at  one  side  of 
the  temple.  Among  the  Macedonians,  there  was  a  band  of 
boys  of  the  highest  birth,  chosen  out  to  wait  on  the  King, 
and  called  the  royal  pages :  this  band  had  accompanied  Per¬ 
seus  in  his  flight,  and  did  not  even  now  desert  him,  until  Cneius 
Octavius  ordered  a  herald  to  proclaim,  that,  “  if  the  royal 
pages  and  other  Macedonians,  then  in  Samothrace,  would  come 
over  to  the  Romans,  they  should  have  Impunity,  liberty,  and  all 
their  property, both  what  they  had  in  the  island,  and  what  they 
had  left  in  Macedonia. On  this  notice  they  came  over,  and  made 
t'T. — 2  I 

242 

HISTORY  OF  ROME,  [Y.R.  584 

a  formal  surrender  before  Caius  Postumius,  a  military  tribune. 
The  King's  younger  children  also  were  delivered  up  to  Cneius 
Octavius,  by  lo  of  Thessalonica  ;  nor  was  any  one,  now,  left 
with  Perseus,  except  Philip  his  eldest  son.  Then,  after  ut¬ 
tering  many  execrations  against  fortune,  and  the  gods  to 
whom  the  temple  belonged,  for  not  affording  aid  to  a  sup¬ 
pliant,  he  surrendered  himself,  and  his  son,  to  Octavius.  He 
was  put  on  board  the  praetor's  ship,  arid,  with  him,  all  his  re¬ 
maining  money ;  and  the  fleet  immediately  returned  to  Am- 
phipolis.  From  thence  Octavius  sent  the  King  into  the 
camp  to  the  consul,  having  previously^  informed  him  by  let¬ 
ter,  that  he  was  a  prisoner,  and  on  the  road  thither. 
VII.  Paullus,  justly  considering  this  as  a  second  victory, 
offered  sacrifices  on  the  occasion  ;  then,  calling  a  council,  and 
reading  to  them  the  praetor’s  letter,  he  sent  Quintus  iElius 
Tubero,  to  meet  and  escort  the  King  ;  the  rest  he  desired  to 
remain  assembled  in  the  praetorium.  Never,  on  any  other 
occasion,  did  so  great  a  multitude  gather  about  a  spectacle. 
In  the  time  of  their  fathers,  King  Syphax  had  been  made 
prisoner,  and  brought  into  the  Roman  camp ;  but,  besides 
that  he  could  not  be  compared  with  Perseus,  either  in  respect 
of  his  own  reputation,  or  that  of  his  country,  he  was  at  the 
time  a  subordinate  party  in  the  Carthaginian  war,  as  Gentius 
was  in  the  Macedonian.  Whereas  Perseus  was  the  principal 
in. this  war :  and  was  not  only  highly  conspicuous  through 
his  own  personal  renown,  and  that  of  his  father,  grandfather, 
and  other  relations  in  blood  and  extraction,  but  of  these,  two 
shone  with  unparalleled  lustre, — Philip,  arid  Alexander  the 
Great ;  who  acquired  to  the  Macedonians  sovereign  do¬ 
minion  over  the  whole  world.  Perseus  came  into  the  camp, 
dressed  in  mourning,  unattended  by  any  of  his  countrymen, 
except  his  own  son,  whose  being  a  sharer  in  the  calamity 
added  to  the  wretchedness  of  his  situation.  The  crowd, 
which  had  collected  to  get  a  sight  of  him,  prevented  his  ad- 

BOOK  XLV. 

243 

B.C- 168.] 
vancing,  until  the  consul  sent  his  lictors,  who  cleared  the  way 
and  opened  a  passage  to  the  praetorium.  At  his  coming,  the 
consul  arose,  but  ordered  the  rest  to  keep  their  seats,  and, 
advancing  a  little,  held  out  his  right  hand  to  the  King  at  the 
entrance  ;  when  Berseus  offered  to  fall  at  his  feet,  he  held 
him  up,  nor  would  he  suffer  him  to  embrace  his  knees,  but 
led  him  into  the  tent,  and  desired  him  to  sit  on  the  side  op¬ 
posite  to  the  officers,  assembled  in  council. 
Vm.  He  began  by  asking,  “  what  injuries  had  obliged  him 
to  enter  into  a  war  against  the  Roman  people  with  such  violent 
animosity,  and  to  bring  himself  and  his  kingdom  to  the  ex¬ 
tremity  of  danger.”  While  all  expected  his  answer,  he  kept 
his  eyes  fixed  on  the  ground,  and  wept  a  long  time  in  silence. 
The  consul,  again  addressing  him,*  said,  if  you  had  acceded 
to  the  government  in  early  youth,  I  should  have  less  wonder¬ 
ed  at  your  not  being  sensible  of  the  great  importance  of  the 
friendship  or  enmity  of  the  Roman  people.  But  that  was 
not  the  case,  as  you  bore  a  part  in  the  war  which  your  father 
waged  with  us,  and,  afterwards,  must  have  remembered  the 
peace  which  we  maintained  towards  him  with  the  strictest 
sincerity.  What  motive,  then,  could  induce  you  to  prefer 
war  to  peace,  with  those,  whose  power  in  war,  and  whose 
good  faith  in  peace,  you  had  so  fully  experienced  ?”  Neither 
questions  nor  reproaches  could  draw  an  answer  from  him : 
on  which,  the  consul  added,  Whatever  cause  may  have 
produced  these  events,  whether  mistakes  incident  to  humanity, 
or  accident  or  necessity,  suffer  not  your  spirits  to  be  deject¬ 
ed.  The  clemency  of  the  Roman  people,  displayed  in  nu¬ 
merous  instances  towards  kings  and  nations  in  distress,  af¬ 
fords  you  not  only  hope,  but  almost  perfect  confidence  of 
safety.”  This  he  said  in  the  Greek  language  to  Perseus  ; 
and  then,  turning  to  his  own  people,  he  said,  in  the  Latine 
tongue  ;  Do  you  not  observe  this  striking  instance  of  the 
instability  of  human  affairs  ?  To  you,  young  men,  principal- 

244 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  584. 

ly,  I  address  the  observation.  In  the  hour  of  prosperity, 
therefore,  we  ought  to  harbour  neither  sentiments  of  arro¬ 
gance  nor  of  rancour ;  nor  to  confide  implicitly  in  present 
advantages  ;  since  we  know  not  what  the  evening  may  pro¬ 
duce.  He  alone  will  deserve  the  character  of  a  man,  who 
suffers  not  his  spirit  to  be  elated  by  the  favourable  gales  of 
fortune,  nor  to  be  broken  by  its  adverse  blasts.”  He  then 
dismissed  the  council,  and  gave  the  charge  of  guarding  the 
King  to  Quintus  iElius.  Perseus  was  invited  to  dine  that 
day  with  the  consul,  and  received  every  mark  of  respect, 
which  his  present  circumstances  would  admit. 
IX.  The  troops  were  immediately  sent  off  to  their  winter 
cantonments  ;  the  greater  part  were  quartered  in  Amphipo- 
lis,  and  the  rest  in  the  towns  in  that  neighbourhood.  Thus 
ended  the  war  between  the  Romans  and  Perseus,  which  had 
lasted,  without  intermission,  four  years  ;  and  thus  ended  a 
kingdom,  long  renowned  through  a  great  part  of  Europe, 
and  throughout  all  Asia.  From  Caranus,  their  first  king, 
they  reckoned  Perseus  the  fortieth.  Perseus  came  to  the 
crown,  in  the  consulate  of  Quintus  Fulvius  and  Lucius  Man¬ 
lius  ;  received  the  title  of  king  from  the  senate  in  that  of 
Marcus  Junius  and  Aulus  Manlius,  and  reigned  eleven 
years.  The  fame  of  the  Macedonians  was  but  obscure,  un¬ 
til  the  reign  of  Philip,  son  of  Amyntas  ;  and  though,  in  his 
time,  and  by  his  means,  it  began  to  increase,  yet  it  was  still 
confined  within  the  limits  of  Europe,  extending  only  to  all 
Greece,  with  a  part  of  Thrace,  and  Illyria.  Afterwards,  the 
force  of  Macedon  poured  down  like  a  deluge  on  Asia ;  and 
it  was  in  the  course  of  the  thirteen  years  of  the  reign  of 
Alexander,  that  they  reduced  under  their  dominion  that  al¬ 
most  immense  tract  which  had  constituted  the  empire  of  the 
Persians,  and  then  overspread  the  Arabias,  and  India,  as  far 
as  where  the  Red  Sea  forms  the  utmost  boundar)  of  the 
earth.  At  that  time,  their  empire  was  the  greatest  in  the 

B.C,168.] 

245 

JooK,  XUV 
OOK  XLV. 
world  ;  but  on  the  death  of  Alexander,  it  was  tom  asunder 
into  a  number  of  kingdoms,  each  of  his  successors  struggling 
to  grasp  power  to  himself,  and  thereby  dismembering  the 
whole.  From  the  time  of  its  highest  elevation  to  this  its  final 
downfall,  it  stood  one  hundred  and  fifty  years. 
X.  When  the  news  of  the  victory,  obtained  by  the  Romans, 
was  carried  into  Asia,  Antenor,  who  lay  with  a  fleet  of  small 
vessels,  at  Phanae,  sailed  over  to  Cassandrea.  Caius  Popil- 
lius,  who  staid  at  Delos  to  protect  the  ships  bound  to  Mace¬ 
donia,  learning  that  the  war  there  was  at  an  ^d,  and  that  the 
enemy^s  fleet  had  left  its  station,  sent  home  the  Athenian 
squadron,  and  proceeded  on  his  voyage  for  Egypt,  to  finish 
the  business  of  the  embassy,  with  which  he  was  charged;  for 
he  wished  to  meet  Antiochus  before  he  should  approach  the 
walls  of  Alexandria.  When  the  ambassadors,  sailing  along 
the  coast  of  Asia,  arrived  at  Loryma,  a  port  somewhat  more 
than  twenty  miles  from  Rhodes,  and  just  opposite  to  that 
city,  they  were  met  by  some  of  the  principal  Rhodians, — (for 
the  news  of  the  victory  had  by  this  time  reached  them  too,) 
who  besought  them  to  sail  over  to  their  city ;  for  that  it  was 
of  the  utmost  consequence  to  the  character  and  well-being  of 
the  Roman  state  that  they  should,  in  person,  inform  them¬ 
selves  of  what  had  been  done,  and  what  was  then  passing  at 
Rhodes  ;  so  as  to  carry  home  intelligence,  founded  on  their 
own  knowledge,  and  not  on  vague  reports.’’  After  refusing 
for  a  long  time,  they  were  at  length  prevailed  on  to  submit  to 
a  short  delay  of  their  voyage,  for  the  sake  of  the  safety  of  an 
allied  city.  When  they  came  to  Rhodes,  the  same  persons, 
by  urgent  entreaties,  persuaded  them  to  be  present  at  a  gene¬ 
ral  assembly.*  The  arrival  of  the  ambassadors  rather  height¬ 
ened,  than  allayed,  the  fears  of  the  public.  For  Popillius 
enumerated  all  the  hostile  expressions  and  actions,  both  of 
the  community,  and  of  individuals,  during  the  war  ;  and,  be¬ 
ing  naturally  of  an  austere  temper,  he  magnified  the  atro- 

24& 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  584. 

ciousness  of  the  matters  which  he  mentioned,  by  the  stern¬ 
ness  of  his  countenance,  and  the  harshness  of  his  tone  of 
voice  ;  so  that,  as  he  had  no  cause  of  personal  quarrel  with 
their  state,  people  judged,  from  the  austerity  of  one  Roman 
senator,  what  was  the  disposition  of  the  whole  senate  towards 
them.  Caius  Decimius  spoke  with  more  moderation ;  and, 
respecting  most  of  the  particulars  mentioned  by  Popillius,  he 
asserted  that  the  blame  lay,  not  on  the  nation,  but  on  a 
few  incendiary  ringleaders  of  the  populace,  who,  employing 
their  tongues  for  hire,  procured  the  passing  of  several  de¬ 
crees,  full  of  flattery  towards  the  King  ;  and  had  sent  several 
embassies,  which  always  excited,  in  the  minds  of  the  Rho¬ 
dians,  both  shame  and  sorrow,  all  which  proceedings,  how¬ 
ever,  if  the  people  were  disposed  to  act  properly,  would  fall 
on  the  heads  of  the  guilty.”  His  discourse  gave  great  satis¬ 
faction  ;  not  only,  because  it  extenuated  the  offences  of  the 
community,  but  because  it  threw  the  whole  blame  on  the  au¬ 
thors  of  their  misconduct.  When,  therefore,  their  own  ma¬ 
gistrates  spoke  in  answer  to  the  Romans,  the  people  were  not 
so  well  pleased  with  those  who  endeavoured  to  exculpate 
mem,  in  some  measure,  from  the  charges  advanced  by  Po¬ 
pillius,  as  with  those  who  advised  to  concur  with  the  opinion 
of  Decimius,  and  expiate  their  fault  by  the  punishment  of 
the  chief  offenders.  A  decree  was  therefore  immediately 
passed,  that  all  who  should  be  convicted  of  having,  in  any 
instance,  spoken  or  acted  in  favour  of  Perseus,  against  the 
Romans,  should  be  condemned  to  die.  Several  of  those  con¬ 
cerned,  had  left  the  city  on  the  arrival  of  the  Romans  ;  others 
put  an  end  to  their  own  lives.  The  ambassadors  staid  only 
five  days  at  Rhodes,  and  then  proceeded  to  Al^andria  ;  but 
the  trials  instituted,  pursuant  to  the  decree  passed  in  their 
presence,  were  still  carried  on  at  Rhodes,  with  the  same  ac¬ 
tivity  ;  and  this  perseverance  of  the  Rhodians,  in  the  execu- 

247 

B.C.  168.]  BOOK  XLV. 
tton  of  that  business,  was  entirely  owing  to  the  mild  behaviour 
of  Decimius. 
XI.  In  the  mean  time,  Antiochus,  after  a  fruitless  attempt 
against  the  walls  of  Alexandria,  had  retired  ;  and  being  now 
master  of  all  the  rest  of  Egypt,  he  left,  at  Memphis,  the 
elder  Ptolemy,  whose  settlement  on  the  throne  was  the  pre¬ 
tended  object  of  his  armament,  though,  in  reality’,  he  meant  to 
attack  him,  as  soon  as  he  should  have  vanquished  his  com¬ 
petitors  ;  and,  then,  he  led  back  his  army  into  Syria.  Ptole¬ 
my,  who  was  not  nnapprised  of  this  his  intention,  conceived 
hopes,  that,  while  he  held  his  younger  brother  under  terror, 
and  in  dread  of  a  siege,  he  might  be  able  to  manage  matters 
so  as  to  procure  admittance  into  Alexandria,  provided  his 
sister  favoured  the  design,  and  his  brother’s  friends  did  not 
oppose  it.  Accordingly,  he  never  ceased  sending  proposals 
to  all  these,  until  he  effected  an  accommodation  with  them. 
His  suspicmns  of  Antiochus  were  corroborated  by  this  cir¬ 
cumstance,  that,  when  he  gave  him  possession  of  the  rest  of 
Egypt,  he  left  a  strong  garrison  in  Pelusium  :  a  plain  proof 
that  he  kept  that  key  of  Egypt  in  his  hands,  in  order  that  he 
might  be  able  whenever  he  *  pleased,  to  mtrcduce  an  army, 
again,  into  the  country  ;  and  he  foresaw,  that  the  final  issue 
of  a  civil  war  with  his  brother,  must  be,  that  the  conqueror, 
thoroughly  weakened  by  the  contest,  would  be  utterly  unable 
to  contend  with  Antiochus.  In  these  prudent  observations 
of  the  elder  brother,  the  younger,  and  those  about  him,  con¬ 
curred  ;  while  their  sister  greatly  promoted  the  negotiation, 
both  by  her  advice  and  entreaties.  A  friendly  intercourse, 
therefore,  took  place,  to  the  satisfaction  of  all  the  parties,  and 
the  elder  Ptolemy  was  received  in  Alexandria.  Nor  was 
this  unpleasing,  even  to  the  populace  ;  who,  during  the  war, 
had  been  severely  distressed  by  general  scarcity,  not  only 
in  consequence  of  the  siege,  but,  after  the  enemy  bad  retired, 
by*  all  communication  with  every  part  of  Egypt,  being  shut 

248 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R,  584. 

up.  Although  it  was  reasonable  to  suppose,  that  Antiochus 
would  be  rejoiced  at  these  events,  if  he  had  really  marched 
his  army  into  Egypt,  for  the  purpose  of  reinstating  Ptolemy 
on  the  throne, — (the  plausible  pretext  which  he  had  professed 
to  all  the  states  of  Asia  and  Greece,  in  his  answers  to  their 
embassies,  and  in  the  letters  that  he  wrote  ;)  yet  he  was  so 
highly  offended,  that  he  prepared  to  make  war  on  the  two 
brothers,  with  much  greater  acrimony  and  fury  of  resent¬ 
ment,  than  he  had  shown  against  the  one.  He  instantly  sent 
his  fleet  to  Cyprus  ;  and,  as  soon  as  the  spring  appeared, 
putting  himself  at  the  head  of  his  army,  he  directed  his 
route  towards  Egypt,  and  advanced  into  Ccelesyria.  Near 
Rhinocolura,  he  was  met  by  ambassadors  from  Ptolemy,  who 
gave  him  thanks  for  the  assistance,  by  means  of  which  he  had 
recovered  the  throne  of  his  ancestors  ;  and  he  requested  him 
to  secure  to  him  the  enjoyment  of  the  benefit,  which  he  had 
himself  conferred ;  and  rather  to  signify  what  he  wished  to 
be  done,  than  from  an  ally  to  become  an  enemy,  and  proceed 
by  force  of  arms.  To  this  he  answered,  that  “  he  would 
neither  recall  his  fleet,  nor  stop  the  march  of  his  army,  on 
any  other  conditions,  than  that  all  Cyprus  and  the  city  of 
Pelusium,  together  with  the  lands  adjoining  the  Pelusian 
mouth  of  the  Nile,  should  be  ceded  to  him  and  he  even 
named  a  particular  day,  on  or  before  which  he  expected  to 
receive  an  answer,  that  these  terms  were  complied  with. 
XII.  When  the  time  fixed  for  the  suspension  of  hostilities, 
was  elapsed,  Anttochus  ordered  the  commanders  of  his  feet 
to  sail  up  the  mouth  of  the  Nile  to  Pelusium,  while  he  him¬ 
self  entered  Egypt ^  through  the  deserts  of  Arabia.  He  was 
amicably  received  bij  the  people  about  Memphis,  as  he  was, 
afterwards,  by  the  rest  of  the  Egyptians  ;  some  being  led  by 
inclination,  others  by  fear  ;  and  he  proceeded  thus,  by  short 
marches,  dowm  to  Alexandria.  He  had  just  crossed  the  river 
at  Eleusine,  four  miles  from  that  city,  when  he  was  met  by 

BOOK  XLV. 

249 

B.C.  1^80 
the  Roman  ambassadors.  At  their  coming,  he  saluted  them, 
and  held  out  his  right  hand  to  Popillius  ;  but  Popillius  put¬ 
ting  into  his  hand  a  written  tablet,  desired  him  first  to  peruse 
that.  On  reading  it,  he  said,  that  he  would  call  his  friends 
together,  and  consult  what  was  to  be  done  ;  on  which  Po¬ 
pillius,  with  that  roughness  which  generally  marked  his 
character,  drew  a  line  round  the  King,  with  a  wand  which 
he  held  in  his  hand,  and  said,  Before  you  go  out  of  that 
circle,  give  such  an  answer  as  I  may  report  to  the  senate.” 
Astonished  at  such  a  peremptory  injunction,  the  King  hesi¬ 
tated  for  some  time  ;  but,  at  last,  replied,  “  I  will  do  as  the 
senate  directs.”  Popillius  then  thought  proper  to  stretch  out 
his  right  hand  to  him  ;  as  to  a  friend  and  ally.  Antiochus 
having  retired  out  of  Egypt,  on  a  day  prefixed,  the  ambassa¬ 
dors  employed  their  influence  in  establishing  concord  among 
the  royal  family,  on  a  more  firm  basis  than  it  had  yet  acquired ; 
and  then  sailed  to  Cyprus,  from  whence  they  sent  home  the 
ships  of  Antiochus,  and  which  had  fought  and  defeated  an 
Egyptian  fleet.  This  embassy  attracted  a  great  share  of  re¬ 
spect  from  all  nations  ;  having  manifestly  rescued  Egypt  out 
of  the  hands  of  the  Syrian,  when  he  had  it  within  his  grasp, 
and  restored  to  the  race  of  Ptolemy,  the  kingdom  of  their 
forefathers.  While  one  of  the  consuls  of  this  year  distin¬ 
guished  his  administration,  by  a  glorious  victory,  the  other 
acquired  no  new  lustre  to  his  reputation,  no  object  presenting 
itself  to  call  forth  his  abilities.  When,  in  the  beginning  of 
his  administration,  he  had  appointed  his  troops  to  assemble, 
he  entered  the  consecrated  place,  without  due  auspices  ;  and 
the  augurs,  on  the  matter  being  laid  before  them,  pronounced 
the  appointment  improper.  Going  into  Gaul,  be  lay  encamp¬ 
ed  near  the  long  plains,  at  the  foot  of  the  mountains  Sicimina 
and  Papirus,  passing  the  winter  in  the  same  country  with  the 
troops  of  the  Latine  allies.  The  Roman  legions  staid  all  the 
while  in  the  city,  because  their  assembling  had  been  irregu- 
VOL.  K 

250 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  584. 

larly  ordered.  The  praetors  went  to  their  several  provinces, 
except  Cains  Papirius  Carbo,  to  whose  lot  Sardinia  had 
fallen  ;  the  senate  having  commanded  him  to  administer  jus¬ 
tice,  at  Rome,  between  natives  and  foreigners  ;  a  duty  to 
which  he  had  been  already  named. 
XlII.  When  Popillius,  with  his  colleagues  in  the  embassy 
to  Antiochus,  returned  to  Rome,  he  gave  information,  that 
all  disputes  between  the  Kings  were  done  away,  and  that  the 
army  had  marched  out  of  Egypt,  into  Syria.  Soon  after, 
arrived  ambassadors,  from  the  Kings  themselves.  Those  of 
Antiochus  represented,  that  “  their  King  had  considered  a 
peace,  which  was  agreeable  to  the  senate,  as  preferable  to  a 
victory,  how  complete  soever,  and  had,  accordingly,  obeyed 
the  order  of  the  lioman  ambassadors,  as  implicitly,  as  if  it 
had  been  a  mandate  of  the  gods.”  They  then  offered  his 
congratulations  on  their  victory,  ‘‘  to  which,”  they  said, 
the  King  would  have  contributed  with  his  utmost  power, 
if  he  had  received  any  orders  to  act.”  The  .ambassadors  of 
Ptolemy,  in  the  joint  names  of  that  prince  and  Cleopatra, 
presented  their  thanks,  acknowledging  that  “  they  were  more 
indebted  to  the  senate  and  people  of  Rome,  then  to  their  own 
parents,  more  than  to  the  immortal  gods  ;  since,  through 
their  intervention,  they  had  been  relieved  from  a  most  dis¬ 
tressing  siege,  and  had  recovered  the  kingdom  of  their  fa¬ 
thers,  when  it  was  almost  entirely  lost.”  The  senate  observed 
of  Antiochus  that  he  had  acted  rightly  and  properly,  in 
complying  with  the  demand  of  their  ambassadors  j  and  that 
his  conduct  was  pleasing  to  the  senate  and  people  of  Rome.” 
To  Ptolemy  and  Cleopatra,  King  and  Queen  of  Egypt,  they 
answered,  that  the  senate  rejoiced  very  much,  at  having 
been,  in  any  degree,  instrumental  to  their  benefit  and  advan¬ 
tage  ;  and  would  take  care,  that  they  should  always  have 
reason  to  account  the  good  faith  of  the  Roman  people  the 
strongest  support  of  their  kingdom.”  Caius  Papirius,  the 

BOOK  XLV. 

251 

B.C,  168.] 
prsetor,  was  commissioned  to  send  the  usual  presents  to  the 
ambassadors.  A  letter  now  arrived  from  Macedonia,  which 
greatly  added  to  the  public  joy,  as  it  brought  information, 
that  King  Perseus  was  in  the  hands  of  the  consul.”  After 
the  ambassadors  were  dismissed,  the  senate  gave  hearing  to 
a  controversy,  between  deputies  from  Pisa,  and  others  from 
Luna  ;  the  former  complaining  that  they  were  dispossessed  of 
their  lands,  by  the  Roman  colonists  ;  while  the  latter  insisted, 
that  the  lands  in  question  had  been  marked  out  to  them,  by 
the  triumvirs.  The  senate  sent  five  commissioners  to  ex¬ 
amine  and  fix  the  boundaries,  Quintus  Fabius  Buteo,  Publius 
Cornelius  Blasio,  Tiberius  Sempronius  Musca,  Lucius  Nae- 
vius  Balbus,  and  Caius  Appuleius  Saturninus.  A  joint  em¬ 
bassy  from  the  three  brothers,  Eumenes,  Attalus,  and  Athe- 
naeus,  came  with  congratulations  on  the  victory  ;  and  Mas- 
gaba,  son  of  King  Masinissa,  having  landed  at  Puteoli,  Lu¬ 
cius  Manlius,  the  questor,  was  immediately  despatched  to 
meet  and  conduct  him  to  Rome  at  the  public  expense.  As 
soon  as  he  arrived,  the  senate  was  assembled  to  give  him 
audience.  This  young  prince  enhanced  the  ‘value  of  ser¬ 
vices,  in  themselves  meritorious,  by  the  engaging  manner  in 
which  he  mentioned  them.  He  recounted  what  numbers  of 
foot  and  horse,  how  many  elephants,  and  what  quantities  of 
com,  his  father  had  sent  into  Macedonia  in  aid  of  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  during  the  last  four  years.  ‘‘  But  there  were  two 
things,”  he  said,  that  made  him  blush  ;  one,  the  senate 
having  sent,  by  their  ambassadors,  a  request,  instead  of  an 
order,  to  furnish  necessaries  for  their  army  :  the  other,  their 
having  sent  money,  in  payment  for  the  corn.  Masinissa  well 
remembered,  that  the  kingdom,  which  he  held,  had  been  ac¬ 
quired,  and  very  greatly  augmented,  by  the  Roman  people  ; 
and,  contenting  himself  with  the  management  of  it,  acknow¬ 
ledged  the  right  and  sovereignty  to  be  vested  in  those  who 
granted  it  to  him.  It  became  them,  therefore,  to  take  what- 

252 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  584. 

ever  grew  in  the  country,  and  not  to  ask  from  him,  nor  to 
purchase,  any  of  the  produce  of  lands  made  over  by  them  - 
selves.  Whatever  remained,  after  supplying  the  Roman 
people,  Masinissa  thought  fully  sufficient  for  himself.  These 
were^he  declarations,”  he  said,  ‘‘of  his  father,  at  parting; 
but  he  was,  afterwards,  overtaken  by  some  horsemen,  who 
brought  him  an  account  of  Macedonia  being  conquered,  with 
directions  to  congratulate  the  senate  on  that  event.  He  had, 
also,  orders  to  acquaint  them,  that  Masinissa  was  so  over¬ 
joyed  at  it,  that  he  wished  to  come  to  Rome,  and,  in  the 
Capitol,  to  offer  thanks  to  Jupiter,  supremely  good  and  great. 
He  requested,  therefore,  that,  if  it  were  not  disagreeable,  the 
senate  would  give  him  permission  so  to  do.” 
XIV.  Masgaba  was  answered,  that  “  the  conduct  of  his 
father,  Masinissa,  was  such  as  became  a  prince  of  a  benevo¬ 
lent  and  grateful  disposition ;  while  his  manner  of  acknow¬ 
ledging  the  kindness  of  his  friends,  added  value  and  dignity 
to  it.  The  Roman  people  had  been  faithfully  and  bravely  as¬ 
sisted  by  him  in  the  Carthaginian  war  ;  by  the  favour  of  the 
Roman  people,  he  had  obtained  his  kingdom  ;  and  he  had, 
afterwards,  in  the  successive  wars  with  the  three  kings,  dis¬ 
charged,  with  his  usual  spirit,  every  duty.  That  it  was  no 
matter  of  surprise  to  them,  that  their  successes  should  give 
joy  to  a  king,  who  had  intimately  blended  his  own  in¬ 
terests,  and  those  of  his  kingdom,  with  the  interests  of  the 
Romans.  That  they  wished  him  to  return  thanks  for  the 
same,  in  the  temples  of  his  own  country,  and  which  his  son 
might  do  in  his  stead  at  Rome ;  as  he  had  already  said 
enough,  in  the  way  of  congratulation,^  both  in  his  own  name, 
and  in  his  father’s.  But  that  the  senate  were  of  opinion,  that 
by  leaving  his  own  kingdom,  and  going  out  of  Africa,  it 
might,  besides  being  inconvenient  to  himself,  prove  detrimen¬ 
tal  to  the  Roman  people.”  On  Masgaba  making  a  request, 
that  Hanno,  son  of  Hamilcar,  might  be  brought  to  Rome  a^i  a 

BOOK  XLV. 

253 

BX.  168.] 
hostage,  in  the  place  of  some  other ^  the  senate  replied^  that 
they  could  not  reasonably  require  hostages  from  the  Cartha^ 
ginianSy  at  the  choice  of  any  other  person.  The  quaestor  was 
ordered,  by  a  vote  of  the  senate,  to  purchase  presents  for  the 
young  prince,  to  the  value  of  one  hundred  pounds  weight  of 
silver,  to  accompany  him  to  Puteoli,  to  defray  all  his  ex¬ 
penses  while  he  staid  in  Italy,  and  to  hire  two  ships  to  carry 
him  and  his  retinue  to  Africa  ;  every  one  of  his  attendants, 
both  freemen  and  slaves,  receiving  gifts  of  clothes.  Soon 
after  this  a  letter  was  brought,  concerning  Masinissa’s  other 
son,  Misagenes,  stating  that,  after  the  conquest  of  Perseus,  he 
was  directed,  by  Lucius  Paulus,  to  go  home,  with  his  horse¬ 
men,  to  Africa  ;  and  that,  while  he  was  on  his  voyage  in  the 
Adriatic  Sea,  his  fleet  was  dispersed,  and  himself  in  a  bad  state 
of  health,  driven  into  Brundusium  with  only  three  ships.  Lu¬ 
cius  Stertinius,  the  quaestor,  was  sent  to  him,  to  Brundusium, 
with  presents  of  the  same  kind  with  those  given  to  his  brother 
at  Rome,  and  he  was  ordered  to  provide  lodgings  for  the 
prince  and  his  retinue,  and  every  thing  necessary  for  his 
health  and  convenience,  *##*** 
########### 
XV.  **#*#^*#* 
The  sons  of  freed  men  had  been  enrolled  in  the  four  city 
tribes,  excepting  such  as  had  a  son  more  than  five  years  old  ; 
all  these  the  censors,  in  pursuance  of  a  decree  of  the  senate, 
ordered  to  be  surveyed  in  the  tribe  wherein  they  had  been 
surveyed  the  year  before ;  and  such  as  had  a  farm,  or  farms, 
in  the  country,  exceeding  in  value  thirty  thoi^and  sesterces,* 
were  allowed  the  privilege  of  being  included  in  the  country 
tribes.  Though  this  reservation  was  made  in  their  favour, 
yet  Claudius  still  insisted,  that  “  a  censor  could  not,  without 
an  order  of  the  people,  take  away  from  any  man,  and  much 

2421.  4s;  3d. 

254 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  584. 

less  from  a  whole  class  of  men,  the  right  of  suffrage.  For 
though  he  can  remove  a  man  from  his  tribe,  which  is  nothing 
more  than  ordering  him  to  change  it,  yet  he  cannot,  therefore, 
remove  him  out  of  all  the  thirty-five  tribes  ;  which  would  be 
to  strip  him  of  the  rights  of  a  citizen,  and  of  liberty  ;  not  to 
fix  where  he  should  be  surveyed,  but  to  exclude  him  from  the 
survey.”  These  points  were  discussed  by  the  censors,  who 
at  last  came  to  this  compromise  :  that  out  of  the  four  city 
tribes,  they  should,  openly  in  the  court  of  the  temple  of  li¬ 
berty,  select  one  by  lot,  in  which  they  should  include  all  those 
who  had  ever  been  in  servitude.  The  lot  fell  on  the  iEsqui- 
line  tribe  ;  on  which  Tiberius  Gracchus  published  an  order, 
that  all  sons  of  freedmen  should  be  surveyed  in  that  tribe. 
This  proceeding  gained  the  censors  great  honour  with  the 
senate,  who  gave  thanks  to  Sempronius  for  his  perseverance 
in  so  good  a  design,  and  also  to  Claudius  for  not  obstructing 
it.  These  censors  expelled  from  the  senate,  and  ordered  to 
sell  their  horses,  greater  numbers  than  their  predecessors. 
They  both  concurred,  in  removing  from  their  tribes,  and  dis¬ 
franchising  the  same  persons,  in  every  instance  ;  nor  did  one 
of  them  remove  any  mark  of  disgrace  inflicted  by  the  other. 
They  petitioned  that,  according  to  custom,  the  year  and  half’s 
time,  allowed  for  enforcing  the  repairs  of  buildings,  and  for 
approving  the  execution  of  works  contracted  for,  should  be 
prolonged ;  but  Cneius  Tremellius,  a  tribune,  provoked  at 
not  having  been  chosen  into  the  senate,  protested  against  it. 
This  year  Caius  Cicerius  dedicated  a  temple  on  the  Alban 
mount,  five  yea^  after  he  had  vowed  it ;  and  Lucius  Postu- 
mius  Albinus  was  inaugurated  flamen  of  Mars. 
XVI.  The  consuls,  Quintus  iElius  and  Marcus  Junius, 
having  proposed  the  business  of  distributing  the 
B  C  167  Provinces,  the  senate  decreed  that  Spain,  which, 
during  the  Macedonian  war,  had  been  but  one 
province,  should  be  again  formed  into  two  ;  and  that  the 

BOOK  XLV. 

255 

B.C.  167.] 
present  governors,  Lucius  Paulius  and  Lucius  Anicius, 
should  continue  in  the  government  of  Macedonia  and  Illyria, 
until,  with  the  concurrence  of  commissioners,  they  should  ad¬ 
just  the  affairs  of  those  countries  disordered  by  the  war,  and 
form  a  new  constitution  for  both  kingdoms.  The  provinces 
assigned  to  the  consuls  were  Pisee  and  Gaul,  with  two  le¬ 
gions  to  each,  containing  five  thousand  two  hundred  foot,  and 
three  hundred  horse.  The  lots  of  the  praetors  were  of  Quin¬ 
tus  Cassius,  the  city  jurisdiction  ;  of  Manius  Juventius  Thal- 
na,  the  foreign ;  of  Tiberius  Claudius  Nero,  Sicily  ;  of  Cneius 
Fulvius,  Hither  Spain,  and  of  Caius  Licinius  Nerva,  Farther 
Spain.  Sardinia  had  fallen  to  Aulus  Manlius  Torquatus,  but 
he  could  not  proceed  thither,  being  detained  by  a  decree  of 
the  senate,  to  preside  at  trials  of  capital  offences.  The  senate 
was  then  consulted  concerning  prodigies  which  were  reported: 
the  temple  of  the  tutelar  deities,  on  the  Velian  hill,  had  been 
struck  by  lightning  ;  and  two  gates,  and  a  large  part  of  the 
wall  in  the  town  of  Minervium.  At  Anagnia,  a  shower  of 
earth  had  fallen  ;  and,  at  Lanuvium,  a  blazing  torch  was  seen 
in  the  sky.  Marcus  Valerius,  a  Roman  citizen,  reported, 
that  at  Calatia,  on  the  lands  of  the  public,  blood  had  flowed 
from  his  hearth,  during  three  days  and  two  nights.  On  ac¬ 
count  chiefly  of  this  last,  the  decemvirs  were  directed  to  con¬ 
sult  the  books  ;  on  which  they  ordered  a  gerieral  supplication 
for  one  day,  and  sacrificed  in  the  Forum  fifty  goats.  On  ac¬ 
count  of  the  other  prodigies,  there  was  another  supplication, 
of  one  day’s  continuance,  with  sacrifices  of  the  larger  victims, 
and  the  city  was  piiy'ified.  Then,  mindful  of  the  gratitude 
due  to  the  immortal  gods,  tl^  senate  decreed,  that,  “  foras¬ 
much  as  their  enemies  were  subdued,  and  Macedonia  and 
Illyria,  with  their  kings  .Perseus  and  Gentius,  were  in  the 
power  of  the  Roman  people,  therefore,  whatever  oflerings 
were  made  in  all  the  temples  by  Appius  Claudius  and  Mar¬ 
cus  Sempronius,  consuls,  on  occasion  of  the  conquest  of  King 

256 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  585. 

Antiochus,  offerings  of  the  same  value  should  then  be  made, 
under  the  superintendence  of  Quintus  Cassius  and  Manius 
Juventius,  prsetors.” 
XVII.  They  then  constituted  commissioners,  with  whose 
advice  the  generals,  Lucius  Paullus  and  Lucius  Anicius  were 
to  regulate  the  affairs  of  their  provinces  ;  ten  for  Macedonia, 
and  five  for  Illyria.  Those  nominated  for  Macedonia  were, 
Aulus  Postiimius  Luscus,  Caius  Claudius,  both  of  whom 
had  been  censors,  Caius  Licinius  Crassus,  who  had  been  col¬ 
league  to  Paullus  in  the  consulship,  and  then  held  the  pro¬ 
vince  of  Gaul,  having  been  continued  in  command.  To 
these,  who  were  of  consular  rank,  were  added,  Cneius  Do- 
mitius  iEnobarhus,  Servius  Cornelius  Sulla,  Lucius  Junius, 
Caius  Antistius  Labeo,  Titus  Numisius  Tarquiniensis,  and 
Aulus  Tcrentius  Varro.  The  following  were  nominated  for 
Illyria  ;  Publius  iElius  Ligus,  a  man  of  consular  rank,  Caius 
Cicereius,  Cneius  Bsebius  Tamphilus,  who  had  been  praetor 
the  last  year,  as  had  Cicereius,  many  years  before,  Publius 
Terentius  Tusciveicanus,  and  Publius  Manillas.  The  senate 
then  recommended  to  the  consuls  that,  one  of  them  must 
go  into  Gaul,  in  the  room  of  Caius  Licinius,  appointed  a 
commissioner,  they  should  either  settle  their  provinces  be¬ 
tween  themselves,  or  cast  lots,  as  might  be  agreeable  to  them. 
They  chose  to  cast  lots ;  when  Pisae  fell  to  Marcus  Junius, 
who  was  ordered  to  introduce  to  the  senate  the  embassies 
that  came  to  Rome,  from,  all  quartets,  with  congratulations, 
before  he  went  to  his  province  ;  and  Gaul  to  Quintus  iElius. 
XV III.  Although  the  commissioners  were  men  of  such 
characters  as  afforded  confident  hopes  that,  guided  by  their 
counsel,  the  generals  would  determine  on  nothing  derogatory 
either  to  the  clemency  or  dignity  of  the  Roman  people,  yet 
the  heads  of  a  plan  of  settlement  were  considered  in  the 
senate,  that  the  said  commissioners  might  carry  out  to  them 
a  general  idea  of  the  whole.  First,  it  was  determined,  that 

BOOK  XLV. 

257 

B.C,  167.] 
the  Macedonians  and  Illyrians  should  be  enfranchised :  in 
order  to  demonstrate  to  all  the  world,  that  the  arms  of  the 
Roman  people  were  employed  not  in  rivetting  chains,  but  in 
breaking  them  ;  and  to  convince  those  who  already  enjoyed 
freedom,  that  it  would  enure  to  them  safe  and  permanent, 
under  the  protection  of  the  Roman  people ;  and  farther  to 
make  known  to  such  as  now  were  subject  to  despotic  rule, 
that  their  princes,  under  awe  of  the  Roman  people,  would 
be,  at  the  present,  more  just  and  mild  ;  and  that,  should  war 
break  out  at  any  time  between  their  kings  and  the  Roman 
people,  the  issue  would  bring  victory  to  the  latter,  and  liberty 
to  themselves.  It  was  also  provided,  that  the  farming  both 
of  the  Macedonian  mines,  which  produced  a  very  large  pro¬ 
fit,  and  crown  lands,  should  be  abolished  ;  as  business  of  that 
kind  could  not  be  managed  without  the  intervention  of  re¬ 
venue  farmers  j  and  wherever  people  of  that  description  were 
employed,  either  the  rights  of  the  public  were  invaded,  or 
the  freedom  of  the  allies  destroyed.  Nor  could  the  Mace¬ 
donians  themselves  conduct  such  affairs ;  for  while  they  af¬ 
forded  the  managers  opportunities  of  acquiring  prey  to  them¬ 
selves,  there  would  never  be  an  end  of  disputes  and  sedi¬ 
tions.  It  was  farther  determined,  that  there  should  be  no 
general  council  of  the  nation  ;  lest  the  perverseness  of  the 
populace  might,  some  time  or  other,  convert  into  pestilent 
licentiousness  the  wholesome  liberty  granted  by  the  senate  ; 
but,  that  Macedonia  should  be  divided  into  four  districts, 
each  of  which  should  have  a  council  of  its  own  ;  and  that 
they  should  pay  to  the  Roman  people  half  the  tribute  which 
they  used,  formerly,  to  pay  to  their  kings.”  Similar  instruc¬ 
tions  were  given  respecting  Illyria.  Other  particulars  were 
left  to  the  generals  and  commissioners  ;  who,  by  investigating 
matters  on  the  spot,  would  be  enabled  to  form  more  accurate 
plans. 
VOL.  VI. — 2  L 

258 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  585. 

XIX,  Among  the  many  embassies  from  kings,  nations,  and 
states,  Attains,  brother  to  Eumenes,  attracted  the  general 
attention  in  a  very  particular  manner ;  for  he  was  received, 
by  those  who  had  served  along  with  him  in  the  late  war, 
with  even  greater  demonstration  of  kindness,  than  could  have 
been  shown  to  the  monarch  himself.  He  had  two  reasons  for 
coming,  both,  apparently,  highly  honourable  ;  one  to  offer 
congratulations,  which  was  quite  proper,  in  the  case  of  a 
victory  to  which  himself  had  contributed  ;  the  other,  to 
complain  of  disturbances  raised  by  the  Gauls,  so  as  to  en¬ 
danger  his  brother’s  kingdom.  But  he  had,  also,  a  private 
view  ;  he  entertained  secret  hopes  of  honours  and  rewards 
from  the  senate,  which  yet,  he  could  scarcely  receive  as  be¬ 
ing  more  properly  the  claims  of  the  King.  There  were  some 
among  the  Romans  who  had  given  him  ill  counsel ;  and  the 
prospects,  which  they  opened  to  him,  set  his  ambition  at 
work.  They  told  him,  that  “  the  general  opinion  concerning 
Attains  and  Eumenes  was,  that  one  was  a  steady  friend  to 
the  Romans,  and  that  the  other  was  not  a  faithful  ally  either 
to  them  or  to  Perseus.  That  it  was  not  easy  to  say,  with 
regard  to  any  requests  that  he  might  make,  whether  the 
senate  would  have  more  pleasure  in  serving  him,  or  in  hurt¬ 
ing  his  brother  ;  so  entirely  were  all  disposed  to  gratify  the 
one,  and  to  grant  nothing  to  the  other.”  As  the  event  prov¬ 
ed,  Attains  was  one  of  those  who  covet  all  that  hope  can 
promise  to  itself ;  and  he  would  have  been  deluded  by  these 
suggestions,  had  not  the  prudent  admonitions  of  one  friend 
put  a  curb  on  those  passions,  which  were  growing  wanton 
through  prosperity.  He  had,  in  his  retinue,  a  physician  call¬ 
ed  Stratius,  whom  Eumenes,  not  perfectly  assured  of  his 
brother’s  fidelity,  had  sent  to  Rome,  for  the  purpose  of  watch¬ 
ing  over  his  conduct,  and  for  giving  him  faithful  advice,  if 
he  should  perceive  his  honour  wavering.  This  man,  al¬ 
though  he  had  to  address  ears  already  prepossessed,  and  a 

BOOK  XLV. 

259 

B.C.  167.] 
mind  labouring  under  a  strong  bias,  yet,  by  arguments  judi¬ 
ciously  timed,  he  restored  every  thing  to  its  proper  state, 
even  after  the  case  had  become  almost  desperate.  He  urged 
that  “  different  kingdoms  grew  into  power  by  different  means. 
As  to  that  of  Eumenes,  being  lately  formed,  and  unsupport¬ 
ed  by  any  long  established  strength,  it  was  upheld,  solely,  by 
the  concord  of  the  brothers  ;  for,  while  one  bore  the  title, 
and  the  ornament  which  distinguishes  the  head  of  a  sovereign, 
each  of  them  was  considered  as  a  king.  As  to  Attains,  in 
particular,  being  the  next  in  years,  was  there  any  man  who 
did  not  hold  him  as  such  ?  and  that,  not  only  because  his  pre¬ 
sent  po%ver  was  great ;  but  because  he  must,  unquestionably, 
ascend  the  throne,  in  a  very  short  time,  in  consequence  of 
the  age  and  infirmity  of  Eumenes,  who  had  no  legitimate 
issue  j”  for  he  had  not,  at  this  time,  acknowledged  the  son 
who  afterwards  reigned :  “  To  what  purpose,  then,  employ 
violence,  to  attain  what  of  course  must  soon  be  his  ?  Besides, 
a  new  storm  had  fallen  on  the  kingdom,  from  the  insurrec¬ 
tion  of  the  Gauls,  which  the  most  perfect  harmony  and  union 
of  the  brothers  would  scarce  enable  them  to  withstand.  But 
if  to  a  foreign  war  dissensions  were  added,  nothing  but  ruin 
could  ensue  ;  nor  would  his  scheme  produce  any  other  effects, 
than  that  of  hindering  his  brother  from  ending  his  life  on 
the  throne,  and  himself  from  ascending  it.  If  both  modes 
of  acting  were  honourable, — either  to  preserve  the  kingdom 
for  his  relative,  or  to  take  it  from  him,— yei  the  honour  that 
would  derive  to  him  from  the  first  mentioned  proceeding,  as 
it  arose  in  brotherly  love,  would  be  the  greater.  The  latter, 
indeed,  would  be  detestable,  and  bordering  nearly  on  parri¬ 
cide  ;  what  room,  then,  could  there  be  for  deliberation  ? 
For,  whether  did  he  mean  to  demand  d  share  of  the  king¬ 
dom,  or  to  seize  the  whole  ?  If  a  share  were  his  object,  it 
must  follow,  that  both,  by  the  separation  of  their  strength, 
would  be  rendered  feeble,  and  exposed  to  injuries  of  every 

260 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  585. 

kind  ;  if  the  whole,  would  he  then  require  his  elder  brother, ~ 
reduced  to  a  private  station,  at  his  time  of  life,  and  under  such 
infirmity  of  body, — either  to  live  in  exile,  or  to  end  his  life  ? 
Not  to  speak  of  the  tragical  catastrophes,  represented  on  the 
stage,  the  fate  of  Perseus  was  remarkably  striking  ;  who,  hav- 
ing,  by  the  murder  of  his  brother,  opened  himself  a  way  to 
the  seizure  of  the  crown,  was  obliged,  on  his  knees,  to  lay  it 
down,  at  the  feet  of  a  victorious  enemy,  in  the  temple  of  Sa* 
mothrace  ;  as  if  the  gods,  present  on  the  spot,  had  demanded 
vengeance  for  his  crimes.  Those  very  men,”  he  continued, 
who,  from  no  motive  of  friendship  for  him,  but  of  enmity 
to  Eumenes,  had  instigated  him  to  the  adoption  of  such  mea¬ 
sures,  would  ultimately  bestow  praises  on  him,  if  he  main¬ 
tained  his  fidelity  to  his  brother,” 
XX.  These  arguments  determined  Attains.  On  being  in¬ 
troduced  to  the  senate,  after  congratulating  them  on  their  suc¬ 
cess,  he  made  mention  of  his  own  services  during  the  war, 
and  those  of  his  brother  ;  of  the  defection  of  the  Gauk,  which 
had  lately  happened,  and  which  had  caused  violent  commo¬ 
tions  ;  and  he  entreated  that  ambassadors  might  be  sent  to 
those  people,  whose  authority  would  oblige  them  to  desist 
from  hostilities.  After  delivering  these  messages,  respecting 
the  general  interest  of  the  state,  he  requested  a  grant  of 
Alnus  and  Maronea  to  himself.  Having  thus  disappointed 
the  hopes  of  those  who  expected  him  to  arraign  his  brother’s 
conduct,  and  solicit  a  partition  of  the  kingdom,  he  retired 
from  the  senate-house.  There  have  been  few  instances  of  any 
discourse,  whether  delivered  by  a  private  person  or  a  king, 
being  received  with  such  a  degree  of  favour  and  approbation 
by  all  who  heard  it ;  and  presents  and  honours  of  every  kind 
were  conferred  upon  him,  during  his  stay,  and  at  his  depar¬ 
ture.  Of  the  many  embassies  which  came  from  Greece  and 
Asia,  that  of  the  Rhodians  engaged  the  greatest  share  of  the 
public  attention.  At  first  they  appeared  in  white,  that  colour 

BOOK  XLV; 

261 

B.C.  167.] 
being  the  best  adapted  to  persons  charged  with  a  message  of 
a  joyful  nature  ;  for  had  they  worn  mourning,  it  might  seem 
to  be  put  on  for  the  misfortunes  of  Perseus.  Afterwards,  on 
the  question  being  put  to  the  senate,  by  the  consul  Marcus 
Junius,  (the  ambassadors  standing  in  the  Comitium,)  whether 
lodging  and  entertainment  should  be  allowed  them,  it  was 
voted,  that  no  duty  of  hospitality  was  due  to  them.  When 
the  consul  came  out  of  the  senate-house,  the  Rhodians  told 
him,  that  they  were  come  to  congratulate  the  Romans  on  their 
late  success,  and  to  clear  their  state  of  the  charges  made 
against  it.  They  then  requested  an  audience  of  the  senate, 
to  which  he  returned  this  answer ;  that  it  was  the  custom 
of  the  Romans  both  to  grant  audience  in  their  senate,  and  to 
perform  other  acts  of  kindness  and  hospitality  to  their  friends 
and  allies  ;  but  that  the  conduct  of  the  Rhodians,  in  the  late 
war,  had  not  entitled  them  to  be  ranked  in  the  number  of 
friends  or  allies.”  On  hearing  this,  they  all  prostrated  them* 
selves  on  the  ground,  beseeching  the  consul,  and  all  present, 
not  to  suffer  new  and  false  imputations  to  operate  more  pow¬ 
erfully  to  their  prejudice,  than  their  long  course  of  services, 
known  to  all  present,  in  their  favour.  They  immediately  as¬ 
sumed  a  mourning  dress,  and,  going  round  to  the  houses  of 
the  principal  men,  supplicated,  with  prayers  and  tears,  that 
their  cause  might  be  heard  before  they  were  condemned. 
XXL  Marcus  Juvencius  Thalna,  the  praetor  who  had  the 
jurisdiction  between  natives  and  foreigners,  stimulated  the 
public  resentment  against  the  Rhodians,  proposing  an  order, 
that  war  should  be  declared  against  the  Rhodians,  and  that 
the  people  should  choose  one  of  the  magistrates  of  the  pre¬ 
sent  year,  who  should'be  sent  with  a  fleet  to  carry  on  that 
war:”  he  hoped  that  himself  should  be  the  person  chosen. 
This  proceeding  was  opposed  by  two  of  the  plebeian  tribunes, 
Marcus  Antonius  and  Marcus  Pomponius.  But  the  prsetor, 
on  his  part,  commenced  the  business  in  a  manner  highly  un- 

262 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  585. 

precedented,  and  of  very  pernicious  tendency  j  for,  without 
first  consulting  the  senate,  and  without  acquainting  the  con¬ 
suls,  of  his  own  sole  judgment  he  proposed  to  the  people  the 
question,  “  Was  it  their  will  and  order  that  war  should  be 
declared  against  the  Rhodians  whereas,  it  had  ever,  until 
then,  been  the  practice,  first  to  take  the  judgment  of  the  se¬ 
nate  on  such  a  matter,  and  then  to  lay  the  business  before  the 
people.  On  the  other  side,  the  plebeian  tribunes  opposed  this 
proceeding  ;  although  it  was  a  received  rule,  that  no  tribune 
should  protest  against  a  proposal  until  opportunity  was  given 
to  private  citizens  to  argue  for  and  against  it ;  in  consequence 
of  which  it  had  often  happened  that  some,  who  had  no  inten¬ 
tion  of  protesting,  discovered  improprieties  iathe  question 
from  the  discourses  of  those  who  opposed  it,  and  therefore 
did  protest ;  and  some,  who  came  avowedly  to  protest,  ab¬ 
stained  from  it,  being  convinced  by  the  arguments  adduced 
in  its  favour.  On  this  occasion,  the  praetor  and  tribunes  vied 
with  each  other  in  doing  every  thing  out  of  time.  While  the 
tribunes  blamed  the  hasty  proceeding  of  the  prastor^  they  imi- 
tated  the  example  by  a  premature  protest.  The  only  pretence 
they  alleged  for  it  was,^  the  necessity  of  adjourning  the  busi^ 
ness  of  the  Rhodians  until  the  general^  and  the  ten  commis¬ 
sioners^  should  return  from  Macedonia, 
XXII.  #**#***#  |, 
Whether  we  have  transgressed,  or  not,  is  yet  doubtful; 
meanwhile,  we  suffer  punishments  and  disgraces  of  all  sorts. 
In  former  times,  when  we  visited  Rome,  after  the  conquest 
of  Carthage,  after  the  defeat  of  Philip,  and  after  that  of  An- 
tiochus,  we  were  escorted  from  a  lodging,  furnished  us  by  the 
public,  into  the  senate-house,  to  present  our  congratulations 
to  you,  Conscript  Fathers;  and,  from  the  senate-house  to 
f  The  be^nBing  of  this  speech  of  Astymedes,  chief  of  the  Rhodian  cm' 
bass>s  is  lost. 

BOOK  XLV. 

263 

B.C.  167.] 

the  Capitol,  carrying  offerings  to  your  gods.  But  now,  from 
a  vile  and  filthy  inn,  where  scarcely  could  we  get  a  reception 
for  our  money,  treated  as  enemies,  and  forbid  to  lodge  within 
the  city,  we  come,  in  this  squalid  dress,  to  the  Roman  senate- 
house  :  we,  Rhodians,  on  whom,  a  short  time  ago,  you  be¬ 
stowed  the  provinces  of  Lycia  and  Caria  ;  on  whom  you  con¬ 
ferred  the  most  ample  rewards  and  honours.  Even  the  Ma¬ 
cedonians  and  Illyrians,  you  order,  as  we  hear,  to  be  free  ; 
though  they  were  in  servitude  before  they  waged  war  with 
you.  Not  that  we  envy  the  good  fortune  of  any  ;  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  we  acknowledge  therein  the  usual  clemency  of  the  Ro¬ 
man  people.  But  will  you  convert,  from  allies  into  enemies, 
the  Rhodians,  who,  during  the  war,  have  maintained  the 
strictest  neutrality  ?  You  are  the  same  Romans,  who  boast 
that  your  wars  are  successful,  because  they  are  just;  w^ho 
glory  not  so  much  in  the  issue  of  them  (being,  as  you  are, 
victorious,)  as  in  the  commencement  of  them,  because  under¬ 
taken  not  without  cause.  Your  war  with  the  Carthaginians 
was  occasioned  by  their  having  attacked  Messana,  in  Sicily. 
The  rupture  with  Philip  arose  from  his  attempt  to  reduce 
Greece  to  slavery,  and  in  giving  assistance  of  men  and  mo¬ 
ney  to  Hannibal.  Antiochus,  on  the  invitation  of  the  iEto- 
lians,  your  enemies,  came  over  in  person,  with  a  fleet  from 
Asia  to  Greece  ;  and,  by  seizing  Demeti'ias,  Chalcis,  and  the 
straight  of  Thermopylae,  endeavoured  to  dispossess  you  of  a 
part  of  your  empire.  The  motives  to  your  war  with  Perseus 
were  his  attacks  on  your  allies,  and  his  putting  to  death  the 
princes  and  leading  members  of  certain  states.  But,  if  we 
are  doomed  to  ruin,  to  what  will  our  misfortune  be  ascribed  f 
I  do  not  yet  separate  the  cause  of  the  state  from  that  of  our 
countrymen,  Polyaratus  and  Dino,  with  others,  whom  we 
have  brought  hither,  in  order  to  deliver  them  into  your 
hands.  But  supposing  every  one  of  us  were  equally  guilty, 
I  ask  what  was  our  crime  with  respect  to  the  late  war  ?  We 

264 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

[Y.R,  585. 

fa'  >ured,  it  is  said,  the  interest  of  Perseus.  But  have  we  sup- 
pcrted  that  prince  against  you  in  like  manner  as,  in  the  wars  of 
Artiochus  and  Philip,  we  supported  you  against  those  kings  ? 
Now,  in  what  manner  we  are  accustomed  to  assist  our  allies, 
and  with  what  vigour  to  conduct  wars,  ask  Caius  Livius  and 
Lucius  iEmilius  Regillus,  who  commanded  your  fleets  on  the 
coasts  of  Asia.  Your  ships  never  fought  a  battle  in  which 
we  did  not  co-operate.  We,  with  our  own  fleet,  fought  one 
engagement  at  Samos,  and  a  second  on  the  coast  of  Pamphy- 
lia,  against  no  less  a  commander  than  Hannibal.  The  victory 
which  we  gained  in  the  latter,  was  the  more  glorious  to  us, 
as  the  loss  of  a  great  part  of  our  navy,  with  a  considerable 
number  of  the  principal  young  men,  in  the  unfortunate  fight 
at  Samos,  did  not  deter  us  from  venturing  again  to  give  bat¬ 
tle  to  the  King’s  fleet  on  its  return  from  Syria.  These  mat¬ 
ters  I  have  mentioned  not  out  of  ostentation,  (that  would  ill 
become  our  present  situation,)  but  to  remind  you  in  what  way 
the  Rhodians  assist  their  allies. 
XXIII.  When  Philip  and  Antiochus  were  subdued,  we 
received  from  you  very  ample  rewards.  If  the  same  fortune, 
which  the  favour  of  the  gods,  and  your  own  courage,  have 
procured  to  you,  had  fallen  to  the  lot  of  Perseus,  and  we  were 
to  go  into  Macedonia,  to  the  victorious  King,  to  demand  re¬ 
wards  from  him,  what  merit  should  we  have  to  plead  ?  Could 
we  say,  that  we  had  assisted  him  with  money,  or  with  corn ; 
with  land  or  sea  forces  ?  Had  we  defended  his  garrison  ;  or 
fought  either  under  his  generals,  or  by  ourselves  ?  If  he 
should  enquire  among  the  land  and  sea  forces,  which  we  sent 
to  act  in  concert  with  his,  what  answer  could  we  give  ?  Per¬ 
haps  we  might  be  brought  to  a  trial  before  him,  if  successful, 
as  we  are  now,  before  you.  All  that  we  have  gained  by  send¬ 
ing  ambassadors,  to  both,  to  mediate  a  peace,  is,  that  we  re¬ 
ceived  no  thanks  from  either  party,  and  incurred  from  one  of 
them  accusations  and  danger,  Perseus,  indeed,  might  justly 

BOOK  XLV. 

265 

B.C.  167.] 
object  to  us,  what  cannot  be  objected  by  you,  Conscript 
Fathers,  that,  at  the  commencement  of  the  war,  we  sent  am¬ 
bassadors  to  Rome,  promising  supplies  of  all  sorts  requisite 
for  the  war,  and  engaging' to  be  ready,  as  in  former  wars, 
with  our  ships,  our  arms,  and  our  men.  That  we  did  not 
perform  this,  you  were,  yourselves,  the  cause  ;  you,  who, 
whatever  was  the  reason,  rejected  our  assistance  on  that  oc¬ 
casion.  We  have,  therefore,  neither  acted  in  any  instance 
as  enemies,  nor  been  deficient  in  the  duty  of  well-affected  al¬ 
lies  ;  which  duty,  had  not  you  prevented  us,  we  should  have 
performed.  What  then  shall  we  say  ?  Rhodians,  has  there 
been  nothing  said,  or  done,  in  your  country,  which  you  dis¬ 
approve  of,  and  which  might  give  just  cause  of  offence  to  the 
Romans  ?  Henceforward,  I  do  not  mean  to  defend  what  has 
been  done,  I  am  not  so  weak,  but  to  distinguish  the  cause  of 
the  public  from  the  guilt  of  private  men.  For  there  is  no 
nation  whatever  that  has  not,  generally,  some  ilf-disposed 
members,  and  always  an  ignorant  populace.  I  have  heard^ 
that,  even  among  the  Romans,  there  have  been  men  who 
worked  themselves  into  power  by  courting  the  multitude ; 
that  the  plebeians  sometimes  seceded  from  you,  and  that  you 
lost  the  power  of  directing  the  affairs  of  governnient.  If  it 
were  possible  for  this  to  happen  in  a  state  where  the  rules  of 
conduct  are  so  well  established,  who  can  Wonder  at  their  be¬ 
ing  some  among  us,  who,  out  of  a  wish  to  gain  the  King^s 
friendship,  seduced  our  meaner  people  by  bad  advice  ?  Yet 
their  intrigues  produced  no  farther  effect  than  our  remaining 
inactive,  without  infringing  our  duty.  I  shall  not  pass  by  that, 
which  has  been  made  the  heaviest  charge  against  our  state 
during  the  war.  We  sent  ambassadors  at  the  same  time  to 
you,  and  to  Perseus,  to  mediate  a  peace ;  and  that  unfortu¬ 
nate  undertaking  was,  by  a  furious  orator,  as  we  afterwards 
heard,  rendered  foolish  to  the  last  degree  ;  for  it  appears,  that 
ne  spoke  in  such  a  mauncr  afs  Caius  Popillius.,  the  Romrjprr 
vr, — 2  M 

266 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  585. 

ambassador,  would  have  spoken,  when  you  sent  him  to  the 
two  kings,  Antiochus  and  Ptolemy,  to  induce  them  to  cease 
from  hostilities.  But  still,  whether  this  conduct  is  to  be 
called  arrogance  or  folly,  it  was  the  same  towards  Perseus  as 
towards  you.  States,  as  well  as  individuals,  have  their  dif¬ 
ferent  characters ;  some  are  violent,  others  daring,  others 
timid ;  some  addicted  to  wine,  others  more  particularly  to 
women.  The  Athenian  nation  has  the  character  of  being 
quick  and  bold,  beyond  its  strength,  in  beginning  an  enter¬ 
prise  ;  and  the  Lacedaemonian,  of  being  dilatory  and  back^ 
ward,  in  entering  upon  business,  even  when  confident  of  suc¬ 
cess.  I  cannot  deny  that  Asia,  throughout  its  whole  extent, 
produces  men  too  much  inclined  to  vanity,  and  that  the  speech 
of  even  the  Rhodians  is  too  much  tinctured  with  vain-glory. 
which  arises  from  our  being  supposed  to  hold  some  pre-emi¬ 
nence  above  the  neighbouring  states.  That,  however,  is 
owing  not  so  much  to  our  particular  strength,  as  to  the  marks 
of  honour  and  esteem  conferred  on  us  by  you.  Our  first  em¬ 
bassy  received  a  sufficient  rebuke  from  you.  But,  if  the  dis¬ 
grace  which  we  then  underwent  was  too  trifling,  surely  the 
present  mournful  and  suppliant  embassy  would  be  a  sufficient 
expiation  for  the  offence.  Arrogance,  it  is  true,  creates  dis¬ 
gust  in  some,  and  ridicule  in  others  ;  more  especially,  if  it 
be  shown  by  an  inferior  towards  a  superior  ;  but  no  one  has 
ever  yet  thought  it  deserving  of  capital  punishment.  It  was 
to  be  feared  that  the  Rhodians  should  contemn  the  Romans  ! 
Some  men  have  spoken,  even  of  the  gods,  in  terms  too  pre¬ 
sumptuous  ;  yet  we  have  never  heard  of  any  one  being  struck 
with  thunder  on  that  account. 
XXIV ,  ‘‘  What  charge,  then,  remains,  of  which  we  are  to 
acquit  ourselves,  since  there  has  been  no  hostile  act  on  our 
part  ?  Must  the  too  haughty  expressions  of  an  ambassador, 
though  they  deserve  the  displeasure  of  the  hearers,  be  punish¬ 
ed  by  Ute  ruin  of  the  state  ?  Conscript  Fathers,  I  heard  you 

BOOK  XLV. 

567 

B.€.  167.] 
debating  on  the  penalty  which  we  ought  to  pay  for  our  secret 
wishes.  Some  assert  that  we  favoured  the  King,  and,  there¬ 
fore,  that  we  should  be  punished  with  war ;  others,  that  we 
did  indeed  wish  him  success,  but  ought  not,  on  that  account, 
to  be  held  criminal,  since  neither  the  practice  nor  the  laws  of 
any  state  admit,  that  simply  desiring  the  destruction  of  a  foe, 
should  subject  any  one  to  the  penalty  of  death.  We  are  ab¬ 
solved  from  the  punishment,  but  not  from  the  crime  ;  and  for 
this  it  may  be  thought  we  should  be  thankful ;  but  we  lay 
down  this  law  for  ourselves ;  if  we  all  entertained  the  wishes 
imputed  to  us,  we  will  then  make  no  distinction  between  the 
will  and  the  deed ;  let  us  all  be  punished.  If  some  of  our  peo¬ 
ple  in  power  favoured  you,  and  others  the  King,  I  do  not  de¬ 
mand,  that,  for  the  sake  of  us,  who  were  on  your  side,  the  fa¬ 
vourers  of  the  King  may  be  saved  ;  but  I  pray  you  that  we 
may  not  be  ruined  through  them.  You  are  not  moret  invete¬ 
rate  against  them,  than  is  our  state  itself ;  and  knowing  this, 
most  of  them  fled,  or  put  themselves  to  death,  the  others  have 
been  condemned  by  us,  ayd  will  soon  be  in  your  power,  Con¬ 
script  Fathers.  The  rest  of  us  Rhodians,  as  we  have  merited 
no  thanks  during  the  war,  so  neither  have  we  deserved  pun¬ 
ishment.  Let  our  former  services  be  set  against  our  late  in¬ 
activity,  You  have  recently  %vaged  war  with  three  kings  : 
let  not  the  demerit  of  our  inaction,  during  one  of  these  wars, 
outweigh  the  merit  of  having  fought  on  your  side  in  the  other 
two.  Consider  Philip,  Antiochus,  and  Perseus,  as  you  would 
three  votes  ;  two  of  them  acquit  us,  one  is  doubtful,  but 
rather  inclines  to  our  side  than  otherwise.  If  they  were  to 
hit  in  judgment,  they  would  give  sentence  against  us.  Con¬ 
script  Fathers,  you  are  to  decide,  whether  Rhodes  is  to  con¬ 
tinue  to  exist  or  to  be  utterly  destroyed.  The  issue  of  your 
deliberations  will  not  be  war;  because,  Conscript  Fathers, 
though  it  is  in  your  power  to  declare  war,  it  is  not  in  your 
power  to  wage  it,  as  not  a  single  Rhodian  will  take  up  arms 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

|;Y.R.  585. 

268 
against  you.  If  you  persist  in  your  anger,  we  will  beg  time 
from  you,  until  we  carry  home  an  account  of  this  unhappy 
embassy.  We  will  then,  every  free  person  of  the  Rhodians, 
both  men  and  women,  with  all  our  wealth,  embark  in  ships, 
and  leaving  the  seats  of  our  tutelar  deities,  both  public  and 
private,  repair  to  Rome  ;  where,  heaping  together  in  the  Co- 
mitium,  at  the  door  of  your  senate-house,  all  our  gold  and 
silver,  all  the  public  and  private  property  that  we  possess,  we 
win  submit  our  persons,  and  those  of  our  wives  and  children, 
to  your  disposal ;  that,  whatever  we  are  to  suffer,  we  may 
suffer  here,  and  be  far  removed  from  the  sight  of  the  sacking 
and  burning  of  our  city.  The  Romans  may  pass  a  judgment, 
that  the  Rhodians  are  enemies  ;  but  we  have  also  a  right,  in 
some  degree,  to  judge  ourselves  ;  and  we  never  will  judge 
ourselves  your  enemies,  nor  do  one  hostile  act,  should  we 
even  suffer  the  last  extremities.” 
XXV.  Such  was  their  speech  ;  after  which  they  all  pros¬ 
trated  themselves  again,  and,  as  supplicants,  held  out  olive 
branches ;  but,  at  length,  they  were  raised,  and  withdrew 
from  the  senate-house.  The  opinions  of  the  senators  were 
then  demanded.  The  most  inveterate  against  the  Rhodians 
were  those,  who,  as  consuls,  prsetors,  or  lieutenant-generals, 
had  atted  in  Macedonia,  during  the  war ;  and  the  person  who 
was  most  useful  to  their  cause  was  Marcus  Porcius  Cato, 
who,  though  naturally  austere,  acted  his  part  as  a  senator,  on 
this  occasion,  with  much  mildness.  It  is  not  necessary,  here, 
to  give  a  specimen  of  his  copious  eloquence,  by  inserting  his 
speech,  as  he  has  published  it  himself,  in  the  fifth  book  of  his 
Antiquities.  The  answer  given  to  the  Rhodians  was,  that 
‘‘  they  should  neither  be  declared  enemies  ;  nor,  any  longer, 
be  considered  as  allies.”  At  the  head  of  this  embassy  were 
Philocrates  and  Astimedes.  Half  their  number,  with  Philo- 
crates,  were  ordered  to  carry  home  to  Rhodes  an  account  of 
their  proceedings ;  and  the  other  half,  with  Astimedes,  to 

B.C.  167.] 

BOOK  XLV. 

369 

remain  at  Rome,  that  they  might  be  acquainted  with  what 
passed,  and  inform  their  countrymen.  For  the  present,  they 
were  commanded  to  remove  their  governors  out  of  Lycia  and 
Caria,  before  a  certain  day.  This  news  was,  in  itself,  suffi¬ 
ciently  afflicting ;  nevertheless,  as  it  relieved  the  Rhodians 
from  the  dread  of  a  greater  evil,  for  they  had  feared  a  war, 
it  occasioned  even  a  degree  of  joy.  They,  therefore,  imme¬ 
diately  voted  a  present,  amountijg  in  value  to  twenty  thou¬ 
sand  pieces  of  gold,  and  deputed  Theodotus,  the  commander 
of  their  fleet,  to  be  the  bearer  of  it.  They  wished  to  pro¬ 
cure  an  alliance  with  the  Romans ;  but,  in  such  a  manner,  as 
that  no  order  of  the  people  should  pass  concerning  it,  nor  any 
thing  be  committed  to  writing  ;  so  that,  if  they  should  fail  of 
success,  the  disgrace  of  a  refusal  might  appear  the  less.  Theo¬ 
dotus  was  empowered,  singly,  to  negociate  ,that  business,  with 
the  above  proviso  ;  for,  during  a  considerable  length  of  time, 
they  had  maintained  a  friendship  with  the  Romans,  without 
being  bound  by  any  treaty  ;  their  reason  for  which  was,  that 
they  might  neither  preclude  the  kings  from  all  hope  of  their 
assistance,  if  any  of  them  should  need  it,  nor  themselves  from 
a  participation  of  the  advantages  which  might  accrue  from 
the  good  fortune  and  liberality  of  the  said  kings.  At  this 
time,  however,  an  alliance  seemed  parti,cularly  desirable,  not 
60  much  for  the  sake  of  security  against  others,  (for,  except- 
ing  the  Romans,  they  feared  none,)  as  to  render  them  less  lia¬ 
ble  to  jealousies,  on  the  part  of  the  Romans.  About  this  time, 
the  Caunians  revolted  from  them,  and  the  Mylassians  seized 
on  the  towns  of  the  Euromensians.  The  spirit  of  their  com¬ 
munity  was  not  so  totally  broken,  as  to  hinder  their  perceiv¬ 
ing,  that,  if  Lycia  and  Caria  were  taken  from  them  by  the 
Romans,  their  other  provinces  would  either  assert  their  own 
freedom,  by  a  revolt,  or  be  seized  on  by  their  neighbours  ; 
and  that  themselves  would  then  be  shut  up  in  a  small  island ; 
within  the  shores  of  a  barren  country,  inadequate  to  the  main- 

aro  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  58.V 
tenance  of  the  numerous  people  in  so  large  a  city.  They 
therefore  sent  out,  with  all  speed,  a  body  of  troops,  and  re¬ 
duced  the  Caunians  to  obedience,  though  they  had  received 
succours  from  Cybara ;  and  afterwards  defeated  in  a  battle 
at  Orthosia  the  Mylassians  and  Alabandians,  who,  having 
seized  the  province  of  Euroma,  had  united  their  forces,  and 
came  to  meet  them. 
XXVI.  Such  were  the  occurrences  in  Rhodes,  in  Mace¬ 
donia,  and  in  Rome.  Meanwhilef  in  Illyria,  Lucius  Anicius, 
having  reduced  King  Gentius  under  his  power,  as  before 
mentioned,  placed  a  garrison  in  Scodra,  which  had  been  the 
capital  of  the  kingdom,  and  gave  the  command  to  Gabinius. 
He  also  garrisoned  Rhizo,  and  Olcinium,  towns  very  con¬ 
veniently  situated,  and  appointed  Caius  Licinius  commander. 
Committing  the  government  of  Illyria  to  these  two,  he 
inarched,  with  the  rest  of  his  forces,  into  Epirus.  Here, 
Phanota  was  the  first  place  which  submitted  to  him  ;  the 
whole  multitude,  with  fillets  on  their  heads,  coming  out  to 
meet  him.  Placing  a  garrison  there,  he  went  over  into  Mo- 
lossis,  all  the  towns  of  which  province,  except  Passora,  Tec- 
mo,  Phylace,  and  Horreum,  having  surrendered,  he  marched 
first  against  Passora.  The  two  men,  of  the  greatest  authority 
in  that  city,  were  Antinous  and  Theodotus,  who  were  r«- 
markable  for  their  warm  attachment  to  Perseus,  and  hatred 
to  the  Romans  ;  into  a  revolt  from  whom,  the  whole  nation 
had  been  hurried  by  their  instigations.  These  men,  conscious 
of  their  own  delinquency,  and  despairing  of  pardon,  shut  the 
gates,  that  they  might  be  buried  under  the  general  ruin  of 
their  country,  and  exhorting  the  multitude  to  prefer  death  to 
slavery.  No  man  dared  to  open  his  lips  against  men  of  such 
transcendent  power.  At  last,  one  Theodotus,  a  young  man 
of  distinction,  (his  greater  dread  of  the  Romans  overpower¬ 
ing  the  lesser  fear  of  his  own  leaders,)  exclaimed,  “  What 
madness  has  seized  you,  to  make  the  public  accessary  to  the 

BOOK  XLV. 

271 

BX.  167.] 
crimes  of  individuals,  and  only  two  in  number  ?  I  have  often 
heard  mention  made  of  men  who  offered  themselves  to  death 
for  the  sake  of  their  country  ;  but  never,  before  these,  were 
any  found,  who  required  that  their  country  should  perish  for 
theirs.  Why  not  open  our  gates,  and  submit  to  that  power, 
to  which  the  whole  world  has  submitted  As  he  spoke 
thus,  he  was  followed  by  the  multitude  ;  on  which,  Antinous 
and  Theodotus,  rushing  out  on  the  first  advanced  guards  of 
the  enemy,  and  freely  exposing  themselves  to  their  weapons, 
were  slain,  and  the  city  was  surrendered  to  the  Romans. 
Through  a  similar  obstinacy  in  Cephalus,  a  man  in  power, 
the  gates  of  Teemo  were  shut ;  but  he  was  soon  put  to  death, 
and  then  the  town  capitulated.  Neither  Phylace  nor  Hor- 
reum  stood  a  siege.  Having  thus  reduced  Epirus,  Anicius 
distributed  his  troops  in  winter  quarters,  through  the  most 
convenient  towns  ;  and,  returning  into  Illyria,  held  a  general 
convention  at  Scodra,  where  the  five  commissioners  had  ar¬ 
rived  from  Rome,  and  to  which  place  he  had  summoned  the 
principal  men,  from  all  parts  of  the  province.  There,  with 
advice  of  the  council,  he  proclaimed  from  his  tribunal,  that 
“  the  senate  and  people  of  Rome  granted  freedom  to  the  Il¬ 
lyrians  ;  and  that  he  would  withdraw  his  garrisons  from  all 
their  towns,  citadels,  and  castles.  That  the  Issans  and  Tau- 
lantians,  with  the  Pirustans,  the  Rizonites,  and  the  Okinians, 
should  not  only  enjoy  liberty,  but  likewise  an  immunity  from 
taxes  j  because,  when  Gentius  was  in  his  full  strength,  they 
had  quitted  him,  and  sided  with  the  Romans.  That  the  same 
exemption  was  granted  to  the  Daorseans  ;  because  they  for¬ 
sook  Caravantius,  and  came  over  with  their  arms,  to  the 
Romans  ;  and  that  the  Scodrans,  Dassarensians,  Selepitans, 
and  the  rest  of  the  Illyrians,  should  pay  half  the  taxes  which 
they  had  formerly  paid  to  their  king.”  He  then  divided  Il¬ 
lyria  into  three  districts ;  the  first  was  composed  of  the  peo¬ 
ple  above  mentipned,  the  second  comprehended  all  the  Ea- 

m  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  585. 
beatians,  and  tht  xKird  the  Agranonites,  Rizonites,  and  Ol- 
chiians,  with  the  contiguous  states/  Harag  thus  regulated 
affairs  in  Illyria,  he  returned  into  Epirus,  to  his  winter  quar¬ 
ters,  at  Passaro. 
XXVII.  While  these  matters  ps^sed  in  Illyria,  Paullus, 
before  the  arrival  of  the  ten  commissioners,  sent  his  son  Quin¬ 
tus  Maximus,  who  was  by  this  time  returned  from  Rome,  to 
sack  Agassse  and  iEginium  ;  the  former,  because  the  inhabi¬ 
tants,  after  surrendering  their  city  to  the  consul,  and  volun¬ 
tarily  soliciting  an  alliance  with  Rome,  had  revolted  again  to 
Persetis  :  the  crime  of  the  people  of  jiEginium  was  of  a  late 
date  ;  not  giving  credit  to  the  report  of  the  Romans  being 
victorious,  they  Imd  treated,  with  hostile  cruelty,  some  sol¬ 
diers  who  came  into  the  city.  He  also  detached  Lucius  Pos- 
tumius  to  pillage  the  city  of  iEnia ;  because  the  inhabitants 
had  continued  in  arms  with  more  obstinacy  than  the  "neigh¬ 
bouring  nations.  Autumn  now  approached,  when  he  reeved 
to  make  a  tour  through  Greece,  in  order  to  take  a  view  of 
those  celebrated  curiosities,  the  knowledge  of  which  is,  by 
the  major  part  of  a  people,  generally  taken  from  the  reports 
of  others.  With  this  intention,  he  gave  the  commmid  of  his 
quarters  to  Caius  Sulpicius  Gallus,  and,  with  a  moderate,  re¬ 
tinue,  began  his  journey,  in  which  he  was  accompanied  by  his 
son  Scipio,  and  Athenaeus,  King  Eumenes’s  brother.  He  di¬ 
rected  his  route,  through  Thessaly,  to  Delphi,  so  famous  foi 
its  oracle,  where  he  offered  Sacrifices  to  Apollo  ;  and  ob¬ 
serving  in  the  porch  some  unfinished  pillars,  on  which  it  had 
been  intended  to  place  statues  of  King  Perseus,  he  deter¬ 
mined,  that  statues  of  himself  should  be  erected  on  them,  to 
commemorate  his  successes.  He  also  visited  the  temple  of 
Jupiter  Trophonius  at  Lebadia  ;  where,  after  viewing  the 
mouth  of  the  cave,  through  which  people  applying  to  the 
oracle  descend,  in  order  to  obtain  information  from  the  gods, 
he  sacrificed  to  Jupiter  and  Hercynna,  who  have  a  temple 

BOOK  XLV. 

srs 

B.C.  16r.] 
there  ;  and  then  went  down  to  Chalcis,  to  see  the  curiosities 
of  the  Euripus,  and  of  the  island  of  Euboea,  which  is  there 
united  to  the  continent  by  a  bridge.  From  Chalcis,  he  passed 
over  to  Aulis,  a  port  three  miles  distant,  and  famous  for  hav¬ 
ing  been  formerly  the  station  of  Agamemnon’s  fleet  of  one 
thousand  ships ;  he  then  visited  the  temple  of  Diana,  in 
which  the  Argive  chief  purchased  a  passage  to  Troy,  by 
offering  his  daughter  Iphigenia  as  a  victim  at  the  altar. 
Thence  he  came  to  Oropus,  in  Attica  ;  where  the  prophet 
Amphilochus  is  worshipped  as  a  god,  and  has  an  ancient 
temple,  surrounded  by  delightful  springs  and  streams.  He 
then  went  to  Athens,  which,  though  filled  with  only  the  de¬ 
cayed  relics  of  ancient  grandeur,  still  contained  many  things 
worthy  of  observation  ;  the  citadel,  the  port,  the  walls  con¬ 
necting  Piraeus  with  the  city  ;  the  dock-yards,  the  monuments 
of  illustrious  generals,  the  statues  of  gods  and  men,  exceed¬ 
ingly  curious  both  in  respect  of  the  materials,  of  various 
kinds,  and  the  skill  of  the  several  artists. 
XXVIll.  After  sacrificing  to  Minerva,  the  guardian  of 
the  citadel,  he  continued  his  journey,  and  on  the  second  day 
arrived  at  Corinth.  At  this  time,  that  city  flourished  in  ex¬ 
traordinary  splendour;  the  citadel  too,  and  the  isthmus,  af¬ 
forded  admirable  views  ;  the  former,  towering  up  to  an  im¬ 
mense  height,  yet  abounding  with  springs  ;  and  the  latter, 
separating  by  a  narrow  neck  two  seas,  which  almost  meet 
from  the  east  and  west.  He  next  visited  the  celebrated  cities 
of  Sicyon,  and  Argos  ;  then  Epidaurus,  which,  though  not 
comparable  to  them  in  opulence,  was  yet  remarkable  for  a 
famous  temple  of  Esculapius,  standing  at  five  miles’  distance, 
and,  at  that  time,  rich  in  offerings  dedicated  to  that  semi¬ 
deity  by  the  sick,  in  acknowledgment  of  the  recovery  of 
their  health  ;  but  now  showing  only  the  traces  of  them, 
whence  they  have  been  torn  away.  Thence  he  proceed »  d  to 
Lacedaemon,  renowned,  not  for  magnificent  works  of  art,  but 
VOL.  VI.— ,9  N 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y*R.  58d* 

2r4< 
for  its  laws  and  discipline  ;  and  then,  passing  through  Maga- 
lopoiis,  he  went  up  to  Olympia,  Here  having  taken  a  view 
of  all  things  worthy  of  notice,  and  beholding  Jupiter  in  a 
manner  present  before  him,  he  was  struck  with  the  deepest 
reverence ;  so  much  so,  that  he  ordered  preparations  to  be 
made  for  a  sacrifice,  with  more  than  usual  magnificence,  and 
as  if  he  were  going  to  make  offerings  in  the  Capitol,  Thus 
he  finished  his  circuit  through  Greece  ;  during  which,  he 
never  once  inquired  how  any  one,  either  in  their  public  or 
pri\  ate  capacity,  had  stood  affected  towards  Perseus,  during 
the  war  ;  being  unwilling  to  disturb  the  minds  of  the  allies 
with  any  kind  of  apprehensions.  On  his  way  back  to  Deme- 
trias,  he  was  met  by  a  crowd  of  iEtolians,  in  mourning  ap¬ 
parel.  Expressing  surprise,  and  asking  the  reason  of  this 
proceeding,  he  was  told,  that  five  hundred  and  fifty  of  the 
chief  of  their  countrymen  had  been  put  to  death  by  Lyciscus 
and  Tisippus,  who  surrounded  their  senate  with  Roman  sol¬ 
diers,  sent  by  their  commander  Baebius  ;  that  others  had  been 
driven  into  exile  ;  and  that  the  goods  of  the  killed  and  exiled 
were  in  the  hands  of  their  accusers.  They  were  ordered 
to  attend  him  at  Amphipolis  j  and  then,  having  met  Cneius 
Octavius  at  Demetrias,  who  informed  him  that  the  ten 
commissioners  were  landed,  he  laid  aside  all  other  business, 
and  went  to  Apollonia  to  meet  them.  Perseus,  being  too 
negligently  guarded,  had  come  hither  to  meet  him  from 
Amphipolis,  the  distance  of  a  day’s  journey.  To  him 
jEmilius  spoke  with  great  courtesy  ;  but,  when  at  the  quar 
ters  of  the  troops,  he  gave  a  severe  reprimand  to  Caius  Sul- 
picius ;  first,  for  allowing  Perseus  thus  to  ramble  through 
the  province,  and,  next  for  indulging  the  soldiers  so  far 
as  to  suffer  them  to  strip  the  buildings  on  the  city  walls  ot 
the  tiles,  in  order  to  cover  their  own  winter  huts.  These 
tiles  he  ordered  to  be  carried  back,  the  buildings  to  be  re¬ 
paired,  and  put  in  their  former  condition.  Perseus,  with 

BOOK  XLV. 

B.c.ier.] 

}ns  elder  son  Philip,  he  gave  in  charge  to  Aulas  Postumius, 
and  sent  them  into  a  place  of  confinement  ;  his  daughter  and 
younger  son  he  ordered  to  be  brought  from  Samothrace  to 
Amphi polls,  and  treated  them  with  all  possible  kindness. 
XXIX.  When  the  day  arrived,  on  which  he  had  ordered 
ten  chiefs  from  each  of  the  states  to  attend  at  Amphipolis, 
and  all  the  writings  wherever  deposited,  and  the  money  be¬ 
longing  to  the  King,  to  be  brought  thither,  he  seated  himself, 
with  the  ten  commissioners,  on  his  tribunal,  where  he  was 
surrounded  by  the  whole  multitude  of  the  Macedonians. 
Though  they  were  inured  to  the  government  of  a  king,  yet  a 
tribunal,  of  a  different  kind  from  what  they  were  acquainted 
with,  impressed  them  with  terror  ;  the  lictor  clearing  the 
way,  the  herald,  the  sergeant,  were  all  objects  strange  to 
their  eyes  and  ears,  and  capable  of  inspiring  awe  in  allies, 
much  more  in  conquered  enemies.  Silence  being  proclaimed 
by  the  herald,  Paullus  promulgated,  in  the  Latine  tongue,  the 
regulations  adopted  by  the  senate,  and  by  himself  with  the 
advice  of  the  council  ;  and  the  prsetor,  Cneius  Octavius,  re¬ 
peated  the  same  in  Greek.  First  of  all,  he  ordered,  that 
the  Macedonians  should  live  free  ;  possessing  the  same 
cities,  and  lands,  as  before  ;  governed  by  their  own  laws,  and 
creating  annual  magistrates  ;  and  that  they  should  pay  to  the 
Roman  people,  one  half  of  the  taxes  which  they  had  paid  to 
their  kings.  Next,  that  Macedonia  should  be  divided  into 
four  districts.  That  one,  which  should  be  deemed  the  first, 
should  comprehend  the  lands  between  the  rivers  Strymon 
and  Nessus,  with  the  addition  of  that  tract,  beyond  the  Nes- 
sus,  towards  the  east,  wherein  Perseus  had  possessed  vil¬ 
lages,  castles,  or  towns,  excepting  ^nus,  Maronsea,  and  Ab- 
dera  ;  and  of  the  tract  beyond  the  Strymon,  towards  the 
west,  comprising  all  Bisaltica,  with  Heraclea,  which  they  call 
Sintice.  That  the  second  district  should  be  the  country  in¬ 
closed  by  the  river  Strymon,  on  the  east,  where  were  ex- 

276 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R,  585. 

cepted  Sintlce-Heraclea  and  Bisaltica,and  by  the  river  Axius^ 
on  the  west ;  to  which  should  be  added  the  Paeonians,  living 
on  the  eastern  bank  of  the  Axius.  That  the  third  district 
should  have  for  its  bounds,  the  river  Axius  on  the  east,  the 
Peneus  on  the  west,  and  Mount  Bora,  on  the  north.  That 
to  this  division  should  be  joined  that  tract  of  Paeonia,  which 
stretches  along  the  western  side  of  the  Axius  ;  Edessa  also, 
and  Beraea,  should  be  united  to  it.  The  fourth  district  was 
to  consist  of  the  country  on  the  north  of  Mount  Bora,  touch¬ 
ing  Illyria,  on  one  side,  and  Epirus,  on  the  other.  He  then 
appointed  the  capitals  of  the  districts,  in  which  the  councils 
should  be  held ;  of  the  first  district,  Amphipolis  ;  of  the 
second,  Thessalonica  ;  of  the  third,  Pella  ;  and  of  the  fourth, 
Pelagonia.  In  these,  he  ordered,  that  the  councils  of  the 
several  districts  should  be  assembled,  the  public  money  de¬ 
posited,  and  the  magistrates  elected.”  He  then  gave  notice, 
that  it  was  determined,  that  intermarriages  should  not  be  al¬ 
lowed  ;  that  no  one  should  be  at  liberty  to  purchase  lands  or 
houses,  out  of  the  limits  of  his  own  district ;  that  the  mines 
of  gold  and  silver  must  not  be  worked ;  but  those  of  iron 
and  copper  might ;  the  persons  working  them  paying  one  half 
of  the  tax  which  they  had  paid  to  the  King.  He  likewise 
forbade  the  importation  of  salt.  To  the  Dardanians,  who 
reclaimed  Pseonia,  because  it  had  formerly  been  theirs,  and 
was  contiguous  to  their  territory,  he  declared,  that  he  gave 
liberty  to  all  who  had  been  under  subjection  to  Perseus. 
Pseonia  he  refused  ;  but  to  compensate  for  this  refusal,  he 
granted  them  liberty  to  purchase  salt,  and  ordered  that  the 
third  district  should  bring  it  down  to  Stol^i  ;  and  he  fixed  the 
price  to  be  paid  for  it.  He  prohibited  them  from  cutting 
ship  timber  themselves,  or  suffering  others  to  cut  it.  To  those 
districts  which  bordered  on  the  barbarians,  (and  excepting 
the  third,  this  was  the  case  of  them  all,)  he  gave  permission 
to  keep  armed  forces  on  their  frontiers. 

BOOK  XLV. 

277 

B.C.  167.] 
XXX.  These  terms,  ann9unced  on  the  first  day  of  the  con¬ 
vention,  affected  the  minds  of  those  who  were  present  with 
very  different  emotions.  Liberty  being  granted  them,  be¬ 
yond  their  expectation,  and  the  annual  tribute  being  lightened, 
gave  them  high  satisfaction  ;  but  then,  by  the  prohibi¬ 
tion  of  a  commercial  intercourse  between  the  districts,  they 
thought  the  territory  dismembered,  like  an  animal  torn  asun¬ 
der  into  separate  limbs,  which  stood  in  need  of  mutual  aid 
from  each  other ;  so  litttle  did  the  Macedonians  themselves 
know  how  great  was  the  extent  of  their  country,  how  aptly  it 
was  formed  for  a  division,  and  how  competent  each  part  was 
to  subsist  by  itself.  The  first  division  contains  the  Bisal- 
tians,  men  of  the  greatest  courage,  residing  beyond  the  river 
Nessus,  and  on  both  sides  of  the  Strymon  ;  it  is  peculiarl} 
productive  of  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  has  mines  also,  and  the 
city  of  Amphipolis,most  advantageously  situated  ;  for,  stand¬ 
ing  just  in  the  way,  it  shuts  upeveiy^  passage  into  Macedonia 
from  the  east.  The  second  division  has  two  very  remarkable 
cities,  Thessalonica  and  Cassandria,  and  the  country  of  Pal- 
iene,  abundantly  productive  of  grain  and  fruits  ;  it  is  also  well 
calculated  for  maritime  business,  by  means  of  its  harbours, 
at  Toro,  and  at  Mount  Athos,  (called  .£nea,)  besides  others, 
some  of  which  are  conveniently  situated  upon  the  Eubcea,  and 
some  opposite  the  Hellespont.  The  third  district  has  the  ce¬ 
lebrated  cities  of  Edessa,  Beraea,  and  Pella  ;  and  is  partlj'  in- 
liabited  by  the  Vettians,  a  warlike  people,  also  by  great  num¬ 
bers  of  Gauls  and  Illyrians,  who  are  industrious  husbandmen. 
The  fourth  district  is  occupied  by  the  Eordaeans,  Lyncestans, 
and  Pelagonians,  to  whom  are  joined  Atintania,  Stymphalis, 
and  Elemiotis.  All  this  tract  is  cold,  and  the  soil  rough,  and 
unfavourable  to  tillage  ;  to  which  the  tempers  of  the  inhabi¬ 
tants  bear  a  strong  resemblance.  They  are  rendered  the 
more  ferocious  by  their  vicinity  to  the  barbarians,  who,  by 
frequent  attacks,  inure  them  to  a  life  of  arms,  and,  during 

278 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  585. 

peace,  introduce  their  customs  ampng  them.  Having,  by  this 
division  of  Macedonia,  separated  the  interests  of  the  several 
districts,  he  informed  them,  that  the  regulations  which  were 
to  be  .binding  on  the  Macedonians  in  general,  should  be  made 
known  to  them,  when  the  time  came  which  he  intended  to 
appoint,  for  giving  them  a  body  of  laws. 
XXXI.  The  ^tolians  were  then  summoned  to  appear  ;  but 
m  the  trial  of  their  cause,  the  inquiry  was  directed  to  dis¬ 
cover,  rather,  which  party  had  favoured  the  Romans,  and 
which  the  King,  than  which  had  done,  and  which  suffered 
jnjui'y  ;  for  the  murderers  vrere  absolved  of  guilt,  the  exile- 
inents  confirmed,  and  the  death  of  the  citizens  overlooked. 
Aulus  Bsebius,  alone,  was  condemned  for  having  lent  Ro¬ 
man  soldiers  on  the  occasion.  I'he  consequence  of  this  de¬ 
cision  through  the  states  and  nations  of  Greece,  was,  that  it 
puffed  up  the  party  which  favoured  the  Romans  to  an  intolera¬ 
ble  degree  of  arrogance  ;  and  subjected  to  be  trodden  under 
their  feet,’ all  those  who  were,  in  the  least,  suspected  of  being 
in  the  King’s  interest.  Of  the  leading  men  in  the  states, 
there  were  three  parties  :  two  of  which,  paying  servile  court 
cither  to  the  Romans,  or  the  kings,  sought  to  aggrandize  them¬ 
selves  by  enslaving  their  countries  ;  while  the  third,  taking 
a  different  course  from  either,  and  struggling  against  both, 
stood  up  in  support  of  their  laws  and  liberty.  I’hese  last 
had  the  greatest  share  of  the  affection  of  their  countrymen, 
but  the  least  interest  among  foreigners.  The  great  succes¬ 
ses  of  the  Romans  had  raised  their  partizans  to  such  import¬ 
ance,  that  they  alone  held  the  offices  of  magistracy  j  they 
alone  were  employed  on  embassies.  Great  nunii)ers  of  these, 
coming  from  the  diets  of  Peloponnesus,  Boeotia,  and  other 
parts  of  Greece,  filled  the  ears  of  the  ten  commissioners  with 
insinuations,  that  “  those  who,  through  folly,  had  openly 
boasted  of  being  friends  and  intimates  of  Perseus,  were  not 
the  only  persons  who  had  favoured  his  cause  }  much  greater 

B.C.  167.] 

BOOK  XLV. 

279 

numbers  had  done  so  in  secret.  That  there  was  another  party, 
who,  under  pretence  of  supporting  liberty,  had,  in  the  diets, 
advanced  every  measure  prejudicial  to  the  Roman  interest  j 
and  that  those  nations  would  not  continue  faithful,  unless  the 
spirits  of  these  parties  were  subdued,  and  the  influence  of 
those,  who  had  no  other  object  than  the  advancement  of  the 
Roman  power,  were  augmented  and  strengthened.’^  These 
men  gave  a  list  of  the  persons  alluded  to,  whom  the  general 
called  by  letter  out  of  iEtolia,  Acarnania,  Epirus,  and  Boeotia, 
to  follow  him  to  Rome,  and  account  for  their  conduct.  Two 
of  the  ten  commissioners,  Caius  Claudius  and  Cneius  Domi- 
tius,  were  sent  to  Achaia,  that  they  might,  on  the  spot,  sum¬ 
mon  by  proclamation  the  persons  concerned  there.  For  this 
procedure,  there  were  two  reasons  ;  one,  that  it  was  believed 
that  the  Achaeans  would  be  apt  to  show  more  courage  than  the 
rest,  and  refuse  obedience,  and,  perhaps,  even  endanger  Cal¬ 
licrates,  and  other  authors  of  the  charges.  The  other  reason 
for  summoning  them,  on  the  spot,  was,  that  the  commission¬ 
ers  had  in  their  possession,  letters  from  the  chief  men  of  the 
other  nations,  which  had  been  found  among  the  King’s  pa¬ 
pers  ;  but  with  regard  to  the  Achasans  the  charges  were  not 
clear,  because  no  letters  of  theirs  had  been  discovered.  When 
the  iEtolians  were  dismissed,  the  Acarnanian  nation  was 
called  in.  No  alteration  was  made  in  their  situation,  only 
Leucas  was  disunited  from  their  council.  Then,  taking  a 
wider  range  for  their  inquiries,  respecting  those  who  had, 
publicly  or  privately,  favoured  the  King,  they  extended  their 
jurisdiction  even  into  Asia,  and  sent  Labeo  to  demolish  An- 
tissa,  in  the  island  of  Lesbos,  and  to  remove  the  inhabitants 
to  Methymna  ;  because,  when  Antenor,  the  commander  of 
the  King’s  fleet,  was  cruising  with  his  squadron  on  the  coast 
of  Lesbos,  they  admitted  him  into  their  harbour,  and  supplied 
him  with  provisions.  Two  distinguished  men  were  beheaded, 
Androiiicus,  son  of  Andronicus,  an  .Etolian,  because,  accom- 

280 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  585. 

panying  his  father,  he  had  borne  arms  against  the  Roman 
people  ;  and  Neo,  a  Theban,  by  whose  advice,  his  country¬ 
men  were  led  to  form  an  alliance  with  Perseus. 
XXXII.  After  the  interruption  caused  by  the  considera¬ 
tion  of  these  foreign  matters,  jEmilius  reassembled  the  coun¬ 
cil  of  Macedonia,  and  informed  them,  that  with  regard  to 
the  future  form  of  government  they  must  elect  senators  called 
by  themselves  Synedroi,  to  whom  the  administration  of  pub¬ 
lic  affairs  should  be  entrusted.’’  Then  was  read  a  list  of  Ma¬ 
cedonians  of  distinction,  who,  with  their  children  above  fif¬ 
teen  years  of  age,  were  ordered  to  go  before  him  into  Italy, 
rhis  injunction,  at  first  view  cruel,  appeared,  afterwards,  to 
the  Macedonian  populace,  to  have  been  intended  in  favour  of 
their  freedom.  For  the  persons  named  were  Perseus’s  friends 
and  courtiers,  the  generals  of  his  armies,  and  the  commanders 
of  his  ships,  or  garrisons  ;  men  accustomed  to  pay  servile 
obedience  to  the  King,  and  to  domineer  haughtily  over 
withers;  some  immoderately  rich,  others  vicing  in  expense 
with  those  to  whom  they  were  inferior,  in  point  of  fortune ; 
in  a  word,  none  possessed  of  a  disposition  suited  to  a  mem¬ 
ber  of  a  commonwealth,  and  all  of  them  incapable  of  paying 
due  obedience  to  the  laws,  and  of  enjoying  an  equal  participa¬ 
tion  of  liberty.  All,  therefore,  who  had  held  any  employ¬ 
ment  under  the  King,  even  those  who  had  been  upon  the 
most  trivial  embassies,  were  ordered  to  leave  Macedonia  and 
go  into  Italy  j  and  the  penalty  of  death  was  denounced 
against  any  who  disobeyed  the  mandate.  He  framed  laws 
for  Macedonia  with  such  care,  that  they  seemed  intended  not 
for  vanquished  foes,  but  for  faithful  and  deserving  allies ; 
laws  so  wise,  that  even  long  experience,  the  infallible  test  of 
excellence,  has  not  been  able  to  discover  in  them  any  thing 
liable  to  exception.  Serious  business  being  now  despatched, 
he  turned  his  thoughts  to  the  celebration  of  games,  for  which 
he  had  long  been  making  preparations,  having  sent  people  to 

BOOK  XLV. 

281 

B.c.  ler.j 
the  states  and  kings  in  Asia,  to  give  notice  of  the  intended 
diversions.  In  his  late  tour  through  Greece,  he  had  himself 
mentioned  his  design  to  the  principal  people  :  and  he  now  ex¬ 
hibited  them  at  Amphipolis  with  very  great  splendour. 
There  came  thither  from  every  quarter,  multitudes  of  artists 
of  every  sort,  skilled  in  such  exhibitions,  wrestlers,  and  re¬ 
markably  fine  horses  ;  deputations  also  came  with  victims 
and  every  other  mark  of  respect,  usually  shown  to  gods  or 
men,  on  occasion  of  the  great  games  of  Greece.  Ktnce  it 
came  to  pass,  that  people’s  admiration  was  excited,  not  only 
by  the  magnificence,  but  likewise  by  the  skill  displayed  in 
the  entertainments;  in  which  kind  of  business  the  Romans 
were,  at  that  time,  quite  inexperienced.  Feasts  were  also 
provided  for  the  ambassadors  with  the  same  degree  of  care 
and  elegance.  An  expression  of  his  was  generallv  remarked, 
that,  to  furnish  out  a  feast,  and  to  conduct  games,  required 
talents  equal  to  those  of  a  consummate  general. 
XXXIII.  When  the  games  of  every  kind  were  finished,  he 
put  the  brazen  shields  on  board  the  ships ;  the  rest  of  the 
arms,  being  all  collected  together  in  a  huge  pile,  the  general 
himself,  after  praying  to  Mars,  Minerva,  mother  Lua,  and 
the  other  deities,  to  whom  it  is  right  and  proper  to  dedicate 
the  spoils  of  enemies,  set  fire  to  them  with  a  torch,  and  then 
the  military  tribunes,  who  stood  round,  all  threw  fire  on  the 
same.  It  was  remarkable,  that,  at  such  a  general  congress  of 
Europe  and  Asia,  where  such  multitudes  were  assembled, 
some  to  congratulate  the  victors,  some  to  see  the  shows  ;  and 
where  such  numerous  bodies  of  land  and  naval  forces  were 
quartered,  so  great  was  the  plenty  of  every  thing,  and  so 
moderate  the  price  of  provisions,  that  the  general  made  pre¬ 
sents  of  divers  articles  to  private  persons,  and  states,  and  na¬ 
tions  ;  not  only  for  their  present  ust‘,  but  even  to  carry  home 
w’ith  them.  The  crowd  were  not  more  highly  gratified  by 
the  sight  of  the  stage  entertainments,  the  gymnastics  and  the 
\  oi  .  VI. — 2  O 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R. 
horse  races,, than  by  that  of  the  Macedonian  booty,  which 
was  all  exposed  to  view.  In  the  palace  was  such  a  number 
of  statues,  pictures,  tapestry,  and  vases,  most  elaborately 
formed  of  gold,  silver,  brass,  and  ivory,  that  they  seemed  in¬ 
tended,  not  merely  for  present  show,  like  the  furniture  of 
that  of  Alexandria,  but  even  for  the  use  of  after  times. 
'I'hese  were  embarked  in  the  fleet,  and  given  in  charge  to 
Cneius  Octavius,  to  be  carried  to  Rome.  Paullus  then  dis» 
missed  the  ambassadors  with  every  demonstration  of  good 
will ;  and,  crossing  the  Strymon,  encamped  for  the  night  -at 
the  distance  of  a  mile  from  Amphipolis  ;  then  resuming  his 
march,  he  arrived,  on  the  fifth  day,  at  Pella.  Halting  for 
two  days,  at  a  place  called  Spelaeum,  he  detached  his  son 
Quintus  Maximus  and  Publius  Nasica,  with  half  of  the 
troops,  to  ia\  waste  the  country  of  the  Illyrians,  who  had  as- 
sisted  Perseus  in  the  war,  ordering  them  to  meet  him  at  Ori- 
cum  ;  then,  taking  the  road  to  Epirus,  on  the  evening  of  the 
fiftcenih  da}  ,  he  reached  the  city  of  Passaro. 
XXXI\".  Not  far  from  hence  was  the  camp  of  Anicius,  tc 
whom  he  sent  a  letter,  desiring  him  not  to  be  alarmed  at  any 
thing  that  should  happen,  for  the  senate  had  granted  to  his 
soldiers,  the  plunder  of  those  cities  in  Epirus,  which  had  re¬ 
volted  to  Perseus.  He  despatched  centurions,  who  were  to 
give  out,  that  they  came  to  bring  away  the  garrisons,  in  ordex 
that  the  Epirotes  might  be  free,  as  well  as  the  Macedonians  ; 
and  summoning  before  him  ten  of  the  principal  men  of  each 
city,  he  gave  them  strict  injunctions  that  all  their  gold  and 
silver  should  be  brought  into  the  public  street.  He  then  sent 
cohorts  to  the  several  states,  ordering  those  who  had  the 
greater  distance  to  go,  to  set  out  sooner  than  the  others,  that 
they  might  all  arrive  at  the  places  of  their  destination,  on  the 
same  day.  The  tribunes  and  centurions  were  instructed  how 
to  act.  Early  in  the  morning,  all  the  treasure  was  collected  ; 
at  the  fourth  hour  the  signal  was  given  to  the  soldiers  to 

B,C,  167.] 

BOOK  XLV. 

283 

plunder,  and  so  ample  was  the  booty  acquired,  that  the  shares 
distributed  were  four  hundred  denariuses*  to  a  horseman, 
and  two  hundred  to  a  footman.  One  hundred  and  fifty  thou¬ 
sand  persons  were  led  away  captive.  Then  the  walls  of  the 
plundered  cities,  in  number  about  seventy,  were  razed  ;  the 
effects  sold,  and  the  soldiers’  shares  paid  out  of  the  price. 
Paullus  then  marched  down  to  the  sea  to  Oricum  ;  he  found, 
that,  contrary  to  his  opinion,  he  had  by  no  means  satisfied 
the  wishes  of  his  men,  who  were  enraged,  at  being  excluded 
from  sharing  in  the  spoil  of  the  King,  as  if  they  had  not 
waged  any  war  in  Macedonia.  Finding,  at  Oricum,  the 
troops  sent  with  his  son  Maximus  and  Scipio  Nasica,  he  em¬ 
barked  the  army,  and  sailed  over  to  Italy.  Anicius,  a  short 
time  after,  having  held  a  convention  of  the  rest  of  the  Epi¬ 
rotes,  and  Acarnanians,  and  having  ordered  those  of  their 
chiefs,  whose  cases  he  had  reserved  f(>r  consideration,  to  fol¬ 
low  him,  waited  only  for  the  return  of  the  ships  that  had  car¬ 
ried  the  Macedonian  army,  and  then  passed  over  to  Italy. 
During  these  transactions  in  Macedonia  and  Epirus,  the  ambas¬ 
sadors,  sent  with  Attalus,  to  put  a  stop  to  hostilities  between 
the  Gauls  and  King  Eumenes,  arrived  in  Asia.  Having 
agreed  to  a  suspension  of  arms,  for  the  winter,  the  Gauls 
were  gone  home,  and  the  King  had  retired  to  Pergamus  into 
winter  quarters,  where  he  was  seized  with  a  heavy  fit  of  sick¬ 
ness.  The  first  appearance  of  spring  drew  out  both  parties  ; 
the  Gauls  had  advanced  as  far  as  Synada,  while  Eumenes 
had  collected  all  his  forces  at  Sardis.  The  Romans  went  to 
confer  with  Solovettius,  general  of  the  Gauls,  and  Attalus 
accompanied  them  ;  but  it  was  not  thought  proper  that  he 
should  enter  the  camp,  lest  the  passions  of  either  party  might 
be  heated  by  debate.  Publius  Licinius  held  a  conference 
with  the  aforesaid  chieftain  ;  and  the  account  he  gave  was. 

*  121  18s.  4d 

284 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  585. 

that  mild  remonstrances  rendered  him  more  presumptuous. 
It  might,  therefore,  seem  matter  of  wonder,  that  the  media¬ 
tion  of  Roman  ambassadors  should  have  had  so  great  influ¬ 
ence  on  Antioch  us  and  Ptolemv,  two  powerful  kings,  as  to 
make  them  instantly  conclude  a  peace  ;  and  vet,  that  it  should 
have  had  no  kind  of  efficacy  with  the  Gauls. 
XXXV.  The  captive  kings,  Perseus  and  Gentius,  with 
their  children,  were  the  first  brought  to  Rome,  and  put  in 
custod},  and  next  the  other  prisoners  ;  then  came  the  Mace¬ 
donians,  who  had  been  laid  under  injunctions  to  attend  the 
senate,  with  the  principal  (ireeks,  in  the  same  circumstances  ; 
for  of  these,  not  only  such  as  were  at  home  were  summoned, 
but  even  those,  who  were  said  to  be  at  the  courts  of  the 
kings.  In  a  few  days  after,  Paullus  was  carried  up  the  Ti¬ 
ber  to  the  city,  in  a  royal  galley  of  vast  size,  which  was 
moved  by  sixteen  tiers  of  oars,  and  decorated  with  Mace¬ 
donian  spoils,  consisting  not  only  of  beautiful  armour,  but  of 
tapestry,  and  such  kind  of  works,  which  had  been  the  pro¬ 
perty  of  the  King  ;  while  the  banks  of  the  river  were  covered 
with  the  multitudes  that  poured  out  to  do  him  honour.  After 
a  few  days,  arrived  Anicius,  and  Cneius  Octavius  with  his 
fleet.  The  senate  voted  a  triumph  to  each,  and  charged  the 
praetor,  Quintus  Cassius,  to  apply  to  the  plebeian  tribunes,  who 
should  propose  to  the  commons  the  passing  of  an  order,  in¬ 
vesting  them  with  plenary  authority,  during  the  day  on  which 
they  should  ride  through  the  city  in  triumph.  Secondary 
objects  are  generally  secure  from  popular  displeasure,  which 
usually  aims  at  the  highest.  With  regard  to  the  triumphs  of 
Anicius  and  Octavius,  no  hesitation  was  made  ;  yet  Paullus, 
with  whom  these  men  could  not,  without  blushing,  set  them¬ 
selves  in  comparison,  felt  the  attacks  of  invidious  detraction. 
He  had  kept  his  soldiers  under  the  ancient  rules  of  discipline, 
and  his  donations,  out  of  the  spoil,  were  smaller  than  they 
hoped  to  have  received,  when  the  treasures  of  the  King  were 

BOOK  XLV. 

285 

B.C.  16r.] 
so  large;  for  if  he  had  indulged  their  avarice,  there  would 
have  been 'nothing  left  to  be  carried  to  the  treasury.  The 
whole  Macedonian  army  were  disposed  to  neglect  attending, 
in  support  of  their  commander’s  pretensions,  at  the  assembly 
held  for  the  passing  of  the  order.  But  Servius  Sulpicius 
Galba,  (who  had  been  military  tribune  in  Macedonia,  and 
who  harboured  a  personal  enmity  against  the  general,)  partly, 
by  his  own  importunities,  partly,  by  soliciting  them,  through 
the  soldiers  of  his  own  legion,— had  spirited  them  up  to  at¬ 
tend  in  full  numbers,  to  give  their  votes,  and  to  take  re¬ 
venge  on  a  haughty  and  morose  commander,  by  rejecting  the 
order  proposed  for  his  triumph..  The  commons  of  the  city 
would  follow  the  judgment  of  the  soldiery.  Was  it  right, 
that  he  should  have  power  to  withhold  the  money,  and  the 
army  not  have  power  to  withhold  the  honours  ?  Let  him  not 
hope  to  reap  the  fruits  of  gratitude,  which  he  had  not 
merited.” 
XXXVI.  By  such  expressions  did  he  stimulate  their  re¬ 
sentment  ;  and  when,  in  the  Capitol,  Tiberius  Sempronius, 
tribune  of  the  commons,  proposed  the  order,  and  it  came  to 
the  turn  of  private  citizens  to  speak  on  the  subject,  the  pass¬ 
ing  of  it  was  thought  so  clear  of  all  doubt,  that  not  one  stood 
forth  to  argue  in  favour  of  it.  Whereupon,  Servius  Galba 
suddenly  came  forward,  and  demanded  of  the  tribune,  that, 
as  it  was  then  the  eighth  hour,  and  as  there  would  not  be 
time  enough  to  produce  all  the  reasons,  for  not  ordering  a 
triumph  to  Lucius  ^Emilius,  they  should  adjourn  to  the  next 
day,  and  take  up  the  business  early  in  the  morning :  for  not 
less  than  an  entire  day  would  be  sufficient  to  say  what  was 
tequisitein  the  cause.”  The  tribune  desired,  that,  whatever 
he  chose  to  object,  he  would  say  it  then  ;  and  he  spoke  so 
long,  as  to  protract  the  affair  until  night.  lie  represented, 
and  reminded  the  soldiers,  that  ‘‘  the  duties  of  the  service 
had  been  enforced  with  unusual  severity  ;  that  greater  toil 

2«6 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R,  585. 

and  greater  danger  had  been  imposed  on  them  than  the  oc¬ 
casion  required  ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  in  respect  of  re¬ 
wards  and  honours,  every  thing  was  conducted  on  the  nar¬ 
rowest  scale  ;  and  if  such  commanders  succeeded  in  their 
views,  military  employment  would  become  more  irksome 
and  more  laborious,  while  it  would  produce  to  conquering 
troops,  neither  riches  nor  honours.  That  the  Macedonians 
were  in  a  better  condition  than  the  Roman  soldiers.  He  then 
told  them,  that,  if  they  would  attend,  next  day,  in  full  num¬ 
bers,  to  reject  the  order,  men  in  power  would  learn,  that 
every  thing  was  not  in  the  disposal  of  the  commander,  but 
that  there  was  something  in  that  of  the  soldiery.”  The  sol¬ 
diers,  instigated  by  such  arguments,  filled  the  Capitol,  next 
day,  with  such  a  crowd,  that  no  one  else  could  find  room  to 
come  in  and  vote.  The  tribes,  first  called  in,  gave  a  nega¬ 
tive  to  the  question  ;  on  which  the  principal  men  in  the  state 
ran  together  to  the  Capitol,  crying  out,  that  it  was  a  shame¬ 
ful  thing,  that  Lucius  Paullus,  after  his  success  in  such  an 
important  war,  should  be  robbed  of  a  triumph ;  that  com¬ 
manders  should  be  given  up,  in  a  state  of  subjection,  to  the 
licentiousness  and  avarice  of  their  men.  A  desire  of  popu¬ 
larity,  of  itself,  too  often  led  generals  astray  j  but  what  must 
be  the  consequence,  if  the  soldiers  were  raised  into  the  place 
of  masters  over  their  generals?”  All  heaped  violent  re¬ 
proaches  on  Galba.  At  last,  when  the  uproar  was  calmed, 
Marcus  Servilius,  who  had  been  consul,  and  master  of  the 
horse,  requested  that  the  tribunes  would  begin  the  proceed¬ 
ings  anew,  and  give  him  an  opportunity  of  speaking  to  the 
people.  These,  after  withdrawing  to  deliberate,  being  over¬ 
come  by  the  arguments  of  some  of  the  first  rank,  complied 
with  the  intreaty  of  Servilius,  that  they  would  call  back  the 
tribes,  as  soon  as  himself  and  other  private  persons  should 
have  delivered  their  sentiments. 

BOOK  XLV. 

28r 

B.C.  167.] 
XXXVII.  Serviiius  then  said  :  ‘‘  Roman  citizens,  if  there 
were  no  other  proof  of  the  eminent  abilities  of  Lucius  -£mi- 
lius,  as  a  commander,  this  one  would  be  sufficient :  that,  not¬ 
withstanding  he  had  in  his  camp  soldiers  so  inconstant  and 
mutinously  inclined  with  an  enemy  so  active,  so  zealous,  and 
so  eloquent,  to  stir  up  the  passions  of  the  multitude,  yet  was 
there  never  any  tumult  in  his  arm3\  That  strictness  of  dis¬ 
cipline,  at  which  they  have  now  conceived  so  much  displea¬ 
sure,  kept  them  then  in  order.  Subjected  to  the  ancient 
rules,  they  then  remained  quiet.  As  to  Servius  Galba,  if  he 
were  disposed  to  set  himself  up  for  an  orator,  and  to  give  a 
specimen  of  his  eloquence,  in  accusing  Lucius  Paulius,  he 
ought  not  now  to  obstruct  his  triumph  ;  if  for  no  other  rea¬ 
son  than  this,  that  the  senate  has  pronounced  that,  in  their 
judgment,  he  has  deserved  it.  But  the  proper  wa}'  would 
have  been,  on  the  day  after  the  triumph,  when  he  should  see 
iLmilius  in  a  private  station,  to  prefer  a  charge,  and  prosecute 
him  according  to  the  laws  ;  or  else,  when  he  himself  should 
be  invested  with  magistracy.  Let  Galba  cite  him  to  a  trial ; 
let  him  accuse  his  enemy  before  the  people.  In  that  method, 
Lucius  Paulius  would  both  receive  the  reward  of  his  proper 
conduct,  a  triumph  for  extraordinar)’  success  in  war,  and  also 
meet  punishment,  if  he  had  committed  any  thing  unwortht" 
of  his  former  or  present  reputation.  Instead  of  which,  he 
has  undertaken  to  depreciate  the  character  of  aman,  to  whom 
he  cannot  impute  a  single  act  either  criminal  or  dishonour¬ 
able.  Yesterday  he  demanded  a  whole  day,  for  making  his 
charges  on  Lucius  Paulius,  and  four  hours  which  remained 
of  that  da)^,  he  spent  in  delivering  a  speech  to  that  purpose. 
What  accused  man  was  ever  so  transcendently  wicked,  that 
his  offences  could  not  be  set  forth  in  that  number  of  hours 
And  yet,  in  all  that  time,  what  did  he  object  to  him,  that 
Lucius  Paulius,  if  actually  on  his  trial,  would  have  wished 
to  be  denied  ?  Let  me,  for  a  moment,  suppose  two  assem- 

288 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y,R.  585 

blies  :  one  composed  of  the  soldiers  who  served  in  Mace-' 
donia  ;  the  other,  of  sounder  judgment,  unbiassed  either  by 
favour  or  dislike  ;  w  here  the  whole  body  of  the  Roman  peo¬ 
ple  is  the  judge.  Let  the  business  be  discussed,  first,  before 
the  citizens,  peaceably  assembled  in  their  gowns.  Servius 
Galba,  what  have  you  to  say  before  the  Roman  citizens  ;  for 
such  a  discourse,  as  you  made  before,  is  totally  precluded. 
You  were  obliged  to  stand  on  your  guards  with  too  much 
strictness  and  attention  ;  the  watches  were  visited  with  too 
much  exactness  and  severity  ;  you  had  more  fatigue  than 
formerly,  because  the  general  himself  went  the  rounds,  and 
enforced  the  duties.  On  the  same  day  you  performed  a 
march,  and,  without  repose,  were  led  forth  to  battle.  Even 
when  you  had  gained  a  victory,  he  did  not  allow  you  rest: 
he  led  you  immediately  in  pursuit  of  the  enemy.  When  he 
has  it  in  his  power  to  make  }ou  rich,  by  dividing  the  spoil, 
he  intends  to  carry  the  King’s  treasure  in  his  triumph,  and 
deposit  it  in  the  treasury.  Though  these  arguments  may 
have  some  degree  of  weight,  and  are  well  calculated  to  sti¬ 
mulate  the  passions  of  soldiers,  who  imagine  that  too  little 
deference  has  been  shown  to  their  licentious  temper,  and  too 
little  indulgence  to  their  avarice  ;  yet  they  would  have  no 
kind  of  influence  on  the  judgment  of  the  Roman  people  ; 
who,  though  they  should  not  recollect  old  accounts,  and  what 
they  heard  from  their  parents,  of  the  numerous  defeats  suf¬ 
fered  in  consequence  of  improper  indulgence  given  by  com¬ 
manders,  or  of  victories  gained  in  consequence  of  strict  in- 
forcement  of  discipline  ;  yet  must  they  surely  remember,  so 
late  as  in  the  last  Punic  war,  what  a  difference  there  was  be¬ 
tween  Marcus  Minucius,  the  master  of  the  horse,  and  Quin¬ 
tus  Fabius  Maximus,  the  dictator.  The  accuser,  therefore, 
would  soon  know,  that  any  defence,  on  the  part  of  Pauli  us, 
would  be  needless  and  superfluous. 

B.C.  167.] 

BOOK  XLV. 

289 

XXXVIII.  Let  us  now  pass  to  the  other  assembly  ;  and 
here  I  am  not  to  address  you  as  citizens,  but  as  soldiers,  if, 
indeed,  you  can  hear  yourselves  so  called  without  blushing, 
and  feeling  the  deepest  shame  for  your  illiberal  treatment  of 
your  general.  And,  to  say  the  truth,  I  feel  my  own  mind 
affected  in  a  very  different  manner,  when  I  suppose  myself 
speaking  to  an  army,  than  it  was,  just  now,  when  I  address¬ 
ed  myself  to  the  commons  of  the  city.  For  what  say  you, 
soldiers,  is  there  any  man  in  Rome,  except  Perseus,  that 
wishes  there  should  be  no  conquest  over  Macedonia ;  and 
are  not  you  tearing  him  in  pieces,  with  the  same  hands  with 
which  you  subdued  the  Macedonians  ?  That  man,  who  would 
hinder  you  from  entering  the  city  in  triumph,  would,  if  it 
had  been  in  his  pow’er,  have  hindered  you  from  conquering. 
Soldiers,  you  are  mistaken,  if  you  imagine  that  a  triumph  is 
an  honour  to  the  general  only,  and  not  to  the  soldiers  also, 
as  'well  as  to  the  whole  Roman  people.  Not  Paullus  alone  is 
interested  in  the  present  case.  Many  v’ho  failed  of  obtain¬ 
ing  from  the  senate  the  grant  of  public  entry,  have  triumphed 
on  the  Alban  mount.  No  man  can  ravish  from  Lucius  Paul- 
liis  the  honour  of  having  brought  the  Macedonian  war  to  a 
conclusion,  any  more  than  he  can  from  Caius  Lutatius,  that 
of  putting  an  end  to  the  first  Punic  war,  or  from  Publius 
Cornelius,  that  of  finishing  the  second  ;  or  from  those  who 
have  triumphed  either  before  those  generals^  or  since.  Neither 
will  a  triumph  add  to,  or  diminish,  the  honour  of  Lucius 
Paullus,  as  a  commander  :  the  character  of  the  soldiers,  and 
of  the  whole  Roman  people,  is  more  immediately  concerned 
therein,  lest  they  should  incur  the  imputation  of  envy  and 
ingratitude,  towards  one  of  their  most  illustrious  citizens, 
and  appear  to  imitate,  in  this  respect,  the  Athenians,  who 
have  repeatedly  persecuted  such  by  exciting  the  hatred  of  the 
populace.  Your  ancestors  were  sufficiently  culpable  in  the 
case  of  Camillus.  They  treated  him  injuriously,  before  the 
VOL.  VI. — 2  P 

290 

HISTORY  Of  ROME. 

[Y.R.  58$. 

city  was  recovered  from  the  Gauls,  through  his  mcaus  ;  and 
the  same  was  done  by  you  in  the  case  of  Publius  Africanus. 
How  must  we  blush,  when  we  reflect,  that  the  habitation  of 
the  conqueror  of  Africa,  was  at  Litemum  ;  his  tomb  at  Li- 
temum  ?  And  shall  Lucius  Paullus,  equal  to  any  of  these 
men  in  renown,  receive  from  you  an  equal  share  of  ill  treat¬ 
ment  ?  Let  that,  then,  be  blotted  out,  which  dishonours  us 
among  foreigners,  and  injures  us  at  home  ;  for  who  will, 
henceforward,  wish  to  resemble  either  Africanus,  or  Paullus, 
in  a  state  where  merit  meets  only  with  ingratitude  and  en¬ 
mity  ?  If  there  were  no  disgrace  in  the  case,  and  the  ques¬ 
tion  merely  concerned  glory,  what  triumph  does  not  imply 
the  general  glory  of  the  Roman  race  ?  Are  all  the  numerous 
triumphs  over  the  Gauls,  the  Spaniards,  and  the  Carthagin¬ 
ians,  called  the  triumphs  of  the  generals  only,  or  are  they  not, 
in  fact,  the  triumphs  of  the  Roman  people  ?  As  the  triumphs 
were  celebrated,  not  merely  over  Pyrrhus,  or  Hannibal,  but 
over  the  Epirotes  and  Carthaginians  ;  so,  it  was  not  the  in¬ 
dividual  Manius  Curius,  or  Publius  Cornelius,  but  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  that  triumphed.  The  soldiers,  indeed,  are  peculiarly 
interested  in  this  case  j  for  it  is  their  part  to  appear  with 
crowns  of  laurel,  and  decorated  with  the  honorary  presents 
which  each  has  received,  to  utter  the  acclamations  of  victory, 
and  march  in  procession  through  the  city,  singing  their  own 
and  their  commander\praises.  If,  at  any  time,  soldiers  are 
not  brought  home  from  a  province  to  such  honours,  they 
murmur  ;  and  yet,  even  in  that  case,  they  consider  themselves 
distinguished,  though  absent,  because  by  their  hands  the 
victory  was  obtained.  Soldiers,  if  it  should  be  asked,  for 
what  purpose  you  were  brought  home  to  Italy,  and  not  dis¬ 
banded,  immediately,  when  the  business  of  the  province  was 
flnished  ;  why  ye  came  to  Rome,  in  a  body,  round  your 
standards  ;  why  you  loiter  here,  rather  than  repair  to  your 
several  homes  ;  what  other  answer  can  you  give,  than  that 

BOOK  XLV. 

291 

B.C.  167*] 

you  wished  to  be  seen  in  festival  ?  And,  certainly,  you  have 
a  right  to  show  yourselves  as  conquerors. 
XXXIX.  Triumphs  have  been  lately  celebrated  over 
Philip,  father  of  the  present  prince,  and  over  Antiochus : 
both  of  whom  were  in  possession  of  their  thrones,  when  these 
were  performed  ;  and  shall  there  be  no  triumph  over  Per¬ 
seus,  who  has  been  taken  prisoner,  and,  with  his  children, 
brought  away  to  this  city  ?  But  if,  (while  the  other  generals 
mounted  the  Capitol  in  their  chariots,  clad  in  gold  and  pur¬ 
ple,)  Lucius  Paullus,  alone,  reduced  to  a  private  rank,  should, 
amid  the  crowd  of  gowned  citizens,  call  out  from  the  lower 
ground,  and  ask  them,  ‘  Lucius  Anicius,  and  Cneius  Octa¬ 
vius,  whether  do  you  esteem  yourselves,  or  me,  more  de¬ 
serving  of  a  triumph  V  I  am  confident  they  would  yield  him 
the  chariot,  and,  through  shame,  present  to  him,  with  their 
own  hands,  their  ensigns  of  honour.  Do  ye  choose,  citizens, 
that  Gentius  should  be  led  in  procession,  rather  than  Per¬ 
seus  ;  do  you  wish  to  triumph  over  an  accessary,  rather  than 
over  the  principal  in  the  war  ?  Shall  the  legions  from  Illyria, 
and  the  crews  of  the  fleet,  enter  the  city  with  laurel  crowns ; 
and  shall  the  Macedonian  legions,  being  refused  one  for 
themselves,  be  only  spectators  of  other  men’s  glories  ?  What 
then  will  become  of  such  a  rich  booty,  the  spoils  of  a  victory 
so  lucrative  ?  Where  shall  be  buried  so  many  thousand  suits 
of  armour,  stripped  from  the  bodies  of  the  enemy  ?  or  shall 
they  be  sent  back  to  Macedonia  ?  Where  shall  be  lodged  the 
statues  of  gold,  of  marble,  and  of  ivory ;  the  pictures,  the 
ingenious  productions  of  the  loom  ;  such  a  quantity  of 
wrought  silver  and  gold,  and  such  a  mass  of  money’’  as  the 
King’s  ?  Shall  they  be  conveyed  to  the  treasury,  by  night,  as 
if  they  were  stolen  ?  What  will  become  of  the  greatest  of 
all  shows ;  where  will  that  very  celebrated  and  powerful 
King,  Perseus,  be  exhibited  to  the  eyes  of  a  victorious  peo¬ 
ple  ?  What  a  concourse  the  captured  King  Syphax,  an 

HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  585. 
• 
auxiliary  only  in  the  Punic  war,  caused,  most  of  us  remem¬ 
ber  ;  and  shall  the  captured  King  Perseus,  with  his  sons, 
Philip  and  Alexander,  names  so  illustrious,  be  kept  from  the 
view  of  the  public  ?  All  men  are  eagerly  anxious  to  behold 
Lucius  Paullus  himself,  twice  consul,  the  conqueror  of 
Greece,  entering  the  city  in  his  triumphal  chariot.  We  made 
him  consul,  for  this  very  purpose,  that  he  should  finish  a 
war  which  had  been  protracted  for  four  years,  to  our  great 
shame.  When  he  obtained  that  province  by  lot,  and  when 
he  was  setting  out  for  it,  with  presaging  minds,  we  destined 
to  him  victory  ;  and  shall  we  now,  when  he  is  victorious,  re¬ 
fuse  him  a  triumph  ;  shall  we  defraud,  not  only  men,  but  the 
gods  also  of  the  honours  due  to  them  ?  A  triumph  is  due  to 
the  gods,  as  well  as  to  men  :  your  ancestors  commenced 
every  business  of  importance  with  worshipping  them,  and 
ended  all  in  the  same  manner.  The  consul,  or  praetor,  (when 
going  to  his  province,  and  to  a  war,  dressed  in  his  military 
robe,  and  attended  by  his  lictors,)  offers  vowsan  the  Capitol  ; 
and,  tvhen  he  returns  victorious,  carries,  in  triumph,  to  the 
Capitol,  to  the  deities  to  whom  he  made  the  vows,  the  due 
offering  of  the  Roman  people.  The  victims  that  precede 
him  are  not  the  most  immaterial  part  of  the  procession, — to 
demonstrate  that  the  commander  comes  home  with  thanks¬ 
givings  to  the  gods  for  the  success  granted  to  the  business  of 
the  state.  All  those  victims,  which  he  has  provided  to  be 
led  in  his  triumph,  you  may  slay  at  sacrifices,  performed  by 
different  persons.  Do  you  intend  to  interrupt  those  banquets 
of  the  senate,  which  are  not  allow^ed  to  be  served  up,  cither 
in  any  private  or  even  public  place,  if  unconsecrated,  but 
only  in  the  Capitol,  whether  they  are  meant  for  the  gratifica¬ 
tion  of  men,  or  in  honour  both  of  gods  and  men, — because 
such  is  the  w  ill  of  Servius  Galba  ?  Shall  the  gates  be  shut 
against  Lucius  Paullus's  triumph  ?  Shall  Perseus,  King  oi 
Macedonia,  wdth  his  children,  the  multitude  of  other  cap- 

BOOK  XLV. 

293 

B.CA67.] 
tives,  and  the  spoils  of  the  Macedonians,  be  left  behind,  on 
this  side  of  the  river  ?  Shall  Lucius  Paullus,  in  a  private 
character,  go  straight  from  the  gate  to  his  house,  as  if  re¬ 
turning  home  from  his  country-seat  ?  And  you,  centurion, 
you,  soldiers,  listen  to  the  votes  of  the  senate  respecting  your 
general  Paullus,  rather  than  to  the  babbling  of  Servius  Galba ; 
listen  to  me,  rather  than  to  him.  He  has  learned  nothing, 
but  to  speak  ;  and  even  that  with  rancour  and  malice.  I  have 
three-and-tvventy  times  fought  the  enemy,  on  challenges,  and 
from  every  one  I  brought  off  spoils.  I  have  my  body  plen¬ 
tifully  marked  with  honourable  scars,  all  received  in  front/’ 
It  is  said,  that  he  then  stripped  himself,  and  mentioned  in 
what  war  each  of  his  wounds  was  received ;  and  that,  while 
he  was  showing  these,  he  happened  to  uncover  what  ought  to 
be  hid,  and  that  a  swelling  in  his  groins  raised  a  laugh  among 
those  near  him,  on  which  he  said,  This  too,  which  excites 
vour  laughter,  I  got  by  continuing  days  and  nights  on  horse¬ 
back  ;  nor  do  I  feel  either  shame  or  sorrow  for  it,  any  more 
than  for  these  scars,  since  it  never  obstructs  me  in  doing 
good  service  to  the  public,  either  in  peace  or  war.  An  aged 
soldier,  I  have  shown  to  youthful  soldiers  this  body  of  mine, 
often  wounded  by  the  weapons  of  the  enemy.  Let  Galba 
expose  his,  which  is  sleek  and  unhurt.  Tribunes,  be  pleased 
to  call  back  the  tribes  to  vote.  Soldiers,  I  #  *  #  *  *  #  ^ 
XL.  Valerius  Antias  tells  us,  that  the  total  of  the  captured 
gold  and  silver,  carried  in  the  procession,  was  one  hundred 
and  twenty  millions  of  sestercesf  ;  but  from  the  number  oi; 
Philippics,  and  the  weights  of  the  gold  and  silver,  specifical¬ 
ly  set  down  by  himself,  the  amount  is  unquestionably  made 
much  greater.  An  equal  sum,  it  is  said,  had  been  either 
9 
*  Tlic  conclusion  of  tins  speech  is  lost.  The  efi'cct  of  it  wa«,  tljai  thr 
order  for  the  triumph  of  Lucius  Lauilus  passed  unaiiinujUvU  ,  Tb*.  bepr-ri 
lyng'  of  tlic  account  of  the  procession  is  uLo 
96f,7J0k 

294 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  58^. 

expended  on  the  late  war,  or  dissipated  during  the  King’s 
flight,  on  his  way  to  Samothrace.  It  is  wonderful,  that  so 
large  a  quantity  of  money  should  have  been  amassed  within 
the  space  of  thirty  years,  since  Philip’s  war  with  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  out  of  the  produce  of  the  mines,  and  the  other  branches 
of  revenue  Philip  began  war  against  the  Romans  with  his 
treasury  very  poorly  supplied  ;  Perseus,  on  the  contrary, 
with  his  immensely  rich.  Last  came  Paullus,  in  his  chariot, 
making  a  very  majestic  appearance,  both  from  the  dignity  of 
his  person,  and  of  his  age.  He  was  accompanied,  among 
other  illustrious  personages,  by  his  two  sons,  Quintus  Maxi¬ 
mus,  and  Publius  Scipio  ;  then  followed  the  cavalry,  troop  by 
troop,  and  the  cohorts  of  infantry,  each  in  its  order.  The 
donative  distributed  among  them  was  one  hundred  dena* 
riuses*  to  each  footman,  double  to  a  centurion,  and  triple  to 
a  horseman ;  and  it  is  believed,  that  he  would  have  given 
double  to  each,  had  they  not  objected  to  his  attaining  the 
present  honour,  or  had  answered  with  thankful  acclamations 
when  that  sum  was  announced  as  their  reward.  Perseus,  led 
through  the  city,  in  chains,  before  the  chariot  of  the  general, 
his  conqueror,  was  not  the  only  instance,  at  the  time,  of  the 
misfortunes  incident  to  mankind  ;  another  appeared  even  in 
the  victorious  Paullus,  though  glittering  in  gold  and  purple. 
For,  of  two  sons,  (who,  as  he  had  given  away  two  others  on 
adoption,  were  the  only  remaining  heirs  of  his  name,)  the 
younger,  about  twelve  years  old,  died  five  days  before  the 
triumph,  and  the  elder,  fourteen  years  of  age,  three  days  af¬ 
ter  it  ;  children,  who  might  have  been  expected,  a  short  time 
before,  to  be  carried  in  the  chariot  with  their  father,  dressed 
in  the  prsetexta,  and  anticipating,  in  their  hopes,  the  like  kind 
of  honours  for  themselves.  A  few  days  aft^r,  Marcus  An* 
tonius,  tribune  of  the  commons,  summoned  a  general  assem 

*  SI  4s.  7d 

BOOK  XLV, 

295 

B.C.  167,] 
bly,  at  the  generaPs  request.  Emilius,  after  descanting  on 
his  own  proper  services,  as  usually  done  by  other  command* 
ers,  proceeded  in  a  very  remarkable  manner,  and  well  be- 
coming  a  man  of  the  first  consequence  in  Rome. 
XLI.  Although,  Romans,  I  cannot  suppose  you  unin¬ 
formed,  either  of  the  success  which  has  attended  my  endea¬ 
vours  in  the  service  of  the  commonwealth,  or  of  the  two 
dreadful  strokes  which  have  lately  crushed  my  house  ;  since, 
within  a  short  space  of  time,  my  triumph  and  the  funerals  of 
my  two  sons  have  been  exhibited  to  your  view ;  yet,  I  beg 
leave  to  represent  to  you,  in  few  words,  and  with  that  tem¬ 
per  which  becomes  me,  a  comparative  view  of  my  own  pri¬ 
vate  situation,  and  the  happy  state  of  the  public.  Departing 
from  Italy,  I  sailed  from  Brundusium,  at  sunrise  ;  at  the 
ninth  hour,  with  my  whole  squadron,  I  reached  Corcyra.  On 
the  fifth  day  after,  I  offered  sacrifice  to  Apollo,  at  Delphi,  in 
behalf  of  myself,  of  your  armies  and  fleets.  From  Delphi,  I 
arrived,  on  the  fifth  day,  in  the  camp ;  where,  having  re¬ 
ceived  the  command  of  the  army,  and  put  in  order  several 
matters,  which  greatly  impeded  success,  I  advanced  into  the 
country  ;  the  enemy’s  post  being  impregnable,  and  there  being 
no  possibility  of  forcing  Perseus  to  fight.  In  spite  of  the 
guards  which  he  had  stationed,  I  made  my  way  through  the 
pass  at  Petra,  and,  at  length,  compelling  the  King  to  come  to 
an  engagement,  gained  a  complete  victory.  I  reduced  Ma¬ 
cedonia  under  the  power  of  the  Romans  ;  and,  in  fifteen  days., 
finished  a  war,  which  three  consuls  before  me,  had,  for  three 
years,  conducted  in  such  a  manner,  that  each  left  it  to  his 
successor  more  formidable  than  he  had  found  it.  Other 
prosperous  events  followed  in  consequence  of  this  :  all  the 
cities  of  Macedonia  submitted ;  the  royal  treasure  came  into 
my  hands  ;  the  King  himself,  with  his  children,  was  taken 
in  the  temple  of  Samotbrace,  delivered  up,  in  a  manner  by 
the  gods  themselves.  I  now  thought  my  good  fortune  ex- 

296 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.586. 

cessive,  and  became  apprehensive  of  a  change  ;  I  began  to 
dread  the  dangers  of  the  sea  in  carrying  away  the  King’s 
vast  treasure,  and  transporting  the  victorious  army.  When 
all  arrived  in  Italy,  after  a  prosperous  voyage,  and  I  had 
nothing  farther  to  wish,  I  prayed,  that,  (as  fortune  generally" 
from  the  highest  elevation  rolls  backwards,)  my  own  house, 
rather  than  the  commonwealth,  might  feel  the  change.  I  trust, 
therefore,  that  the  public  is  free  from  danger,  by  my  having 
undergone  such  an  extraordinary  calamity,  as  to  have  my  tri¬ 
umph  come  in  between  the  funerals  of  my  two  sons  :  such  is 
the  delusive  imperfection  of  human  happiness  !  And  though 
Perseus  and  myself,  are,  at  present,  exhibited  as  the  most 
striking  examples  of  the  vicissitudes  to  which  mankind  are 
liable,  yet  he, — who,  himself  in  captivity,  saw  his  children 
led  captive, — has  them  still  in  safety  ;  while  I,  who  triumphed 
over  him,  went  up  in  my  chariot  to  the  Capitol  from  the  fu¬ 
neral  of  one  son,  and  came  down  from  the  Capitol  to  the  bed 
of  the  other,  just  expiring  ;  nor  out  of  so  large  a  stock  of 
children  is  there  one  remaining  to  bear  the  name  of  Lucius 
^milius  Paullus.  For,  having  a  numerous  progeny,  I  gave 
away  two,  on  adoption,  to  the  Cornelian  and  Fabian  families. 
In  the  house  of  Paullus  not  one  is  there  remaining  but  him¬ 
self !  However,  for  this  disaster  of  my  own  family,  I  find 
consolation  in  your  happiness,  and  in  the  prosperous  state  of 
the  commonwealth.”  These  words,  expressive  of  such  mag¬ 
nanimity,  moved  the  minds  of  the  audience  with  deeper  com¬ 
miseration  than  if  he  had  bewailed  the  loss  of  his  children  in 
the  most  plaintive  terms. 
XL  1 1.  Cneius  Octavius  celebrated  a  naval  triumph  over 
King  Perseus,  on  the  calends  of  December,  in  whichappeared 
neither  prisoners  nor  spoils.  He  distributed  to  each  seaman 
seventy-five  denariuses  to  the  pilots,  who  were  on  board. 

*  21.  8?.  5d. 

BOOK  XLV. 

297 

BX.  167.] 
twice  that  sum  ;  and  to  the  masters  of  ships,  four  times.  A 
meeting  of  the  senate  was  then  held,  and  they  ordered,  that 
Quintus  Cassius  should  conduct  King  Perseus  and  his  sou 
Alexander  to  Alba,  to  be  there  kept  in  custody  ;  but  that  he 
should  retain  his  attendants,  money,  silver,  and  furniture. 
Bitis,  son  to  the  King  of  Thrace,  with  the  hostages  he  had 
given  to  Macedon,  were  sent  to  Carseoli ;  the  rest,  who  had 
been  led  in  triumph,  were  ordered  to  be  shut  up  in  prison.  A 
few  days  after  this  passed,  ambassadors  came  from  Cotys, 
King  of  Thrace,  bringing  money  to  ransom  his  son  and  the 
said  hostages.  Being  introduced  to  an  audience  of  the  senate, 
they  alleged,  in  excuse  of  Cotys,  that  he  had  not  voluntarily 
assisted  Perseus  in  the  war,  but  had  been  compelled  to  it ; 
and  they  requested  the  senate  to  allow  the  hostages  to  be 
ransomed,  at  any  rate  that  should  be  judged  proper.  They 
were  answered,  that  the  Roman  people  remembered  the 
friendship  which  had  subsisted  between  them  and  Cotys,  as 
■well  as  with  his  predecessors,  and  the  Thracian  nation  ;  that  the 
giving  of  hostages  was  the  very  fault  laid  to  his  charge,  and 
not  an  apology  for  it  ;  for  Perseus,  even  when  at  rest  from 
others,  could  not  be  formidable  to  the  Thracian  nation,  much 
less  when  he  was  embroiled  in  a  war  with  Rome.  But  that, 
notwithstanding  Cotys  had  preferred  the  favour  of  Perseus  to 
the  friendship  of  the  Roman  people,  yet  the  senate  would 
consider  rather  what  suited  their  own  dignity,  than  what 
treatment  he  had  merited  ;  and  would  send  home  his  son  and 
the  hostages  ;  that  the  kindnesses  of  the  Roman  people  were 
always  gratuitous  j  and  that  they  chose  to  leave  the  value  of 
them  in  the  memory  of  the  receivers,  rather  than  to  demand 
it  in  present.”  Titus  Quintius  Flamininus,  Caius  Licinius 
Nerva,  and  Marcus  Caninius  Rebilus,  were  nominated  am- 
Ijassadors  to  conduct  Bitis,  with  the  hostages,  to  Thrace  ; 
V  OL.  VI. — 2  Q 

298  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.  585 
and  a  present  of  two  thousand  asses*  was  made  to  each  of  the 
ambassadors.  Some  of  Perseus’s  ships,  of  a  size  never  seen 
before,  were  hauled  ashore  in  the  field  of  Mars. 
XL  I II.  While  people  yet  retained,  not  only  fresh  in  me- 
mor}’,  but  almost  before  their  eyes,  the  celebration  of  the  Ma¬ 
cedonian  conquest,  Lucius  Anicius  triumphed  over  King 
Gcntius,  and  the  Illyrians,  on  the  day  of  the  festival  of  Qui- 
rinus.  These  exhibitions  were  considered  rather  as  similar, 
than  equal.  The  commander  himself  was  inferior  ;  Anicius 
was  not  to  be  compared  in  renown  with  iEmilius  ;  a  praetor 
in  dignity  of  office  with  a  consul  j  neither  could  Gentius  be 
set  on  a  level  with  Perseus,  nor  the  Illyrians  with  the  Mace¬ 
donians  ;  nor  the  spoils,  nor  the  money,  nor  the  presents  ob¬ 
tained  in  one  country,  with  those  obtained  in  the  other.  But 
though  the  late  triumph  outshone  the  present,  yet  the  latter, 
when  considered  by  itself,  appeared  very  far  from  contempti¬ 
ble.  For  Anicius  had,  in  the  space  of  a  few  days,  entirely 
subdued  the  Illyrian  nation,  remarkable  for  their  courage 
both  on  land  and  sea,  and  confident  in  the  strength  of  their 
posts  ;  he  had  also  taken  their  king,  and  the  whole  royal  fa¬ 
mily.  He  carried,  in  his  triumph,  many  military  standards, 
and  much  spoil  of  other  sorts,  with  all  the  royal  furniture  ; 
and  also  twenty- seven  pounds  weight  of  gold,  and  nineteen  of 
silver,  besides  three  thousand  denariuses,f  and,  in  Illyrian 
money,  the  amount  of  one  hundred  and  twenty  thousand.  :j: 
Before  his  chariot  were  led  Gentius,  with  his  queen,  and 
children  ;  Carovantius,  the  King’s  brother,  and  several  Illy¬ 
rian  nobles.  Out  of  the  booty,  he  gave  forty-five  denariuses§ 
to  each  footman,  double  to  a  centurion,  triple  to  a  horseman ; 
to  the  Latine  allies  the  like  sums  as  to  natives,  and  to  the 
seamen  the  same  as  to  the  soldiers.  The  troops  showed  more 

61.  9s.  2d. 
3874L 

7  961.  17s.  6d. 
^  11.  9s.  Id. 

BOOK  XLV. 

299 

B.C.  167,] 
joy  in  their  attendance  on  this  triumph  than  in  that  of  iEmi- 
lius,  and  the  general  was  celebrated  in  abundance  of  songs. 
Valerius  Antias  says,  that  this  victory  produced  to  the  public 
twenty  thousand  sesterces,*  besides  the  gold  and  silver  carried 
to  the  treasury  ;  but,  as  no  sources  appeared  from  which  such 
a  sum  could  be  raised,  I  have  set  down  my  author,  instead 
of  asserting  the  fact.  King  Gentius,  with  his  queen,  chil¬ 
dren,  and  brother,  was,  pursuant  to  an  order  of  the  senate, 
taken  to  Spoletium,  to  be  kepi  there  in  custody  ;  the  rest  of 
the  prisoners  were  thrown  into  prison  at  Rome  ;  but  the  peo*» 
pie  of  Spoletium  refusing  the  charge,  the  royal  family  were 
removed  to  Iguvium.  There  remained,  of  the  Illyrian  spoil, 
two  hundred  and  twenty  barks,  which  Quintus  Cassius,  by 
order  of  the  senate,  distributed  among  the  Corcyrcans,  Apol- 
lonians,  and  Dyrrachians. 
XLIV.  The  consuls  of  this  year  after  merely  ravaging  the 
lands  of  the  Ligurians,  as  the  enemy  never  brought  an  army 
into  the  field,  returned  to  Rome,  to  elect  new  magistrates, 
without  having  performed  any  matter  of  importance.  The 
first  day  on  which  the  assembly  could  meet,  were  chosen 
consuls,  Marcus  Claudiu^  Marcellas,  and  Caius  Sulpicius 
Gallus.  Next  day  were  elected  praetors,  Lucius 
Livius,  Lucius  Appuleius  Saturninus,  Aulus  Li-  g  c  155 
cinius  Nerva,  Publius  Rutilius  Calvus,  Publius 
Quintilius  Varus,  and  Marcus  Fonteius.  To  these  praetors 
were  decreed  the  two  city  provinces,  the  two  Spains,  Sicily, 
and  Sardinia.  There  was  an  intercalation  made  in  the  calen¬ 
dar  this  year,  which  took  place  on  the  day  after  the  feast  of 
Terminus.  One  of  the  augurs,  Caius  Claudius,  died  this 
year,  and  in  his  place  was  chosen,  by  the  college,  Titus 
Ouintius  Flamininus.  The  flamen  quirinalis,  Quintus  Fabius 
Pi^tor,  died  also.  This  year  King  Prusias  arrived  at  Rome, 

^  1G1.458I  6s.  M 

600  HISTORY  OF  ROME.  [Y.R.586, 
with  his  son  Nicomedes.  Coming  into  the  city,  with  a  large 
retinue,  he  went  directly  from  the  gate  to  the  Forum,  to  the 
tribunal  of  the  praetor,  Quintus  Cassius  ;  and  a  crowd  imme¬ 
diately  collecting,  he  said,  that  he  came  to  pay  his  respects 
to  the  deities  inhabiting  the  city  of  Rome,  and  to  the  Roman 
senate  and  people,  to  congratulate  them  on  their  conquest  of 
the  two  Kings,  Perseus  and  Gentius,  and  the  augmentation 
of  their  empire  by  the  reduction  of  Macedonia  and  Illyria 
under  their  dominion.’'  The  praetor  told  him,  that,  if  he 
chose  it,  he  would  procure  him  audience  of  the  senate  on  the 
same  day,  but  he  desired  two  days^  time,  in  which  he  might 
go  round  and  visit  the  temples  of  the  gods  ;  see  the  city,  and 
his  acquaintances  and  friends.  Lucius  Cornelius  Scipio,  then 
quaestor,  who  had  been  sent  to  Capua  to  meet  him,  was  ap¬ 
pointed  his  conductor  in  Rome.  A  house  was  likewise  pro¬ 
vided,  capable  of  lodging  him  and  his  retinue  with  con¬ 
venience.  On  the  third  day  after,  he  attended  at  a  meeting 
of  the  senate.  He  congratulated  them  on  their  success,  re¬ 
counted  his  own  deserts  towards  them  during  the  war,  and 
then  requested  that  he  might  be  allowed  to  fulfil  a  vow  of 
sacrificing  ten  large  victims  in  the  Capitol,  and  one  to  For¬ 
tune  at  Prseneste  ;  a  vow  which  had  been  made  for  the  suc¬ 
cess  of  the  Roman  people.  He  farther  desired,  that  the 
alliance  witli  him  might  be  renewed  ;  and  that  the  territory 
taken  from  King  Antiochus,  and  not  granted  to  any  other, 
but  now  in  possession  of  the  Gauls,  might  be  given  to  him." 
Lastly,  he  recommended  to  the  senate  his  son  Nicomedes. 
His  interest  was  espoused  by  all  those  who  had  commanded 
armies  in  Macedonia ;  his  requests,  therefore,  were  granted, 
except  that,  with  regard  to  the  territory,  he  received  this  an¬ 
swer  ;  that  they  would  send  ambassadors  to  examine  the 
matter  on  the  spot.  If  the  territory  in  question  had  become 
the  property  of  the  Roman  people,  and  if  no  grant  had  been 
made  of  it,  they  would  deem  no  other  so  deserving  of  a  pre- 

BOOK  XLV. 

BX.  166.] 

JOl 

sent  of  the  kind  as  Prusias.  But,  if  it  had  not  belonged  to 
Antiochus,  it  evidently,  in  consequence,  did  not  become  the 
property  of  the  Roman  people  ;  or  if  it  had  been  already 
granted  to  the  Gauls,  Prusias  must  excuse  them  if  they  did 
not  choose  to  confer  a  favour  on  him  at  the  expense  of  others’ 
rights.  A  present  cannot  be  acceptable  to  the  receiver,  which 
he  knows  the  donor  may  take  away  whenever  he  thinks  pro¬ 
per.  That  they  cheerfully  accepted  his  recommendation  of 
Nicomedes  ;  and  Ptolemy,  King  of  Egypt,  was  an  instance 
of  the  great  care  of  the  Roman  people  in  supporting  the  chil¬ 
dren  of  their  friends.”  With  this  answer  Prusias  was  dis¬ 
missed.  Presents  were  ordered  to  be  given  him,  to  the  value 
of  #  #  *  *  sesterces,  beside  vases  of  silver,  weighing  fifty 
pounds  ;  with  others  to  his  son,  Nicomedes,  of  the  same 
value  with  those  given  to  Masgaba,  the  son  of  King  Masi- 
nissa  ;  and  that  victims,  and  other  matters  pertaining  to  sacri¬ 
fices,  should  be  furnished  to  the  King  at  the  public  expense, 
the  same  as  to  the  Roman  magistrates,  whenever  he  chose  to 
make  the  offering,  either  at  Rome  or  at  Prseneste  ;  and  that 
twenty  ships  of  war  should  be  assigned  to  him,  and  which 
were  then  lying  at  Brundusium,  of  which  he  should  have  the 
use  until  he  arrived  at  the  fleet  which  was  freely  given  to 
him.  That  Lucius  Cornelius  Scipio  should  constantly  attend 
him,  and  defray  all  his  expenses,  and  those  of  his  retinue, 
until  they  went  on  board  the  ships.  We  are  told  that  Pru* 
sias  was  wonderfullv  rejoiced  at  the  kind  treatment  which  he 
received  from  the  Roman  people  ;  that  he  refused  all  that 
had  been  offered  to  himself,  but  ordered  his  son  to  receive 
the  present  of  the  Roman  people.  Such  are  the  accounts 
given  of  Prusias  by  our  own  writers.  Polybius,  however, 
represents  the  behaviour  of  that  King  as  highly  unbecoming 
a  person  of  his  rank, — saying,  that  he  used  to  meet  the  am¬ 
bassadors,  wearing  a  cap,  and  having  his  head  shaved  ;  call¬ 
ing  himself  a  freed  slave  of  the  Roman  people,  and,  accord- 

302 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

[Y.R.  586. 

ingly,  bearing  the  badges  of  that  class  ;  that,  likewise,  when 
coming  into  the  senate-house,  he  stooped  down  and  kissed 
the  threshold  ;  called  the  senate  his  tutelar  deities,  with  other 
expressions  not  so  honourable  to  the  hearers  as  disgraceful  to 
himself.  He  staid  in  the  city  and  its  vicinity  not  more  than 
*hirty  days,  and  then  returned  to  his  kingdom. 

LOST  BOOKS. 

303 

HERE  ends  all  that  has  reached  us  of  this  history.  Oi 
ninety-five  books  more,  which  it  originally  consisted  of, 
the  contents  only  have  been  preserved ;  they  are  as  fol¬ 
low 

BOOK  XLVT. 
Y.R.  586.  B.C.  166. — Eumenes  comes  to  Rome.  He  had  stood  neuter  ir. 
the  Macedonian  war ;  in  order,  however,  that  he  might  not  be  deemed  ar. 
enemy,  if  excluded,  or  considered  as  absolved  of  all  guilt,  if  admitted,  a 
general  law  was  made,  that  no  king  be  received  into  the  cit3\  The  consul, 
Claudius  Marcellus,  subdues  the  Alpine  Gauls  ;  and  Caius  Suipicius  Gallus 
the  XJgurians.  Y.R.  587.  B.C.  165. — The  ambassadors  of  King  Prusias 
complain  of  Eumenes,  for  ravaging  their  borders  ;  they  accuse  him  of  en¬ 
tering  into  a  conspiracy,  with  Antiochus,  against  the  Romans.  A  treaty  of 
friendship  made  with  the  Rhodians,  upon  their  solicitation.  Y.R.  588.  B.C. 
164. — A  census  held ;  the  number  of  the  citizens  found  to  be  three  hundred 
and  twenty-seven  thousand  and  twenty -two.  Marcus  JLepidus 
chosen  chief  of  the  senate.  Ptolemy,  King  of  Egypt,  dethroned  by  his 
younger  brother,  is  restored  bv  ambassadors  sent  from  Rome.  Y.R.  589. 
B.C.  163. — Ariarathes,  King  of  Cappadocia,  dies,  and  is  succeeded  by  his 
son  Ariarathes,  who  enters  anew  into  a  treaty  of  friendslup  with  the  Ro¬ 
mans.  Y.R.  590.  B.C.  162. — Expeditious  against  the  Ligurians,  Corsicans, 
and  Lusitanians,  attended  with  various  success.  Commotions  in  Syria,  on 
occasion  of  the  death  of  Antiochus,  who  left  a  son,  an  infant ;  who,  to¬ 
gether  with  his  guardian,  Lesias,  is  murdered  by  Demetrius,  who  usurps 
the  kingdom.  Y.R.  591.  B.C.  161. — Lucius  JEnailius  Paullus,  the  con* 
queror  of  Perseus :  Such  was  the  moderation  and  incorruptibility  of  this 
great  commander,  that  notwithstanding  the  immense  treasures  he  had 
brought  from  Spain  and  Macedonia,  ^et,  upon  the  sale  of  his  effects,  there 
:ould  scarcely  be  raised  a  sum  sufficient  to  repay  his  wife's  fortune 
Y.R.  592.  B.C.  160. — The  Pomptine  marshes  drained,  and  converted  into 
dry  land,  by  the  consul  Cornelius  Cethegus. 
BOOK  XL VII. 
Y.R.  593.  B.C,  159. — Cneius  Tremellius,  a  plebeian  tribune,  fined,  for 
intending,  in  an  unjust  cause,  with  Marcus  .diimilius  Lepidus,  chief  priest; 
»viiich  greatly  enhanced  the  authority  of  the  priesthood.  A  law  made 

304 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

respecting  the  canvassing  for  offices.  Y.R.  594,  B.C.  158. — A  census 
held ;  the  nun^ber  of  Homan  citizens  found  to  be  three  hundred  and  twenty- 
eight  thousand  three  hundred  and  fourteen.  Marcus  iEmilius  Lepidus 
again  chosen  chief  of  the  senate.  A  treaty  concluded  between  the  Ptole- 
mys,  brothers,  that  one  should  be  king  of  Egypt,  the  other  of  Cyrense. 
y,K.  595.  B.C.  157, — Ariarathes,  Kingof  Cappadocia,  deprived  of  his  king¬ 
dom,  by  the  intrigues  and  power  of  Demetrius,  King  of  Syria  ;  restored  by 
the  senate.  Ambassadors  sent  by  the  senate  to  determine  a  territorial  dis¬ 
pute  between  Masinissa  and  the  Carthaginians  Y.H.  596.  B.C.  156. — Cains 
Marcius,  consul,  fights  the  Dalmatians,  at  first,  unfortunately  ;  but,  after¬ 
wards,  successfully.  I'he  cause  of  this  war  was,  that  they  had  made  in¬ 
roads  upon  the  Illyrians,  \^ho  were  in  alliance  with  the  people  of  Home. 
Y.R.  597.  B.C.  155. — The  Dalmatians  completely  subdued,  by  the  consul, 
Cornelius  Nasica.  The  consul,  Quintus  Opiinius,  defeats  the  Transalpine 
Ligurians,  who  had  plundered  Antipolis  and  Nicaca,  two  towns  belonging 
to  the  Massileans.  Y.R.  598.  B.C.  154. — Various  ill  successes,  under  differ¬ 
ent  commanders,  in  Spain.  In  the  five  hundred  and  ninety -eighth  year 
from  the  foundation  of  the  city,  the  consuls  enter  upon  office,  immediately 
after  the  conclusion  of  their  election  ;  wdiich  alteration  was  made,  on  ac¬ 
count  of  a  rebellion  in  Spain.  Y.R.  599.  B.C.  153. — The  ambassadors,  sent 
by  the  senate,  to  determine  a  dispute  between  Masinissa  and  the  Cartha¬ 
ginians,  return,  and  report  that  the  Carthaginians  had  collected  a  vast 
quantity  ot  materials  for  shi])-building.  Several  praetors,  accused  of  extor 
tion,  by  different  provinces,  condemned  and  punished. 

BOOK  XLVni. 
Y.R.  600.  B.C.  152. — A  census  held  ,  the  number  of  citizens  amounts  to 
three  hundred  and  t\\  c  11  ty -four  thousand.  A  third  Punic  war;  causes  of 
it.  Marcus  Porcius  Cato  urges  a  declaration  of  w^ar  against  the  Carthagi¬ 
nians,  on  account  of  their  employing  a  vast  body  of  Numidian  troops  under 
the  command  of  Arcobarzanes,  destined,  they  allege,  to  act  against  Masi- 
nissu,  but  he  asserts,  against  the  Romans.  Publius  Scipio  Nasica  being  of 
a  contrary  opinion,  it  is  resolved  to  send  ambassadors  to  Carthage,  to  in¬ 
quire  into  the  truth  of  the  affair.  The  Carthaginian  senate  being  reproved 
for  levying  forces,  and  preparing  materials  for  ship-building,  contrary  to 
treaty,  declare  themselves  ready  to  make  peace  with  Masinissa,  upon  con¬ 
dition  of  his  giving  up  the  lands  in  dispute.  But  Gisgo,  son  of  Hamilcar,  a 
man  of  a  seditious  disposition,  at  that  time  chief  magistrate,  notwithslaud' 
ing  the  determination  of  the  senate  to  abide  by  the  decision  of  the  ambas¬ 
sadors,  urges  the  Carlliaginians  to  war  against  the  Romans,  in  such  strong 
terms,  that  the  ambassadors  arc  obliged  to  save  themselves  by  flight,  fi-om 

LOST  BOOKS. 

3C« 

personal,  viol^ce.  On  tins  being’  told  at  Rome,  the  senate  beconies  more 
highly  incensed  against  them.  Cato,  being  poor,  celebrates  the  funeral  of 
his  son,  who  died  in  the  office  of  pr*tor,  at  a  very  small  expense.  Aodr^* 
cus,  an  impostor,  pretending  to  be  the  son  of  Perseus,  King  of  Macedonia^ 
sent  to  Rome,  Marcus  JEmihus  Lepidus,  who  had  been  six  times  declared 
chief  of  the  senate,  on  his  death-bed,  gives  strict  orders  to  his  sons  that  1^ 
shall  be  carried  out  to  burial,  on  u  couch,  without  the  usual  ornament^l^f 
purple  and  fine  linen,  and  that  there  shall  not  be  expended  on  his  funeral 
more  than  ten  pieces  of  brass :  alleging  that  the  funei-als  of  the  most  dis* 
tinguished  men,  used,  formerly,  to  be  decoi’atetl  by  trains  of  images,  and  not 
by  sumptuous  expense.  An  inquiry  instituted  concerning  poisoning.  Pub- 
licia  and  JLicinia,  women  of  high  rank,  accused  of  the  murder  of  their  hus¬ 
bands,  tried  before  the  pr* tor  and  executed.  Y.R,  601.  B.C,  151.— Gulus- 
sa,  son  of  Masinissa,  gives  information  that  troops  were  levying,  and  a  fleet 
fitting  out  at  Carthage,  and  that  there  could  be  no  doubt  of  their  intending 
war.  Cato  urging  a  declaration  of  war,  and  Nasica  dissuading  it,  entreat¬ 
ing  the  senate  to  do  nothing  rashly  ;  it  is  resolved  to  send  ten  ambassadors 
to  inquire  into  the  affair.  The  consuls,  Lucius,  Licmius  Lucullus  and  Au* 
lus  Postumius  Albinus,  carrying  on  the  levying  of  soldiers  with  inflexible 
severity,  committed  to  prison  by  the  tribunes  of  the  people,  for  not,  jtt 
their  entreaty,  sparing  some  of  their  friends.  The  ill  success  of  the  war 
in  Spain,  having  so  discouraged  the  citizens  of  Rome,  that  none  could  be 
found  to  undertake  any  military  command,  or  office,  Publius  Cornelius 
uSlmilianus  comes  forward,  and  offers  to  undertake  any  office  whatever, 
which  it  should  be  thought  proper  to  call  him  to ;  roused  by  his  example, 
the  whole  body  of  the  people  make  the  Hke  offer,  U  was  thought  that 
the  consul,  Claudius  Marcellus,  had  reduced  all  the  states  of  Celtiberia  to 
a  state  of  tranquillity  j  nevertlielesi^  his  successor,  Lucius  Lucullus,  is  en¬ 
gaged  in  war  with  the  Vaccasans,  Cantabrians,  and  other  nations  of  Spa¬ 
niards,  hitherto  unknown  ;  all  of  which  he  subdues.  In  tl^is  war,  Publius 
Cornehus  Afneanus  Scipio  iEmihanus,  the  son  of  Lucius  Paullus,  and  ne¬ 
phew  by  adoption,  of  Africanus,  a  military  tribune,  slays  a  barbarian  who 
had  challenged  him,  and  distinguishes  himself  highly  at  the  siege  of  liHer- 
catia,  being  the  first  who  scaled  the  wall.  The  praetor,  Servius  Sulpiciua 
Galba,  fights  the  Lusitanians  unsuccessfully.  The  ambassadors,  returnu^ 
from  Africa,  together  with  some  Ca rthagiman  deputies,  and  Galussa,  re¬ 
port  that  they  found  an  army  and  a  fleet  ready  for  service  at  Carthage. 
The  matter  take/i  into  consideration  by  the  senate.  Cato,  and  other  prin¬ 
cipal  senators,  urge,  that  an  army  should  he  immediately  sent  over  into 
Africa;  but  Cornelius  Nasica  declaring  that  he,  yet,  saw  no  just  cause  for 
war,  it  was  resolved  that  tlie  same  should  not  be  declared,  provided  the 
Carthaginians  would  burn  their  fleet,  and  disband  their  troops;  but  if  not, 
VOL.  VI. - 2  R 

306 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

that  then  the  next  succeedmg  consuls  should  propose  the  question  of  war, 
A  theatre  which  the  censors  had  contracted  for,  being  built,  Cornelius  Na- 
sica  moves,  and  carries  the  question,  that  it  be  pulled  down,  as  being  not 
only  useless,  but  injurious  to  the  morals  of  the  people  :  the  people,  there¬ 
fore,  continue  to  behold  the  public  shows  standingv  Masinissa,  now  ninety- 
twp  years  old,  vanquishes  the  Carthaginians,  who  had  made  war  against 
trim  unjustly,  and  contrary  to  treaty.  By  this  infraction  of  the  treaty,  thev 
also  involve  tiiexnselves  in  a  war  with  Home, 
BOOK  XLIX. 
Y.K.  602.  B.G.  150. — The  third  Tunic  war ;  which  was  ended  wdthinfivo 
years  after  it  began.  Marcus  Porcius  Cato,  deemed  the  wisest  man  in  the 
state,  and  Scipio  Nasica,  adjudged  by  the  senate  to  be  the  best,  differ  in 
opinion,  and  contend  sharply :  Cato  urging  the  demolition  of  Carthage  , 
Nastca  arguing  against  it.  It  was,  however,  resolved,  that  war  should  be 
declared  against  the  Carthaginians,  for  having  fitted  out  a  fleet  contrary 
to  treaty,  and  led  forth  an  army  beyond  tlie  boundaries  of  their  state  ;  for 
having  committed  hostilities  against  Masinissa,  the  friend  and  ally  of  tin 
Romans;  and  refusing  to  admit  Galussa,  who  accompanied  the  ambassa 
dors  into  their  city.  Y.R.  603.  B.C.  149. — Before  any  forces  were  em¬ 
barked,  ambassador?  came  horn  Ctica,  and  survewdered  their  state  and 
property  to  the  Romans :  a  circumstance  highly  pleasing  to  the  Roman  se¬ 
nate,  and  at  the  same  time,  a  grievous  mortification  to  the  Carthaginians, 
Games  exhibited  at  Tarentum,  in  honour  of  Pluto,  according  to  directions 
found  in  the  Sibylline  books.  The  Carthaginians  send  thirty  ambassadors 
to  Rome,  to  make  a  tender  of  submission ;  but  the  opinion  of  Cato,  tliat  the 
consuls  should  be  ordered  to  proceed  immediately  to  the  war,  prevails. 
These,  passing  over  into  Africa,  receive  three  hundred  hostages,  and  tukt' 
possession  of  all  the  arms  and  warlike  stores  to  be  found  in  Carthage  ;  ihe\ 
then,  by  authority  of  the  senate,  command  them  to  build  themselves  a  new 
city,  at  least  ten  miles  from  the  sea.  Roused  by  this  indignant  treatment, 
the  Carthaginians  resolve  to  have  recourse  to  arms.  Lucius  Marcius  and 
Marcus  Manlius,  consuls,  lay  siege  to  Carthage.  During  tills  siege,  two 
militarv  tribunes  force  their  way  in,  with  their  troops,  in  a  place  whici* 
they  ob.'jerved  to  be  negligently  guar<led  ,  tbe3'  are  set  upon  and  beaten 
by  the  townsmen,  but  rescued  afterw  ards  by  Scipio  Africanus,  who  also, 
with  a  few  horsemen,  relieves  a  Roman  fort,  attacked  by  the  enen\y>  iti  the 
night.  He  also  repulsed  the  Carthaginians,  wi\o  sullied  forth,  iu  great 
force,  to  attack  the  camp.  When,  afterwards,  one  of  the  consuls  (the  other 
being  gone  to  Rome,  to  hold  the  elections)  observing,  that  the  siege  of 
Carthage  was  not  going  on  prosperously,  proposed  to  attack  Hasdrabal. 

LOST  BOOKS. 

aor 

who  had  drawn  up  his  forces  in  a  narrow  pass,  he  (Scipio)  first  advised  him 
not  to  venture  upon  an  engagement  on  ground  so  very  disadvantageous  ; 
and  then,  his  advice  being  over-ruled  by  those  who  were  envious,  both  of 
his  prudence  and  valour,  he,  himself,  rushes  into  the  pass ;  and  wlien,  as  he 
foresaw  the  Romans  were  routed  and  put  to  flight,  be  returns  with  a  very 
small  body  of  horse,  rescues  his  friends,  and  brings  them  off  in  safety. 
Which  valiant  action,  Cato,  although  much  more  inclined  to  censure  than 
to  praise,  extols  in  the  senate  in  very  magnificent  terms ;  saying,  that  all 
the  others,  who  were  fighting  in  Africa,  were  but  mere  shadows  ;  Scipio 
was  life  itself ;  and  such  was  the  favour  he  gained  among  his  fellow  citi¬ 
zens,  that  at  the  ensuing  election,  the  greater  number  of  the  tribes  voted 
for  electing  him  consul,  although  he  was  under  the  legal  age.  Lucius  Scri- 
bonius,  tribune  of  the  people,  proposes  a  law,  that  the  Lusitanians,  who, 
notwithstanding  they  had  surrendered  upon  the  faith  of  tlie  Roman  peo¬ 
ple,  had  been  sold  in  Gaul,  by  Servius  Galba,  should  be  restored  to  liberty; 
which  Marcus  Cato  supports  with  great  zeal,  as  may  be  seen  by  his  oration, 
w^hich  is  still  extant,  being  published  in  his  annals.  Quintus  Fulvius  No- 
biJior,  although  Cato  had  before  handled  him  with  great  severity,  yet  takes 
up  the  cause  of  Galba.  Cialba  himself  too,  apprehensive  of  being  con¬ 
demned,  taking  up  in  his  arms  his  own  two  infant  children,  and  the  son  of 
Sulprcms  Gallos,  speaks  in  his  own  behalf,  in  such  a  piteous  strain  of  ^up- 
pUcation,  that  the  question  is  csrned  in  his  favour.  One  Andriscn^  a  man 
of  the  ttieanest  extraction,  having  given  himself  out  to  be  the  son  of  Per¬ 
seus,  and  changed  his  name  to  Philip,  flies  from  Rome,  whither  Demetrius 
had  sent  him,  on  account  of  this  audacious  forgery  ;  many  people  believ¬ 
ing  his  fabulous  account  of  himself  to  be  true,  gather  round  him,  and  enable 
him  to  raise  an  army  ;  at  the  head  of  which,  partly  by  force,  and  partly  by 
the  willing  submission  of  the  people,  he  acquires  the  possession  of  all  Ma¬ 
cedonia.  I'he  story  which  he  propigated  was  this  ;  that  he  wastiie  son  of 
Perseus  by  a  harlot ;  that  he  had  been  delivered  to  a  certain  Cretan  wo¬ 
man,  to  be  taken  care  of,  and  brought  up  ;  in  order  that  whatever  might  be 
the  event  of  the  war,  in  which  the  king  was,  at  that  time,  engaged  with 
tlie  Romans,  some  one,  at  least,  of  the  royal  progeny  might  remain.  That, 
upon  the  deatli  of  Perseus,  he  was  educated  at  Adramittium,  until  he  was 
twelve  years  old ;  ignorant,  all  along,  of  his  real  parentage,  and  always 
supposing  himself  to  be  the  son  of  the  person  who  brought  him  up.  That, 
at  lengtli,  this  person  being  ili,  and  like  to  die,  discovered  to  him  the  se¬ 
cret  of  his  birth ;  informing  him,  at  the  same  time,  of  a  certain  writing, 
with  the  royal  signet  of  Perseus,  which  had  been  entrusted  to  his 
supposed  mother,  to  keep  and  give  to  him,  when  he  should  attain  to  man- 
liood  r  but  with  the  strictest  injunctions  that  the  affair  should  be  kept  a 
profound  secret,  until  the  arrival  of  that  period.  That,  w'hen  the  time 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

came,  the  writing  was  delivered  to  him ;  in  which  was  indicated  a  very 
considerable  treasure,  left  him  by  his  father.  That  the  woman,  after  in¬ 
forming  him  fully  of  the  circumstance  of  his  birth,  earnestly  besought  him 
to  quit  that  part  of  the  country,  before  the  affair  should  come  to  the  know¬ 
ledge  of  Eumenes,  who,  being  the  determined  enemy  of  his  father  Perseus, 
would,  most  assuredly,  procure  him  to  be  murdered.  That,  fearful  of  be¬ 
ing  assassinated,  and  in  hopes  also  of  receiving  some  assistance  from  De¬ 
metrius,  he  had  gone  into  Syria ;  and  had  there  first  ventured  openly  to 
declare  who  he  was. 

BOOK  L. 
Y.R.  604.  B.C.  148. — The  aforesaid  impostor,  assuming  the  name  of 
Philip,  about  to  invade,  and  forcibly  possess  himself  of  Thessaly,  is  pre¬ 
vented  by  the  Roman  ambassadors,  with  the  aid  of  the  Achaeans.  Pm- 
rias,  King  of  Bithinia,  a  man  abandoned  to  the  practice  of  every  vice,  mur¬ 
dered  by  his  son  Nicomedes,  assisted  by  Attalus,  King  of  Pergamus.  He 
had  another  son,  who  in  the  place  of  teeth  in  his  upper  jaw,  had  one  en¬ 
tire  bone.  The  Romans  send  an  embassy  to  negotiate  peace  between 
JTicomedes  and  Prusias  ;  it  happening  that  one  of  the  ambassadors  had  his 
head  deformed  by  scars,  from  many  wounds  ;  another  was  Jame  from  gout, 
and  the  third  was  of  weak  understanding  :  Cato  said,  it  was  an  embassy 
without  head,  feet,  or  heart.  The  King  of  Syria  was  of  the  royal  race  of 
Perseus ;  but  being,  like  Prusias,  addicted  to  every  vicious  pursuit,  and 
passing  his  whole  time  in  tippling-houses,  brothels,  and  sucli  like  places  of 
infamous  resort,  Ammonius  rules  in  his  stead ;  and  puts  to  death  all  the 
King^s  friends,  together  with  his  Queen  Laodice,  and  Antigonus,  the  son 
of  Demetrius.  Masinjssa,  King  of  Numidia,  a  man  of  a  character  truly  il¬ 
lustrious,  dies,  aged  upwards  of  ninety  years  ;  he  retained  the  vigour  of 
youtlr  even  to  his  last  years;  and  begot  a  son  at  tlie  age  of  eight) -six. 
Publius  Scipio  Ailmilianus,  being  authorised  by  his  will  so  to  do,  divides 
his  kingdom  into  three  parts,  and  allots  their  respective  portions  of  it,  to 
his  three  sons,  Micipsa,  GuUissa  and  Manastabales,  Scipio  persuades  Pha- 
mias,  general  of  the  Carthaginian  cavalry,  under  Himilco,  a  man  highly 
looked  up  to  and  relied  upon  by  the  Carthaginians,  to  revolt  to  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  with  the  troops  under  his  command.  Claudius  Marcellus,  one  of  the 
three  ambassadors  sent  to  Masimssa,  lost  in  a  storm.  Hasdrubal,  nephew 
of  Masinissa,  put  to  death  by  the  Carthaginians,  who  suspected  him  of 
treasonable  views,  on  account  of  his  affinity  to  Guhissa,  now  the  friend  of 
the  Romans,  Scipio  Aimihanus,  when  a  candidate  for  the  xdileship,  is,  by 
the  people,  elected  consul,  though  under  age  :  a  violent  contest  arises 
upon  this,  the  people  supporting,  the  nobles  opposing,  his  election  ;  which- 

LOST  BOOKS. 

309 

at  length,  terminates  in  his  favour.  Marcus  Manlius  takes  several  citizens  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  Carthage.  The  impostor  Philip,  having  slain  the  prae¬ 
tor  Publius  Juventius,  and  vanquished  his  army,  is,  himself,  afterwards  sub¬ 
dued  and  taken  prisoner  by  Quintus  Caccilius,  who  recovers  Macedonia. 
BOOK  JLI. 
V.K.  605.  B.C.  147. — Carthage  comprehended  in  a  circuit  of  twenty -three 
miles,  besieged  with  immense  exertion,  and  gradually  taken;  first,  by 
Mancinus,  acting  as  lieutenant-general ;  and  afterwards  by  Scipio,  consul, 
to  whom  Africa  was  voted  as  bis  province,  without  casting  lots.  The  Car¬ 
thaginians  having  constructed  a  new  mole,  (the  old  one  being  destroyed  by 
Scipio,)  and  equipped,  secretly,  in  an  extraordinary  short  space  of  time,  a 
considerable  fleet,  engage,  unsuccessfully,  in  a  sea  fight.  Hasdrubal,  with 
his  army,  notwithstanding  he  had  taken  post  in  a  place  of  extremely  diffi¬ 
cult  approach,  cut  off  by  Scipio :  who,  at  length,  masters  the  city,  in 
the  seven  hundredth  year  after  its  foundation.  Y.K.  606.  B.C.  146. — The 
greater  part  of  the  spoil  returned  to  the  Sicilians,  from  whom  it  had  been 
taken.  During  the  destruction  of  the  city,  when  Hasdrubal  had  given 
himself  up  into  Scipio’s  hands,  his  wife,  who,  a  few  days  before,  had  not 
been  able  to  prevail  upon  him  to  surrender  to  the  conqueror,  casts  herself, 
with  her  two  children,  from  a  tower,  into  the  flames  of  the  burning  city. 
Scipio,  following  the  example  of  his  father,  .SImilius  Paullus,  the  conqueror 
of  Macedonia,  celebrates  solemn  games  ;  during  which,  he  exposes  the  de¬ 
serters  and  fugitives  to  wild  beasts.  War  declared  against  the  Achacans, 
who  had  forcibly  driven  away  the  Koman  ambassadors,  sent  to  ('orintii  to 
separate  the  cities,  under  the  dominion  of  Philip,  from  the  Achaean 
council. 

BOOK  I.IL 
Quintus  Caccilius  Metellus  engages  and  conquers  the  Achacans,  together 
with  the  Boeotians  and  Chalcidians.  Critolaus,  their  unsuccessful  general, 
poisons  himself;  in  whose  room,  the  Achacans  choose  Diaeus,  the  chief  pro¬ 
moter  of  the  insurrection,  general ;  he,  also,  is  conquered,  in  an  engage¬ 
ment  near  Isthmus,  and  all  Achaia  reduced  ;  Corinth  demolished,  by  order 
of  the  senate,  because  violence  bad  been  done  there  to  the  ambassadors. 
Thebes,  also,  and  Chalcis,  for  having  furnished  aid  to  the  Achacans,  destroy¬ 
ed.  Extraordinary  moderation  of  Miimmius,  who,having  all  the  vast  wealth, 
and  splendid  ornaments,  of  tiie  opulent  city  of  Corinth,  in  his  power,  took 
none  of  it.  Quintus  Cjccilius  Metellus  triumphs,  on  account  of  his  victory 
over  Andriscus ;  likewise,  Publius  Cornelius  Scipio,  for  the  conquest  of 

310 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

Carthage  and  Hasdrubal.  Y.R.  607.  B.C.  145. — Viriathus,  iil  Spain,  fi*om 
a  shepherd  becomes  a  hunter,  then  leader  of  a  band  of  robbers ;  afterwards, 
general  of  a  powerful  army,  with  which,  he  possesses  himself  of  all  Lusi¬ 
tania,  having  vanquished  the  praetor,  Petillius,  and  put  his  army  to  flight. 
Caius  Plautms,  praetor,  sent  against  him;  is  equally  unsuccessful.  So  suc¬ 
cessful  was  his  career,  that,  at  length,  it  was  deemed  necessary  to  send  a 
consul,  at  the  head  of  a  consular  army,  against  him.  Commotions  in  Syria, 
and  wars  between  the  kings  in  those  parts.  Alexander,  a  man  utterly  un¬ 
known,  and  of  an  unknowm  race,  murders  Demetrius,  and  usurps  the  crown 
in  Syria:  he  is  afterwards  slain  by  Demetrius,  (son  of  the  before-mentioned 
Demetrius,)  aided  by  Ptolemy,  King  of  Egypt,  whose  daughter  he  had 
married.  Ptolemy  grievously  wounded  in  the  head;  dies  of  the  operations 
intended  for  the  cure  of  his  wounds  ;  is  succeeded  by  his  younger  brother, 
Ptolemy,  King  of  Cyrene.  Demetrius,  by  his  cruelty  towards  his  subjects, 
provokes  an  insurrection:  vanquished  by  Diodotus,  and  flies  to  Seleucia, 
Diodotus  claims  the  crown  for  Alexander,  a  child  scarcely  two  years  old. 
Splendid  triumph  of  Lucius  Mummius  over  the  Achacans. 
BOOK  LIII. 
Y.R.  608.  B.C.  144. — Appius  Claudius,  consul,  subdues  the  Salacians,  a  na¬ 
tion  (.r  the  Alps.  Another  impostor,  assuming  the  name  of  Philip,  makes 
his  appearance  in  Macedonia;  vanquished  by  the  quaestor,  Lucius  Tremel- 
lius.  f  .K.  6o9.  B.C.  143. — Quintus  Csecilius  Metellus,  proconsul,  defeats 
the  Ccltibcr.aas.  Y.Ii.  610.  B.C.  142. — Quintus  Fabius,  proconsul,  takes 
many  cities  of  Lusitania,  and  recovers  the  greatest  part  of  that  country. 
Caius  Julius,  a  senator,  writes  the  Roman  history,  in  tl\e  Greek  language. 
BOOK  LIV, 
Y.R.  611.  B.C.  141. — Quintus  Pompeius,  consul,  subdues  the  Termes- 
tines,  in  Spain  ;  makes  peace  with  them,  and  also  wdth  the  Numantians, 
The  census  held  ;  the  number  of  citizens  amounts  to  three  hundred  and-f 
twenty-eight  thousand  three  hundred  and  forty -two.  Ambassadors  from 
Macedonia  complain  that  Decius  Junius  Siianus,  the  prsetor,  had  extorted 
money  from  that  province  ;  the  senate,  at  his  desire,  refer  the  inquiry  into 
the  matter  to  Titus  Manlius  Torquatus,  father  of  Siianus  ;  having  finished 
the  inquiry,  in  his  own  house,  he  pronounces  his  son  guilty,  and  disclaims 
him  ;  and  would  not,  afterwards,  attend  his  funeral,  when  he  put  an  end  to 
his  life,  by  hanging  himself ;  but  continued  to  sit  at  home,  and  give  au¬ 
dience  to  those  who  consulted  him,  as  if  nothing,  which  concerned  him, 
had  happened.  Y.R.  612.  B.C.  140.^Quintus  Fabius,  proconsul,  having 

LOST  BOOKS. 

311 

successfully  terminated  the  war,  stains  the  honour  of  his  victories,  by  mak¬ 
ing*  peace  with  Viriathus,  upon  terms  of  equality.  Y.R.  613.  B.C.  139. — 
Servilius  Caepio  procures  the  death  of  Viriathus,  by  traitors;  he  is  much 
bewailed,  and  interred  with  distinguished  funeral  honours  by  his  array. 
He  was  in  truth,  a  great  man,  and  a  valiant  general;  and  in  the  fourteen 
years  during  which  he  carried  on  war  with  the  Tiomans,  had  very  fre¬ 
quently  vanquished  tiieir  armies. 
BOOK  LV. 
Y.R.  614.  B.C.  138. — Mobile  Publius  Cornelius  Nasica  (who  was  nick¬ 
named  Serapio,  by  the  plebeian  tribune  Curiatius,  a  man  of  humour)  and 
Decius  Junius  Brutus,  the  consuls  were  holding  the  levies,  an  act  of  pub¬ 
lic  justice  was  done,  in  the  sight  of  the  whole  body  of  the  young  men,  then 
assembled,  which  afforded  a  very  useful  example  :  Caius  Matienus  was  ac¬ 
cused,  before  the  tribunes,  of  deserting  from  the  army  in  Spain  :  being 
found  guilty,  he  was  scourged  under  the  gallows,  and  sold  as  a  slave,  for  a 
very  small  piece  of  money.*  The  tribunes  of  the  people  claimed  the  pri¬ 
vilege  of  exempting  from  service  any  ten  soldiers,  whom  they  tliought 
proper;  which  behig  refused  by  the  consuls,  they  commit  them  to  prison. 
Junius  Brutus,  consul  in  Spain,  allots  lands,  and  a  town,  called  Valentia,  to 
the  soldiers  who  had  served  under  Viriathus.  Marcus  Popiliius,  having 
made  peace  with  the  Numantines,  which  the  senate  refused  to  ratify,  is 
routed,  and  his  whole  army  put  to  flight.  Y.R.  615.  B.C.  137. — Wliile 
Caius  Hostilius  Mancinus,  the  consul,  was  sacrificing,  the  holy  chickens  es¬ 
cape  from  their  coop,  and  fly  away  ;  afterwai’ds,  as  he  was  getting  on 
board  his  ship,  to  sail  for  Spain,  a  voice  is  heard,  crying  out,  “  Go  not, 
Mancinus,  go  not.”  The  event  afterwards  proves  these  omens  to  have 
been  inauspicious :  for,  being  vanquished  by  the  Numanlines,  and  driven 
out  of  his  camp,  having  no  prospect  of  preserving  his  army,  he  made  a  dis- 
graceful  peace,  which  the  senate  likewise  refused  to  ratifi^ .  Upon  this  oc- 
ca.sion,  thirty  thousand  Romans  were  beaten  by  only  four  thousand  JVu- 
mantines,  Decius  Junius  Brutus  subdues  all  Lusitania,  as  far  as  the  west¬ 
ern  sea  ;  his  soldiers  refusing  to  pass  the  river  Oblivion,  he  snatches  the 
standard  and  carries  it^ver ;  whereupon,  they  follow  Inm.  The  son  of 
Alexander,  King  of  Syria,  traitorously  murdered  b)  his  guardian  Diodotus, 
surnamed  Trjphon;  his  physicians  were  bribed  to  give  out  that  he  had  a 
stone  in  his  bladder;  in  pretending  to  cut  him  for  which,  they  killed  him 

Worth  less  than  4d. 

ai2 

HISTORY  OF  ROME, 

BOOK  LVI. 
Y.H.  616.  B.C.  136. — Decius  Junius  Brutus  fights  the  Gallxcians,  with 
success,  in  the  Farther  Spain  :  Marcus  ^milius  Lepidus  engages  the  Vac- 
cxans,  unsuccessfully,  and  is  as  unfortunate  as  Mancinus  was  against  the 
Numantines.  The  Romans,  to  absolve  themselves  of  the  g^ilt  of  breach 
of  treaty,  order  Mancinus,  who  made  the  peace  with  the  Numantines,  to 
be  dehvered  up  to  that  people ;  but  they  refuse  to  receive  him.  Y.R.  617 
B.C.  135. — The  lustrum  closed  by  the  censors :  the  number  of  citizens, 
three  hundred  and  twenty -three  thousand.  Fulvius  Flaccus,  consul,  sub¬ 
dues  the  Vardeans  in  Illyria.  Marcus  Cosconms,  praetor,  fights  the  Scor- 
discians,  in  Thrace,  and  conquers  them.  The  war  in  Numantia,  owing  to 
the  ill  conduct  of  the  generals,  still  continuing,  the  senate  and  people 
voluntarily  confer  the  consulship  upon  Scipio  Africanus :  on  which  occa¬ 
sion  the  law,  which  prohibits  any  man  from  being  elected  consul  a  second 
time,  is  dispensed  with.  Y.R.  618.  B.C.  134. — An  insurrection  of  the 
slaves  in  Sicily;  which,  the  praetor  not  being  able  to  queU  it,  is  committed 
to  the  care  of  the  consul  Caius  Fulvius.  Bunus,  a  slave,  a  Syrian  by  birth, 
was  the  author  of  this  war ;  by  gathering  a  large  body  of  the  rustic  slaves, 
and  breaking  open  the  prisons,  he  raised  a  considerable  army :  Cleon, 
also,  another  slave,  having  assembled  seventy  thousand  slaves,  joins  him  ; 
and  they,  several  times,  engage  the  Roman  forces  in  those  parts. 
BOOK  LVIt. 
Y.R.  619.  B.C.  133. — Scipio  Africanus  lays  siege  to  Numantia.  Reduces 
to  strict  discipline  the  army,  now  exceedingly  licentious,  being  corrupted 
by  luxurious  indulgence  :  this  he  effects  by  cutting  off  every  kind  of  plea¬ 
surable  gratification  ;  driving  away  the  prostitutes  who  followed  the  camp, 
to  the  number  of  two  thousand ;  keeping  the  soldiers  to  hard  labour,  and 
compelling  every  man  to  bear  on  his  shoulders  provisions  for  thirty  days, 
besides  seven  stakes,  for  their  fortifications ;  whenever  he  observed  any  of 
them  sinking  under  the  burden,  he  used  to  cry  out,  “  When  you  are  able 
to  defend  yourself  with  your  sword,  then  shall  gou  be  eased  from  your 
load  of  timber.”  He  made  them  carry  shields  of  immense  size  and  weight ; 
and  not  unfrequently  ridiculed  them,  for  being  more  expert  in  managing 
their  shields,  for  the  defence  of  their  own  bodies,  than  their  swords  for  the 
annoyance  of  those  of  the  enemy.  When  he  found  any  man  absent  from 
his  post,  he  ordered  him  to  be  flogged,  with  vine  twigs,  if  a  Roman ;  if  a 
foreigner,  with  rods.  He  sold  all  the  beasts  of  burden,  that  the  soldiers 
might  be  forced  to  carry  their  own  baggage.  He  engaged  in  frequent 

LOST  BOOKS. 

313 

skirmishes  with  the  enemy,  with  g-ood  success.  The  Vaccaeans,  being*  re¬ 
duced  to  extremity,  first,  put  their  wives  and  children  to  death,  and  then 
slew  themselves.  Antiochus,  King  of  Syria,  having  sent  him  some  very 
magnificent  presents,  Scipio,  contrary  to  the  practice  of  other  command¬ 
ers,  who  used  to  conceal  these  royal  gifts,  received  them  openly,  and  or¬ 
dered  the  qusestor  to  place  the  whole  to  the  public  account ;  and  promised, 
out  of  them,  to  reward  those  who  should  most  distinguish  themselves  by 
their  valour.  When  Numantia  was  closely  invested  on  all  sides,  he  gave 
orders,  that  those  who  came  out,  in  search  of  victuals,  should  not  be  kill¬ 
ed:  saying,  that  the  more  numerous  the  inliabitants  were,  the  sooner 
would  their  provisions  be  consumed. 
BOOK  LVIII. 
Titus  Sempronius  Gracchus,  plebeian  tribune,  having  proposed  an  Agra¬ 
rian  law,  (contrary  to  the  sense  of  the  senate,  and  the  equestrian  order,) 
that  no  person  should  hold  more  than  five  hundred  acres  of  tlie  public 
lands,  wrought  himself  up  to  such  a  degree  of  passion,  that  he  deprived 
his  colleague,  Marcus  Octavius,  of  his  authority,  and  appointed  himself, 
together  with  his  brother  Caius,  and  his  father  in-law,  Appius  Claudius, 
commissioners  for  dividing  the  lands.  He  also  proposed  another  Agrarian 
law;  that  the  same  commissioners  should  be  authorised  to  determine, 
which  was  public,  and  wliich  private,  land ;  and  to  settle  the  extent  of 
each.  When,  afterwards,  it  appeared  that  there  was  not  land  sufficient,  to 
be  divided,  according  to  his  sciieme,  and  that  he  had  excited  the  hopes  of 
the  people,  by  the  expectations  held  out  to  them,  he  declared  that  he 
would  propose  a  law,  that  all  tliose,  who,  by  the  law  of  Sempronius,  were 
entitled  to  such  grant,  should  be  paid  in  money,  out  of  the  bequest  of  At¬ 
tains,  King  of  Pergamus.  The  senate  was  roused  to  indignation,  at  such 
repeated  lU-treatment ;  and  cliiefly,  Publius  Mucius  tlie  consul,  who,  hav¬ 
ing  delivered  a  severe  invective  against  Gracchus,  in  the  senate,  was  seized 
by  him,  dragged  before  the  people,  and  accused ;  nevertheless,  he  con¬ 
tinued  to  inveigh  against  hint  from  the  rostrum.  Gracchus  endeavouring 
to  procure  his  re-election,  as  tribune,  slain,  in  tlie  Capitol,  by  the  chief 
nobles,  by  the  advice  of  Publius  Cornelius  Nasica  :  is  thrown,  without  the 
rites  of  sepulture,  into  the  river,  together  with  some  others,  who  fell  in 
the  tumult.  Various  engagements,  with  various  success,  against  the  slaves 
»n  Sicily. 
VOL.  A  I. — 2  S 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

ai4 

BOOK  LIX. 
The  Numantines,  reduced  to  the  extremity  of  distress,  by  famine,  put 
themselves  to  death.  Scipio,  having  taken  the  city,  destroys  it,  and  tri¬ 
umphs,  in  the  fourteenth  year  after  the  destruction  of  Carthage.  Y.R. 
620.  B.C.  l52. — The  consul,  Publius  Rupilius,  puts  an  end  to  tlie  war 
with  the  slaves  in  Sicily,  Aristonicus,  the  son  of  King  Eumenes,  invades 
and  seizes  Asia ;  which  having  been  bequeathed  to  the  Roman  people,  by 
Attains,  ought  to  be  free.  The  consul,  Publius  Licinius  Crassus,  who  was 
also  chief  priest,  marches  against  him,  out  of  Italy,  (which  never  before 
was  done,)  engages  him  in  battle,  is  beaten  and  slain.  Marcus  Peperna, 
consul,  subdues  Aristonicus.  Quintus  Metellus  and  Quintus  Pomponius, 
tlie  first  plebeians,  who  were  ever,  both  at  one  time,  elected  censors, 
close  the  lustrum :  the  number  of  citizens  amount  to  three  hundred  and 
thirteen  thousand  eight  hundred  and  twenty-three,  besides  orphans  and 
widows.  y.R.  621.  B.C.  131. — Quintus  Metellus  gives  his  opinion,  that 
every  man  should  be  compelled  to  marry,  in  order  to  increase  the  popula¬ 
tion  of  the  state.  His  speech,  upon  the  occasion,  is  still  extant,  and  so 
exactly  does  it  apply  to  the  present  times,  that  Augustus  Caesar  read  it, 
in  the  senate,  upon  occasion  of  his  proposing  to  remove  from  marriage  all 
restraints,  on  account  of  difference  of  rank.  Caius  Atinius  Eabeo,  tribune 
of  the  people,  orders  the  censor  Quintus  Metellus,  to  be  thrown  from  the 
Tarpeian  rock,  for  striking  him  out  of  the  list  of  the  senate  ;  but  the  other 
tribunes  interfere  and  protect  him.  Y.R.  622.  B.C.  130. — Quintus  Carbo, 
plebeian  tribune,  proposes  a  law,  that  the  people  might  have  the  power  of 
re-electing  the  same  tribune  as  often  as  they  please  :  Publius  Africanus, 
argues  against  the  proposition,  in  a  speech  of  great  energy,  in  which  he 
asserts  that  Tiberius  Gracchus  was  justly  put  to  death.  Caius  Gracchus 
supports  the  proposed  law  :  but  Scipio  prevails.  War  between  Antiochus 
King  of  Syria,  and  Phraates  King  of  Parthia.  Commotions  in  Egypt. 
Ptolemy,  surnamed  Evergetes,  detested  by  his  subjects  for  his  cruelty  . 
they  set  his  palace  on  fire  ;  he  escapes  to  Cyprus.  The  people  confer  the 
kingdom  upon  his  sister  Cleopatra,  who  had  been  his  wife,  but  he  had 
divorced  her,  having  first  ravished,  and  then  married  her  daughter.  In¬ 
censed  at  his  dethronement,  he  murders  tlie  son  he  had  by  her,  and  sends 
to  her  his  head  and  limbs.  Y.R.  623.  B.C.  129. — Seditions  excited  by 
Fulvius  Flaccus,  Caius  Gracchus,  and  Caius  Carbo,  cominissioneis  for  car¬ 
rying  into  execution  the  Agrarian  law  :  these  are  opposed  by  Publius 
Scipio  Afnc  uius,  who  going  home  at  night,  in  peifect  healtli,  is  found  dead 
in  his  chamber  the  next  morning.  His  wife  Sempronia,  sister  of  the  tirac- 

LOST  BOOKS. 

315 

chases,  with  whom  Scipio  was  at  enmity,  is  strongly  suspected  of  having 
given  him  poison :  no  inquiry,  however,  is  made  into  the  matter.  Upon 
his  death,  the  popular  seditions  blaze  out  with  great  fury.  Caius  Sempro- 
nius,  the  consul,  fights  the  lapidx,  at  first,  unsuccessfully ;  but  soon  re^ 
pairs  all  his  losses,  by  a  signal  victory,  gained,  chiefly  by  Junius  Brutus, 
the  conqueror  of  Lusitania. 

BOOK  LX. 
V.R.  624,  B,C.  128. — A  rebellion  in  Sardinia  ;  quelled  by  the  consul,  Lu¬ 
cius  Aurelius.  Marcus  Fulvius  Flaccus,  who,  first,  subdued  the  Transal¬ 
pine  Ligurians,  sent  to  assist  the  Massilians,  against  the  Salvian  Gauls,  who 
were  ravaging  their  country.  Lucius  Opimius,  prxtor,  subdues  the  re¬ 
volted  Fregellans,  and  destroys  their  town,  Fregellae.  F.R.  625.  B.C.  12T. 
— An  extraordinary  multitude  of  locusts,  in  Africa,  killed  and  lying  dead  on 
the  ground,  produce  a  pestilence,  Y.R.  626.  B.C.  126. — The  censors  close 
the  lustrum  :  the  number  of  the  citizens,  three  hundred  and  ninety  thou¬ 
sand  seven  hundred  and  thirty-six.  Y.R.  627.  B.C.  125. — Caius  Gracchus, 
plebeian  tribune,  the  brother  of  Tiberius,  yet  professing  more  eloquence 
than  him,  carries  some  veiy  dangerous  laws  ;  among  others,  one,  respect¬ 
ing  corn,  that  the  people  shall  be  supplied  with  the  article  in  the  market, 
at  the  rate  of  half  and  a  third  of  an  as  :  also  an  Agrarian  law,  the  same  as 
his  brothers  :  and  a  third,  intended  to  corrupt  the  equestrian  order,  who, 
at  that  time,  were  subservient,  in  all  their  opinions,  to  the  senate  :  it  was, 
that  six  hundred  of  them  should  be  admitted  of  their  house.  At  that  time 
the  senate  consisted  of  only  three  hundred  members :  the  operation  of  the 
law  was  to  throw  all  the  power  into  the  hands  of  this  order,  by  making 
them  double  in  number  to  the  ancient  senators.  His  office  being  continued 
to  him  another  year,  he  causes  several  colonies  to  be  led  out  into  various 
parts  of  Italy ;  and  one,  which  he  conducted  liimself,  to  be  established  on 
the  soil  where  Carthage,  now  demolished,  formerly  stood.  Y.R.  628.  B.C. 
124. — Successful  expedition  of  the  consul  Quintus  Metellus,  against  the  Ba- 
learians,  called  by  the  Greeks,  Gymnesians,  because  they  go  naked  all  the 
summer.  They  are  called  Balearians,  from  their  skill  in  throwing  wea¬ 
pons  :  or,  as  some  will  have  it,  from  Baleus,  the  companion  of  Hercules, 
who  left  him  tliere  behind  him,  when  he  sailed  to  Geryon.  Y.R.  629.  B.C, 
123. — Commotions  in  Syria,  in  which  Cleopatra  murders  her  husband  De¬ 
metrius  ;  and  also  his  son  Seleucus,  for  assuming  the  crotvn,  without  her 
consent,  upon  his  father’s  death. 

316 

HISTOHY  OF  ROME. 

BOOK  LXI. 
Y.R.  630.  B.C.  122. — Caius  Sextius,  proconsul,  having  subdued  the  na¬ 
tion  of  the  Salyans,  founds  a  colony,  which  he  names  Aquae  Sextiac,  after 
his  own  name,  and  on  account  of  the  plenty  of  water,  which  he  found  there, 
flowing  both  from  hot  and  cold  springs.  Y.R.  631.  B.C.  121. — Cneius  Do- 
mitius,  proconsul,  figlds  the  Allobrogians,  with  success,  at  the  town  of  Vin- 
dalium.  The  cause  of  this  war  was,  their  receiving,  and  furnishing  with 
all  the  aid  in  their  power,  Teutomalius,  the  King  of  the  Salyans,  who  had 
fled  to  them  ;  and  ravaging  the  lands  of  the  Ai^duans,  who  were  in  alliance 
with  the  people  of  Rome.  Y.R.  632.  B.C.  120. — Caius  Gracchus,  upon 
the  expiration  of  his  seditious  tribunate,  seizes  upon  the  Aventine  mount, 
with  a  considerable  number  of  armed  followers ;  Lucius  Opimius,  by  a  de* 
cree  of  the  senate,  arms  the  people,  drives  him  from  thence,  and  puts  him 
to  death  ;  together  with  Fuivius  Flaccus,  a  man  of  consular  rank,  associated 
with  hhn.  Quintus  Fabius  Maximus,  the  consul,  nephew  of  Paullus,  gains 
a  battle  against  the  Allobrogians,  and  Bituitus  King  of  the  Arvernians  ;  in 
which  one  thousand  one  hundred  and  twenty  of  the  army  of  Bituitus,  are 
slsun.  Y.R.  633.  B.C.  119. — The  king  comes  to  Rome  to  make  satisfaction 
to  the  senate,  and  is  sent  prisoner  to  Alba,  there  to  be  kept  in  custody,  it 
not  being  deemed  safe  to  send  him  back  to  Gaul.  A  decree,  also,  passes,  that 
his  son  Congentiatus  should  be  taken,  and  sent  to  Rome.  Submission  of  the 
Allobrogians.  Lucius  Opimius  brought  to  trial,  before  the  people,  for  com¬ 
mitting  to  prison  some  citizens  who  had  not  been  condemned  j  acquitted. 

BOOK  LXII. 
Y.R.  634.  B.C.  118. — The  consul  Quintus  Marcius  subdues  the  Stonians, 
an  Alpine  nation.  Micipsa,* King  of  Numidia,  dying,  bequeaths  his  king¬ 
dom  to  his  three  sons,  Atherbal,  Hiempsal,  and  Jugurtha,  his  nephew, 
tvhom  he  had  adopted.  Y.R.  635.  B.C.  117. — Metellus  subdues  the  Dal¬ 
matians.  Jugurtha  goes  to  war  with  his  brother  Hiempsal ;  vanquishes 
and  puts  him  to  death  :  drives  Atherbal  from  his  kingdom  ;  who  is  restored 
by  the  senate.  Y.R.  636.  B.C.  116. — Lucius  Caccilius  Metellus^  and  Cneius 
Domitius  Ahenobarbus,  censors,  expel  thirty-two  senators.  Y,R,  637.  B.C. 
llS.-^Disturbanceain  Syria, 

LOST  BOOKS, 

317 

BOOK  Lxm. 
638.  B.C.  114. — Csuus  Porcius,  the  consul,  combats  the  Scordis- 
cians,  in  Thrace,  unsuccessfully.  Th^  lustrum  closed  by  the  censors  :  the 
number  of  the  citizens  amounts  to  three  hundred  and  ninety  .four  thousand 
three  hundred  and  thirty-six.  .ffiimilia,  Licinia,  and  Marcio,  vestals,  found 
guilty  of  incest.  Y.B.  639.  B.C.  113. — The  Cimbrians,  a  wandering  peo¬ 
ple,  come  into  Illyria,  where  they  fight  with,  and  defeat,  the  army  of  the 
consul  Papirius  Carbo.  Y.R.  640.  B.C.  112. — The  consul  Livius  Drusus, 
makes  war  upon  the  Scordisaans,  a  people  descended  from  the  Gauls  ; 
vanquishes  them,  and  gains  great  honour. 
BOOK  LXIV. 
Jugurtha  attacks  Atherbal,  besieges  him  mCirtha,  and  puts  him  to  death, 
contraiy  to  the  express  commands  of  the  senate.  Y.R.  641.  B.C.  111. 
— ^War  is  declared  against  him,  which  being  committed  to  the  conduct  of 
the  consul,  Calpumius  Bestia,  he  makes  peace  with  Jugurtha,  without  au¬ 
thority  from  the  senate  and  people.  Y.K.  642.  B.C.  110. — ^Jugurtha, 
called  upon  to  declare  who  were  his  advisers,  comes  to  Rome  upon  tlie 
faitli  of  a  safe-conduct ;  he  is  supposed  to  have  bribed  many  of  the  princi¬ 
pal  senators.  He  murders  Massiva,  who  sought,  through  the  hatred  which 
he  saw  the  Romans  bore  to  Jugurtha,  to  procui*e  his  kingdom  for  himself. 
Being  ordered  to  stand  his  trial,  he  escapes ;  and  is  reported  to  have  said, 
on  going  away,  “  O  venal  city  !  doomed  to  quick  perdition,  could  but  a 
purchaser  be  found  Aulus  Postumius,  having  unsuccessful!}^  fought  Ju. 
gurtha,  adds  to  his  disgrace,  by  making  an  ignominious  peace  with  him  ; 
which  the  senate  refuses  to  ratify. 
BOOK  LXV. 
Y.B.  643.  B.C.  109. — Quintus  Caecilius  Metellus,  consul,  defeats  Jugur¬ 
tha,  in  two  battles,  and  ravages  all  Numidia.  Marcus  Junius  Silanus,  con¬ 
sul,  combats  the  Cimbrians,  unsuccessfully.  The  Cimbrian  ambassadors  pe¬ 
tition  the  senate  for  a  settlement  and  lands  ;  are  refused.  Y.K.  644.  B.C, 
108. — Marcus  Minucius,  consul,  vanquishes  the  Thracians.  Cassius,  the 
consul,  with  his  array,  cut  off  by  the  Tigurine  Gauls,  in  the  country  of  the 
Helvetians.  The  soldiers,  who  survived  that  unfortunate  action,  condition 
for  their  lives,  by  giving  hostages,  and  agreeing  to  deliver  up  Iwdf  fheir 
property. 

318 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

BOOK  LXVI, 
y.R.  645.  B.C.  107. — Jugurtha,  driven  out  of  Numidia  by  Cains  Marius, 
receives  aid  from  Bocchus,  King  of  the  Moors.  Y.R.  646.  B.C.  106. — Boc- 
chus,  having  lost  a  battle,  and  being  unwilling  to  carry  on  the  war  any 
longer,  delivers  up  Jugurtha,  in  chains,  to  Marius.  In  this  action,  Lucius 
Cornelius  Sylla,  quxstor  under  Marius,  most  highly  distinguishes  himself. 
BOOK  Lxvn. 
Y.R.  647.  B.C.  105, — Marcus  Aurelius  Scaurus,  lieutenant-general  under 
the  consul,  taken  prisoner  by  the  Cimbrians,  his  army  being  routed :  slain 
by  Boiorix,  for  saying,  in  their  council,  when  they  talked  of  invading  Italy, 
that  the  Romans  were  not  to  be  conquered.  Cneius  MalUus,  consul,  and 
Quintus  Servilius  Cxpio,  proconsul,  taken  prisoners,  by  the  same  enemy 
who  defeated  their  annies  and  drove  them  from  both  their  camps,  with  the 
loss  of  eighty  thousand  men,  and  forty  thousand  sutlers,  and  other  follow¬ 
ers  of  the  camp.  The  goods  of  Csepio,  whose  rashness  was  the  cause  of 
this  misfortune,  sold  by  auction,  by  order  of  the  people  ;  being  the  first 
person  whose  effects  were  confiscated,  since  the  dethroning  of  King  Tar- 
quin.  Y.R.  648.  B.C.  104. — Jugurtha,  and  his  two  sons,  led  in  triumph, 
before  the  chariot  of  Caius  Marius  ;  put  to  death  in  prison.  Marius  enters 
the  senate,  in  his  triumphal  habit ;  the  first  person  that  ever  did  so  :  on 
account  of  the  apprehensions  entertained  of  a  Citnbrian  war,  he  is  con¬ 
tinued  in  the  consulship  for  several  years,  being  elected  a  second,  and  a 
third  time,  in  his  absence :  dissembling  his  views,  he  attains  the  consulship 
a  fourth  time.  The  Cimbrians,  having  ravaged  all  the  country  between 
the  Rhine  and  the  Pyrenees,  pass  into  Spmn ;  where  having  committed  the 
like  depredations,  they  are  at  length  put  to  flight  by  the  Celtiberians  :  re¬ 
turning  into  Gaul,  they  join  the  'Peutons,  a  warlike  people. 
BOOK  Lxvm. 
Y.R.  649.  B.C.  103. — Marcus  Antonins,  prsetor,  attacks  the  pirates,  and 
chaces  them  into  Cilicia.  The  consul  Caius  Marius,  attacked  by  the  Teu¬ 
tons  and  Ambrogians,  with  their  utmost  force,  defends  himself ;  and  after¬ 
wards  in  two  battles,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Aqux  Sextia,  utterly  de¬ 
feats  them,  with  the  loss,  it  is  ssud,  of  two  hundred  thousand  lolled,  and 
ninety  thousand  taken  prisoners.  Marius  elected  consul,  in  his  absence, 
a  filth  time,  A  triumph  offered  to  him  which  he  defers,  until  he  shall 
have  subdued  the  Cimbrians  also.  Y,R.  650.  B.C.  102. — The  Cimbrians 

LOST  BOOKS. 

319 

unve  Quuitus  Catulus,  the  proconsul,  from  tlie  Alps,  where  he  had  pos¬ 
sessed  himself  of  the  narrow  passe*,  and  erected  a  castle  to  command  the 
river  Athesis,  which  he  abandons.  They  pass  into  Italy.  Catulus  and  Ma¬ 
rius,  having  effected  a  junction  of  their  forces,  fight  and  vanquish  them  t 
in  this  battle,  we  are  told,  that  there  fell,  one*  hundred  and  forty  thousand 
of  the  enemy,  and  that  sixty  thousand  were  taken.  Marius,  on  his  return 
to  Rome,  is  received  with  the  highest  honours,  by  the  whole  body  of  the 
citizens }  two  triumphs  offered  him,  but  he  contents  himself  with  one. 
The  principal  men  in  the  state,  who  were,  for  some  time,  extremely  envious 
that  such  distinctions  should  be  conferred  upon  a  new  man,  now  acknow¬ 
ledge  him  to  have  saved  the  commonwealth.  Y.R.  651.  B.C.  101. — ^Publi- 
cius  Malleolus  executed  for  the  murder  of  his  mother ;  being  the  first  that 
ever  was  sown  up  in  a  sack  and  cast  into  the  sea.  The  sacred  shields  are 
said  to  have  shaken,  witli  considerable  noise,  previous  to  the  conclusion  of 
the  Cimbrian  war.  Wars  between  the  kings  of  Syria. 
BOOK  jLXIX. 
Lucius  Apuleius  Saturninus,  aided  by  Marius, — the  soldiers  having  killed 
his  competitor,  Aulus  Nonius, < — forcibly  elected  prsetor;  exercises  his  of¬ 
fice,  with  a  violence  equal  to  that  by  which  he  obtained  it.  Having  pro¬ 
cured  an  Agrarian  law,  he  summons  Metelius  Numidicus  to  stand  his  trial 
before  the  people,  for  refusing  to  swear  to  the  observance  of  it.  Metelius, 
notwithstanding  he  enjoyed  the  protection  of  all  the  best  men  in  the  state, 
yet,  being  unwdlling  to  furnish  matter  of  dispute,  retires  into  voluntan' 
exile,  to  Rhodes  :  there  he  passed  his  time,  entirely  in  study,  and  in  re¬ 
ceiving  the  visits  of  men  of  eminent  character.  Y.R,  652.  B.C.  100. — On 
his  departure,  Caius  Marius,  who  was,  in  fact,  the  chief  promoter  of  the 
sedition,  and  who  had  now  purchased  a  fourth  consulship,  by  openly  dis¬ 
tributing  money  among  the  tribes,  pronounced  sentence  of  banishment 
upon  him.  The  same  Saturninus  murders  Caius  Memmius,  who  was  a  can¬ 
didate  for  the  consulship,  fearing  lest  he  might  have,  in  him,  a  strenuous 
opposer  of  his  evil  actions.  The  senate  were  at  length  roused  by  such 
repeated  acts  of  enonnity,  and  Marius  (a  man  of  a  very  versatile  charac* 
ter,  and  always  desirous  of  being  on  the  strong  side,  if  he  could  any  way 
discover  it)  joined  them.  In  consequence  of  this,  Saturninus,  together 
with  Glaucias,  the  praetor,  and  some  otliers  of  his  mad  associates,  is  attacked 
by  force  of  arms,  and  slain  by  one  Rabirius.  Y.ll.  653.  B.C.  99. — Quintus 
Caecilius  Metelius,  honourably  recalled  from  banishment.  Marcus  Aquilius, 
proconsul,  puts  an  end  to  the  war  of  the  slaves  in  Sylly. 

324) 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

BOOK  LXX. 
Y.R.  654.  B.C.  98. — Marcus  Aquillkis,  accused  of  extortion,  refuses  to 
implore  the  favour  of  the  judges  appointed  to  try  him ;  whereupon  Mar¬ 
cus  Xntonius,  his  advocate,  cuts  open  his  vest,  and  show  the  scars  of  his 
honourable  wounds,  received  in  front ;  upon  sight  of  which  he  is  imme¬ 
diately  acquitted.  This  fact  is  related  upon  the  authority  of  Cicero,  only. 
Y.R.  655.  B.C.  97. — Successful  expedition  of  Didius,  the  proconsul,  against 
the  Celtiberians,  Y.R.  656,  B.C.  96. — Ptolemy,  King  of  Cjrrene,  dies  ; 
bequeaths  his  kingdom  to  the  Roman  people :  the  senate  decrees  that 
the  cities  shall  be  free.  Y.R.  657.  B.C.  95. — Ariobarzanes  restored  to  his 
kingdom  of  Cappadocia,  by  Lucius  Sylia.  And)assadors  from  Arsaces, 
King  of  Parthia,  come  to  Sylia,  to  solicit  the  friendship  of  the  Roman  peo¬ 
ple.  Y.R.  658.  B.C.  94. — Publius  Rutilius,  a  man  of  tlie  strictest  integrity, 
having  exerted  himself,  when  lieutenant-general  under  Quintus  Mucius, 
proconsul,  to  protect  the  people  of  Asia  from  the  oppression  of  the  re¬ 
venue  farmers,  becomes  odious,  on  that  account,  to  the  equestrian  order, 
who  had  the  cognisance  of  affairs  of  that  nature  ;  is  brought  to  trial,  and 
condemned  to  exile.  Y.R.  659.  B.C.  93. — Caius  Geminius,  praetor,  unfor¬ 
tunate  in  an  expedition  against  the  Thracians.  Y.R.  660.  B.C,  92.— The 
senate,  disgusted  by  the  many  abuses  committed  by  the  equestrian  order 
in  the  exercise  of  their  jurisdiction,  endeavour  to  bring  that  jurisdiction 
into  their  own  hands  ;  they  are  supported  by  Marcus  Livius  Drusus,  ple¬ 
beian  tribune ;  who,  in  order  to  gain  the  people,  holds  out  to  them  the 
pernicious  hope  of  a  pecuniary  gratification.  Commotions  in  Syria. 
BOOK  LXXI. 
Y.R.  661.  B.C.  9L— Marcus  Livius  Drusus,  plebeian  tribune,  in  order 
the  more  effectually  to  support  the  senate  in  their  pretensions,  engages 
the  concurrence  of  tiie  allies,  and  the  Italian  states,  by  promising  them  the 
freedom  of  the  city.  Aided  by  them,  besides  the  Agrarian  and  com  laws, 
he  carries  that,  also,  relative  to  criminal  jurisdiction  ; — ^that  in  capital  pro¬ 
secutions  the  senate  should  have  equal  authority  with  the  equestrian  order. 
It  is  afterwards  found  that  the  freedom  which  he  had  promised,  cannot  be 
conferred  upon  them  ;  wliich  incenses  and  incites  them  to  revolt.  An  ac¬ 
count  of  their  assembling ;  their  combinations  and  speeches  made  at  their 
meetings,  by  the  chief  men  among  thepi.  Drusus  becomes  obnoxious  to 
the  senate,  on  account  of  his  conduct  in  this  affair ;  is  considered  as  the 
cause  of  the  social  war  ;  is  slain  in  his  own  house  by  an  unknown  hand. 

LOST  BOOKS. 

321 

BOOK  LXXII. 
The  Italian  states,  the  Picentians,  Vestinians,  Marcians,  Pell^nians, 
Marrucinians,  Samnites,  and  Lucanians,  revolt.  The  war  begins  with  the 
Picentians.  Quintus  Serviliiis,  proconsul,  murdered,  in  the  town  of  Ascu- 
lum,  and  all  the  Roman  citizens  in  the  place.  The  whole  body  of  the  Ro¬ 
man  people  assume  the  military  dress,  Servius  Galba,  taken  by  the  Lu¬ 
canians,  escapes,  by  the  assistance  of  a  woman  with  whom  he  lodged, 
Y.R.  662.  B,C.  90. — ^sernia  and  Alba,  besieged  by  the  Italians.  Aid  sent 
to  the  Romans,  by  the  Latines,  and  other  foreign  nations.  Military  opera¬ 
tions,  expeditions,  and  sieges,  on  both  sides, 
BOOK  LXXIII. 
The  consul,  Lucius  Julius  Caesar,  engages  the  Samnites  unsuccessfully. 
The  colony  of  Nola  falls  into  the  hands  of  the  Samnites,  together  wdli  Lu¬ 
cius  Postumius,  the  praetor,  whom  they  kill.  Many  dift’erent  states  go  over 
to  the  enemy.  Publius  Kutilius  slain  in  an  engagemcr.t  with  the  Marcians , 
Caius  Marius,  his  lieutenant-general,  fights  them  witii  better  success.  Ser¬ 
vius  Sulpicius  defeats  the  Pelignians,  in  a  pitched  battle.  Quintus  Caepio, 
Rutilius’s  lieutenant-general,  makes  a  successful  sally  against  the  enemy 
besieging  him  :  on  account  of  which  success,  he  is  made  equal  in  command 
to  Marius  ;  becomes  adventurous  and  rash  ,  is  surprised  in  an  ambuscade, 
his  army  routed,  and  himself  slain.  Successes  of  the  consul  Lucius  Caesar 
against  the  Samnites  ;  on  account  of  his  conquests,  the  inhabitants  of  Rome 
lay  aside  the  military  habit.  The  war  carried  on  with  various  success. 
.$sernia,  with  Marcellus,  falls  into  the  hands  of  the  Samnites  ;  Cams  Marius 
vanquishes  the  Martians,  and  kills  Herius  Asinius,  the  praetor  of  the  Mar¬ 
rucinians.  Caius  Cjecilius  subdues  the  rebellious  Salvians  in  Transalpine 
Gaul. 

BOOK  LXXIV. 
Cneius  Pompeius  defeats  the  Picentians,  and  lays  siege  to  their  town  ;  on 
account  of  this  victory,  the  inliabitants  of  Rome  resume  their  purple  robes, 
other  usual  ornaments  of  dress,  and  distinguishing  marks  of  magistracy. 
Caius  Marius  fights  an  undecided  battle  with  the  Marcians.  Freedmen^s 
sons  now,  for  the  first  time,  received  into  the  army.  Y.R.  663,  B.C.  89. — 
Aulus  Plotius  subdues  the  Umbrians,  and  Lucius  Porcius  the  Marcians, 
both  of  whom  had  revolted.  Nicomedes  restored  to  the  kingdom  of 
VOL,  VI. — 2  T 

322 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

Bithynia,  and  Ariobarzanes,  to  that  of  Cappadocia.  Cneius  Pompeius,  con¬ 
sul,  overthrows  the  Marcians  in  a  pitched  battle.  The  citizens  being  deeply 
involved  in  debt,  Aulus  Sempronius  Asellio,  prsetor,  is  murdered  in  the  Fo- 
runi,  by  the  usurers,  in  consequence  of  some  judgments  given  by  him  in 
favour  of  debtors.  Incursion  of  the  I'hracians,  and  devastations  committed 
by  them  against  the  Macedonians. 
BOOK  LXXV. 
Aulus  Postumius  Albinus,  commander  of  a  fleet,  upon  a  suspicion  of  trea¬ 
chery,  murdered  by  the  forces  under  his  command.  Lucius  Cornelius  Sylla, 
lieutenant-general,  defeats  the  Samnites,  and  takes  two  of  their  camps. 
The  A'estinians  surrender  to  Cneius  Pompeius.  Lucius  Porcius,  consul, 
having  been  successful  in  frequent  engagements  with  the  Marcians,  slain 
in  an  attack  upon  their  camp,  which  circumstance  decides  the  victory  in 
favour  of  the  enemy.  Cosconius  and  Lucius  overthrow  the  Samnites  in  a 
battle,  slay  Marius  Egnatius,  the  most  distinguished  of  their  generals,  and 
receive  the  surrender  of  many  of  their  towns.  Lucius  Sylla  subdues  the 
Hirpi Ilians,  defeats  the  Samnites  in  many  battles,  and  receives  the  submis- 
sion  of  several  states ;  in  consequence  of  having  performed  so  many  dis¬ 
tinguished  services,  he  repairs  to  Rome  to  solicit  the  consulship. 
BOOK  LXXVL 
Aulus  Gabinius  defeats  the  Lucanians,  and  takes  several  of  their  towns , 
is  slain  in  an  attack  on  their  camp.  Sulpicius,  a  lieutenant-general,  com¬ 
mits  military  execution  on  the  Marrucinians,  and  reduces  their  whole 
country.  Cneius  Pompeius,  proconsul,  forces  the  Vestmians  and  Peligni- 
ansto  submission.  Also  the  Marcians,  defeated  in  several  battles,  by  Lu¬ 
cius  Murena  and  Cxcilius  Pius,  sue  for  peace.  Y.R.  664.  B.C.  88. — Ascu- 
lum  taken  by  Cneius  Pompeius,  and  the  Italians,  there,  put  to  death  by 
Mamercus  iEmilius.  Silo  Pompaedius,  the  author  of  the  revolt,  killed  in  an 
action.  Ariobarzanes,  King  of  Cappadocia,  and  Nxcomedes,  King  of  Bithy 
nia,  driven  out  of  their  kingdoms  by  Mithridates,  King  of  Pontus.  Preda¬ 
tory  incursions  of  the  'I'hracians  into  Macedonia. 
BOOK  LXXYIl. 
Publius  Sulpicius,  tribune  of  the  people,  (having,  witli  the  aid  of  Cuius 
Marius,  carried  certain  laws :  that  those  who  had  been  banished,  should  be 
recalled  ;  that  the  newh  -created  citizens,  and  the  sons  of  freedmen,  should 
be  distributed  among  the  tribes,  and  that  Caius  Manus  should  be  appointed 

LOST  BOOKS. 

323 

general  against  Mithridates,)  commits  violence  against  Quintus  Pompeius 
and  Lucius  Sylla,  the  consuls,  who  had  opposed  these  proceedings  ;  kills 
Quintus,  the  son  of  Pompeius,  who  was  married  to  Sylla’s  daughter.  Lu¬ 
cius  Sylla  comes  into  the  town  with  an  army,  and  fights  the  faction  of  Sul- 
picius  and  Marius,  in  the  city  ;  he  gets  the  better  of  them,  and  drives  them 
out.  Twelve  of  them,  among  whom  are  Caius  Marius  the  father,  and  his 
son,  condemned  by  the  senate,  Publius  Sulpicius,  having  concealed  him¬ 
self  in  a  farm  house.  In  the  neighbourhood,  is  discovered  by  one  of  his 
slaves,  apprehended,  and  put  to  death.  The  slave  being  entitled  to  the 
reward  promised  to  the  discoverer,  is  made  free ;  and  is  then  thrown  from 
the  Tarpeian  rock,  for  having  traitorously  betrayed  his  master.  Caius- 
Marids,  the  son,  passes  over  into  Africa.  Caius  Marius,  the  father,  having 
concealed  himself  in  the  marshes  of  Minturna,  is  seized  by  the  towns-peo- 
ple :  aGallic slave,  sent  to  despatch  him,  terrified  at  his  majestic  appearance, 
retires,  unable  to  accomplish  the  deed ;  he  is  sent  off  to  Africa.  Lucius 
Sylla  makes  a  considerable  reform  in  the  state  ;  sends  forth  several  colonies. 
Cneius  Pompeius,  proconsul,  procures  the  murder  of  Quintus  Pompeius, 
the  consul,  who  was  to  succeeded  him  in  the  command  of  the  army. 
Mithridates,  King  of  Pontus,  seizes  Bithynia  and  Cappadocia,  having  driven 
thence  the  Roman  general,  Aquillius ;  at  the  head  of  a  great  army  enters 
Phrygia,  a  province  belonging  to  the  Roman  people. 
Lxxvm. 
Mithridates  possesses  himself  of  Asia;  throwsinto  chains  Quintus  Oppius, 
the  proconsul,  and  Aquillius,  the  general ;  orders  all  the  Romans  in  Asia, 
to  be  massacred  on  the  same  day  ;  attacks  the  city  of  Rhodes,  the  only  one 
which  had  retained  its  fidelity  to  the  Roman  state.  Being  overcome  in 
several  actions  at  sea,  he  retreats,  Y.R.  665.  B.C.  87. — Archelaus,  one  of 
the  King’s  governors,  invatles  Greece  ;  takes  Athens.  Commotions  in  se¬ 
veral  states  and  islands,  some  endeavouring  to  draw  over  their  people  to 
the  side  of  the  Romans,  others  to  that  of  Mithridates. 
BOOK  LXXIX. 
Lucius  Cornelius  Sylla,  having  by  force  of  arms,  procured  tlie  enacting  of 
several  injurious  laws,  is  driven  out  of  tlie  city  by  lus  colleague,  Cneiiis  Octa¬ 
vius,  together  with  sixplebeian  tribunes.  Thus  deposed  from  his  authority,  he 
procures  the  command  of  the  army  under  Appius  Claudius,  by  bribery,  and 
makes  war  upon  the  city,  having  called  to  his  assistance,  Caius  Marius,  and 
other  exiles,  from  Africa.  In  this  war,  two  brothers,  (one  of  Pompcius’s 
army,  the  other  of  Cinna’s.)  encounter  each  other,  without  knowing  it ;  the 

324 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

conqueror,  upon  stripping  the  other,  whom  he  had  slain,  discovers  who  he 
is,  whereupon,  in  tlie  agony  of  grief,  he  kills  himself.  Having  erected  a 
funeral-pile  for  his  brother,  is,  himself,  consumed  in  the  same  flames.  This 
war  might  easily  have  been  suppressed,  in  the  beginning,  but  is  kept  up 
by  the  artifices  ofPompeius,  who  underhand  encouraged  both  parties,  and 
kept  himself  aloof,  till  much  of  the  best  blood  in  the  state  was  spilt :  the 
consul,  also,  was  singularly  languid  and  negligent.  Cmna  and  Marius,  with 
four  armies,  two  of  which  were  commanded  by  Sertorius  and  Carbo,  lay 
siege  to  the  city.  Marius  takes  Ostia,  which  he  plunders  in  the  most  cruel 
manner. 

BOOK  LXXX. 
The  freedom  of  the  city  of  Home  granted  to  the  Italian  states.  The  Sam- 
nites,  the  only  people  w  ho  continue  in  arms,  join  Cinna  and  Marius,  and 
overthrow  Plautius’s  armv,  killing  the  general.  Cinna  and  Marius  seize 
the  Janiculum  ;  repelled  by  the  consul  Octavius.  Marius  plunders  Antium, 
Aricia,  and  Lanuvium.  The  pnncijjal  men  in  the  state,  having  now’  no  hope 
of  resisting,  on  account  of  the  cowardice  and  treachery  of  their  troops  and 
of  the  commanders,  (most  of  whom  had  been  gained  by  bribes,)  receive 
Cinna  and  Marius  into  the  city.  As  if  it  were  a  captured  place,  they  mur¬ 
der  great  numbers  of  tlie  inhabitants,  and  plunder  others  in  the  most  cruel 
manner.  They  put  to  death  the  consul  Cneius  Octavius,  and  all  the  chiefs 
of  the  (‘pposite  ])arty  ;  among  others,  Marcus  Antonius,  a  man  highly  dis¬ 
tinguished  for  his  eloquence,  wuth  Lucius  and  Caius  Caesar,  whose  heads 
the\-  stick  up  on  the  rostrum.  'Phe  younger  Crassus  slain  by  a  party  of 
horsemen  at  Fmibna;  his  father,  to  escape  suftering  indignity,  kills  him¬ 
self.  Cinna  and  Marius,  witliout  even  tlie  formality  of  an  election,  declare 
themselves  consuls.  I’he  first  day  of  their  entering  upon  office,  Marius, 
after  having  commitled  vcr\  many  atrocious  acts,  dies,  on  the  ides  of  Ja- 
Tiuar\  ;  u  man,  whom,  if  we  compare  his  vices  with  his  \’irtues,  it  will  be 
diflicult  to  pronounce  whether  he  w’ere  greater  in  war,  or  more  wicked  in 
peace.  Having  preserved  lus  country  by  his  valour,  he  ruined  it  after- 
vvartls,  by  every  species  of  artifice  and  fraud ;  and  finally,  destroyed  it  by 
open  force. 

BOOK  LXXXI. 
V,R.  666.  B.C.  86, — Lucius  Sylla  besieges  Athens,  held  by  Archelaus, 
under  Mithridates,  and  takes  it,  after  an  obstinate  resistance  :  the  city,  and 
such  of  the  inhabitants  as  remained  alive,  restored  to  liberty.  Magnesia. 

LOST  BOOKS. 

325 

the  only  city  in  Asia,  which  continued  faithful,  defended  against  Mithri- 
dates,  with  great  valour.  The  Thracians  invade  Macedonia. 
BOOK  LXXXII. 
Sylla  defeats  Mithridates  in  Thessaly,  killing  one  hundred  thousand  men, 
and  taking  their  camp.  The  war  being  renewed,  he  entirely  routs  and 
destroys  the  King’s  army.  Archelaus,  with  the  royal  fleet,  surrenders  to 
S}  Ua.  Lucius  Valerius  f'laccus,  Cinna’s  colleague  in  the  consulship,  ap¬ 
pointed  to  succeed  Sylla,  in  tlie  command  of  his  army,  becomes  so  odious 
to  his  men,  on  account  of  his  avarice,  that  he  is  slain  by  Caius  Fimbria,  his 
lieutenant-general,  a  man  of  consummate  audacity,  who,  thereupon,  as¬ 
sumes  the  command.  Several  cities  in  Asia  taken  by  Mithridates,  who 
treats  them  with  extreme  cruelty.  Invasion  of  Macedonia  by  the  Thra¬ 
cians. 

BOOK  LXXXIII. 
y.R.  667.  B.C,  85. — Caius  Fimbrias  having  defeated  several  of  Mithri- 
dates’s  generals  in  Asia,  takes  the  city  of  Pergamus,  and  is  very  near  mak¬ 
ing  tile  King  captive.  He  takes  and  destroys  the  city  of  Ilion,  whicji  ad¬ 
hered  to  Sylla,  and  recovers  a  great  part  of  Asia.  Sylla  overcomes  tlie 
Thracians  in  several  battles.  I.ucius  Cinna  and  Cneius  Papirius  Carbo, 
having  declared  themselves  consuls,  make  preparations  for  war  against 
Sylla;  Lucius  Valerius  Flaccus  moves  the  senate,  and,  assisted  by  those 
who  were  desirous  of  peace,  prevails,  that  a  deputation  should  be  sent  to 
Sylla,  to  treat  of  terms.  Cinna,  attempting  to  force  his  men  to  embark  and 
go  against  Sylla,  is  slain  by  tliem.  Y.R.  668.  B.C.  84. — Carbo  sole  consul. 
Sylla  makes  peace,  in  Asia,  with  Mithridates,  upon  condition  that  the 
King  shall  evacuate  Asia,  Bithynia,  and  Cappadocia.  Fimbria,  deserted  by 
Ills  arm}  ,  which  went  over  to  Sylla,  puts  himself  to  death. 
BOOK  LXXXIV. 
Sylla  answers  the  deputies,  that  he  would  yield  to  the  authority  of  tlie 
senate,  upon  condition  that  those  who,  being  banished  by  Cinna,  had  fled 
10  him,  should  be  restored  .  which  proposition  .appears  reasonable  to  the 
senate,  but  is  opposed  and  rejected  by  Carbo,  and  his  faction,  who  con¬ 
ceive  that  the)  may  derive  more  advantage  from  a  continuance  of  the  war. 
Carbo,  requiring  hostages  from  all  the  touns  and  colonies  of  Italy,  to  bind 
them  more  firmly  in  union  against  S\]1a,  is  o\er-ruledby  the  senate.  The 
tight  of  voting  given  to  the  new  citizens,  by  a  decree  of  the  senate.  Quin- 

326 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

tus  Metellus  Piu«,  who  had  taken  part  with  the  chief  men  of  the  atate, 
prepares  for  war  in  Africa ;  is  crushed  by  Caius  Fabius,  the  praetor.  Y.R. 
669.  B.C.  83. — Garbo’s  faction  and  the  Marian  party  procure  a  decree  of 
the  senate,  that  the  armies  shall  every  where  be  disbanded.  The  sons  of 
freedmen  distributed  among  the  thirty -five  tribes.  Preparations  for  war 
igidnst  SyUa. 

BOOK  LXXXV. 
Sylla  enters  Italy,  at  the  head  of  an  army ;  his  ambassadors  ill  treated  by 
Norbanusj  the  consul,  whom  he  afterwards  defeats  in  battle.  Having,  in¬ 
effectually,  tried  every  means  with  Lucius  Scipio,  the  other  consul,  to 
bring  about  a  peace,  he  prepares  lo  attack  his  camp,  when  the  consul’s 
whole  army,  seduced  by  some  of  his  soldiers,  who  had  insinuated  them¬ 
selves  among  them,  desert  to  him  in  a  body.  Having  Scipio  in  his  power, 
he  sets  him  free,  w'hen  he  might  have  killed  him.  Cneius  Pompeius,  the 
son  of  Pompeius  who  took  Asculum,  raises  an  army  of  volunteers,  and  goes 
over  to  SyUa,  with  three  legions  :  also,  the  whole  body  of  the  nobility  quit 
the  city,  and  join  his  camp.  Sundry  actions  in  different  parts  of  Italy, 
BOOK  LXXXVL 
V.R.  670.  B.C.  82. — Caius  Marius,  son  of  Caius  Marius,  made  consul,  by 
force,  before  he  was  twenty  years  old.  Caius  Fabius  burned  alive  in  his 
tent,  in  Africa,  for  his  avarice  and  extortion.  Lucius  Philippus,  Sylla’s 
Keutenant-general,  having  overthrown  and  killed  the  praetor  Quintus  Anto- 
nius,  takes  Sardinia,  SyUa,  in  order  to  conciliate  the  different  Italian  states, 
makes  a  league  with  them,  contracting,  not  to  deprive  them  of  the  city,  and 
6Jie  right  of  voting  lately  conferred  upon  them.  So  confident  is  he  of  the 
victoiy,  that  he  publishes  an  order, that  all  suitors,  bound  by  sureties,  should 
make  their  appearance  at  Rome,  although  the  city  was  yet  in  the  possession 
of  the  opposite  party.  Lucius  Damasippus,  the  praetor,  having  called  to¬ 
gether  the  senate,  at  the  desire  of  Manus,  murders  what  remains  of  the  no¬ 
bility  in  the  city  ;  among  them,  Quintus  Mucius  Scaevola,  the  high  priest, 
endeavouring  to  make  his  escape,  is  killed  in  the  vestibule  of  tiie  temple  of 
Vesta.  The  war  in  Asia,  against  Mithridates,  renewed  by  Lucius  Muraena, 
BOOK  LXXXMI. 
Sylla,  having  subdued  and  destroyed  Caius  Marius’s  army,  at  Sacripor- 
tus,  lays  siege  to  Prxneste,  where  Marius  had  taken  refuge;  recovers 
Rome,  out  of  the  hands  of  his  enemies.  Marius  attempting  to  break  forth 

LOST  BOOKS, 

327 

from  Prscneste,  is  repelled.  Successes  of  the  different  commanders  under 
him,  every  where. 

BOOK  LXXXVm. 
Sylla,  having-  routed  and  cut  off  the  army  of  Carbo,  at  Clusium,  Faven* 
lia,  and  Fidentia,  drives  him  entirely  out  of  Italy  ;  fights  and  overthrows 
the  Samnites,  the  only  nation  in  Italy  which  still  continued  in  arms.  Hay* 
ing  restored  the  affairs  of  the  commonwealth,  be  stains  his  glorious  victoiy 
with  the  most  atrocious  cruelties  ever  committed  ;  he  murders  eight  thou¬ 
sand  men,  in  the  Villa  Publica,  who  had  submitted  and  laid  down  their 
arms,  and  publishes  a  list  of  persons  proscribed :  he  fills  with  blood  the 
city  of  Rome,  and  all  Italy.  All  the  Praenestines,  without  exception,  al¬ 
though  they  had  laid  down  their  arms,  he  orders  to  be  murdered  ;  he  kills 
Marius,  a  senator,  by  breaking  his  legs  and  arms,  cutting  off  his  ears,  and 
scooping  out  his  eyes.  Caius  Marius,  besieged  at  Praeneste,  by  Lucretius 
Aseila,  and  other  partisans  of  Sylla,  endeavours  to  escape  through  a  mine; 
failing  in  which  attempt  he  kills  himself. 
BOOK  LXXXIX. 
Lucius  Brutus  sent,  in  a  fishing-boat,  from  Cossura,  by  Cneius  Papirius 
Carbo,  to  Lilybaeum,  to  discover  if  Pompeius  were  there,  is  surrounded  by 
some  of  Pompeius^s  vessels,  whereupon  he  destroys  himself.  Cneius  Pom¬ 
peius,  sent  by  the  senate  to  Sicily,  with  full  powers,  takes  Carbo  prisoner, 
and  puts  him  to  death,  who  dies  weeping  with  womanly  weakness.  Sylla 
made  dictator ;  assumes  a  state  never  before  seen,  walking,  preceded  by 
twenty-fom*  lictors.  He  establishes  many  new  regulations  in  the  state; 
abridges  the  authority  of  tlie  plebeian  tribunes ;  takes  from  them  entirely 
the  power  of  proposing  laws  ;  increases  the  college  of  priests  and  augurs 
to  fifteen ;  fills  up  the  senate  from  the  equestrian  order ;  takes  from  the 
descendants  of  the  proscribed  persons  all  power  of  reclaiming  the  property 
of  their  ancestors,  and  sells  such  of  their  effects  as  had  not  been  already 
confiscated,  to  the  amount  of  one  hundred  and  fifty  millions  of  sesterces.  He 
orders  Lucretius  Ofella  to  be  put  to  death  in  the  Forum,  for  having  de¬ 
clared  himself  a  candidate  for  the  consulship,  without  having  previously 
obtained  his  permission  ;  at  which  the  people  of  Rome  being  offended,  he 
calls  a  meeting,  and  tells  them,  that  Ofella  was  slain  by  his  orders.  Y.R. 
fin.  B.C.  81. — Cneius  Pompeius  vanquishes  and  kills  Cneius  Domitius, 
one  of  the  proscribed  persons,  in  Africa ;  also  Hiarbas,  King  of  Numidia, 
who  was  making  preparations  for  war.  He  triumphs  over  Africa,  although 

328 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

not  more  than  twenty-four  years  of  age,  and  only  of  equestrian  rank,  whicii 
never  happened  to  any  man  before.  Caius  Norbonus,  of  consular  rank, 
being  proscribed,  seeks  safety  at  Rhodes,  where,  being  discovered,  he  kills 
himself.  Mutilus,  one  of  the  proscribed,  coming  privately  and  in  disguise, 
to  the  back  door  of  his  wife  Bastia’s  house,  she  refuses  to  admit  him,  tell¬ 
ing  him  that  he  was  a  forbidden  man,  whereupon  he  stabs  himself,  and 
sprinkles  the  door  of  his  wife’s  house  with  his  blood.*  Sylla  takes  Nola,  a 
city  of  the  Samnites.  Y.R.  672,  B.C.  80. — He  leads  forth  forty-seven  le¬ 
mons,  into  the  conquered  lands,  and  divides  them  among  them.  Y.R.  673. 
B.C.  79. — He  besieges  and  takes  the  town  of  Volaterra;  he  demolishes 
likewise  Mitylene,  the  only  town  in  Asia  which  continued  to  adhere  to 
Mithridates. 

BOOK  XC. 
Y.R.  674.  B.C.  78. — Death  of  Sylla  ;  he  is  buried  in  the  Campus  Mar- 
tius,  by  a  decree  of  the  senate.  Marcus  JEmilius  Lepidus,  by  attempting 
to  rescind  the  acts  of  Sylla,  raises  new  commotions  ;  is  driven  out  of  Italy, 
by  his  colleague,  Quintus  Catulus  ;  endeavouring  to  excite  a  war  in  Sar¬ 
dinia,  he  loses  his  life,  Y.R.  675.  B.C,  77. — Marcus  Brutus,  who  held  pos¬ 
session  of  Cisalpine  Gaul,  slain  by  Cneius  Pompeius.  Quintus  Sertorius, 
one  of  the  proscribed,  raises  a  formidable  war  in  the  Farther  Spain.  Lucius 
ManiUus,  proconsul,  and  Marcus  Domitius,  overthrown  in  a  battle  by  the 
quscstor  Herculeius.  Expedition  of  the  proconsul,  Publius  Serviiius, 
against  the  Cilicians. 

BOOK  XCI. 
Cneius  Pompeius,  while  yet  only  of  equestrian  rank,  sent  against  Ser- 
torius  with  consular  authority.  Sertorius  takes  several  cities,  and  reduces 
many  others  to  submission.  The  proconsul,  Appius  Claudius,  conquers 
the  Thracians  in  several  battles.  Y.R.  676,  B.C,  76. — Quintus  Metellus, 
proconsul,  cuts  off  Herculeius,  with  his  whole  army. 
BOOK  xcn. 
Cneius  Pompeius  fights  an  undecided  battle  with  Sertorius,  the  wings 
on  each  side  being  reciprocally  beaten.  Quintus  Metellus  conquers  Ser- 
torius  and  Peperna,  with  both  their  armies ;  Pompeius,  desirous  of  hav¬ 
ing  a  share  in  this  victory,  engages  in  the  action,  but  without  success. 
Sertorius,  besieged  in  Clunia,  makes  frequent  sallies,  to  the  gp*eat  loss  of 

LOST  BOOKS. 

SS9 
the  besiegers.  X.U.677,  B.C.  75 — Successful  expedition  (rf*  Cano,  the 
proconsul,  agtiinst  the  Dardanians.  Cruelties  of  Sertorius,  against  his 
own  partisans,  many  of  whom  he  puts  to  death,  upon  pretended  suspicion 
rf  treachery. 

BOOK  xcm. 
I^ubiius  ServiHus,  pn>c<msul  in  Cilicia,  subdues  the  Isaurians,  and  takes 
several  cities  belonging  to  the  pirates.  Nicomedes  King  of  Bithynia,  dying, 
bequeaths^  his  domkubns  to^the  Roman  people,  who  reduce  them  into  the 
fmtn  of  a  province.  Y.Rr<B78.  B.C.  74. — Mithridates  establishes  a  league 
with  Sertorius,  and  declares  ^ar  against  Rome ;  makes  vast  preparations, 
both  of  land  and  sea  forces,  and  seizes  Bithynia.  Marcus  Aurelius  Cotta  over¬ 
come  in  an  action  by  the  King  at  Chalcedon.  Pompeius  and  Metellus  con¬ 
duct  the  war  against  Sertorius,  who  proves  fully  equal  to  them  in  the  mili¬ 
tary  arts.  Sertcmus  raises  the  siege  of  Calgurius,  and  compels  them  to  re¬ 
treat  into  different  countries.  Metellus  into  the  Farther  Spain,  Pompeius 
into  Gaul, 

BOOK  XCIV. 
.  Lucius  Licinius  LucuUus,  consul,  defeats  Mithridates,  in  an  acrion  be¬ 
tween  their  cavalry,  ^nd  makes  several  successful  expeditions ;  a  mutiny 
among  his  soldiers,  arising  from  an  eager  desire  of  fighting,  repressed. 
Deiotarus,  tetrarch  of  Gallograccia,  kills  certain  officers  of  Mithridates,  who 
were  stirring  up  war  in  Phrygia.  Successes  of  Pompeius,  against  Seriorius, 
in  Spain. 

BOOK  XCV. 
Y.R.  679.  B.C.  73. — Caius  Curio,  proconsul,  subdues  the  Dardanians,  in 
Thrace.  Seventy-four  gladiators,  belonging  to  Lentulus,  make  their  escape 
from  Capua ;  having  collected  a  great  number  of  slaves  and  hired  servants, 
and  putting  themselves  under  the  command  of  Crixus  and  Spartacus,  they 
attack  and  defeat  Claudius  Pulcher,  a  lieutenant-general,  and  Publius  Va- 
renus,  praetor.  Lucius  Lucullus,  proconsul,  destroys  the  army  of  Mithri¬ 
dates,  by  the  sword  and  fiimine,  at  Cyzicus ;  that  King,  driven  from  Bithr- 
nia,  having  suftered  much,  in  several  engagements  and  shipwrecks,  is,  at 
length,  obliged  to  fly  to  Pontus. 
VOL.  VI. — 2  U 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

3^0 

XCVI. 
Y.R.  680.  B.C.  72.~-Quinta8  Arrius,  the  prattot,  defeats  and  kills  Crixus, 
the  commander  of  the  fugitive  gladiators.  Cneius  Lentulue,  the  consul, 
engages  Spartacus  unsuccessfully,  who  also  defeats  Lucius  GelUus,  the 
consul,  and  Quintus  Arrius,  the  prsctor.  Sertorius  slain,  at  a  feast,  in  the 
eighth  year  of  his  command,  by  Manias  Antonius,  Marcus  Pepema,  knd 
other  conspirators :  he  was  a  great  general,  and  being  opposed  to  two 
commanders,  Pompeius  and  Metellus,  was  often  equal,  and  sometimes 
even  superior,  to  both  of  them ;  at  last,  being  doserted  and  betrayed,  the 
command  of  his  force  devolved  upon  Pepema,  whom  Pompeius  took  pri¬ 
soner  and  slew,  and  recovered  Spain,  towards  the  close  of  the  tenth  year  of 
that  war.  Spartacus  gains  another  victory  over  Caius  Cassius,  the  procon¬ 
sul,  and  Cneius  Manlius,  the  prsetor ;  the  charge  of  that  war  committed  to 
the  pr*tor,  Marcus  Crassus, 

BOOK  XCVII. 
Y.R.  681.  B.C.  71. — Marcus  Crassus,  the  prxtor,  engages  with  and  de¬ 
feats  an  army  of  the  fugitives,  consisting  of  Gauls  and  Germans,  killing 
thirty -five  thousand  of  them,  together  with  their  general,  Granicus  ;  after¬ 
wards,  he  fights  Spartacds,  whom  he  conquers,  killing  him  and  forty  thou¬ 
sand  men.  The  war  against  the  Cretans,  unfortunately  undertaken, 
finishes  with  the  death  of  the  praetor,  Marcus  Antonius.  Marcus  Lucullus, 
proconsul,  subdues  the  Thracians.  Lucius  Lucullus  gives  battle  to  Mithri- 
dates,  in  Pontus ;  overcomes  him,  killing  sixty  thousand  men.  Y.R.  682. 
B.C.  70. — M&rcus  Crassus  and  Cneius  Pompeius,  elected  consuls;  the  lat¬ 
ter  being  only  of  the  equestrian  order,  not  having  yet  served  the  office  of 
quxstor ;  they  restore  the  tribunitian  power.  The  right  of  trial  transferred 
to  the  Roman  knights,  by  the  prxtor,  Lucius  Aurelius  Cotta.  The  affairs 
of  Mithridates  being  reduced  to  a  state  of  desperation,  he  flies  for  refuge 
to  Tigranes,  King  of  Armenia. 
BOOK  xcvm. 
A  treaty  of  friendship  made  by  Machares,  son  of  Mithridates,  l^ng  of 
Bosphorus,  with  Lucius  Lucullus.  Cneius  Lentulus  and  Caius  Galius,  cen¬ 
sors,  exercise  their  office  with  extreme  rigour ;  tliey  expel  sixty-four  se¬ 
nators.  The  lustrum  closed  ;  the  number  of  citizens  amounts  to  four  hun¬ 
dred  and  fifty  thousand.  Y.R.  683.  B.C.  69. — Lucius  Metellus,  prxtor,  is 

LOST  BOO^S. 

331 

successful  against  the  pirates  in  Sicily.  The  temple  of  Jupiter  in  the  Ca¬ 
pitol,  having  been  consumed  by  fire,  rebuilt,  and  dedicated  by  Quintus 
Catulus.  Y.R.  684.  B.C.  68. — ^Lucius  Lucullus  defeats  Mithridates  and 
Tigranes,  with  their  vast  armies,  in  Armenia,  m  several  battles.  The  war 
against  the  Cretans  being  committed  to  the  charge  of  the  proconsul,  Quin¬ 
tus  Metellus,  he  lays  siege  to  the  city  of  Cydonia.  Y.R.  685,  B.C,  67. — 
Lucius  Triarius,  a  lieutenant-general  of  LucuUus,  defeated  in  a  battle 
against  Mithridates.  Lucullus  prevented,  by  a  sedition  in  his  army,  from 
pursuing  Mithridates  and  Tigranes,  and  completing  his  victory ;  the  princi¬ 
pal  authors  of  the  sedition  were  the  Valerian  legions,  who  refused  to  fol¬ 
low  Lucullus,  alleging  that  they  had  served  out  their  time, 
BOOK  XCIX. 
The  proconsul,  Quintus  Metellus,  takes  Gnossua,  Lyctum,  Cydonia,  and 
many  other  cities.  Lucius  Roscius,  plebeian  tribune,  carries  a  law,  that  the 
fourteen  lower  seats  in  the  theatre  shall  be  allotted  to  the  Roman  knights. 
Cneius  Pompeius,  being  ordered  by  a  law,  which  had  the  sanction  of  the 
people,  to  proceed  agfainst  the  pirates,  who  had  interrupted  the  commerce 
of  com,  in  forty  days  drives  them  wholly  from  the  sea;  and  having  finished 
the  war  against  them  in  Cilicia,  reduces  them  to  submission,  and  assigns 
them  lands  and  towns.  Successes  of  Metellus  against  the  Cretans.  Letters 
between  Metellus  and  Pompeius.  Metellus  complains,  that  Pompeius  had 
treated  him  injuriously,  in  sending  a  deputy  of  his  own  to  receive  the  sub¬ 
mission  of  the  Cretans :  Pompeius  alleges,  that  he  haH  a  right  to  do  so. 
^  BOOK  C. 
Y.R.  686.  B.C.  66. — Caius  Manilius,  tribune  of  the  people,  to  the  great 
dissatisfaction  of  the  nobility,  proposes,  that  the  Mithridatic  war  should  be 
committed  to  the  conduct  of  Pompeius.  His  excellent  speech  upon  that 
occasion.  Quintus  Metellus,  having  subdued  Crete,  imposes  laws  upon 
that  hitherto  free  island.  Cneius  Pompeius,  setting  out  for  the  war  against 
Mithridates,  renews  the  treaty  of  friendship  with  Phraates,  Kingof  Parthia; 
overcomes  Mithridates  in  an  engagement  between  their  cavalry.  War 
between  Phraates,  King  of  Parthia,  and  Tigranes,  King  of  Armenia ; 
terwards,  between  the  father  and  son  Tigranes. 

332 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

BOOK  C2. 
Cneius  Pompeius  vanquiahes  Mitlindatea,  in  a  battle  fought  in  the  nighty 
and  compels  him  to  Ay  to  Bosphorus ;  reduces  Tigranes  to  subnussion, 
taking  from  himy  Syria,  Phoenicia,  and  Cilicia ;  restores  to  hkn  bis  own 
kii^dom  of  Amvenia.  A  conspiracy  to  mnvder  Uie  consuls  suppressed  { 
the  authors  of  it  were  certain  persons,  who  had  been  convicted  of  unlawful 
practices,  when  candidates  for  the  consulship.  Y.R.  687.  B.C.  65. — Pom¬ 
peius  pursues  Mithri dates  into  remote,  and  even  unknown,  regions  ;  ^he 
fights  and  conquers  the  Iberians  ami  Albanians,  who  had  refused  him  a 
passage  through  their  territories.  Mithniiates  flies  to  the  Colchians  and 
Heniochians;  his  transactions  at  Bosphorus. 
BOOK  Cll. 
Pompeius  reduces  Pontus  to  the  form  of  a  Koman  province,  Phamaces, 
son  of  Mithridates,  makes  war  upon  his  father.  Mithridates,  be^eged  in 
his  palace,  takes  poison,  which  not  producing  the  deshred  effect,  he  pro¬ 
cures  himself  to  be  slain  by  a  Gaul,  named  Bituitus.  Pompeius  conquers 
the  Jews,  and  takes  their  temple,  hitherto  unviolated.  Y.R.  688.  B.C. 
64. — ^Catiline,  having  twice  failed  in  his  pursuit  of  the  consulship,  forms  a 
conspiracy,  with  Centulus,  Cethegus,  and  others,  to  destroy  the  consuls 
and  the  senate,  to  burn  the  city,  and  seize  t^e  commonwealth ;  he  raises 
an  army  in  Etru^a  :  Y.R,  689,  B.C.  63. — the  conspiracy  is  discovered  and 
frustrated  by  the  exertions  of  Marcus  Tullius  Cicero  the  consul.  Catiline 
is  driven  out  of  Rome  ;  the  other  conspirators  punished  with  death. 
BOOK  cm. 
Y.R.  690.  B.C.  62. — Catiline’s  army  vanquished,  and  himself  slain,  by 
the  proconsul,  Caius  Antoni  us.  Publius  Clodius  accused  of  haying  entered 
a  chapel,  disguised  in  woman’s  apparel,  wlud^  it  was  not  lawful  for  a  man 
to  enter ;  and  of  having  defiled  the  wife  of  the  high-priest ;  acquitted. 
Caius  Pontinius,  pr:etor,sub^esthe  Allobro^ans,  who  had  rebelled.  Pub- 
Ima  Clodius  joins  the  party  of  the  people.  Y.R.  691.  B.C,  61. — Caius  Cae¬ 
sar  subdues  the  Lusitanians :  being  a  candidate  ff>r  the  consulship,  and  de* 
termined  to  seize  the  power  of  the  comnmn wealth  into  his  own  hands,  he 
forms  a  party  with  two  of  the  principal  men  of  Bie  state,  Marcus  Antonins 
and  Marcus  Crassus.  Y.R.  692.  B.C.  60.— Caesar,  now  consul,  procures 
the  passing  of  some  Agrariaa  laws,  ctmlrary  to  Uie  will  of  the  senate,  and 

UMT  POOKS 

333 

notwithftUnding  the  oppeakhmofl^eoHeague,  Marcus  Bibuhis.  Y.R.  693. 
B.C.  59.— ^aius  AntofMM,  proeoiMBi, defeated  in  Thrace.  Y.R.  694.  B.C. 
58. — Marcus  Ciceits  bam^d,  m  eo«i8ei{uence  of  a  law  procured  by  Publius 
Clodius,  for  havinj^  put  to  death  Rcunan  citizens  unconderaned.  Csesar 
goes  into  the  province  of  Gaul,  wheie  he  subdues  the  Helvetians,  a  wan¬ 
dering  tribe,  who,  seeking  a  place  of  settlement,  attempted  to  pass  through 
Narbo,  a  part  of  his  province.  Description  and  situation  of  Gaul.  Pom- 
peius  triumphs  over  the  children  of  Mithridates  and  Tigranes,  the  father 
and  son  ;  the  surname  of  the  Great  conferred  upon  him  by  a  full  assembly 
of  the  people. 

BOOK  CIV. 
Situation  of  Germany ;  description  of  that  country,  and  of  the  people. 
Caius  Caesar,  at  the  request  of  the  jEduans  and  Sequanians,  leads  his 
army  against  the  Germans,  who  had  invaded  Gaul,  under  tlie  command  of 
Ariov^us ;  he  rouses  the  courage  of  his  soldiers,  who  were  alarmed  at 
the  unusual  appearance  of  these  liew  enemies ;  he  then  defeats  the  Ger¬ 
mans  in  an  engagement,  and  drives  them  out  of  €^ul.  Y.R.  695.  BC. 
Marcus  Tullius  Cicero,  to  the  g^at  joy  of  the  senate,  and  of  all  Italy,  re¬ 
called  from  banishment,  cluefly  by  the  persuasion  of  Pompeius,  aided  by 
Titus  Annius  Milo,  plebeian  tribune,  who  also  argued  in  his  favour.  The 
charge  of  providing  com  for  the  city  committed  to  Cneius  Pompeius,  for 
five  years.  Cscsar  overcomes  in  battle  the  Ambians,  Suessians,  Veroman- 
doaas,  and  Atrebatians,  a  people  of  tiie  Belgians,  whose  numbers  were 
Immense,  and  reduces  them  all  to  subjection.  He  afterwards,  at  great  risk, 
engages  the  Nervians,  a  people  belonging  to  one  of  the  above  states,  and 
entirely  cuts  them  off :  this  war  they  continued,  with  such  obstinacy,  that 
their  army  was  reduced  from  sixty  thousand  men  to  three  hundred,  and, 
of  four  hundred  senators,  only  three  remained  alive.  A  law  made  to  re¬ 
duce  Cyprus  to  the  form  of  a  province,  and  to  confiscate  the  royal  trea¬ 
sure;  niMiagement  of  that  business  committed  to  Marcus  Cato.  Y.R. 
696.  56.^— Ptolemy,  ill-treated  by  Im  subjects,  and  dethroned,  comes 
to  Rome.  Caius  Caesar  defeats  the  Venetians,  a  people  living  on  the  bor¬ 
ders  of  the  sea,  in  a  sea-fight.  Successful  expeditions  of  bis  lieutenants- 
general. 

BOOK  CV. 
Caius  Cato,  tribune  of  the  people,  persists  in  preventing  the  holding  of 
tiie  elections ;  on  which  the  senate  goes  kjto  tnounung.  Y.R.  697,  B.C. 

334 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

55.— Marcus  Cato,  a  caiuiidate  for  the  practorship,  i(»e8  the  electicm,  Va. 
6iiiu8  carrying  it  against  him.  The  same  Cato  comnutted  to  pnson^  by  the 
tribune,  Trebotiius,  for  resisting  the  law  allotting  the  provinces,  for  five 
years :  to  Caesar,  Gaul  and  Germany  ;  to  Pompeius,  Spain ;  and  to  Crassus, 
S3rria,  and  the  Parthian  war.  Aulus  Gabinius,  proconsul,  restores  Ptolemy 
to  his  kingdom  of  Egypt,  dethroning  Archelaus,  whom  the  people  had 
elected  king.  Y.B.  698.  B.C.  54. — Caesar,  having  vanquished  the  Germans, 
who  had  invaded  Gaul,  passes  the  Rhine,  and  subdues  them  also  in  those 
parts  :  he  then  crosses  the  sea,  and,  having, suffered  much  from  tempests, 
invades  Britan ;  where,  having  killed  a  considerable  number  of  the  in¬ 
habitants,  he  reduces  a  part  of  the  island  to  subjection. 
BOOK  CVI, 
Julia,  Caesar’s  daughter,  and  wife  of  Pompeius,  dies  ;  by  a  vote  of  tlie 
people,  she  is  honoured  with  burial  in  the  Campus  Martius.  Certain  tribes 
of  tlie  Gauls  revolt,  and  put  themselves  under  the  command  of  Ambioiix  ; 
they  ensnare,  and  cut  off,  Cotta  and  Titurius,  lieutenants-general  imder 
Caesai',  with  the  armies  under  their  command  :  having  attacked  oth^  le¬ 
mons,  who  with  difficulty  defended  their  camps,  and,  among  the  rest, 
Quintus  Cicero,  they  are  at  length  defeated  by  Caesar  himself.  Y.B.  699. 
B.C.  53.— Marcus  Crassus  crosses  the  Euphrates,  to  make  war  upon  the 
Partbians,  and  is  overthrown  in  a  battle,  in  which  his  son  is  felled ;  having 
collected  the  remains  of  his  army  upon  a  rising  ground,  a  conference,  to 
treat  of  peace,  is  proposed  j  at  which  he  is  seized  by  a  party  under  the- 
command  of  Surenas ;  to  avoid  suffering  any  indignity,  he  makes  such  re¬ 
sistance  as  obliges  them  to  put  him  to  death. 
BOOK  cvn. 
Caius  Cxsar,  having  subdued  the  Trevirian  Gauls,  passes  over  a  second 
time  into  Germany ;  finding  no  enemy  there,  he  returns  to  Gaul,  and  re¬ 
duces  to  obedience  the  Eburones,  and  other  cities,  which  had  revolted. 
Titus  Amuus  Milo,  a  candidate  for  the  consulship,  kills  Publius  GlocUus, 
on  the  Appian  road,  near  Bovilla,  whose  body  the  people  bum  in  the  curia. 
Y.R.  700.  B.C.  52 .—“The  candidates  for  the  consulship,  Hypsaus,  Scipio, 
and  Milo,  carry  on  their  contention  with  so  much  rancour,  as  to  come  to 
open  violence,  which  excites  a  seditious  tumult.  To  repress  these  enor- 
nuties,  Cneius  Pompeius  is,  a  third  time,  elected  consul,  in  his  absence, 
and  without  a  colleague, — a  circumstance  which  never  occurred  before. 
Milo  tried  for  the  murder  of  Clodhis,  and  condemned  to  bani^sent  A 

LOST  BOOKS. 

335 

law  made,  notwitbstanding*  the  strenuous  opposition  of  Marcus  Cato,  to 
empower  Caesar  to  stand  for  the  consulship,  thougii  absent.  Caesar’s  opera¬ 
tions  against  the  Gauls,  who  had,  almost  all,  revolted,  and  put  themselves 
under  the  command  of  Vercingetorix;  he  takes  many  towns;  amongst 
others,  Avaricum,  Biturium,  and  Gergovia. 
BOOK  cvm. 
Caesar  overthrows  the  Gauls  at  Alesia,  and  reduces  all  the  revolted  cities 
to  subjection.  Caius  Cassius,  Marcus  Crassus’s  quaestor,  defeats  the  Par¬ 
tisans  who  had  passed  over  into  Syria.  Y.R.  701.  B.C.  51. — M.  Cato  fails 
in  his  pursuit  of  the  consulship ;  the  successful  candidates  being  Servius 
Sulpicius  and  Marcus  Marcellus.  Caesar  subdues  the  Bellovacians,  and  other 
Gallic  tribes.  Disputes  between  the  consuls,  concerning  the  sending  out  a 
person  to  succeed  Caesar;  Marcellus  contends  that  Caesar  stiould  come 
home  to  sue  for  the  consulship,  being,  by  a  law  made  expressly  for  that 
purpose,  enabled  to  hold  his  province  until  that  period.  Exploits  of  Mar¬ 
cus  Btbulus  in  Syria. 

BOOK  CIX. 
Y.R.  702.  B.C.  50.^Causes  and  beginning  of  the  civil  war :  disputes 
about  sen(^ng  a  successor  to  Caesar,  who  refuses  to  disband  his  army,  un¬ 
less  Pompeius  shall  also  do  the  same.  Y.R.  703.  B.C.  49. — Caius  Curio, 
plebeian  tribune,  takes  an  active  part ;  first,  against  Cxsar,  afterwards,  in 
his  favour.  A  decree  of  the  senate  being  passed,  that  a  successor  to  Caesar 
should  be  appointed,  Marcus  Antonius  and  Quintus  Cassius  are  dnven  out 
of  the  city,  for  protesting  against  that  measure.  Orders  sent  by  the  senate 
to  the  consuls,  and  to  Cneius  Pompeius,  to  take  care  tliat  the  common¬ 
wealth  should  sustain  no  injury.  Caesar,  determined  to  make  war  upon  his 
enemies,  arrives  in  Italy  with  his  army :  he  takes  Corsinmm,  and  in  it  Lu¬ 
cius  Domitius  and  Lucius  Lentulus,  whom  he  discharges  ^  drives  Cneius 
Pompeius,  and  his  adherents,  out  of  Italy. 
BOOK  CX. 
Caesar  besieges  Massilia,  tlie  gates  of  which  had  been  shut  against  him ; 
leaving  his  lieutemutts-general,  Caius  Trebonius  and  Decius  Brutus,  to 
cairy  on  the  siege,  he  sets  out  for  Spain,  where  Lucius  Afranius  and  Caius 
Petreimi,  Porapeius’s  lieutenants-general,  with  seven  legions,  surrender  to 
himatlleidu:  he  dismisses  them  all  in  safety.  He  also  reduces  to  sub- 

4 

336 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

^isMon  Varro,  another  lieutenant-general  of  Pompei^s,  with  the  army  un¬ 
der  his  command.  He  ^ants  the  privileges  of  Roman  cidaens  tp  the  Ga- 
ditanians.  The  MassOians  defeated  in  two  engagements  at  sea^  after  hav¬ 
ing  sustained  a  long  siege,  they  yield  to  Cssar.  Caius  Antonins,  a  lieu¬ 
tenant-general  of  Caesar,  makes  an  unsuccessful  attack  upon  Pompeius’s 
forces  in  Illyria,  and  is  taken  prisoner.  In  the  course  of  this  war,  the  in¬ 
habitants  of  Opitergium,  a  district  beyond  the  Po,  in  alliance  with  Cxsar, 
seeing  their  bridge  blocked  up  by  the  enemy’s  ships,  rather  than  fall  into 
their  hands,  kill  one  another.  Caius  Curio,  one  of  Caesar’s  lieutenants -ge¬ 
neral  in  Africa,  after  a  successful  engagement  of  Varus,  a  genersd  of  the 
Pompeian  party,  attacked  and  cut  off,  together  with  his  army,  by  Juba, 
King  of  Mauritania.  Cfuus  Caesar  passes  over  into  Greece, 
BOOK  CXI. 
Y.R.  704.  B.C.  48, — Marcus  Caclius  Rufus,  praetor,  having  excited  a  sedi¬ 
tion  in  the  city,  by  holding  out  hopes  to  the  people,  that  their  debts  should 
be  annulled,  turned  out  of  his  office,  and  driven  from  the  city ;  he  joins 
Milo,  who,  being  in  exile,  was  raising  an  army  of  fugitives :  they  are  both 
slain.  Cleopatra,  Queen  of  Egypt,  dethroned  by  her  brother  Ptolemy, 
The  Cordubians,  in  Spain  harassed  by  the  extortion  and  oppression  of  the 
praetor  Quintus  Cassius,  desert  Caesar’s  party,  together  with  two  lepons, 
Cneius  Pompeius  besieged  by  Caesar  at  Dyrrachium ;  beating  him  out  of 
his  lines,  the  siege  is  raised.  The  seat  of  war  removed  to  Thessaly :  Caesar 
overcomes  PompeiUs  in  a  battle  at  Phar^ia.  Cicero  remains  in  the  camp, 
— a  man  without  any  kind  of  talent  for  war.  Caesar  grants  a  free  pardon 
to  all  who  submit  themselves  to  his  power. 
♦ 
BOOK  CXII. 
Consternation  and  flight  of  the  vanquished  party,  in  all  parts  of  the  world. 
Pompeius,  endeavouring  to  escape  into  JEgypt,  is  slain,  beibre  he  could 
get  on  shore,  by  order  of  Ptolemy,  the  King,  a. minor,  upon  the  persuasion 
of  Theodotus,  his  governor.  Cornelia,  his  wife,  and  Sextus,  his  son,  fly  to 
Cyprus.  Csesar  follows  him,  three  days  after  his  victory ;  upon  being  pre¬ 
sented  with  the  ring  of  Pompey  by  Theodotus,  he  is  highly  offended  with 
him  for  putting  him  to  death,  and  laments  his  fate  with  tears,  Y.B,  705. 
B.C.  47.-^kssu*  enters  Alexandria  in  safety,  notwithstanding  that  city  was 
in  a  state  of  tumult.  Caesar  created  dictator;  restores  Cleopatra  to  her 
throne  ;  uid  defeats  Ptolemy  with  great  slaughter,  who  had  made  war 
upon  him  by  the  advice  of  those  who  had  caused  him  to  put  Pompeius  to 

LOST  BOOKS, 

337 

slealii.  Ptclemyj  in  his  flight,  driven  pn  shore^  in  his  vessel,  in  the  Kile. 
Laborious  march  of  Marcus  Cato,  with  his  l^ons»  through  vast  tracts  of 
desart  country.  Unsuccessful  war  of  Uomitius  against  PharnacesL 
BOOK  cxni. 
The  Pompeian  party  having  collected  their  forces  in  Africa,  the  com¬ 
mand  in  chief  is  given  to  Publius  Scipio, — Marcus  Cato,  who  hH  been 
Joined  with  him  in  the  command,  giving  up.  When  it  was  deliberated,  in 
council,  whetlier  the  city  of  Utica  should  not  be  demolished,  on  account  of 
its  attachment  to  Caesar,  Cato  opposes  that  measure,  wiuch  was  strongly 
recommended  by  Juba.  Cato’s  opinion  prevailing,  he  is  appointed  gover¬ 
nor  of  the  city.  Cneius  Pompeiua,  the  son  of  Pompeius  the  Great,  having 
collected  some  forces  in  Spain,  which  neither  Afranius  nor  Petrelus  would 
take  the  command  of,  puts  himself  at  the  head  of  them,  and  renews  the  war 
there.  Pharnaceg,  King  of  Pontus,  son  of  Mithridates,  after  supporting  the 
war  but  a  very  short  time,  is  subdued.  A  sedition  excited  in  Rome  by 
Publius  Dolabella,  a  plebeian  tribune,  who  moved  for  a  law  to  extinguish 
the  debts  of  the  people.  Marcus  Antonius,  master  of  the  horse,  biings 
troops  into  the  town,  and  kills  eight  hundred  of  the  people.  dis¬ 
charges  the  veteran  soldiers,  who  were  grown  mutinous :  crosses  over  into 
Africa,  and  engages  the  forces  of  King  Juba,  in  a  very  hazardous  combat, 
BOOK  cxrv . 
Y.K,  706.  B.C.  406. — Caeciiius  Bassus,  a  Roman  knight  of  the  Pompeian 
party,  stirs  up  war  in  Syria :  the  legion  left  there,  under  the  command  of 
Sextus  Caesar,  having  slain  their  commander,  and  revolted  to  Bassus.  Cae¬ 
sar  defeats  the  praetor  Scipio,  Afranius,  and  Juba,  at  Thapsus,  and  takes 
their  camps.  Cato,  hearing  of  this  disaster,  stabs  himself  at  Utica ;  his  son 
coming  in,  forces  him  to  consent  to  have  his  wound  dressed ;  but  he,  after¬ 
wards,  tears  away  the  dressing,  and  expires,  in  the  forty-ninth  year  of  his 
age.  Petreius  also  puts  Juba  and  himself  to  death.  Pubhus  Scipio  also, 
his  ship  being  overpowered,  slays  himself,  having  said  to  those  who  in¬ 
quired  after  the  General,  “  The  General  is  well.”  Faustua  and  Afi^ius 
slain.  Cato’s  eon  is  pardoned.  Brutus,  Caesar’s  Heutenant-general,  gives 
battle  to  the  rebellious  Bellovacians,  and  overcomes  them. 
BOOK  cxy. 
Caesar  triumphs  four  times :  over  Gaul,  Egypt,  Pontus,  and  Africa.  He 
gives  a  feast,  and  exhibits  shows  of  every  description.  To  Marcus  Marcel¬ 
las,  a  man  of  consular  rank,  he  grants  leave  to  return ;  but  he  is  murdered 
VOL.  VI. — 2  X 

338 

HISTORY  OF  ROME* 

at  Athens,  by  Maglus  Cilo,  one  of  his  dependants.  Cscsar  holds  a  census : 
the  number  of  citizens  amounts  to  one  hundred  and  fifty  thousand.  Y.R. 
707.  B.C.  45. — Csesar  goes  to  Spmn  against  Cneius  Pompey ;  where,  after 
many  attacks  on  both  aides,  he  at  length  gains  a  signal  victorj%  after  a  most 
desperate  engagement,  at  Munda.  Pompeius  flies. 
^  ♦  BOOK  CXVI. 
Caesar  triumplis,  a  fifth  time,  over  Spain.  Very  many  and  high  honours 
decreed  him  by  the  senate  ;  among  others,  that  he  should  be  styled  Father 
of  his  Country,  and  Sacred,  and  also  that  he  should  be  perpetual  dUctator. 
Y.R.  708.  B.C.  44. — ^He  gives  much  ground  of  offence  by  his  haughtiness 
and  pride  :  for  when  the  senate,  waiting  upon  him  to  signify  the  honours 
they  had  decreed  him,  find  him  sitting  before  the  temple  of  Venus  Gene- 
trix,  he  nses  not  to  receive  them :  when  also  Marcus  Antonius,  his  col¬ 
league  in  the  consulship,  running  among  the  Lupercalians,  came  up  to  him, 
and  placed  a  diadem  upon  his  head,  he  took  it  off,  and  laid  it  by  him  upon 
a  chair  :  he  turned  out  of  their  office,  Epidius  MaruUua,  and  Cacsetius  Fla- 
vus,  plebeian  tribunes,  for  asserting  that  he  had  assumed  the  office  of  King. 
Having,  by  these  measures,  incurred  the  public  hatred,  a  conspiracy  was 
at  length  formed  against  him ;  the  chiefs  of  which  were,  Marcus  Brutus  and 
Caius  Cassius ;  with  two  of  his  own  partisans,  Decius  Brutus  and  Caius 
Trebonius.  These  kill  him  in  the  court  of  Pompeius,  giving  him  three- 
and-twenty  wounds ;  they  then  seize  the  Capitol.  The  senate  passes  a 
decree  of  oblivion ;  then  the  conspirators,  having  first  received  the  children 
of  Antonius  and  Lepidus  as  hostages,  come  down  from  the  Capitol.  Octa¬ 
vius,  Caesar’s  nephew,  is,  by  his  will,  made  heir  of  half  his  acquisitions. 
Caesar’s  body  burnt  by  the  people,  in  the  Campus  Martius,  opposite  the 
rostrum.  The  office  of  dictator  abolished  for  ever.  Caius  Amatius,  one 
of  the  lowest  of  the  people,  giving  himself  out  for  the  son  of  Caius  MariuSj 
excites  some  seditious  movements  among  the  credulous  vulgar  j  slain, 
BOOK  CXVH. 
Caius  Octavius  comes  to  Rome  from  Epirus,  whither  Caesar  had  sent  him 
to  conduct  the  war  in  Macedonia :  is  received  with  the  most  auspicious; 
omens  :  assumes  the  name  of  Casar.  In  the  confusion  and  bustle  of  affairs. 
Lepidus  contrives  to  procure  his  election  to  the  office  of  chief  priest. 
Marcus  Antonius,  consul,  governs  with  much  haughtiness,  and  forcibly 
causes  a  law  to  be  passed  respecting  the  change  of  provinces.  Caesar,  re¬ 
questing  him  to  join  in  punishing  the  murderers  of  his  unple,  is  harshly 
treated  by  him.  Cxsar,  to  strengthen  himself,  and  the  common  wealth 

LOST  BOOKS. 

339 

against  Antonins,  applies  to  the  veteran  soldiers,  who  had  been  settled  in 
the  colonies.  The  fourth  legion  also,  and  the  Martian,  declare  for  Caesar 
against  Antonius.  Antonius  having  put  many  to  death,  on  mere  suspicion, 
causes  the  revolt  of  very  considerable  numbers  toCsesar.  Decius  Brutus, 
in  order  to  stop  Antonius  on  his  way  into  Cisalpine  Gaul,  seizes  Mutina 
with  his  army.  Attempts  of  both  parties  to  get  possession  of  the  pro¬ 
vinces  ;  preparations  for  war. 

BOOK  cxvni. 
Marcus  Brutus,  in  Greece,  under  the  pretext  of  supporting  the  common¬ 
wealth,  and  the  war  against  Antonius,  manages  to  get  the  command  of 
Vatinius*s  army  and  province.  Y.B.  709.  B.C.  43. — To  Cxsar,  who  first 
took  arms  in  the  defence  of  the  commonwealth,  is  given  the  command,  in 
quality  of  propraetor,  with  the  consular  ornaments ;  he  is  also  made  a  senator. 
Marcus  Antonius  besieges  Brutus  at  Mutina  ;  he  sends  deputies  to  Rome, 
to  treat  of  peace,  but  without  effect.  The  people  of  Rome  assume  the 
military  habit.  Marcus  Brutus  reduces  Antonius  and  his  army  to  submis¬ 
sion,  in  Epirus. 

BOOK  CXIX. 
Publius  Dolabella  circumvents  Caius  Trebonius  in  Asia,  and  kills  him ; 
for  which  crime,  the  senate  votes  Dolabella  to  be  a  public  enemy,  Pansa, 
the  consul,  being  engaged  in  an  action  with  Antonius,  and  in  danger  of  be¬ 
ing  worsted,  Aulus  Hirtius,  his  colleague,  arrives,  routs  Antonius's  forces, 
and  restores  the  fortune  of  the  day.  Antonius,  conquered  by  Hirtius  and 
Csesar,  joins  Lepidus ;  is  declared  a  public  enemy,  by  the  senate,  together 
with  all  his  associates.  Aulus  Hirtius,  who,  after  his  victory,  was  slain  in 
the  enemy’s  camp,  and  Lucius  Pansa,  who  died  of  a  wound  received  in  the 
action,  are  buried  in  the  Campus  Martius.  To  Caesar,  the  only  surviving 
general  of  the  three,  the  senate  showed  but  little  gratitude  ;  for  a  tuiumph 
was  voted  to  Decius  Brutus,  who  was  relieved  from  the  siege  of  Mutina, 
by  Caesar,  while  they  made  but  slight  mention  of  Caesar  and  his  army :  on 
which  account  he  becomes  reconciled  to  Antonius,  by  the  intervention  of 
Lepidus,  and  arrives  in  Rome  at  the  head  of  his  army ;  whereupon  those, 
who  before  treated  him  with  indifference,  stmek  with  fear,  now  elect  him 
consul,  although  only  in  his  twentieth  year. 
BOOK  CXX. 
Caesar,  consul,  procures  a  law  to  be  passed  for  an  inquiry  into  his  father^s 
death ;  in  consequence  of  which  Marcus  Brutus,  Cdus  Cassius,  and  Decius 

340 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

BrutfiB,  are  condemned,  absent.  Asinius  PoUio  And  Majmtiiis  Plan- 
cus,  having  joined  tiieir  forces  to  those  d  Antonius,  Decius  Brutus,  to 
whom  the  senate  had  given  orders  to  pursue  Antonius,  being  desexted  by 
the  legions  under  his  command,  flies;  is  killed  by  Capenos  Sequanus,  by 
order  of  Antonias,  into  whose  hands  he  fell.  Caesar  becomes  reconciled 
to  Antonius  and  Lepidus,  and,  in  conjunction  with  them,  assumes  the  en¬ 
tire  direction  of  the  public  affairs  for  five  years :  it  is  agreed  among  them* 
that  each  shall  have  the  power  of  proscribing  their  own  particular  ene 
mies.  In  this  proscription  are  included  very  many  of  the  equestrian  order, 
and  one  hundred  and  thirty  senators ;  among  whom  were  Lucius  Paolus, 
the  brother  of  Lepidus,  Lucius  Cxsar,  Antonius’s  uncle,  and  Marcus  Tul¬ 
lius  Cicero.  This  last  slain  by  Popilius,  a  legionary  soldier,  and  his  head 
and  right  hand  stuck  up  on  the  rostrum,  in  the  sixty-tlurd  year  of  his  age 
Transactions  of  Bratus  in  Greece. 
BOOK  CXXI, 
Caius  Cassius,  having  received  orders  from  the  senate  to  pursue  Dola- 
bella,  pronounced  a  public  enemy,  by  virtue  of  this  authority  takes  the 
command  in  Syria,  and  putting  himself  at  the  head  of  the  three  armies, 
wluch  were  in  that  province,  besieges  BolibeUa,  in  Laodicea,  and  puts  him 
to  death.  Caius  Antonius  taken  and  slain,  by  order  of  Marcus  Brutus. 
BOOK  CXXII. 
Marcus  Brutus  unsuccessful  in  an  engagement  with  the  Thracians.  Af* 
tcrwards,  all  tlie  provinces  be^'ond  sea,  together  with  the  armies  in  them, 
are  brought  into  obedience  to  him  and  Cassius  ;  they  meet  at  Smyrna  to 
hold  a  council  relative  to  the  conduct  of  ti\e  war  they  are  about  to  engage 
in.  Y.R.  710.  B.C.  42. — They  subdue  Publicola,  the  brother  of  Marcus 
ifessala,  and  agree  in  granting  a  pardon. 
BOOK  cxxm. 
Sextus,  son  of  Pompey  the  Great,  having  assembled  a  considerable  num¬ 
ber  of  the  proscribed  Romans,  and  other  fugitives,  in  Epirus,  wanders 
about,  for  a  long  time,  subsisting  chiefly  by  piracy  ;  at  length,  they  seize, 
first,  Messana  in  Sicily,  and,  afterwards,  the  whole  province.  Then,  hav¬ 
ing  killed  Auius  Pompeius  Bithynicus,  the  praetor,  they  defeat  Quintus 
Salvidienus,  a  general  of  Caesar’s,  in  a  sea-fight.  Caesar  and  Antonius,  with 
their  armies,  pass  over  into  Greece,  to  make  war  against  Brutus  and  Cas¬ 
sius.  Quintiis  Comificios  overcomes  Titus  Sestius,  in  a  battle  in  Africa. 

LOST  BOOKS. 

341 

BOOK  CXXIV, 
Caesar  and  Antonius  fight  an  indiciave  battle  with  Brutus,  at  Philippi ;  in 
which  the  right  wing  of  each  army  is  victorious ;  and,  on  both  sides,  the 
camps  are  taken  :  the  death  of  Cassius  at  length  decides  the  victory ;  for, 
being  at  the  head  of  that  wing  which  is  beaten,  he  supposes  his  whole 
army  routed,  and  kills  himself.  Afterwards,  in  another  battle,  Brutus,  be* 
ing  overcome,  puts  an  end  to  his  life. 
BOOK  eXXV. 
Y,R.  711.  B.C.  41. — Csesar,  leaving  Antonius  to  take  care  of  the  pro¬ 
vinces  beyond  sea,  returns  to  Italy,  and  makes  a  distribution  of  lands 
among  the  veterans.  He  represses,  with  great  risk,  a  mutiny  among  his 
soldiers,  who,  being  bribed  by  Fulvia,  the  wife  of  Marcus  Antonius,  con¬ 
spire  against  their  general.  Lucius  Antonius,  consul,  Influenced  by  Ful¬ 
via,  makes  war  i^on  Caesar,  having  taken  to  his  assistance  those  whose 
Isutds  Caesar  had  distributed  among  his  veteran  soldiers :  having  overthrown 
Lepidus,  who,  with  an  army,  had  charge  of  the  defence  of  the  city,  he 
enters  it  in  a  hostile  manner. 

BOOK  eXXVI. 
Y.H,  712.  B.C.40. — ^Caesar,  now  twenty-three  years  of  age,  besieges  An* 
tonius  in  Perusia;  who,  after  several  attempts  to  escape,  is  at  length  forced 
by  famine  to  surrender.  Caesar  grants  a  pardon  to  him,  and  all  his  follow¬ 
ers.  And  having  reduced  all  the  various  armies,  in  different  parts,  puts  an 
end  to  the  war  without  effusion  of  blood. 
BOOK  CXXVH. 
The  Parthians,  who  had  joined  the  Pompeian  party,  under  the  command 
of  Labienus,  invade  Syria,  and  having  beaten  Decidius  Saxa,  a  lieutenant- 
general  under  Antonius,  seize  that  whole  province.  Marcus  Antonius,.  be¬ 
ing  urged  by  his  wife  Fulvia  to  make  war  a^inst  Caesar,  repudiates  her, 
and  to  strengthen  his  alliance  with  him,  marries  his  sister  Octavia.  He  dis¬ 
covers  the  guilt  of  Quintus  Salvidienus,  who  was  endeavouring  to  promote 
a  conspiracy  against  Caesar :  Quintus  being  condemned,  puts  himself  to 
death.  Y.R.  713.  B.C.  39.— Publfos  Ventidius  overcomes  tlie  Parthians 
in  a  battle,  in  which  their  general  Labienus  is  killed,  and  drives  them  out 
of  Syria.  Sextus  Pompeius,  keeping  possession  of  Sicily,  greatly  obstructs 

342 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

the  imporUtion  of  corn ;  he  demands  peace,  which  is  granted,  and  he  is 
made  govelmor  of  that  island.  Commotions  and  war  in  Africa. 
BOOK  CXXVIII. 
Y.R.  714.  B.C.  38. — Sextus  Pompeius  breaks  the  treaty  which  he  had  so¬ 
licited,  and  infests  the  seas  by  his  piracies  ;  C2esar,  (^liged  to  make  war 
upon  him,  fights  him  in  two  indecisive  sea-engagements.  Y.R.  715.  B.C. 
37. — Publius  V  entidius  overthrows  the  Syrians  in  battle,  and  kills  their 
King.  Y.R.  716.  B.C.  36. — Antonius*s  generals  vanquish  the  Jews.  Pre¬ 
parations  for  the  war  in  Sicily. 
BOOK  CXXIX. 
Several  battles  at  sea,  with  Sextus  Pompeius,  with  various  success  ;  of 
Cesar’s  two  fleets,  one  under  the  command  of  Agrippa  gains  a  victory  ; 
the  other,  led  by  Cjcsar  liimself,  was  cut  off ;  and  his  soldiers,  being  sent  on 
shore,  are  exposed  to  great  dangers.  Pompeius  is  afterwards  defeated,  and 
41ies  into  Sicily.  Marcus  Lepidus  comes  from  Africa,  under  the  pretext  of 
joining  Caesar  in  the  war  against  Sextus  Pompeius,  hut,  in  reality,  to  fight 
against  Caesar  ;  is  deserted  by  his  army,  and  deprived  of  the  honour  of  the 
triumvirate,  but  his  life  is  granted  him.  Caesar  confers  a  naval  crown  upon 
Agrippa,  an  honour  never  before  bestowed  on  any  commander. 
BOOK  eXXX. 
Marcus  Antonius,  having  spent  much  time  in  luxurious  indulgence  with 
Cleopatra,  arrives  late  in  Media ;  with  eighteen  legions  and  sixteen  thou¬ 
sand  horse,  he  makes  war  upon  the  Parthians.  Having  lost  two  of  his  le¬ 
gions,  and  nothing  prospering  with  him,  he  retreats  to  Armenia ;  being 
pursued  by  the  Parthians,  he  flies  three  hundred  miles  in  twenty-one  days 
About  eight  thousand  men  lost  by  tempests ;  he  was  himself  the  cause  of 
all  these  misfortunes,  as  well  of  the  losses  by  the  tempests,  as  in  the  un¬ 
fortunate  Parthian  war ;  for  he  would  not  winter  in  Armenia,  being  in  haste 
to  revisit  Cleopatra. 
BOOK  CXXXI. 
Y.R.  717.  B.C.  35. — Sextus  Pompeius,  not  withstanding  his  engagements 
to  Marcus  Antonius,  endeavours  to  raise  a  war  agwnst  him  in  Asia;  slain 
by  one  of  Antonius’s  generals.  Y.R.  718.  B.C.  34. — Caesar  represses  a 
mutiny  of  the  veterans,  which  threatened  much  mischief;  he  subdues  the 
Japidae,  the  Dalmatians,  and  Pannonians.  Y.R.  719.  B.C.  33. — Antonius, 
having,  by  promises  of  safety  and  protection,  induced  Artavardes,  King  of 

LOST  BOOKS. 

343 

Anaenia,  to  come  to  him,  commands  him  to  be  thrown  into  chains,  and 
gives  the  kingdom  of  Armenia  to  his  own  son,  whom  he  had  by  Cleopatra, 
and  whom  he  now  treats  as  his  wife,  having  been  long  enamoured  of  her. 
BOOK  CXXXU. 
Y.R.  720.  B.C.32. — Caesar  conquers  the  Dalmatians  in  Illyria  ;  Y,R.  721, 
B.C.  31. — he  passes  over  to  Epirus,  at  the  head  of  an  army,  against  Anto¬ 
nins,  who,  fascinated  by  the  love  of  Cleopatra,  by  whom  he  had  two  sons, 
Alexander  and  Philadelphus,  would  neither  come  to  Rome,  nor,  the  time 
of  his  triumvirate  being  expired,  would  he  resign  that  office;  but  medi¬ 
tated  war,  and  was  preparing  a  great  force,  both  for  sea  and  land.  He  had 
also  divorced  Octavia,  Caesar's  sister.  Sea-fights,  and  battles  on  land  be- 
tween  the  cavalry,  in  which  Caesar  is  victorious. 
BOOK  CXXXIH. 
Antoiuus's  fleet  vanquished  by  Cxsar  at  Actium.  Antonius  flies  to  Alex¬ 
andria,  where,  his  affairs  being  reduced  to  extremity,  and  being  agitated 
by  a  false  report  of  Cleopatra’s  death,  he  kills  himself.  Caesar  having  re¬ 
duced  Alexandria,  Cleopatra,  to  avoid  falling  into  his  hands,  puts  herself  to 
death.  Y.R.  722.  B.C.  30. — Caesar,  on  his  return  to  Rome,  triumphs  three 
times ;  first,  over  Illyria ;  secondly,  on  account  of  the  victory  at  Actium  ; 
and  thirdly,  over  Cleopatra.  Thus  ends  the  civil  war,  after  it  had  lasted 
one-and-twenty  years.  Y.R.  723.  B.C.  29. — Marcus  Lepidus,  the  son  of 
Lepidus  who  was  of  the  triumvirate,  forms  a  conspiracy  against  Caesar  ; 
taken  and  killed. 

BOOK  CXXXIV. 
Y.R.  724.  B.C.  28. — Caesar,  having  settled  the  affairs  of  the  state,  and 
reduced  all  the  provinces  to  exact  order,  receives  tlie  surname  of  Augus¬ 
tus  ;  the  month  Sextilis  is  named,  in  honour  of  him,  August.  Y.K.  725. 
B.C.  27. — Caesar  calls  a  meeting  of  the  states  at  Narbo,  and  holds  an  inquiry 
into  the  state  of  the  three  Gauls,  which  were  conquered  by  his  father. 
War  against  the  Bastarnians,  Moesians,  and  other  nations,  under  the  con¬ 
duct  of  Marcus  Crassus. 

BOOK  CXXXV. 
War  carried  on  by  Marcus  Crassus  against  the  Thracians  ;  and  by  Caesar 
agmnst  the  Spaniards.  Y.R,  729.  B.C.  23 .--The  Salassians,  a  people  of 
the  Alps,  subdued. 

344 

HISTORY  OF  ROME. 

BOOK  CXXXVI. 
Rhaetia  subdued  by  Tiberius  Nero,  and  Drusus.  Agrippa,  Caesar’s  son 
indaw,  dies.  The  census  held  by  Drusus. 
BOOK  CXXXVII. 
Orusus  besieges  and  takes  several  cities  in  Germany,  on  both  sides  of  the 
Rhine.  Insun’ections  in  Gaul,  on  account  of  the  taxes  levied  upon  that 
nation,  suppressed.  V.R.  740.  B.C.  12. — An  altar  erected  to  the  Deified 
Caesar,  at  the  confluence  of  the  Arar  and  the  Rhone  ;  dedicated  by  Caius 
Julius  Vercundaridubius,  an  .Siduan,  appointed  priest  for  that  purpose. 
BOOK  cxxxvm. 
Y.R.  741.  B.C.  11. — The  Thracians  subdued  by  Lucius  Piso  ;  also  the 
Cheruscans,  Tenchtherans,  Cattlans,  and  other  nations  beyond  the  Rhine, 
by  Drusus,  Octavia,  Augustus’s  sister,  dies  ;  having  before  lost  her  son 
Marcellus ;  a  theatre  and  portico,  as  his  monument,  dedicated  in  his  name. 
BOOK  CXXXIX. 
Y.R.  742.  B.C.  10. — War,  against  the  nations  beyond  the  Rhine,  con¬ 
ducted  by  Drusus :  the  chief  opponents  in  this  war  were  Senectius  and 
Anectius,  tribunes  of  the  Nervians.  Peace  made  with  Parthia :  the  stand¬ 
ards  taken  from  their  king,  under  Crassus,  and  afterwards  under  Anthonius 
being  restored  to  them. 

BOOK  CXL. 
Y.R.  743.  B.C.  9. — ^War,  against  the  German  nations  beyond  the  Rhine, 
conducted  by  Drusus,  who  breaks  his  leg,  by  a  fall  from  his  horse,  and  dies, 
on  the  thirteenth  day  after  the  accident.  His  brother  Nero,  on  receiving  an 
account  of  his  illness,  hastens  to  him ;  carries  his  body  to  Rome,  where  it 
is  buried  in  the  tomb  of  Caius  Julius.  Augustus  Caesar,  his  uncle,  pro¬ 
nounces  his  funeral  oration,  and  tlie  highest  honours  are  paid  him. 

INDEX 

The  Numerals  refer  to  the  Books,  the  Figures  to  the 
Chapters. 
A 
AB DERITES  com\Adixn  of  the  rapacity  and  cruelty  of  Horten- 
sius,  and  redress  is  ordered  by  the  senate,  xliii.  4. 
Abeloxy  a  Spaniard,  contrives  to  put  into  Scipio’s  hands  the 
hostages  left  by  Hannibal  at  Saguntum,  xxii.  22, 
Aboriginesy  united  to  the  Trojans,  lose  their  king  Latinus  in 
battle,  L  1,2. 
AbrufiolUy  an  ally  of  the  Romans,  oppressed  by  Perseus,  xlii. 
13.  Charged  by  him  as  the  agressor,  41, 
C.  Aburiusy  ambassador  to  Africa,  xlii.  35. 
M,  AburiuSy  praetor,  xli.  14. 
M,  AburiuSy  plebeian  tribune,  xxxix.  4, 
Abydusy  city  of  Mysia,  besieged  by  Philip,  xxxi.  14.  Despe¬ 
rate  resolution  of  the  townsmen,  17.  They  kill  their  w  ives, 
children,  and  themselves,  18.  The  Rhodians  insist  on  the 
Macedonian  garrison  being  withdrawn,  xxxii.  33.  Which 
is  made  an  article  in  the  treaty  of  peace,  xxxiii.  30.  It  is 
besieged  by  the  Romans,  xxxvii.  12. 
Acarnaniay  xxvi.  24,  25^  26.  Two  Acanianians  killed  at  Athens, 
for  entering  the  temple  of  Ceres,  which  gives  ri^e  to  the 
Macedonian  war,  xxxi.  14. 
Acerr£y  city,  admitted  to  the  freedom  of  Rome,  viii,  17.  Sack¬ 
ed  and  burned  by  Hannibal,  xxiii.  17.  Rebuilt,  xxvii.  3. 
Achaiay  xxv.  15. 
Achceansy  assisted  by  Philip  against  the  jEtolians,  xxvii.  29. 
Gain  a  victory  at  Messene,  B2.  la  a  couftcil  at  Sicyon  they 
determine  in  favour  of  the  Romans,  xxxii.  .19.  23.  Are  de¬ 
clared  free,  xxxiii,  20.  Proclaim  war  against  Antiochus^, 
VOL.  VI.- — [A] 

INDEX. 

XXXV.  50.  Against  the  Lacedaemonians,  xxxviii.  32.  Re¬ 
fuse  audience  to  the  ambassadors  of  Perseus,  xli.  25. 
Ach^ron^  river  of  Molossis,  viii.  24. 
Acheron^  or  Acherusia^  river  in  Italy,  viii.  2i4. 
Achelous  river,  xliii.  21.  23. 
Achradina,  See  Syracuse, 
Aciliusy  historian,  his  work  translated  into  Latin  by  Claudius, 
XXV.  39. 
C,  Acilius,,  plebeian  tribune,  xxxii.  29. 
L,  Acilius^  lieutenant-general,  xl.  31,  32. 
Alan  Acilius  Glabrio^  plebeian  tribune,  xxx.  40.  Commis¬ 
sioner  of  religious  affairs,  xxxi,  50.  Plebeian  aedile,  xxxiii. 
25.  Consul,  xxxvi.  1,  2,  3  Arrives  with  his  army  in  Thes¬ 
saly,  14.  His  proceedings  in  Greece,  15  to  20.  When  he 
defeats  Antiochus  and  the  iEtolians  at  Thermopylae,  reduces 
Heraclea,  xxii.  24.  Reduces  the  ^tolians  to  submission,  28.  ; 
and  composes  the  affairs  of  Greece,  35.  Takes  Lamia  and 
Amphissa  from  the  iEtolians,  xxxvii.  5.  Triumphs,  46. 
Dedicates  a  temple  to  Piety,  in  which  he  places  a  gilded 
statute  of  his  father,  the  first  of  the  kind  seen  in  Italy,  xl.  34. 
Q.  Acilius^  commissioner  of  a  colony,  xxi.  25. 
AcrcCy  town,  xxiv.  36.  xxxv.  27. 
Acrillcey  city,  xxiv.  35. 
AcrocorinthuSy  citadel,  xxxvi.  49,  50. 
Actiuni^  promontory,  xliv.  1. 
Adherbaly  defeated  at  sea  by  Laelius,  xxviii.  30. 
Adramytteum^  city  of  Asia,  in  the  plain  of  Thebe,  celebrated  by 
Homer,  xxxvii,  19.  21. 
Adria,,  Tuscan  colony,  v.  33.  xxvii.  10.  xxxiv.  45. 
Adriatic  Sea,  i.  1.  v.  33.  xl.  21.  57. 
Adultery^  punished  by  a  fine,  x.  31. 
JEbutia^  Roman  matron,  xxxix.  11.  12. 
/..  JEbutius,^  consul,  dies  of  a  pestilence,  iii.  6. 
AI,  Mbutius  El-va^  commissioner  of  a  colony,  iv.  11. 
Al,  AE.butiuSy  military  tribune,  xli.  1. 
ikf.  JEbutius  FAva^  praetor,  xliv.  17. 
Postumus  Mbutius  Cornicen,^  consul,  iv.  11. 
T.  M^butiusy  consul,  and  master  of  horse,  ii.  19. 
T,  Mbutius  Carus,,  commissioner  of  a  colony,  xxxix.  55.xlii.  4. 
Mdtles^  plebeian,  iii.  6.  Are  ordered  to  keep  the  decrees  of 
the  senate  in  the  temple  of  Ceres,  and  their  persons  are  de¬ 
clared  inviolable,  55. 
Mdilesj  curule  or  patrician,  vi.  42.  vii.  i.  Commence  a  practice 
of  ornamenting  the  Forum  on  festivals,  ix.  40. 
Mditui^xxx.  17. 
Mduansj  people  of  Gaul,  v.  54. 
Algates^  islands,  xxi.  10.  41.  49.  xxii.  54.  56.  xxiii.  IS.xxx.  2 

INDEX. 

Mgean  Sea,  xxxvi.  43. 
Mgimurus  island,  xxix.  27.  At  the  mouth  of  the  harbour  of 
Carthage,  xxx.  24. 
island,  xxvii.  30.  33.  xxviii.  5.  xxxi.  14  to  33.  xxxii.  39. 
xxxiii.  17.  30.  xxxvi.  42.  xlii.  14.  18. 
Mginium^  town,  xxxii.  15.  xxxvi.  13.  xliv.  46.  xlv.  27. 
Mgium^  sea  port,  xxviii.  7,  8.  xxxv,  26.  47,  48. 
C.  praetor,  xxxii.  26.  Military  tribune,  xli.  f .  4. 
Mlius  P<£tu8^  plebeian  aedile,  x.  23. 
P,  Mlius  Petus^  one  of  the  first  plebeian  quaestors,  iv.  54. 
P,  praetor,  xxx.  17.  21.  Ambassador  to  Antiochus, 
xxxiv.  59. 
P.  Julius  p£tu8^  consul,  viii.  15.  Master  of  horse,  resigns  on 
his  election  appearing  faulty,  ix.  7.  Augur,  x.  9. 
jP.  Mlius  Petus^  praetor,  xxix.  38.  Commissioner  of  lands, 
xxxi.  4.  Of  a  colony,  xxxii.  2.  Censor  7.  Augur,  xli.  21. 
P,  Mlius  LiguH^  consul,  xlii.  9.  xlv.  17. 
P,  JElm8  Tuber praetor,  xxx.  40.  Commissioner  of  a  colony, 
xxxv.  9.  Commissioner  to  Asia,  xxxvii.  55. 
p.  Mlius^  xli.  6. 
Q,  JElius  P(£tus^  xxii.  35.  xxiii.  21.  xli.  21. 
Q.  Mlius  Tubero^  historian,  iv.  23.  x.  9. 
Q,  P.liu8  Tubero^  plebeian  tribune,  xxxiv.  53.  xxxv.  9. 
Q,  charged  by  the  consul  with  the  care  of  Perseus  when 
a  prisoner,  xlv.  8. 
Sex.  Mliue  Pcetica^  xxxii.  2.  Consul,  7.  Censor,  xxxiv.  44. 
xxxv.  8. 
T.  Mliusy  military  tribune,  xli.  1.  4. 
wife  of  Scipio  Africanus,  xxxviii.  57. 
Mmilian  law,  ix.  33,  34. 
- tribe,  xxxviii.  36. 
- portico,  xli.  27. 
Mmiliusy  consul,  compels  Cleonymus  to  re-embark,  x.  2. 
C.  JEmilius^  consular  tribune,  v.  26.  A  second  time,  32. 
X.  consul,  ii.  42.  A  second  time,  49.  A  third,  54. 
jL.  consular  tribune,  vi.  1.  A  second  time,  5.  A 
third,  21.  A  fourth,  22.  A  fifth,  32. 
L.  j^7nihu8^  interrex,  vii.  17.  Being  again  interrex  he  holds 
the  election  of  consuls,  viii.  23. 
X.  JEjniliu8  Mamercinus^  consul,  vii.  1.  A  second  time,  3. 
Master  of  horse,  2 1 . 
X.  Mmiliua  RogilluSy  commander  of  the  fleet,  employed  against 
Antiochus,  xxxvii  1.  14.  Defeats  the  enemy’s  fleet,  xxxix. 
30.  Triumphs,  58.  See  xl.  52. 
X.  Mmilius  Mamercinus.,  master  of  horse,  vii.  39.  Consul,  viii. 
1.  Dictator,  16.  A  second  time  consul,  20.  Again  dictator, 
ix.  21. 
X.  Mmilius  Scauru8^  xxxvii.  31. 

INDEX. 

JEmilius  Paullus^  commissioner  of  a  colony,  xxxiv.  45. 
^dile,  XXXV.  10.  Praetor,  24.  Commissioner  to  settle  the 
affairs  of  Asia,  xxxvii.  55.  Defeats  the  Lusitanians,  57. 
Consul,  xxxix.  56.  Proconsul,  triumphs  over  the  Ligurians, 
xl.  28.  A  second  time  consul,  xliv.  17.  His  conduct  in  the 
war  against  Perseus,  13  to  42.  When  he  gains  a  complete 
victory,  hje  receives  Perseus  with  courtesy,  xlv.  7.  He,  with 
fifteen  coihmissioners,  adjusts  the  affairs  of  Macedonia,  29. 
Exhibits  games  at  Amphipolis  with  extraordinary  mag¬ 
nificence,  32.  Triumphs  over  Perseus,  and  loses  his  two 
sons,  40. 
L,  JEmilius^  ambassador  to  Carthage,  xxi.  18. 
L.  A'-milius  PaulluB^^Tx,  second  time  consul, xxii.  35.  Is  slain  at 
Cannae,  xxiii.  21. 
Mamercus  JEmilius^  consular  tribune,  iv.  16.  Dictator,  17.  Tri¬ 
umphs  over  the  Veians,  20.  A  second  time  dictator,  23.  He 
shortens  the  term  of  the  censorship,  24.  A  third  time  dicta¬ 
tor,  31.  He  triumphs  over  the  Veians,  34. 
Manius  ^Emilius^  consul,  iv.  53.  Consular  tribune,  61.  A  se¬ 
cond  time  consul,  v.  1.  A  third  time  consular  tribune,  10, 
Man.  jE  miliuBy  consular  tribune,  v.  32. 
A/ar.  jEmilius  Pafius^  dictator,  ix.  7. 
Alar.  jEmilius  Pautius^  master  of  horse,  x.  3. 
Alan.  jEmilius^  ambassador  to  King  Philip,  xxxi.  18.  Consul, 
xxxviii.  42.  Censor  and  chief  pontiff,  xl.  45.  Chosen  a  third 
time  prince  of  the  senate,  xliii.  15. 
^mws,  xl.  21,  22. 
jEnarta^  island,  viii.  22. 
JEneas^  i.  1,  2. 
jEneas  Syl-vius^  third  king  of  Alba,  i.  3. 
Mgui^  or  guicola.,  i.  3.  They  invade  Latium,  ii.  30.  Are 
defeated,  31.  A  quarrel,  and  furious  battle,  between  them 
and  the  Volscians,  40.  They  make  war  on  the  Romans,  and 
harass  the  Latines,  48.  53.  58.  Are  conquered,  60.  Are  de¬ 
feated  by  Servilius,  iii.  2.  Again,  3..  Again,  5.  In  conjunc¬ 
tion  with  the  Volscians  they  ravage  the  lands  of  the  Romans 
and  Hernicians,  6.  Are  routed  by  Lucretius,  8.  Seize  the 
citadel  of  Tusculum,  and  suffer  a  severe  overthrow,  23.  Ob¬ 
tain  peace,  24.  Surround  the  consul  Minucius  in  his  camp, 
26.  Are  surrounded,  and  sent  under  the  yoke,  by  Q.  Cincin- 
natus,  dictator,  28.  Are  again  defeated,  31.  They  defeat  a 
Roman  army,  42.  After  several  losses  in  battle,  60,  61.  70. 
iv.  26.  They  obtain  a  truce  of  eight  years,  30.  They  join 
the  Lavicans,  and  waste  the  lands  of  Tusculum,  45.  Are  dri¬ 
ven  out  of  that  country,  47. ;  and  from  Vola,  49.  Attack  La- 
vici,  V.  16,  Are  compelled  to  retire  with  loss,  28.  Suffer 
the  same  fate  at  Vitellia,  xxix.  31.  Are  almost  eiitirely  cut 

INDEX. 

off  in  battle,  ix.  45. ;  and  are  finally  subdued  by  C.  Junius, 
dictator,  x  1.  How  they  were  enabled  to  recruit  their  ar¬ 
mies,  V.  12. 
^quim(Zlium^  iv.  16.  xxiv.  47.  xxxviii.  28. 
•Mrarii  facti^  disfranchised,  iv.  24. 
tMs  Graue^  iv.  41.  60. 
^Mneates^  people,  xl.  4. 
town,  declared  free,  xxxvii.  60.  xxxix.  35.  xlv.  20. 
iMoUs  country,  xxxiii,  38.  xxxiv.  58.  xxxv.  16.  xxxvii.  8.  .35. 
JEtsculafiius^  brought  from  Epidaurus  to  Rome,  xxix.  11.  His 
temple  adorned  with  pictures  by  Lucretius,  xliii.  4. 
%Msula^  its  citadel,  xxvi.  9. 
Mtna^  Mount,  xxvi.  29. 
Mtolians  form  an  alliance  with  the  Romans,  xxvi.  24.  Make 
war  on  Macedonia  and  Acamania,  25,  R-avage  Achaia,  xxvii. 
29.  Are  defeated  by  Philip,  30.  Dislodged  from  Thermo¬ 
pylae,  xxviii.  7:  Make  peace  with  him,  xxix.  12.  Solicit 
the  aid  of  Antiochus,  Philip,  and  Nabis,  against  the  Romans, 
xxxv.  12.  Openly  declare  war,  33. ;  and  seize  Demetrius, 
34,  Are  defeated,  together  with  Antiochus,  at  Thermopylae, 
by  Acilius,  xxxvi.  19.  Sue  for  peace,  27.  Obtain  a  truce, 
28.  Renew  hostilities,  29.  Obtain  peace,  xxxviii.  1 1.  Their 
internal  commotions,  xli.  25.  The  parties  reconciled,  xlii.  5. 
C.  Afranius  Stellio^  praetor,  xxxix.  23,  Deputed  to  Perseus, 
xliii.  18. 
Africa  furnished  with  a  strong  army  by  Hannibal,  xxi.  22. 
The  consul,  Servilius,  is  unsuccessful  there,  xxii.  31.  It  is 
ravaged  by  M.  Valerius  Messala,  xxvii.  5.  Scipio  goes  into 
Africa,  xxix,  26,  27.  See  Scifiio^  Hannibal. 
African  wind,  xxvi.  41.  xxx.  24. 
Agathocles^  King  of  Syracuse,  went  into  Africa,  xxviii.  43. 
Agesifiolis^  rightful  heir  to  the  crown  of  Lacedaemon,  an  exile* 
xxxiv.  26. 
Aglasfiides^  a  band  of  soldiers,  xliv.  41. 
^gathyrnay  tovrn  in  Sicily,  filled  with  miscreants,  xxvi.  40, 
xxvii.  12. 
AgrianSy  xxviii.  5.  xxxiii.  18.  xlii.  51. 
Agrigentumy  xxiv.  35.  xxv.  23.  Is  surrendered  to  the  Romans, 
xxvi,  40,  xxxvi.  2. 
Agrarian  law,  first  proposed  by  Cassius,  ii.  41.  Disputes  con¬ 
cerning  it,  iii.  1.  iv.  48.  vi.  1 1,  &c. 
Agrififiay  King  of  Alba.  i.  3. 
Aiu9  JLocutiusy  V.  50. 
Alabanduy  xxxiii.  2.  xxxviii.  13.  Alabandans  inform  the  se¬ 
nate,  that  they  had  built  a  temple  to  the  city  of  Rom^  as  a 
deity,  and  instituted  games  in  honour  of  it,  xliii.  6. 
Alba  LongQy  built  by  Ascanius,  i.  3.  Demolished,  29. 

INDEX. 

Albans  wage  war  with  the  Romans,  i.  1 .  22,  23.  Combat  of 
the  Horatii  and  Curiatii,  24.  Mettins  punished,  28.  Al¬ 
bans  removed  to  Rome,  29.  Their  chiefs  brought  into  the 
senate,  30. 
Alba  Silvius^  fifth  king. of  Alba,  i.  3. 
Alba^  a  colony  among  the  ^quans,  x.  1. 
Alban  lake,  v.  15.  22. 
L.  Albinius  carries  the  vestal  virgins  in  a  waggon  to  Caere, 
V.  40. 
M,  Albinius^  plebeian  consular  tribune,  vi.  30. 
C.  Albius  Calenus^  a  leader  of  the  mutiny  at  Sucro,  xxviii.  24. 
Put  to  death,  29. 
Albula^  old  name  of  the  Tiber,  i.  3. 
Alcis^  Minerva  so  called,  xlii.  51. 
Alexander^  iEtolian  chief,  xxxv.  34,  35. 
Alexander^  of  Epirus,  comes  into  Italy,  viii.  3.  Makes 
peace  with  the  Romans,  17.  His  actions  and  death,  24.  His 
wife  sister  to  Alexander  the  Great. 
Alexander  the  Great  contemporary  with  the  preceding,  viii.  3. 
Compared  with  the  Roman  generals  of  that  age,  ix.  17.  20. 
Alexander^  son  of  Perseus,  xlii.  52. 
Alexander  of  Beraea,  xl.  24. 
Alexander^  jEtolian,  a  man  of  eloquence,  xxxii.  33. 
Alexander  of  Megalopolis,  father-in-law  of  Amynander,  pre¬ 
tends  to  be  a  descendant  of  Alexander  the  Great,  and  is  led 
into  hopes  of  the  crown  of  Macedonia,  xxxv.  48. 
Alexamenusy  .^tolian,  xxxv.  34,  35. 
Alexandria^  in  Egypt,  founded,  viii.  24.  Besieged  by  Antia- 
chus,  xliv.  19.  Relieved  by  Roman  ambassadors,  xlv.  12. 
Alexandria^  in  Troas,  xxxv.  42.  xxxvii.  35. 
Algidum  mount,  iii.  2  to  68.  iv.  26.  v.  31.  xxi.  62.  xxvi.  9. 
Alifiheray  xxviii.  8. 
Allia  river,  v.  37.  vi.  28.  vii.  13.  xxxviii.  17. 
L,  Allienus^  plebeian  aedile,  iii.  31. 
Allifce^  viii.  25.  ix.  38. 
Allucius^  Celtiberian  prince,  receives  his  spouse  from  Scipio, 
xxvi.  50. 
Alofieconnesus^  xxxi.  16. 
Alorcus  and  Alcon  mediate  between  Hannibal  and  the  Sagun- 
tines,  xxi.  12,  13. 
Alpesy  i.  1.  First  passed  by  the  Gauls,  v.  34.  Crossed  by 
Hannibal  in  fifteen  days,  xxi.  38.  Impassable  in  winter, 
XX vii.  36. 
Altar ^  greatest,  dedicated  to  Hercules  by  Evander,  i.  7.  ix.  29, 
Amdhrynthis^  Diana  so  called,  at  Eretria,  xxxv.  38. 
Ambigarusj  King  of  the  Celts,  v.  34. 

INDEX. 

.Ambassadors^  ought  to  be  considered  as  inviolable,  ii.  4.  Am¬ 
bassadors  from  enemies  were  admitted  to  audience  in  the 
temple  of  Bellona,  xxx.  22. 
jimbracitty  xxxii.  15.  Besieged  by  M.  Fulvius,  xxxviii.  4.  Sur¬ 
rendered,  9. 
Ambracian  gulph,  xxiii.  14.  xliii.  21. 
Amitcrnian  lands,  xxi.  6.  The  inhabitants  promise  soldiers  to 
Scipio,  xxviii.  45. 
Amfihilochiay  xxxviii.  7. 
Amfihilochusy  worshipped  at  iEropus,  xxxviii.  5. 
AmfihifioliSy  xl.  24,  56,  57.  xliv.  43.  The  inhabitants  refuse  to 
give  refuge  to  Perseus,  45, 
Amfihissay  xxxvii.  5. 
Amulius  dethrones  his  brother  Numitor,  i.  3.  Is  slain,  and 
Numitor  restored,  5,  6. 
Amyclady  xxxiv.  28. 
Amynandevy  King  of  Athamania,  xxvii.  30.  xxix.  12.  Joins  the 
Romans,  and  wastes  Thessaly,  xxxii.  14.  Seizes  Pellinaeum, 
xxxvi.  10. 
Amyntasy  King  of  Macedonia,  father  of  Philip,  xxxviii.  34.  xlv. 
9. 
Anagniay  xxvi.  23.  xxvii.  4.  xxix.  14.  xliii.  13.  xlv.  16. 
Anafitis  river,  xxiv.  36. 
Anconuy  xli.  1. 
AnciUuy  the  sacred  shields  that  fell  from  heaven,  i.  20.  v.  52. 
Sfi.  Anciusy  Roman  ambassador,  slain  by  order  of  Tolunmiu^s, 
iv.  17. 
Ancusy  King  of  Rome,  his  acts,  i.  52,  33.  Death,  35. 
Andranodorusy  son-in-law  of  Hiero,  King  of  Syracuse,  and 
guardian  of  his  son  Hieronymus,  xxiv.  4.  Seizes  the  island 
and  citadel,  21.  Is  made  praetor,  23.  Slain,  24. 
Androclesy  Macedonian  ambassador  to  the  Acamanians,  xxxiii. 
16. 
Androsy  island,  xxxi.  15.  Taken  by  the  Romans,  and  bestowed 
on  Attains,  xxxi.  45.  xxxii.  16.  xxxvi.  20. 
Androsthenesy  Macedonian  commander  of  a  garrison  in  Corinth, 
obliges  Quintius  and  Attalus  to  raise  the  siege,  xxxii.  23. 
Is  defeated  by  the  Achaeans,  xxxiii.  14.  Again,  15. 
X.  Aniciusy  praetor,  xliv.  17.  Is  sent  against  Gen  tins,  30. 
His  clemency  and  justice,  31.  Recovers  the  Roman  ambas¬ 
sadors  seized  by  Gentius,  32.  Returns  victorious  to  Rome, 
xlv.  34.  Leads  Gentius  and  his  family  in  triumph,  43. 
X.  Anniusy  praetor  of  the  Latines,  summoned  to  Rome,  viii.  3. 
Demands  that  one  consul,  and  half  the  senate  of  Rome,  may 
be  chosen  out  of  Latium,  5. 
AniOy  river,  i.  27.  36.  iv.  17.  vi.  42.  xxx.  28. 
AnitorgiSy%xy,  32. 

INDEX. 

jinnals  the  magistrates,  ix.  18,  Ancient  annals  confused, 
ix.  15.  Uncertain,  44,  45.  x.  2.  17.  Inconsistent,  30. 
Annals  of  Acilius,  xxv.  39. 
T,  Annius^  commissioner  of  a  colony,  flies  to  Mutina  from  an 
insurrection  of  the  Boians,  xxi.  25. 
T.  Anniusy  LuscuSy  xlii.  25. 
Antesignaniy  xxii.  5.  xxvii.  18, 
Antemnatiansy  i.  9.  11. 
AntenoVy  Trojan,  i.  1. 
AntenoVy  admiral  of  Perseus’s  fleet,  xliv.  28.  xlv.  10. 
Antiansy  make  war  on  the  Romans,  vi.  6.  Are  conquered,  8. 
Renew  hostilities,  viii.  1.  Their  ships  are  taken  from  them, 
with  the  prows  of  which  the  pulpit  in  the  Forum  is  orna¬ 
mented,  14.  Hence  called  Rostrum. 
Anticyruy  island,  taken  by  the  Romans,  and  delivered  to  the 
jEtolians,  xxvi.  26.  xxviii.  28. 
Antigonia,  xliii.  23. 
Antigonusy  son  of  Echecrates,  xl.  54.  Informs  Philip,  King  of 
Macedonia,  of  the  crimes  of  Perseus  against  Demetrius,  55. 
Destined  to  the  throne  by  Philip,  56.  Slain  by  Perseus,  58. 
Antimachusy  Macedonian  commander  of  the  holy  brigade,  xlii. 
46. 
Antinousy  xlv.  26. 
Antiochiay  xxxv.  13.  xxxviii.  13.  xli,  20.  xlii.  18. 
Antiochusy  King  of  Syria,  in  league  with  Philip  of  Macedonia, 
xxxi.  14.  Endeavours  to  make  himself  master  of  all  Asia, 
xxxiii.  38.  Is  solicited  by  the  ^tolians  to  join  in  alliance 
against  the  Romans,  xxxv.  12.  A  conference  between  his 
minister  and  ambassadors  from  Rome,  xxxv.  16.  He  passes 
over  to  Europe,  43.  Makes  a  vain  attempt  on  Chalcis,  46. 
Gains  possession  of  it,  51.  Solicits  the  states  of  Greece, 
xxxvi.  5.  Rejects  the  advice  of  Hannibal,  8.  At  the  ap¬ 
proach  of  the  Romans,  raises  the  siege  of  Larissa,  10.  Mar¬ 
ries  at  Chalcis,  11.  Is  defeated  at  Thermopylae,  18,  19. ;  and 
driven  out  of  Greece,  21.  Instigated  by  Hannibal,  he  pre¬ 
pares  to  renew  the  war,  41.  Proposes  a  treaty  of  peace, 
which  is  rejected  by  jEmilius,  xxxvii.  19.  His  fleet  is  de¬ 
feated  by  the  Rhodians,  23,  24.  Again  by  the  Romans,  30. 
He  makes  overtures  for  peace,  and  sends  back  the  son  of  Sci- 
pio  Africanus,  who  was  a  prisoner  in  his  hands,  34.  The 
treaty  is  broken  off,  and  his  offers  to  Scipio  rejected,  35, 
36.  He  is  finally  defeated  by  Scipio,  43.  Terms  of  peace 
granted  to  him,  45.  His  proceedings  in  Egypt,  xlv.  1 1. 
Antifiatevy  ambassador  from  Antiochus,  xxxvii.  55.  Governor 
of  iVsia.  xxxviii.  16. 
C.  Antistius  LabeOy  xlv.  17. 

INDEX. 

i.  AntUHm^  plebeian  ^ibu&e,  iv.  42*;  Plebeian  ccmsuJar  tri¬ 
bune,  vi,  30. 
M,  Anti9tiu9y^xu  63. 
xxvii.  36. 
Antium^  ii.  33.  Surrender^  to  the  Romans,  65.  A  colony 
settled  there,  iii.  1.  A  new  colony,  viii.  14. 
Jill  Antonim^  master  of  horse,  yiii.  17. 
Q,  Antonivs  Merenda^  consular  tribune,  iv.  42. 
T  Antonins  Merenda^  made  ^deceipvir  by  Appius,iii-  35. 
AnxtiTy  afterwards  Tarracina,  4aiteh  by  the  Romans,  iv.  59. 
Surprised  by  the  Vdlsciajts,  v.  8.  Recovered,  13.  A  colcmy 
sent  thither,  viii.  21. 
Aoub^  river,  xxaii,  5.  10.  xxxvi.  17.  ^ 
Afiamea^  so  called  froth  Apame^,  sister  of  King  Seleucus,  for- 
merly  Gelena,  xxxv.  15.  xxxviii.  13. 
Afiennine  mount,  v.  33.  Hannibal  attempts  to  pass  over  It, 
xxi.  58.  ^ 
^/jcranti«,^xxxvi.  34.  xxxviii^^  txliii.  22, 
Apollo  Pythius^  consulted,  i.  $6.  r.  15.  A  tenth  of  the  spoil 
offered  to  him,  23.  A  golden  vase  sent  to 'Delphi,  25.  See 
iv.  25.  V.  13.  15.  viL  20.  xxlii.  H.  xxv,^12.  xxiJ^.  10,  &c. 
AfiolWs  promontory,  xxx.  24. 
AfiollinarUin  games,  their  origin,  xxV.  12.  Vowed  peipetual, 
xxvii.  23.‘xxx.  38.  .  ♦  ^  ' 
Apodlinarian  circus,  ui.  63.  .  ^ 
Apollodorusj  xxxv.  50.  .  *  - 
Apollonia  attacked  by  Philip,  xXiv,  40.  xxvL  25*  xxix.  12. 
Apollonius^  commander  oC.the  Syrian  fleet,  Xxkvii.  23.  ^ 
Apparitors^  i.  40.  iii.  38, 
Appeal  to  the  people  established  byljftr,!!.  8..ui.^5»  x.  9.  Not 
allowed  from  a  dictator,  ii.  18*  29.  Nor  from  Ife  decemvirs, 
iii.  22.  Nor  at  a  .greater  distance  from  the  bkf  than  one 
mile,  iii.  20.  Submitted  to  by  a  dictator,  ii.  .18. 
Appian  road  made,  ix.  29.  xxii.  IS.xsvi.  8. 
L.  Appule^us^  plebrian  tribune,* prc^secutes  Camillus,  v.  32. 
C.  AppulAna  Satuminm^  commissioner  dl  a  colony,  xlv.  13.  44. 
Q.  Appuleius^  consul,  x.  6.  ^  ^ 
C.  Apronius^  plebeian  tribune,  iii.  54.  ^ 
Apsus  river,  xxxi.  27.  ' 
Apulia^  vi.  42.  vii.  26.ix.  2.  12,  &c.  ’ 
Apulians  form  an  alliance^  with  the  Romans,  viii.  25.  Revolt 
to  the  Carthaginians,  xxii.  61.  ‘  ^ 
i.  Appustiusy  xxiii.  38, 
Appustius^  FuUo^  plebeian  ^dile,  xxxi.  4. 
y.  Appustiusy  ravages  Macedonia,  xxxi.  27. 
Aquileiay  xxix.  22.  55. 
» /ywj7/«, brothers,  conspire  against  the  commonwealth,  ii.  4 
voi;.  VI.— 

INDEX. 

C.  Aquillim^  consul,  subdues  the  Hernicians,  ii.  40. 
L,  Aquillim  Corvus^  consular  tribune,  vi.  4. 
L.  Aquilliuft  Gallus^  praetor,  xli.  14. 
Aquilonia^  x.  38.  T^en  by  the  Romans,  41.  Plundered  and 
burned,  44. 
Aquinean  territory,  xxvi.  9. 
Aquitania^  xxi.  23. 
Arabian  archers,  xxxvii.  4. 
deserts,  xlv.  12. 
Arar  river,  xxi.  31. 
Aratusy  chief  of  the  Acha&ans,  xxvii.  31. 
Arbacalay  xxi,  5, 
Arcadia^  i.  5. 
Archidamusy  Jltoli^  general,  xxxii.  4.  xxxv.  4B.  xliv.  43. 
Archiniedesy  the  famous  mathematican,  bafUes  tlie  attacks  of  the 
Romans  on  Syracuse,  xxiv.  34.  Is  slain,  xxv.  31. 
Ardeay  besieged  by  Tarquinius  Superbus,  i.  57.  In  a  dispute 
between  the  Ardeans  and  Aricians,  the  Romans  make  a  scan¬ 
dalous  decision,  iiL  71,  72.  The  Ardeans  revolt,  iv.  1.  The 
alliance  is  renewed  with  them,  7.  A  colony  led  to  Ardea, 
11.  The  Ardeans,  under  the  command  of  Camillus,  attack 
the  Gauls,  v.  43. 
Ardoneuy  xxiv.  20. 
C.  and  L.  Arenniu»y  plebeian  tribunes,  xxvii.  6.  ^ 
X.  Arennius^  prefect  or  general  of  the  allies,  xxvii.  26,  27. 
ArethuBUy  fountain,  xxv.  30. 
Argeiy  places  appointed  for  the  performance  of  sacrifices,  i.  21, 
Argiietumy  hill,  Adjacent  to  Rome,  i.  19. 
xxxviii.  2. 
Argosy  xxxiv.  25.  Betra3^d  to  Philip,  and  given  in  trust  to 
Nabis,  38.  Robbed  by  him  and  his  wife,  40.  A  fruit¬ 
less  attempt  to  deliver  it,  xxxiv.  25.  It  is  taken  by  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  atni  given  up  to  the  Achseans,  xxxiv.  41. 
Argos  of  Amphilochia,  xxxviii.  10.  ^ 
Ariarathesy  King  of  Cappadocia,  assists  Antiochus,  xxxvii.  40. 
Is  hhed,  and  admitted  into  alii^ee  the  Romani,  xxxviii. 
39.  Sends  his  son  to  Rome„to  \m  educated,  xlii.  -19. 
AriceUy  i.  50.  ii.  14.  26. 
Ariminumy  xxi.  51.  xxiv.  44.  As  a  province,  xxviiL  38. 
Achaean  praetor,  xxxii.  19,  20. 
actor  of  tra^dies,  xxiv.  24. 
Tyrian,  sent,  by  tfannibal,  to  Carthage,  xxxiv.  61. 
Aristodemusy  tyrant  of  Cumae,  detains  the  Roman  ships  to 
Ratify  Tarquinius,  ii,  34. 
Aristomachy^y  leader  of  the  populace  at  Croto,  betrays  the  city 
to  Hannibal,  xxiv.  2,  3. 
Aristoteiesy  officer  in  the  army  of  Antiochus,  xxxvi.  21. 
Axmesy  Carthaginian  commander  at  new  Carthage,  xxvf!  49. 

INDEX. 

,4^milustrnm^  a  festival,  aud  a  plate  m  called,  antvii.  3f . 
Army^  Roman,  and  all  its  parts,  described,  with  the  arms  and 
the  method  of  mirshaliing  and  fighting,  vUi.  8.  Compared 
with  the  Macedonian,  ix.  19. 
Amua^  river,  its  overflowing  very  much  obstructs  Hannibal’s 
march,  xxii.  2,  3. 
Arfi^  xxii.  9.  12.  xxiv.  3.  xxv.  15.  Is  taken  by  Q.  Fabius,  con¬ 
sul,  xxiv.  46,  4T. 
Arfiinum^  taken  from  the  Samnites,  ix.  44. 
Arretians^  mediate  a  revolt,  but  are  kept  in  awe  by  Marcellus, 
xxvii.  21.  Are  compelled  to  give  hostages,  24.  Promise 
supplies  to  Scipio,  xxviii.  45. 
Arsian  wood,  ii.  7. 
Anetarti^^  Illyrian,  killed  by  order  of  Philip,  xliL  1 3. 
Artatus  river,  xliii.  19. 
Arvemiana^  v.  34.  Join  Hannibal,  xxvii.  39. 
Aruns^  son  of  Tarquinius.  ii.  6. 
Aruna^  son  ^  Porsena,  ii.  14. 
Aruna^  Clusian,  advises  the  Gatils  to  besiege  Clusiutn,  and  acts 
as  their  guide,  t.  33. 
Aruafiices  brought  from  ElS’uria,  xxvii.  37. 
Aaeaniua^  son  of  ^neas,  builds  Alba  Longa,  i.  3. 
Aaclefiiodoruay  Gallic  general,  xlii.  51.  * 
Aacalum^  xxxii.  29. 
Aanaua^  mount,  xxxii.  5. 
Aaofina^  river,  xxxvi.  29. 
Aaaefnbly  of  the .  centuries  elects  consuls,  i.  60.  Consular  tri¬ 
bunes,  v.  52.  Praetors,  x,  22.  Passes  the  laws  of  the  twelve 
tables,  iii.  34.  And  others^  tries  persons  accused  of  treason, 
vi.  20.  Declares  war,  xxxi.  6,  7. 
Aaaembly  df  the  tribunes  elects  plebeian  magistrates,  a.  56,  67. 
Excludes  patricians,  60.  Its  orders  bind  all  ranks,  ili^  55. 
viii.  12. 
Aaaembly  of  the  curias  determines  on  military  affldrs,  v.  52. 
ix.  38. 
Aatafia  besieged,  xxviii.  22,  The  i^habhants'set  fire  to  the  eity, 
and  put  themi^ves  to  death,  23. 
Aaylum^  satu^ ary  opened  by  Romulus,  i,  8. 
Atalanta^  ismd,  xt:xv>  37,  38. 
Atella  sides  with  the  Carthaginians,  Xxii.  61 .  Surrenders  to 
the  Romans,  xxvi.  16.  The  mhabitants  are  removed  to  Ca- 
ialia,*xxviL  3. 
AteVan  farces,  vii.  2. 
A.  AtcHua^  consul,  iii.  31.  Plebeian  tribune,  65. 
Athamttniana^  %%ix,  12.  xxxii.  14.  xxxvi.  14.  xxxviii.  1. 
Athanagia^xxi, 
Athens^  ambassadors  sent  thither '  from  Rome  to  coHect  laws, 
iii.  31.  It  is  saved  from  being  surprised,  by*  Philip,  by  the 

1^^DEX. 
expedition  erf  a  courier,  xxxi.  24.  26.  *  It  is  visited  by  jg> 
JEmilius,  xlv.  27. 
Athtniam  send  ambassadors  to  comprotnise  disputes  between 
Philip  and  the  .£toUans,  xxvii.  30.  Implore  the  protection 
of  Rome  a^inst  Philip,  xxxi.  5.  Origin  of  their  war  with 
Philip,  14.  Their  extravagant  compliments  to  Attains,  15. 
Their  compl^nts  in  the  .^.toUan  council,  30.  Decrees  against 
Philip,  44.  They  intercede  with  Scipio  in  favour  of  the  Jlto- 
lians,  xxxvii.  6.  Their  character,  xlv.  23. 
Atheneum^  fort,  xxxviiL  l.xxxix.  25. 
Athenam^  brother  of  King  Eumencs,  xxxviii  12. 
Athenagorasy  one  of  Philip’s  generals,  xxxi.  34,  35. 
Athosy  mount,  xliv,  1 1 .  xlv.  30. 
C.  AtiliuHy  praetor,  brings  succour  to  L.  Manlius,  xxi.  26.  Stands 
for  the  consulship,  xxii.  35.  Dedicates  the  temple  of  Con¬ 
cord,  xxiii.  21. 
E,  AtiUu9y  consular  tribune,  v.  1 3. 
L.  Atiliusy  one  of  the  first  consular  tribunes,  iv.  7.  ^ 
L  vf/rfiiw,  plebeian  tribune,  ix.  30. 
MvAtilixm  Regulusy  consul,  marches  against  the  Sidicinians, 
viii.  16. 
M.  Atiliiis  Regulusy  consul,  x.  32.  Defeated  by  the  Samnites, 
35.  Defeats  them,  36. 
L.  AHLiusy  quaestor,  slain  at  Cannae,  xxii.  49. 
JL.  AtiliuSy  governor  of  Locri,  xxiv.  1, 
Af.  Atiliua  ReguhiSy  a  second  time  consul,  xxii.  25.  Conduct! 
the  war,  according  to  the  advice  of  pabius,  xxiii  21.  Cen¬ 
sor,  xxiv.  11,  Al^icates,  43. 
M,  AtUiusy  praeten*,  xxiv.  43.  Clears  the  city  of  foreign  religious 
rites,  XXV.  1  Ambassador  to  Ptolemy,  xxvii.  4. 
C.  AHHtta  praetor,  xxi.  62.  Poutifi^  xxii.  3  ft.  Curule 
^dile,  xxxiv.  5. 
C.  Atiniua  Lahaoy  praetm*,  xxxvi,  45. 
C.  Atiniu8j  military  tiibune,  throws  the  standard  among  the 
eneiity,  xxxiv.  46. 
xxvii.  30.  xxLx.  12.  xlv.  30. 
C.  Atrias  C7m5rr,  leader  of  a  mutiny  at  Sutro^leh^ded,  xxvili. 
24. 29.  A 
Attalua^  King  of  Asia^  xxvi  24.  Wint^  at  .figiSi,  xxvii.  30. 
33*  "Takes  Opus,  where  he  narrowly  escapes  being  surprised 
by  Philip,  and  returns  to  Asia,  xxviii.  7^  He  escorts  the  Ro¬ 
man  ambassadors  to  Pesstnus,  and  give's  them  the  sacred  stone 
Cybele,  xxix.  11.  Comes  again  to  Piraehs,  xxxi.  14.  Ex¬ 
horts  the  jEtolians  to  pin  in  the  war^jigainst  Philip,  15*  His 
ambassadors  solicit  aid  from  the  Romans  against  Ahtioehus, 
xxxii.  8.  Qis  death,  xxxiii.  2 1 . 
Attalu9y  of  Eumoies,  comes  to  Rome,xxxv.  23#  Again, 

INiyEX. 

with  congratulations  on  the  victory  over  Antiochus,  xlv.  19, 
His  honourable  conduct  towards  his  brother^  20. 
Attim  7u//it«,Volscian  general,  ii.  35.  Entertains  Coriolanus, 
infiames  fiis  countrymen  against  the  Romans,  38.  Is  joined 
in  command  with  Coriolanus,  39.  The  jEquans  refuse  to  act 
under  his  command,  40. 
King  of  Aiba,  i.  3. 
Aveiftinusj  King  of  Alba,  i.  3. 
Aventine^  mount,  i.  6.  Added  to  the  city  and  given  to  the  La* 
tines,  33.  Seized  by  the  seceding  populace,  iii.  50. 
Avernusy  lake,  xxiv.  13. 
Aufidusy  river,  xxli.  44. 
Augustus  Ceesar  shut  the  temple  of  Janus,  i.  19.  Built  and  re¬ 
paired  many  temples,  iv.  20.  Finally  subdued  Spain, 
xxviii.  12. 
Augursy  their  college  formed  by  Numa,  iv.  4.  At  first,  three  in 
number,  x.  6.  Five  plebeians  added,  9^.  Ceremonies  at  tak¬ 
ing  auguries,  i.  16. 
’  AuliSy  XXXV.  37.  51.  xlv.  27. 
Q.  Aulius  Cenetanusy  consul,  viii.  37.  A  second  time,  ix.  15. 
Master  of  horse,  he  kills  the  Samnite  general,  and  is  himself 
slain,  22. 
C.  Aurelius  CottUy  praetor,  xxx.  26. 
C.  Aurelius  Scaurusy  praetor,  xxxix.  6. 
C.  Aureliusy  consul,  xxxi.  12. 
L,  Aurelius  CottUy  military  tribune,  xl.  27,  28. 
M  Aurelius  plebeian  aedile,  xxiii.  30.  Governor  of  Pu- 
teoli,  XXV.  22.  Commissioner  of  sacrifices,  xxix.  38.  Ambas¬ 
sador  to  Philip,  xxx.  26. 
Aurinksy  or  OringiSy  city  in  Spain,  xxiv.^2. 
Aurunca  ^uessuy  viii.  15.  A  colony  settled  there,  ix.  28. 
Auruncians  make  war  on  the  Romans,  iL  16,  17.  26.  Surrendei 
themselves,  viii,  15. 
C.  Aurunculeiusy  praetor,  xxvii.  6.  Military  tribune,  4 1 . 
L,  Aurunculeiusy  praetor,  xxxvi.  45. 
Ausetaniansy  subdued  by  Hannibal,  xxi.  23.  Roused  to  insur¬ 
rection  against  the  Romans,  by  Indibilis,  xxix.  2.  Are  con¬ 
quered,  3 
Ausonians  defeated  by  the  Romans,  viii.  16.  Exterminated, 
ix.  25. 
Ausfiices  attended  to  on  all  occasions,  i,  36.  vi.  41^  Confined 
to  the  patrician s,^iv.  6.  41.  Neglected,  xxi.  63.  Falsely  re¬ 
ported.  X.  40 
Axesy  never,  after  Pubjicola,  carried  before  the  magistrates  in 
the  city,  xxiv.  9. 

INDEX, 

BabyUtiy  xxxviii.  17. 
Baccfm^  or  xxxix.  9.  Extii^ated,  17. 
Bardins^  Campanian,  challenges  Crispinus,  and  flies,  xxv.  10. 
Cn.Beebim  7am/iAi7Ms, plebeian  tribune,  brings  an  action  against 
the  censors,  xxix.  37.  Placed  at  the  head  of  an  army  in  Gaul, 
he  is  defeated  with  great  slaughter,  xxxii.  7. 
M,  Babius^  ambassador  from  Scipio  to  Carthage,  xxx.  25. 
Praetor,  xxxv.  lO.  Wages  war  with  Philip,  xxxvi.  10. 
M»  Bxbius  Tamfihilus^  consul^  yi\.  18. 
Q.  Bsebiua  Tamfihilua^  ambassador  to  Hannibal,  xxi.  6.  To 
Carthage,  18. 
Q.  Bsebiua  Herenniua^  plebeian  tribune,  inveighs  against  the  se¬ 
nate,  and  the  augurs,  xxii.  34. 
Q.  Bsebiua  Sulca^  ambassador  to  Ptolemy,  xUi.  6. 
A,  Bseculoniua^  standard-bearer,  throws  the  standard  into  the 
enemy’s  camp,  and  is  the  first  that  enters,  xli.  4. 
Bmcula^  xxvii.  18.  xxviii.  13. 
Bseticuy  xxviii.  2. 
Bsetia  river,  xxviii.  22. 
Balearic  isles,  xxii.  23.  xxiii.  4.  xxviii.  37. 
- slihgers,  xxi.  21.  55.  xxii.  37.  xxviii.  37. 
Balliata^  mount,  xxxix.  2.  xU.  18. 
Bantiua  of  Nola,  inclined  to  favour  Hannibal,  is  engaged  by 
the  kindness  of  Marcellas,  xxiii.  15. 
Barboathenea^  mount,  xxxv.  27. 
Barcine  family,  xxiii.  13.  xxviii.  12.  41. 
- faction,  xxi.  2.**^ 9. 
Barley  given,  instead  of  wheat,  to  cohorts  that  lost  their  stand¬ 
ards,  xxvii  13. 
Bar^ylise^  xxxii.  33.  xxxiii.  35. 
Baatamiana^  xl.  5.  57. 
Beard^  not  shaved  by  the  ancient  Romans,  v.  4.  Afterwards 
suffered  to  grow  long  in  time  of  mourning,  vi.  16. 
Bellonay  viii.  9.  Victorious,  x.  19 
Belloveaus^  nephew  of  Ambigarus,  King  of  the  Celts,  leads  a 
body  of  them  into  Italy,  v  34. 
Beneventum^  formerly  Maleventum^  ix.  27.  xxii.  13.  xxv. 
xxvii.  10^ 
Bertza  surrendered  to  the  Romans,  xliv.  45.  xlv.  29. 
Biaaltiansy  xliv.  45 
Bythinia^  xxvii.  30.  xxix.  12  xxxiii  30. 
Biturigea  Gaula^  v.  34. 
Blaaiua  surrenders  Salapia  to  Marcellus,  xxvi.  38 

INDEX. 
Blosiiy  two  brothers  in  Capua,  detected  in  a  conspiracy  against 
the  Romans,  xxvii.  3. 
Bocchary  King  of  Mauritania,  xxix.  30. 
Bocchavy  an  officer  sent  by  Syphax  against  Masinissa,  xxix.  32. 
B(Rotiay  xxvii.  30.  xxviii.  8.  xxix.  12.  xxxiU.  H.  Joins  the.  Ro¬ 
mans  against  Perseus,  xlii.  44. 
Boian  Gaulsy  xxxii,  29,  30.  Submit  to  the  Romans,  31.  De¬ 
feat  the  Romans,  xxxiii.  36.  ‘  Surrender  to  the  consul  Do- 
mitius,  XXXV.  40. 
Bomilcavy  Carthaginian  admiral,  ^ils  to  Locri,  xxiii.  41,  To 
.  Syracuse,  xxiv.  36.  See  xxv.  25.  2T. 
Bononiay  colony?  xxxvii.  57.  Depopulated  by  Ligurians,  xxxix. 
2. 
Booksy  linen,  deposited  in  the  temple  of  Moneta,  iv.  20. 
Books  of  the  magistrates,  iv.  7.  20. 
,  Sibylline,  inspected,  iii.  10,  Sec, 
Bostavy  Cartha'ginian  governor  of  Saguntum,  xxii.  22.  Am¬ 
bassador  to  Philip,  xxiii.  34. 
Bo'uianurriy  ix.  28.  Taken  by  the  Romans,  31.  Taken  from 
the  Samnites,  x.  12.  43. 
BovillaSy  x.  47. 
Brachyllasy  Boeotarch,  or  chieCmagistrate  of  Boeotia,  xxxiii. 
27.  XXXV.  47. 
BrennuSy  leader  of  the  Gauls,  defeats  the  Romans  at  the  Allia, 
V.  38.  His  insolence  when  weighing  the  ransom  of  the  ca¬ 
pital,  48.  * 
BridgCy  Sublician,  built,  i.  S3,  ii.  10. 
Bridges  broken  down  to  retard  Hannibal’s  march,  xxvi.  9. 
Brixiay  Cenomanian  Gauls  settle  in  that  quarter,  v.  35. 
BrundusiuTYiy  promontory,  x.  2. 
—  harbour,  xxiii*.  33.  The  inhabitants  commended 
by  the  Romans,  xxvii.  10. 
Bruttian  states  revolt  to  the  Carthaginians,  xxii.  61.  Proceed¬ 
ings  of  the  Carthaginians  in  Bruttium,  xxiv.  1.  Bruttians 
take  Croto,  2.  See  xxv.  1.  xxvi.  12.  xxvii.  41. 
Brutulus  Pafiiusy  who  had  advised  the.  Samnites  to  break  the 
truce  with  the  Romans,  avoids,  by  a  voluntary  death,  being 
sent  prisoner  to  Rome,  viii.  39. 
Bustty  Apulian  woman,  entertains  at  Canusium  the  remains  of 
the  defeated  Roman  army,  xxii.  52. 
Buxenturriy  colony,  xxxii.  29. 
xxxii.  33.  Seized  by  Gauls,  xxxviii.  16. 
C 

Cacus  slain  by  Hercules,  i.  7.  ^ 
L.  CaeciUus  Metellusy  after  the  battle  of  Cannae,  proposes  to 
abandon  Italy,  xxii.  53.  Is  disgraced  by  tlie  censors,  xxiv.  1 P 

INDEX. 

M.  Csecilms  Metcllm^  plebeian  aedile,  xxvii.  36.  Prastor,  xxviii 
10.  Ambassador  to  Attains,  xxix.  1 1. 
(p.  Ca?c27m«,  plebeian  tribune,  iv.  16. 
Q.  Ceeci/ma  MetelHs^  pontiff,  xxiii,  21.  Plebeian  aedile,  xxvii. 
21.  Master  of  horse,  xxviii,  10.  Consul  and  dictator, 
xxix.  11. 
Cmdiciui^  centurion,  at  the  head  of  some  Roman  fugitives  at 
Veii,  routs  the  Etrurians,  v.  45.  46. 
Cxdiciu^^  lieutenant-general,  x.  40. 
C^sninensians  defeated,  i.  10.^ 
Csere  entertains  the  Roman  priests  and  vestals,  v.  40.  An  alli¬ 
ance  of  hospitality  is  formed  with  the  inhabitants,  and  after¬ 
wards  war  declared  against  them,  vii.  19.  Peace  is  granted 
to  them,  20.  They  assist  Scipio  in  fitting  out  a  fleet, 
xxviii.  45. 
Cddnomaniansy  the  only  Gallic  tribe  that  did  not  revolt  to  Han¬ 
nibal,  xxi.  55.  They  join  Hamilcar,  xxxi.  10.  Are  stripped 
of  their  arms,  by  M.  Furius,  who  is  ordered  to  restore  them, 
and  quit  the  country,  xxxix.  3. 
Cap«o.  See  Duilius^  Fabius^  Quintius, 
Calabria^  xxiii.  34. 
Calatia^  ix.  2.  28.  Taken  by  the  Samnites,  45.  Joins  the  Car¬ 
thaginians,  xxii.  61.  xxiii.  14.  Surrenders  to  the  Romans, 
xxvi.  16.  xxvii.  3. 
Pacuviua  Calavius  acquires  an  ascendancy  over  the  senate  and 
people  of  Campania,  xxiii.  2,3.  Hinders  his  son  Perolla  from 
killing  Hannibal,  9. 
Calavii  charged  with  setting  fire  to  Rome,  *xvi.  27, 
Cajeta^  xL  2. 
Calendar  published  by  Flavius,  ix.  46. 
Cales  taken  by  the  Romans^,  and  a  colony  established,  viii.  16. 
xxii.  15.  xxiii.  31.  xxiv^  45.  xxvi.  9.  16.  xxvii.  9.  xxix.  15. 
CallicrateSy  Achaean,  xli.  23.  xlv.  3 1 . 
Cailifae^  viii.  25. 
Calliculuy  mount,  xxii,  15.  16. 
Callidromus^  a  summit  of  mount  CEta,  xxxvi.  16,  17,  18. 
Ca /or,  river,  xxi V.  14.  xxv.  17.  * 
C.  Calfturnius^  xxii.  61. 
C,  Calfiurnius  Piao^  praetor,  xxv.  41.  Again,  xxvi.  10.  15.21. 
Governor  of  Capua,  xxvii.  6.  Triumphs  over  the  Lusitaniaus, 
xxxix.  42.  Consul,  xl.  37. 
Z..  Calfiurniusj  ambassador  to  the  Achaeans,  xxxii.  19. 
Camertiana^  in  Umbria,  xxviii.  45. 
Carnfianiay  ii.  52. 
Camfianiana  and  Sidicinians  overpowered  by  the  Samnites,  vii. 
29.  Implore  aid  from  the  Romans,  and  are  refused,  xxx. 
3 1 .  Surrender  themselves  as  subjects  to  the  Romans,  viii.  1 1 . 

INDEX. 

Are  deprived  of  a  part  of  their  lands^  jmd  made  citizens  of* 
Rome  without  right  of  suffrage,  14.  Misconduct  of  their 
senate  and  populace,  xxiii.  24.  They  suffocate  the  Roman 
soldiers,  and  invite  Hannibal,  xxv.  15.  Are  besieged  by  the 
Romans,  xxvi.  4.  At  the  instigation  of  Vibius  Virius,  twenty- 
seven  senators  poison  themselves,  1 4.  Punishment  of  their 
senate,  15,  16.  A  conspiracy  of  the  Campanians  discovered, 
xxvii.  3.  A  part  of  their  lands  sold,  xxviii.  46. 
Canastrum^  promontory  at  Cassandrea,  xxxi.  45.  xliv.  41. 
C.  Caninius  Rebilua^  praetor,  xlii.  28.  xliii.  11.  xlv.  42. 
Canna^  river,  xxv.  12. 
Cannse^  town,  xxii.  43,  Battle,  47,  &c.  Roman  troops  en¬ 
gaged  there  banished  to  Sicily,  xxiii.  3  i .  They  beseech  Mar¬ 
cellas  to  employ  them,  xxv.  6.  The  senate  inexorable  to¬ 
wards  them,  7.  The  knights  who  fled  thence  disgraced, 
xxvii.  ll. 
Cantherium  in  fossa^  xxiii.  47.  * 
C.  Canuleius^  plebeian  tribune,  procures  a  repeal  of  the  law, 
which  prohibited  the  intermarriage  of  plebeians  with  pati  i- 
cians,  iv.  6. 
M,  Canuleius^  plebeian  tribune,  iv.  44. 
X.  Canuleius  Divesy  prsetor,  xlii.  28. 
Canusium  affords  shelter  to  the  Roman  fugitives  from  Cannae, 
xxii.  50.  52. 
Cafienuy  town,  xxii.  1 . 
- gates,  i.  26.  vii.  23.  x.  23.  xxiii.  32.  xxv.  40.  xxvi.  10. 
Cafienatian  war,  v.  8. 
Cafietusy  King  of  Alba,  i.  3. 
Cafiitol  vowed  by  Tarquinius  Priscus,  i.  38.  Built  by  Tarqui- 
nius  Superbus,  55.  Is  seized  by  Herdonius,  a  Sabine,  with 
slaves  and  exiles,  iii.  15.  Recovered,  18.  Besieged  by  the 
Gauls,  v,  43.  Saved  by  geese,  47.  The  siege  raised,  49. 
The  lower  part  built  with  hewn  stone,  vi.  4. 
Cafiitoline  hilly  i.  10.  Given  to  the  Sabines  for  their  residence,  3,1. 
xxxvii.  21.  40. 
Cafirae  marshy  i.  16. 
Caftuay  formerly  Vultumum,  iv.  37.  Remarkable  for  luxury, 
vii.  38.  Praefects  appointed  by  the  Romans  to  govern  it,  ix. 
20.  Hannibal  spends  the  winter  there,  xxiii.  18.  It  is  be¬ 
sieged  by  the  Romans,  xxv.  20.  22.  xxvi.  1.  4.  Taken  14. 
Cafittsay  son  of  CEsalces,  King  of  Numidia,  succeeds  his  father, 
and  is  slain,  xxix.  29. 
Cafiysy  King  of  Alba,  i.  3. 
Vafiysy  who  gave  name  to  Capua,  xiv.  37. 
Caralesy  xxiii.  40.  xxx.  39. 
Caranusy  first  King  of  Macedonia,  xlv.  9. 
Cflfria,  xxxiii.  19.  27. 
voi«  VI. — [C] 

INDEX. 

Carinas ^  part  of  Rome,  xxvL  10. 
Carmenta^  prophetess,  i.  7. 
Carmental  gate^  ii.  49. 
Carmentis^  a  craggy  hill,  v.  47. 
Carnutians^  v.  34. 
Carseoli^  colony,  x.  3.  15.  Refuses  its  proportion  oi’  troops, 
xxvii.  9.  xxix.  15.  xlv.  42. 
Carteia  taken  by  Hannibal,  xxi.  5. 
Carteia^  a  seaport  on  the  Atlantic  Ocean,  xxviii.  30. 
Carthaginiam  send  an  army  into  Sicily,  iv.  29.  Their  treaty 
with  the  Romans,  vii.  27.  Renewed,  ix.  43.  They  besiege 
Saguntum,  xxi.  6.  And  take  it,  14.  War  is  declared  by 
Rome,  18.  The  Carthaginians  are  finally  vanquished  by 
Scipio,  and  compelled  to  submit  to  his  terms  of  peace,  xxx. 
35,  37.  See  Hannibal^  Mago^  HasdrubaL  The  Carthagi¬ 
nians  send  to  Rome  the  first  payment  of  the  tribute,  and 
receive  some  of  their  hostages,  xxxii.  2.  Offer  ships  and 
corn  to  the  Romans,  xxxvi.  4.  Dispute  with  Masinissa,  xl. 
17.  Send  ambassadors  to  Rome,  with  complaints  against 
him,  xlii.  23. 
Carthage^  Aew,  described,  attacked  by  Scipio,  xxvi.  42.  Taken, 
with  immense  booty,  and  the  hostages  of  all  the  Spanish 
states,  46.  50. 
Car t halo y  Carthaginian  general,  conducts  the  prisoners  to  Rome, 
and  is  ordered  to  quit  Italy,  xxii.  58. 
C.  Carvilius  SpoletinuBy  capitulates  with  Perseus  for  the  garrison 
of  Uscana,  xliii.  18. 
L.  CarviliuBy  plebeian  tribune,  xxv.  3. 
57?.  CarviliuBy  curule  aedile,  x.  9. 
Sfi.  Carviliusy  advises  to  choose  half  the  senate  out  of  the  La- 
tines,  xxiii.  22.  Dies  augur,  xxvi.  23. 
Sfi.  Carviliusy  consul,  takes  Amiternum,  and  other  towns  in 
Samnium,xxxix.  44. 
CarystusyCiXy  in  Greece,  xxxi.  45.  xxxii.  16. 
CarystUBy  in  Liguria,  xlii.  7. 
Carystiansy  Grecian,  harassed  by  descents  of  the  Romans  and 
Rhodians,  xxxi.  45.  xxxii.  16.  Send  succour  to  Chalcis, 
XXXV.  38. 
Cassandreay  xxviii.  8.  xliii.  23.  Obliges  the  Romans  to  retire, 
xliv.  1 1,  12. 
CaBilinumy  xxii.  15.  Its  remarkable  siege,  xxiii.  17.  20.  It  is 
reebvered  by  the  Romans,  xxiv.  19. 
Casinumy  colony,  ix.  28.  xxii.  13.  xxvi.  9. 
Cassander  betrays  Maronea  to  Philip,  and  is  poisoned  by  his 
order,  xxxix.  34. 
C.  Cassius  Longinusy  consul,  xlii.  28. 
Sfi,  Cassiusy  consul,  takes  Pometia,  and  triumphs,  ii.  17.  Is  the 

INDEX. 

first  master  of  horse,  18.  A  second  time  consul,  33.  A 
third  time ;  he  first  proposes  an  agrarian  law,  is  found  guilty 
of  treason,  and  executed,  4 1 . 
Caator,  a  temple  vowed  to  him,  ii.  20.  viii.  1 1. 
Caatulo^  a  strong  city  in  Spain,  joins  the  Romans,  xxiv.  41. 
Re-unites  with  the  Carthaginians,  xxviii.  19.  Surrenders  to 
Scipio,  20. 
Catana^  xxvii.  8. 
Catafiultge^  engines,  xxi.  1 1.  xxvi.  47. 
Q.  Caaaiua^  plebeian  aedile,  xxvii.  6.  Carries  an  offering  to 
Delphi,  xxviii.  45. 
Caudium^  and  the  Caudine  forks,  ix.  2,  5.  10.  27. 
Caulonia  besieged  by  order  of  Fabius,  xxvii.  12.  Relieved  by 
Hannibal,  15. 
Caunus,  mount,  xL  50. 
instituted  by  Romulus,  i,  15.  Their  tribune,  Brutus,  59. 
CeltSy  V.  34. 
Celtiberia^  xxviii.  1. 
Celtiberian  mountains,  xxi.  43. 
Celtiberians  shake  off  the  yoke  of  the  Carthaginians,  xxii.  21. 
Are  engaged  by  the  Roman  generals,  on  the  same  terms  that 
they  had  stipulated  with  the  Carthaginians,  xxiv.  49.  They 
desert  Scipio,  xxv.  93.  Are  subdued  by  M.  Silanus,  xxviii. 
2.  They  attack  Fulvius  Fiaccus,  praetor,  xi.  30.  Are  de¬ 
feated,  32.  Are  finally  subdued,  xli.  26. 
Cenchrege^  port  of  Corinth,  xxviii.  8.  xxxii.  17. 
Cenomanian  Gaula  settle  in  Italy,  v.  35.  Are  attached  to  the 
Romans,  xxi.  55.  Join  the  Ligurians,  xxxi.  10.  Are  de- 
feated  by  Cn.  Cornelius,  xxxix.  3. 
Censors  created,  iv.  8.  First  plebeian,  vii.  22,  A  censor  dis¬ 
graced  by  his  colleague,  xxix.  37,  Term  of  the  office  redu¬ 
ced  from  five  years  to  one  year  and  a  half,  iv.  24.  ix.  *33. 
Census^  general  survey,  instituted,  i.  42,  43. 
Centuries  of  knights^  three  chosen  by  Romulus,  i.  13.  Their 
numbers  doubled  by  Servius  Tullius,  42.  The  people  divided 
into  centuries  by  the  same,  42.  Prerogative  century,  v.  18. 
X.  22.  xxiv.  7.  xxvi.  22, 
Centurion^  chief,  or  first,  primipilus,  vii.  41.  viii.  8. 
C,  Centeniusj  propraetor,  xxii.  8. 
M.  Centenius^  remarkable  centurion,  xxv.  19. 
Vefihallenia^  xxxvi.  11.  xxxvii.  13.  xxxix.  5. 
Cejihalus^  Epirote  general,  xliii.  18.  xlv.  26. 
Vcrcina^  island,  xxii.  31.  xxxiii,  48. 
Ceres^  ii.  ,41.  Her  temple,  iii.  55.  Her  mysteries,  xxxi.  47. 
Games,  xxx.  39. 
i'rssGtion  of  proclaimed,  iii.  3.  27.  iv.  26.  31.  vi.  2.  7. 

INDEX. 

vii,  6.  28.  To  contiuue  eighteen  days,  x.  21.  A  voluntary 
cessation,  ix.  7. 
Chair ^  curule,  i.  8.  ii.  54.  vii.  I .  x.  7.  One  sent  X0  king  Syphax, 
xxvii.  4. 
Chseroneay  xxxv.  46.  xlii.  43. 
Chalcedony  xxxv.  46, 
Chalcisy  in  Euboea,  whence  the  people  of  Cumae  derive  their 
origin,  viii.  22.  Garrisoned  by  Philip,  xxvii.  30.  Attempt¬ 
ed  by  the  Romans,  xxviii.  6.  Surrendered  to  Antiochus, 
xxxv.  51.  xliii.  7. 
ChaoniUy  xxxii.  5.  xliii.  23. 
Charilaua  surrenders  Palaepolis  to  the  Romans,  viii.  25. 
Cher&onesusy  yiSJLi.  16. 
Chiosy  island,  xxxvii.  14.  27. 
CibirUy  xxxviii.  14.  xlv.  25, 
C.  Cicereiusy  praetor,  xli.  28.  xlii.  21.  xlv.  15. 
Ciliciay  xxxiii.  19.  xxxv.  13.  xxxviii.  19. 
Ciminian  forest  penetrated  by  a  Roman  army,ix.  36,  37. 
Cinciusy  an  ancient  historian,  commended,  vii.  3. 
Cincius  Alimentus  taken  by  Hannibal,  xxi.  38.  Praetoi*, 
xxvi.  23.  xxvii.  7. 
M.  Cincius  Alimentusy  plebeian  tribune,  sent  to  Scipio,  xxix.  20. 
Circe y  i.  49. 
Circeiiy  colony,  i.  56.  ii.  39.  xxvii.  9.  xxix.  15. 
CircuSy  principal,  built  by  Tarquinius  Priscus.  i.  35.  Goals 
first  placed  in  it,  viii.  20. 
Circusy  Apollinarian,  hi,  63.  Overflowed,  xxx.  38. 
— — ,  Flaminian,  iii.  54.  The  altar  of  Neptune  therein,  xxviii 
11. 
CirtOy  capital  of  Cyphax,  surrenders  to  Masinissa,  xxx.  12.  On 
whom  Scipio  bestows  it,  44. 
Cithseroriy  mount,  xxxi.  26. 
Citiuniy  city,  xlii.  5 1 .  Mount,  xliii.  2 1 . 
Civil  law  published  by  Flavius,  ix.  46. 
Clamfietia  taken  by  the  Romans,  xxix.  38,  xxjc.  19. 
Classes  of  the  people,  i.  43.  iv.  4. 
Clastidium  betrayed  to  the  Carthaginians,  xxi.  48.  xxix.  1 1. 
Claudia  QuintUy  Roman  matron,  receives  the  Idaean  mother, 
xxix.  14. 
Claudian  family  always  zealous  champions  for  the  patricians, 
vi.  41.  And  opposers  of  the  plebeians,  ix.  34. 
- tribe,  ii.  16. 
- camp,  xxiii.  31.  39.  48.  xxv.  22. 
Claudiusy  historian,  viii.  19.  ix.  5.  Translated  the  annals  of 
Acilius,  xxv.  39. 
Claudius  Asellm  encounters  Jubellius  Taurea,  a  Campanian, 
xxiii.  46,  47. 

INDEX. 

AfiiiiuH  Claudius^  formerly  Atta  Clausus,  remove  from  Regil^ 
lum  to  Rome,  with  a  large  number  of  clients,  who  are  ad¬ 
mitted  citizens,  and  is  made  a  senator,  ii.  16.  Consul,  21. 
Apfiius  Claudius^  son  of  Appius,  ii.  56,  Is  sent  against  the 
Volscians,  and  his  army,  through  dislike  to  him,  fly  before 
the  enemy,  59. 
Ajipiua  Claudiusy  decemvir,  iii.  33.  His  ambition,  35.  Vio¬ 
lence,  36.  Lust,  44.  He  abdicates  the  decern virate,  54. 
And  puts  himself  to  death  in  prison,  58. 
Afifitua  Claudius^  son  of  the  preceding  military  tribune,  iv.  54. 
Ajipiua  Claudius^  grandson  of  the  decemvir,  opposes  the  ad¬ 
mission  of  plebeians  to  the  consulship,  vi.  40.  Is  made  dic¬ 
tator,  vii.  6.  Dies  consul,  25. 
Afiftiua  Claudius^  in  the  office  of  censor,  makes  the  famous  road, 
and  aquaeduct ;  through  his  advice,  the  Potitian  family  com¬ 
mit  the  charge  of  the  rites  of  Hercules  to  public  slaves,  and 
becomes  extinct,  ix.  29.  He  is  made  consul,  42.  Interrex, 
X.  11.  Consul  a  second  time,  15.  Praetor,  22.  His  pro¬ 
ceedings  against  the  Samnites,  31. 
Afipiua  Claudius^  consul,  first  makes  war  against  Carthage, 
xxxi.  1 
Appius  Claudius^  military  tribune,  xxii.  53.  Praetor,  xxiii.  24. 
Commands  in  Sicily,  30.  Consul,  xxv.  3.  Is  wounded  at 
the  siege  of  Capua,  xxvi.  1. 
C.  Claudius^  son  of  Appius,  consul,  iii.  15.  40.  58.  iv.  6. 
C.  Claudius  Cicero  prosecutes  the  consul  Romilius,  iii.  31. 
r.  Claudius  Centho^  interrex,  xxii.  34.  Dictator,  xxv.  2.  Prae¬ 
tor,  xxv.  2. 
C.  Claudius  PTero^  xxiv.  17.  Commands  in  Spain,  and  is  baf¬ 
fled  by  Hasdrubal,  xxvi.  17.  Is  made  consul,  xxvii.  34, 
Encounters  Hannibal  several  times,  41,  42.  Goes  against 
Hasdrubal,  43.  Orders  HasdrubaPs  head  to  be  thrown  in 
the  enemy’s  view,  51.  Triumphs,  xxviii,  9.  Is  made  cen- 
sor,  xxix.  37. 
C,  Claudius  Pulcher^  consul,  xli.  8.  Triumphs,  13. 
C.  Aero,  praetor,  xl.  18. 
M,  Claudius^  client  of  the  decemvir,  claims  Virginia  as  his 
slave,  iii.  44.  Goes  into  exile,  58. 
M.  Claudius  Marcellus^  praetor,  xxii.  35.  Is  sent,  after  the  bat¬ 
tle  of  Cannae,  to  collect  the  remains  of  the  army,  57.  Defeats 
Hannibal  at  Nola,  xxiii.  16.  Is  chosen  consul  a  second  time, 
and  abdicates,  31.  As  proconsul,  repulses  Hannibal,  46.  Is 
made  consul  a  third  time,  xxiv.  9.  Commands  in  Sicily,  21. 
Besieges  Syracuse,  33.  Takes  it.  xxv.  23,24.  Triumphson 
the  Alban  mount,  and  enters  the  city  in  ovation,  xxvi.  21. 
Is  consul  a  fourth  time,  2?.  Worsted  by  Hannibal,  xxvii.  13. 

INDEX. 

Defeats  him,  1 4.  Is  made  consul  a  fifth  time,  2 1 .  Ensnared 
by  a  stratagem,  and  slain,  26,  27. 
M.  Claudius  Marcellus^  son  of  the  consul,  military  tribune,  xx.vi* 
26.  xxix.  11.  20. 
M.  Claudius  Martellus^  praetor,  xxxviii.  35. 
P.  Claudius  Pulcher^  consul,  xxxix.  32. 
P.  Claudius^  praefect  of  the  allies,  xxvii.  41. 
Q.  Claudius^  plebeian  tribune,  xxi.  63. 
Q.  Claudius  Flamen^  praetor,  xxvii.  21. 
Tib.  Claudius  Asellus.^  military  tribune,  xxvii.  41.  Praetor, 
xxviii.  10.  Plebeian  aedile,  xxix.  11. 
Tib.  Claudius  JsTero.^  praetor,  xxix.  11.  Consul,  xxxviii.  26.  39 
Clazomenians.^  xxxviii.  39. 
Ckomenesy  first  tyrant  of  Lacedxmon,  xxxiv.  26. 
Cleonde^  xxxiii.  14.  xxxiv.  25. 
Lacedaemonian  general,  brings  an  army  into  Italy, 
and  takes  Thuriae,  but  is  driven  out  by  the  Patavians,  x.  2. 
Clf^ofiatra.^  consort  of  Alexander,  King  of  Epire,  viii.  24. 
CUoftatra^  Queen  of  Egypt,  xxvii.  4.  xxxvii.  3.  xlv.  13. 
Cioacina.^  iii.  48. 
Cloak^  embroidered,  sent  to  Cleopatra,  xxvii.  4. 
Cloak  of  the  Grecian  fashion,  charged  as  an  instance  of  effemr 
nacy  on  Scipio,  xxix.  19. 
Claeliayii.  13. 
Gracchus  Cla^lius.^  .Lquan  general,  vanquished,  and  taken  by 
Q.  Cincinnatus,  iii.  28. 
Qlrelius  Tullius^  Roman  ambassador,  murdered  by  order  of  To- 
lumnius,  iv.  17, 
Q.  Claelius  Siculus^  one  of  the  first  consular  tribunes,  iv.  7. 
Q.  Claelius.^  consul,  ii.  21. 
Q.  Claelius  Siculus^  censor,  vi.  31. 
P.  Claelius.^  consular  tribune,  vi.  31, 
Clondicusy  Gallic  general,  in  treaty  with  Perseus,  xliv.  26. 
Clndian  trench,  i.  23.  ii.  39. 
Cludius.,  Volscian  general,  iv.  9. 
C.  Cluilius.^  chief  magistrate  at  Alba,  i.  22,  23. 
Clusium^  V.  33.  Besieged  by  the  Gauls,  xxxv.  20. 
Clusium.^  formerly  Gamers,  x.  25. 
Ctuviay  taken  by  the  Samnites,  I'ecovcred  by  the  Romans,  ix.  3. 
Cluvia  and  Opfiia^  Campanian  women,  have  their  liberty  and 
property  restored,  xxvi.  34. 
C.  Cluvius.^  lieutenant-general,  xliv.  40. 
C.  Cluvius  Sajculuj  praetor,  xli.  28, 
S/i  Cluvius^  praetor,  xlii.  9. 
id z/5,  xxxvii.  16. 
Cnossians  refuse  to  restore  the  Roman  prisoners,  xxxvii.  60. 
Caek-Syria^  xxxiii,  19.  xlii.  29.  xlv,  1 1. 

INDEX. 

Caelimontan  g^ate  struck  by  lightning,  xxxv.  9. 
Caelian  mount  added  to  the  city,  i.  30.  33. 
Collatia  taken  from  the  Sabines,  i.  38. 
Collatinus.  See  Tarquinius. 
Colline  gate^  ii.  11.  iii.  51.  vii.  1 1.  viii.  15.  xxvi.  10. 
Cselius^  ancient  historian,  xxi.  38.  xxii.  31.  xxiii.  6.  xxvi.  IK 
xxvii.  27.  xxix.  27.  xxxiii.  7.  xxxviii.  46. 
Colofihony  xxxvii.  26.  xxxviii.  39. 
Combulteria^  xxiii.  39.  xxiv.  20. 
Come  Macra^  xxxii.  13.  36.  xxxiii.  36. 
Cominium  besieged,  x.  39.  Burnt,  44.  xxv.  14. 
Comitium^  part  of  the  Forum  where  the  curias  assembled,  vi.  15. 
Covered,  xxvii.  36. 
Post,  Comitiusy  consul,  ii.  18.  Again,  33. 
Comjisa  given  up  to  the  Carthaginians,  xxiii.  1 .  Recovered  b) 
the  Romans,  xxiii.  20. 
Concordy  her  temple,  ix.  46.  xxii.  33.  xxvi.  23.  Altar,  xxiv.  22. 
Conscrifit  FatherSy  so  named,  ii.  1. 
Commentaries  of  Numa,  published  by  Ancus  Marcius,  i.  32. 
- of  Scrvius  Tullius,  i.  60. 
- of  the  pontiffs,  iv.  3.  vi.  I. 
- of  King  Eumenes,  xliii.  6. 
Consentiay\i\\.  24.  xxv.  1.  xxviii.  ll.xxx.  19. 
Consuahoy  games  of  Neptune,  i.  9. 
Consulsy  first  created,  i.  60.  Decemvirs,  iii.  33.  Consuls  again, 
54,  55.  Consular  tribunes,  iv.  6,  7.  One  plebeian  consul 
admitted,  vi.  35.  42.  Both  consuls  plebeian,  xxiii.  31. 
Contenebra  taken  by  the  Romans,  and  plundered,  against  the 
will  of  the  commanders,  vi.  4. 
Coruy  colony,  viii.  9.  Refuses  contribution,  xxvii.  9. 
CorbiOy  ii.  39.  iii.  66. 
Cor  bio  y  in  Spain,  taken,  xxxix.  42. 
Corey  ray  island,  xxvi.  24.  xxxvi.  42. 
Corinthy  xxvii.  31.  xxxii.  37.  xxxviii.  7,  xlv.  28. 
Corinthian  bayy  xxvi.  26,  xxviii.  7.  xliv.  1. 
Corioli  taken  by  Marcius,  ii,  33. 
Cornelia  forced  to  drink  the  poison  which  she  had  prepared  for 
her  husband,  viii.  18. 
Cornelius  Bar  bat  us  y  chief  pontiff,  ix.  46. 
A,  Corneliusy  quaestor,  iii.  24.  Chief  pontiff,  iv.  27.  Consular 
tribune,  vi.  36.  Again,  42. 
AuL  Cornelius  ArvinUy  dictator,  viii.  38. 
Aul.  Cornelius  Arvinuy  herald,  delivers  up  to  the  Samnites  th< 
sureties  for  the  convention  of  Caudium,  ix.  10. 
AuL  Cornelius  Cossusy  military  tribune,  kills  Tolumnius,  King 
of  the  Venetians,  iv.  19.  And  offers  the  grand  spoils,  20.  1? 
made  consul,  30.  Consular  tribune,  31. 

INDEX. 

AuL  Cornelius  Co«sm«,  dictator,  vi,  11.  Overthrows  the  Volsci- 
ans,  13.  Imprisons  M.  Manlius  for  sedition,  16. 
AuL  Cornelius  Cossus^  master  of  horse,  vii.  19.  Again,  26. 
Consul,  28.  Vanquishes  the  Samnites,  and  triumphs,  36. 
38.  The  first  who  waged  war  with  the  Samnites,  x.  31. 
AuL  Cornelius  Mammula^  propraetor,  commanding  in  Sardinia, 
xxiii.  21.  Praetor,  xxxv.  24. 
C.  Cornelius^  consular  tribune,  vi.  5. 
Cn.  Cornelius  Cossus^  consular  tribune,  iv.  49.  Again,  61. 
Cn,  Cornelius  Cossus^  consul,  iv.  54.  Consular  tribune,  58- 
Again,  v.  10. 
Cn.  Cornelius  Dolabella^  king  in  religious  rites,  xxvii.  36. 
Cn.  Cornelius  Lentulus^  military  triWne,  xxii.  49.  Quaestor, 
he  fights  Hannibal  with  doubtful  success,  xxv.  19.  Curulc 
aedile,  xxix.  11.  Consul,  xxx.  40.  Protests  against  the  de- 
cree  of  the  senate  giving  peace  to  the  Carthaginians,  43. 
Cn.  Cornelius  Cethegus.^  consul,  xxxii.  27. 
Cn.  Cornelius  JMerenda^  and  Cn.  Cornelius  Blasio,  praetors, 
xxxiv,  42. 
Cn.  Cornelius  /Tis/zfl/ws,  consul,  xli.  14 
i.  Cornelius  Sci/iis^  sent  by  his  brother  against  Hasdrubal,  xxi. 
32.  His  actions,  60,  61.  xxii.  19.  21.  He  acts  in  conjunction 
with  his  brother,  xxiii.  26.  29.  48.  49.  xxiv.  41  to  49.  Com¬ 
mands  against  Hasdrubal  Barcas,  xxv.  32.  Deserted  by  the 
Celtiberians,  he  and  his  army  are  cut  off,  36. 
L.  Cornelius  Lentulus^  consul,  viii.  22.  Advises  to  accept  the 
terms  dictated  by  Pontius,  at  Caudium,  ix.  4. 
Jj,  Cornelius  Maluginensis.,  consul,  iii.  22,  23.  40. 
L.  Cornelius  Scipio^  interrex,  vii.  2.  Consul,  23. 
7..  Cornelius  Scipio.^  consul,  x.  11.  25,  26. 
L.  Cornelius  Caudinus^  curule  aedile,  xxvii.  21. 
7^.  Cornelius  Lentulus^  chief  pontiff,  xxii.  10. 
L.  Cornelius  Lentulus.^  commander  in  religious  affairs,  xxv.  2- 
Praetor,  41.  Lieutenant-general,  xxvii.  14. 
L.  Cornelius  Lentulus  succeeds  Scipio  in  the  government  ol 
Spain,  xxviii.  38.  Defeats  ludibilis,  who  is  slain,  xxix.  2,  3. 
Is  curule  aedile,  1 1. 
L.  Cornelius  Scipio.,  brother  of  Publius,  takes  Oringis,  xxviii. 
3.  Is  elected  praetor,  xxxiv.  54.  Consul,  xxxvi.  45.  Arrives 
in  Asia,  xxxvii.  33.  Defeats  Antiochus,  43.  Triumphs  and 
assumes  the  title  Asiaticus,  59.  Condemned  for  having  ac¬ 
cepted  presents  from  Antiochus,  xawtvii.  55.  Ordered  into 
prison,  58.  Liberated  by  Tib.  Gracchus,  plebeian  tribune, 
60.  At  the  review  of  the  knights  be  is  deprived  of  his  horse, 
xxxix.  44. 
L.  Cornelius  Merula.,  praetor,  xxxii.  7.  Consul,  xxxiv.  54.  His 
letter  after  he  had  defeated  the  Boians  at  Mutina,  xxxv.  6. 

INDEX. 

M.  Cornelius  Cqbbxib^  consul,  iv.  51. 
Al,  Cornelius  Maluginensis^  decemvir,  iii.  35.  40,  4!.  Consul, 
iv.  21.  Censor,  V.  31.  Consular  tribune,  vi.  36.  Again,  42. 
M,  Cornelius  Cethegus^  chief  pontiff,  xxv.  2.  Prxtor,  41.  Com¬ 
mands  in  Sicily,  xxvi.  21.  Censor,  xxvii.  1 1.  Consul,  xxix. 
11.  Proconsul,  defeats  Mago,  xxx.  18. 
M,  Cornelius  Scijiio^  praetor,  xii  14. 
/*.  Corne/ius  consular  tribune,  iv.  49.  Again,  56.  Dic¬ 
tator,  57,  Consular  tribune,  58.  Again,  v.  24. 
F,  Cornelius  Arvina^  consul,  ix.  42  Censor,  x.  47.  Again, 
consul,  xi.  24. 
F.  Cornelius  Maluginensis^  consular  tribune,  iv  61  v.  16. 
F.  Cornelius  fc/u‘o,  master  of  horse,  v.  19.  Consular  tribune, 
24.  Interrcx,  32.  Again,  vi  1.  One  of  the  first  curule 
sediles,  vii.  1.  Dictator,  ix.  44. 
F.  Cornelius  Lentulus^  praetor,  xxiv  9.  Commands  in  Sicily, 
10.  and  XXV.  6. 
F.  Cornelius  Sdpio  Asina^  consul,  xx  56.  Interrex,  xxii.  34. 
xxvi.  8. 
P.  Cornelius  Scipio^  consul,  xxi.  6.  Attempts  in  vain  to  over- 
take  Hannibal  in  Gaul,  32.  And  hastens  back  to  the  Po,  39. 
Is  defeated,  and  wounded  at  the  Ticinus,  46.  Recommends 
to  his  colleague  to  avoid  fighting,  52,  53.  Sails  to  Spain,  and 
joins  his  brother,  xxii.  22  Marches  against  Mago,  xxv.  32. 
Is  defeated,  and  slain,  34. 
P.  Cornelius  Scipio^  son  of  the  preceding,  rescues  his  father  from 
imminent  danger  at  the  Ticinus,  xxi.  46.  After  the  battle  of 
Cannae,  he  breaks  up  a  conspiracy,  formed  for  abandoning 
Italy,  xxii.  53.  At  twenty-four  years  of  age,  is  sent  procon¬ 
sul  into  Spain,  xxvi.  18.  Takes  New  Carthage  in  one  day, 
xxvi.  46.  Restores  to  Allucius  his  spouse,  50.  Acts  in  Spain 
with  extraordinary  success,  xxvii.  17,  18.  xxviii.  i.  4.  12.  16. 
Passes  over  to  Africa,  on  a  visit  to  Syphax,  17.  Dines  at  tlie 
same  table  with  Hasdrubal,  18.  Quells  a  mutiny  at  Sucro, 
xxiv.  29.  Vanquishes  Mandonius  and  Indibilis,  32,  34. 
Forms  an  alliance  between  the  Romans  and  Masinissa,  35. 
On  his  return  to  Rome,  is  elected  consul,  38.  Goes  to  Sicily, 
45.  Prepares  for  a  descent  on  Africa,  xxix.  1.  Passes  over 
thither,  and  meets  with  great  success,  24  to  35,  Overthrows 
Syphax  and  Hasdrubal,  xxx.  3.  9.  Reproves  Mashussa*s 
conduct  towards  Sophonisba,  14.  Confers  with  Hannibal,  29. 
31.  *  Defeats  him,  32,  35.  Dictates  terms  of  peace,  37.  Re¬ 
turns  to  Rome,  triumphs,  and  assumes  the  surname  of  Afri- 
canus,  45.  Is  created  censor,  xxii.  7.  Consul,  a  second  time, 
xxiv.  42.  Converses  with  Hannibal  at  Ephesus,  xxxv.  14. 
Accepts  the  post  of  lieutenant-general  under  his  brother, 
xxxvii.  1.  Receives  his  son  from  Antiochus,  and  rejects  his 
\  OL.  VI. — [Dl 

INDEX. 

ofters,  34,  36.  Prescribes  the  tenns  of  peace,  xxxvii.  45.  Is 
accused  of  bribery,  xxxviii.  50.  Retires  to  Liturnum,  52. 
Where  he  dies,  and  according  to  his  orders  previously  given, 
is  buried,  53. 
F.  Cornelius  Scifiio^  son  of  Africanus,  augur,  xl.  42. 
F.  Cornelius  Sci/iio  JSfasica^  son  of  Comelius,  not  yet  of  quaesto- 
rian  age,  is  judged  the  best  man  in  Rome,  and  sent  to  receive 
the  Id X an  Mother,  xxix.  13.  Made  consul,  xxxvi.  1.  He 
triumphs  over  the  Boians,  xxxvi.  40.  Is  commander  of  a 
colony,  xxxix  55.  xl.  34. 
F,  Cornelius  Sulla,  prsetor,  xxv.  2,  3.  The  first  that  solem¬ 
nized  the  Apollinarian  games,  12.  19.  22. 
Ser,  Cornelius.^  consul,  ii.  41.  Flamen  Quirinalis,  dies  of  the 
plague,  iii.  22. 
Ser,  Cornelius  Maluginensis^  consular  tribune,  v.  36.  Again, 
vi.  6.  A  third  time,  18,  A  fourth,  22.  A  fifth,  27.  A 
sixth,  36.  A  seventh,  38.  Master  of  horse,  vii.  9. 
Ser,  Cornelius^  military  tribune,  xxix.  2. 
Ser.  Cornelius  Lentulus,^  curule  xdile,  xxviii.  10.  Prxtor. 
xliii.  11. 
Cornelian  tribe,  xxxviii.  36. 
Cormculuni  taken  by  Tarquinius  Priscus,  i.  38. 
Cornus^  capital  of  Sardinia,  taken  by  T.  Manlius,  xxiii.  40. 
Coronea  besieged  by  Quintius,  xxxiii.  29.  Its  lands  wasted, 
xxxvi.  20. 
Cors?cfl,  island,  xxii.  31.  xxx.  39. 
Corsicans  revolt  from  the  Romans,  xli.  19.  Peace  is  granted  to 
them,  xlii.  7. 
Cortona  solicits  peace  with  the  Romans,  a  truce  is  granted, 
ix.  37. 
Corycua,^  promontory,  xxxiii.  20.  xxxvi.  43.  xxxvii.  12. 
Cosa  commended  for  fidelity,  xxvii.  10.  Its  harbour,  xxii.  11. 
xxx.  39. 
M,  Cosconius,,  military  tribune,  xxx.  18, 
Cottoj  Bastarnian  chieftain,  xl.  57. 
Cotton^  city,  xxx>  iii.  25. 
Co?i/s,  King  of  the  Odrysians,  xlii.  29.  Assists  Perseus,  51.  67 
Cranon^  xxxvi.  10.  14,  xlii.  64. 
CrateruSy  xxxv.  26, 
Cremaste^  otherwise  Larissa,  xxxi.  46.  Besieged,  xlii.  56. 
Cremeray  river,  ii.  49. 
Cremona  besieged  by  the  Gauls,  xxxi.  10.  Its  lands  vfasted. 
xxxviii.  10,  11. 
Cretans,^  xxiv  30;  Their  civil  war,  xli.  25. 
Cretan  archers,  xxxvii.  41. 
Creusa^  mother  of  Ascanius,  i  3. 
Creuaa^  port  of  Thespiae,  xxxvi.  21. 

INDEX. 

Ctito^  of  Bercea,  ambassador  from  Philip  to  Hannibal,  xxiii.  39. 
Croton^  i.  18.  Revolts  to  Hannibal  after  the  battle  of  Cannae, 
xxii,  61.  Its  inhabitants  remove  to  Locri,  xxiv.  3.  xxix.  36. 
XXX.  19. 
Crown  of  gold  presented  in  the  Capitol  to  Jupiter,  by  the  La- 
tines,  ii.  22.  iii.  57.  See  iv.  20.  vii,  38.  Soldiers  honoured 
with  golden  crowns,  vii.  10.  26.  27.  x.  44, 
Crowuy  civic,  vi,  20.  x.  46. 
- obsidional,  tii.  37. 
- mural,  vi.  20.  x.  46. 
- -  vailarian,  x.  46. 
- laurel,  xxiii.  1 1 .  xxvii.  37. 
colony,  founded  by  Romulus,  i.  11.  Taken  by 
Tarquinius,  38.  By  the  Romans,  ii.  19.  iii.  42. 
Crustummiansy  i.  9.  11. 
Crustuminian  tril>e,  xlii.  34. 
Cumse^  ii.  9.  iv.  44.  ix.  19,  Besieged  by  Hannibal,  and  defended 
by  Gracchus,  xxiii.  36.  The  siege  raised,  37.  Its  lands  ra¬ 
vaged  by  Hannibal,  xxiv.  13.  xli.  16. 
J°.  Curatiusy  plebeian  tribune,  accuses  two  military  tribunes. 
V.  1 1. 
CuriOy  the  first  plebeian,  xxvii.  8. 
Curiatii  fight  the  Horatii,  i.  24,  25. 
F,  CuriatiuSy  consul,  iii.  32. 
C.  Curtiusy  consul,  iv.  1. 
M,  Curtins  leaps  into  a  gulph  in  the  Forum,  vii.  6. 
Curtian  lakCy  i.  13.  vii.  6. 
Cycladesy  islands,  xxxiv.  26.  xliv.  28. 
CycliadeSy  prastor  of  the  Achaeans,  xxxi.  25.  Banished,  xxxii.  19. 
CyrendBy  xxiii.  10.  34.  62. 
Cyllency  xxvii.  32. 
Cynosargesy  xxxi.  24. 
Cynosce/zAa/a?,  xxxiii.  16,  17. 
Cyfirian  streety  i.  48. 
Cyfirusy  xxxiii.  41. 
Cyrusy  King  of  Persia,  ix.  17. 

D 
Damaclesy  an  Argive,  his  bravery,  xxxiv.  25. 
DamocrituSy  praetor  of  the  iEtolians,  xxxi.  32.  Envoy  to  Nabis, 
XXXV.  12.  Falls  into  the  hands  of  the  Romans,  xxxvi.  24. 
Disappointed  in  an  attempt  to  escape,  he  kills  himself, 
xxxvii.  46. 
Dardaniansy  xxvi.  25.  Ravage  Macedonia,  xxvii.  33.  Are  in¬ 
vaded  by  Philip,  xxviii.  8.  Philip  proposes  to  exterminate 
them,  xl.  57.  They  are  defeated  bv  the  Bastarnians,  xH.  19 

INDEX 

Da,8iu9  Altinius  of  Arpi,  a  traitor,  thro^Ti  into  prison  by  the 
Romans,  his  family  burned  by  Hannibal,  xxiv.  45. 
Dasisy  of  Salapia,  favours  Hannibal,  xxvi.  38. 
Dasius^  of  Brundusium,  betrays  Clastidium  to  Hannibal,  xxi.  48 
Das&aretiam^  xxvii.  32.  xxxi.  33.  xlv.  26. 
Decemvirs^  appointed  to  form  a  body  of  laws,  iii.  32.  A  new 
set  elected,  35.  Their  cruelty  and  tyranny,  36,  37,  They 
retain  the  power  after  their  time  had  expired,  38.  Arc 
compelled  to  abdicate  the  office,  54.  Two  of  them  die  in  pri~ 
son ;  the  rest  are  banished,  and  their  goods  confiscated,  581 
Decemvirs^  commissioners  of  religious  matters,  half  patrician-t 
and  half  plebeian,  vi.  37.  42. 
Decimation  of  soldiers,  ii.  59. 
C.  Dccimius  Flavus^  military  tribune,  repulses  Hannibars  ele¬ 
phants,  xxvii.  1 4.  Praetor,  xxxix.  32. 
P,  Decius  Mua  rescues  the  legions  from  a  desperate  situation, 
vii.  34,  35,  36.  Is  chosen  consul,  viii.  3.  Devotes  himself 
for  the  army,  ix,  10. 
P.  Decius  Mus^  consul,  ix.  28,  29.  A  second  time,  when  he 
commands  in  Etruria,  41.  Censor,  46.  A  third  time  con¬ 
sul,  X.  14.  Proconsul;  he  performs  great  exploits,  16  to  20. 
A  fourth  time  consul,  22.  He  devotes  himself  for  the  army, 
28. 
Debts  very  great  at  Rome ;  disturbances  and  secession  in  conse¬ 
quence,  ii.  23.  33.  Debts  contracted  by  rebuilding,  vi.  27. 
Commissioners  (mensarii)  appointed  to  regulate  matters  res¬ 
pecting  debts,  vii.  21.  A  law  passed  against  imprisoning 
debtors,  viii.  28. 
Decuman  gate^  iii.  5.  x.  32. 
Dedication  of  a  temple  must  be  performed  by  a  consul  or  gene 
r^l,  ix.  45. 
Delium^  a  temple  of  Apollo,  and  asylum,  xxxv.  51. 
Delos  island,  deemed  sacred  and  inviolable,  xliv.  29. 
Delfihic  oracles^  i,  56,  v.  15,  16.  28.  xxix.  10. 
Delfihi^  i.  56.  v.  15,  16.  28.  xli.  25.  xlii.  15.  17.  40.  xlv.  27. 
Demaratusy  father  of  Lucumo,  i.  34. 
Demetriasy  in  Thessaly,  xxvii  32.  xxviii.  5.  8.  xxxiii.  31.  xxx>. 
34. 
Demetriumy  xxviii.  6. 
Demetriusy  son  of  Philip,  xl.  5.  Ills  quarrel  with  Perseus,  and 
its  immediate  consequences,  7  to  16.  21.  23.  He  is  poisoned 
at  Heraclea,  24. 
DemetriuSy  of  Pharos,  xxii.  33. 
Deserters  scourged,  and  thrown  from  the  rock,  xxiv.  20. 
- Latine,  beheaded,  xxxiii.  43. 
Devoting  law,  iii.  55.  vii.  41.  One  of  the  .fiquans  and  Vol- 
scians,  iv.  26.  The  principal  elders  in  Rome  devote  them 

INDEX. 

selves,  on  the  approach  of  the  Gauls,  v.  4K  A  consul,  dic¬ 
tator,  or  praetor,  may  devote  either  himself,  or  any  soldier 
regularly  enlisted,  for  the  army,  viii.  10. 
Diana  of  Efiheaus^  and  her  temple  on  the  Aventine,  i.  45.  A 
lectistemium  in  honour  of  her,  xxii.  10.  Her  grove,  xxvii.  4. 
Festival  of  three  days  at  Syracuse,  xxv.  23.  Her  temple  at 
Abydus,  xxxi.  17.  At  Aulis,  xlv.  27. 
Diana  Amarynthis^  her  festival  at  Eretria,  xxxv.  38, 
Diana  Taurofioloa^  xliv.  44. 
Dianium^  i.  48. 
Dicaearchus^  proper  name,  xxxiii.  2.  xxxv.  12.  xxxvi.  28. 
Dice  played  with,  iv.  17. 
Dictator  first  created,  ii.  18.  No  appeal  from  him,  29.  iii.  20. 
An  instance  of  an  appeal  by  Fabius,  viii.  33.  Dictator  nomi¬ 
nated  to  drive  the  nail,  vii.  3.  viii.  18.  The  first  plebeian,  vii. 
17.  Dictator  not  allowed  to  use  a  horse  without  leave  of 
the  people,  xxiii.  14.  Two  dictators  at  one  time,  22,  23. 
Warm  disputes  about  the  nomination  of  dictators,  iv.  56. 
xxvii.  5. 
Didaa^  governor  of  Paeonia,  poisons  Demetrius,  xl.  24. 
Hex  Digitius  claims  a  mural  crown,  on  the  capture  of  New  Car¬ 
thage,  xxvi.  48. 
Hex  Digitizia^  praetor,  unsuccessful  in  Spain,  xxxv.  I.  xliii.  1 1. 
Dimallum  taken  by  .kmilius,  xxix.  12. 
Dmocrafre#,  Macedonian  general,  xxiii.  18. 
Dinocratea^  praetor  of  Messene,  xxxix  49. 
Dinomenes^  life.-guard  of  Hieronymus,  conspires  against  him, 
xxiv.  7.^  Is  made  praetor  at  Syracuse,  23. 
Z)io med^’s*plains,  XXV.  12 
Dionysius^  tyrant  of  Sicily,  gets  possession  of  the  citadel  of 
Croton,  xxiv.  3.  An  expression  of  his,  22. 
Dioxifipus^  Athenian  general,  and  ?  . 
Dipylusy  part  of  Athens,  5 
Discipline^  military,  severely  enforced  by  Manlius,  viii.  7.  Sup¬ 
ported  by  the  dictator  Papirius,  34,  35.  Its  gradual  impro\e 
ment,  ix.  17. 
Disfranchised ^{2tT2iYn  facti,"'  iv.  24.  xxiv.  18.  xxix.  37,  See. 
Dodonxan  Jupiter^  his  caution  to  Pyrrhys,  viii  24. 
Dolopians  declared  free,  xxxiii.  34.  Join  the  ^toIians,xxxviii 
3.  5.  8. 
Cn.  Domitiusy  consul,  viii.  17. 
Cn.  Domitius  CalvinuSy  curule  aedile,  x.  9. 
Cn.  Domitius  Mnoharbusy  plebeian  aedile,  xxxiii.  42,  Consul, 
xxxv.  10.  xlv.  17. 
Dorimachusy  .^.tolian,  xxvi.  24. 
Dorisy  its  towns  taken,  xxviii.  " 
Drutntia^  xxi.  31. 

INDEX, 

Dry  season^  remarkable,  iv.  30. 
Cseso  Duihusy  iii.  35.  Consul,  viii.  16. 
Cseso  Duilius,  plebeian  consular  tribune,  v.  13.  7.  21. 
M.  Duillius^  plebeian  tribune,  ii.  58.  Prosecutes  Ap.  Claudius, 
61.  His  good  conduct  respecting  the  decemvirs,  iii.  52.  54. 
He  procures  the  passing  of  a  law,  allowing  an  appeal  from 
the  consuls,  54.  Opposes  his  colleagues,  who  wish  to  con¬ 
tinue  in  office,  64.  Reduces  the  rate  of  interest,  vii  16. 
Duumvirs^  judges  of  capital  offences,  i.  26.  vi.  20. 
- -  commissioners  in  religious  affairs,  keepers  of  the 
Sibylline  books,  iii.  10.  v.  13.  Their  number  increased  to 
ten,  vi.  37. 
Duumvirsy  naval,  ix.  30. 
xxvii.  31.  xxxii.  22.  xxxviii.  29. 
Byrrachium^xxix.  12.  xlii.  48. 

E 

i.  Ebutiufiy  consul,  iii.  6. 
M.  EbutiuB^  military  tribune,  xli.  1. 
M.  Ebutius  Elva^  commissioner  of  a  colony,  iv.  11. 
M.  Ebutius  Elva^  praetor,  xliv.  17. 
Postumus  Ebutius  Cornicen^  consul,  iv.  11.  P.  Ebutius,  xxxix. 
9,  12. 
T.  Ebutius^  consul,  and  master  of  horse,  ii.  19. 
T.  Ebutius  Carus^  commander  of  a  colony, xxxix.  55.  Praetor, 
xlii.  4. 
Rcetra^  iii.  10.  vi.  31. 
Ecetrans,  peace  granted  to  them,  and  part  of  their  lands  taken 
from  them,  ii.  25.  They  revolt  to  the  iEquans,  iii.  4. 
Echedemus  employed  by  Philip  as  envoy  to  the  Acarnaniaiis, 
xxxiii.  16. 
Echedemus^  Athenian  ambassador,  xxxvii.  7. 
Echinus^  xxxii.  33.  xxxiv.  23. 
Eclifise  of  the  sun,  xxii.  1.  xxx.  2.  38.  xxxvii.  4. 
- of  the  moon,  foretold  to  the  army  by  Sulpicius  Gallus, 
xliv.  37.  Custom  of  making  noise  on  it,  xxvi.  5. 
E^desco^  a  celebrated  Spanish  general,  joins  Scipio,  xxvii.  17. 
Edessa^  xlv.  29. 
Egeria^  nymfih^  i.  19. 
Egyfit^  viii.  24.  See  Ptolemy^  Cleofiatra. 
Egerius^  son  of  Aruns,  so  named  from  his  poverty,  i.  34.  38. 
Gellius  Egnatius^  Samnite  general,  advises  war  with  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  x.  18.  Invites  the  Umbrians  to  join  him,  and  tempts 
the  Gauls,  21.  Is  killed,  29. 
Elatia^  xxviii.  7.  xxxii.  18.  21.  Taken  by  the  Romans,  24. 
Roman,  slain  by  the  Gauls,  v.  41.  Elders  obliged  to 

INDEX. 
undertake  the  guard  of  the  city,  v.  10.  vi.  2.  6.  Cohorts 
formed  of  elders,  x.  21. 
Elders^  Carthaginian,  thirty  form  the  principal  council  of  state, 
XXX.  16. 
Eleans  wage  war  with  the  Achaeans,  xxvii.  31,  32,  33.  Macha- 
nidas  resolves  to  attack  them  during  the  Olympic  games, 
xxviii.  7.  They  send  ambassadors  to  Antiochus,  xxxvi.  5. 
Elicius^  Jupiter,  i,  20. 
Elefihants  first  used  by  the  Romans,  xxxi.  36.  Elephants  con¬ 
fuse  their  own  party,  xxvii.  14.  Are  conveyed  over  the 
Rhone,  xxi.  28,  Method  of  killing  them  invented  by  Has- 
drubal,  xxvii.  49. 
Elimcea^  xxxi.  40. 
Elimseans^  xxxv.  48.  xxxvii.  40. 
Elis^  xxvii.  32.  xxxvi.  31.  xxxviii.  32. 
Elito~uius^  Gallic  chief,  crosses  the  Alpes,  v.  35. 
Emathia^  or  Paeonia,  xl.  3.  xliv.  44. 
country,  xxix,  25.  33. 
Elmfiorwe^  city  in  Spain,  founded  by  Phocaeans,  xxi.  60.  xxvh 
19.  xxviii.  42. 
Emtiorium^  fort  near  Placentia,  xxi.  57. 
Enifieus^  river,  xliv.  8.  20.  27. 
Enna  seized  by  the  Romans,  xxiv.  39. 
Q.  Ennius^  his  observation  respecting  Fab.  Maximus,  xxx.  26 
Eordaea^  xxxi.  39.  xlii.  53.  xlv.  30. 
Ephesus^  xxxiii.  38.  xxxviii.  12.  39. 
Epicrates^iuCLxVu  13,  14,  15. 
Epicydes  sent  by  Hannibal,  with  his  brothei  Hippocrates,  am¬ 
bassador  to  Hieronymus,  xxiv.  6.  23.  Both  elected  praetors 
at  Syracuse,  27.  They  seize  Syracuse,  32.  Epicydes  com¬ 
mands  in  the  city  when  besieged  by  the  Romans,  35.  He 
leaves  it,  xxv.  27.  And  goes  to  Africa,  xxvi,  40. 
Epicydes  Sindon^  killed  at  Syracuse,  xxv.  28. 
Epidaurm^  x.  47.  xlv.  28. 
Epipolse^  part  of  Syracuse,  xxv.  24. 
Epirus^  viii.  3.  xxix.  12.  xxxii  13.  xlv.  34. 
Equestrian  estate,  v.  7. 
- spoils,  viii.  7. 
- statue,  ix.  43. 
Eretria^  xxxii.  13.  16.  xxxiii.  34.  xxxv.  .'^8, 
Eretum^  iii.  29.  xxvi.  1 1.  25. 
Erga'via^  xl.  50. 
Ericmwm,  xxxvi.  13. 
Erigonus^  river,  xxxi.  39. 
Eropus^  xxvii.  32.  xxix.  12. 
Eropon^  xliv.  24.  28. 
Erycine  Venus,  xxii.  9,  10. 

INDEX. 

Erythrx^  xxviiu  8.  xx:s.vi.  43.  xxxvii.  27. 
- promontory,  xliv.  28. 
Eryx^  mount,  xxi.  10.  41. 
Eaquilise^  i.  44.  ii.  28. 
Esquiline  hilly  i.  48. 
- gat€y  ii.  11.  iii.  66.  68.  vi.  22. 
Ktovissuy  xxi.  22. 
.Etruria^  i,  23.  30.  Subdued  by  Fabius,  consul,  ix.  41.  Re¬ 
news  hostilities,  x.  3.  Is  laid  waste,  12.  30.  37.  Its  g^eneral 
assemblies,  iv.  23.  v.  IT.  x.  16. 
Etrurians  Rome,  ii.  11.  Recommence  hostilities,  44. 
Are  displeased  at  the  Veians  for  electing  a  king,  v.  1 .  Make 
war  on  the  Romans,  vi.  2,  3,  4.  Prepare  again  for  war,  vii. 
17.  Are  defeated,  ix.  35.  Obtain  a  truce,  41.  Defeat  the 
Romans,  X.  iii.  Are  routed,  4,  5.  See  10. 18.  30.  Meditate 
a  revolt,  xxvii.  21.  Are  checked,  24. 
Evandevy  Arcadian,  introduces  the  use  of  letters  in  Italy,  i.  5.  7. 
Evandery  Cretan,  attempts  to  murder  King  Eumenes,  xlii.  15. 
Accompanies  Perseus  in  his  flight,  xliv.  43.  Is  put  to  death 
by  him,  xlv.  5. 
KiLb£Uy  island,  xxvii.  30.  xxviii.  5.  xxxv,  51.  xxxvi.  15. 
J'.uboicgulfy  xxxi.  47. 
• - talenty  xxxvii.  45.  xxxviii.  9. 
Eubulidasy  of  Chalcis,  demanded  by  Scipio,  xxxvii.  45. 
commander  of  the  Rhodian  fleet,  xxxvii.  12.  15,  xliv. 
28. 
Eumenesy  King  of  Pergamus,  joins  the  Romans  against  Antio- 
chus,  xxxvi.  42.  45.  Is  obliged  to  go  home  to  protect  Per¬ 
gamus,  xxxvii,  18.  Advises  ^milius  not  to  listen  to  over¬ 
tures  of  peace,  19.  Assists  in  the  total  overthrow  of  Antio- 
chus,  41.  42.  Goes  to  Rome,  52,  53.  And  is  rewarded 
with  a  large  addition  of  territory,  56.  His  ambassadors 
complain  of  Philip,  xxxix.  27.  He  comes  to  Rome,  and 
discovers  the  designs  of  PerseUs,  xlii.  6.  11,  12,  13.  Is  as¬ 
saulted  near  Delphi,  15.  He  and  the  Romans  are  worsted 
by  Perseus,  59.  Whom  they  afterwards  defeat,  and  Eu* 
inenes  becomes  suspected  by  the  Romans,  xliv.  20.  He  is 
solicited  by  Perseus,  24.  The  treaty  is  broken  off,  25.  He 
sends  ambassadors  to  Rome  with  congratulations,  xlv.  13. 
Makes  a  truce  with  the  Gauls,  34. 
Eufihranory  Macedonian  general,  relieves  Meliboeafrom  a  siege, 
xliv,  13. 
Eurifiusy  streight  of  Euboea,  xxviii.  6.  xxxi.  22. 
E-urotaSy  river,  xxxiv,  28.  xxxv.  29,  30. 
EuryaluSy  hill  at  Syracuse,  xxv.  25,  26. 
Eurylockusy  Magnesian  chief  magistrate,  provokes  Quintius, 
xxxv.  31.  Flies  to  ..Etolia,  32.  Kills  himself,  xxxvi.  33. 

INDEX. 

Eurymedon^  river,  xxxiii.  41. 
Euthymidas^  head  of  a  faction  at  Chalcis,  xxxv.  37,  SB. 
Exodiay  interludes,  vii.  2. 

F 
Fabian  family^  ii.  45.  Undertake  the  war  with  the  Veians,  48. 
Are  all  cut  off  except  one,  50. 
Fabiee^  daug*hters  of  M.  Fab.  Ambustus,  vi.  34. 
Fabius  Pictor^  a  very  old  writer,  i.  44.  ii.  40.  viii,  30.  x.  37. 
xxii.  7. 
C.  Fabiusj  consul,  wages  an  unsuccessful  war  with  the  Tar- 
quinians,  vii.  12.  15.  Is  made  interrex,  17.  Master  of 
horse,  ix.  23. 
Caaso  Fabius^  quaestor,  accuses  Sp,  Cassius  of  treason,  ii.  4. 
Is  made  consul,  42.  A  second  time  consul,  when  his  troops 
refuse  to  conquer,  43.  He  and  his  brother  renew  the  fight, 
46.  Is  chosen  consul  a  third  time,  48.  Leads  his  family 
against  the  Veians,  49. 
Caeso  Fabim  Ambustus^  quaestor,  iv.  54.  Consular  tribune,  61. 
Again,  v.  10,  A  third  time,  24. 
C.  Fabius  during  the  siege  of  the  Capitol,  passes  through 
the  Gauls  to  perform  sacrifice,  and  returns  safe,  v.  46. 
X.  Fabius^  envoy  from  Scipio  to  Carthage,  xxx.  25. 
Af.  Fabius^  brother  of  Caeso,  consul,  ii.  42.  Again,  43.  Re* 
fuses  a  triumph,  47. 
M.  Fabius^  chief  pontiff,  dictates  the  form  of  w  ords,  in  which 
the  Roman  elders  devote  themselves  on  the  approach  of  the 
Gauls,  V.  41. 
Af.  Fabius  Ambustus^  whose  daughter’s  envy  of  her  sister  occa¬ 
sioned  the  consulship  to  be  opened  to  plebeians,  consular  tri¬ 
bune,  vi.  22;  Again,  36. 
Af.  Fabius  Ambustus^  consul,  honoured  with  an  ovation  over  the 
Hernicians,  vii.  11.  Again  consul,  17.  Dictator,  22. 
Argues  in  favour  of  his  son  against  Papirius,  viii-  33.  Mas¬ 
ter  of  horse,  38. 
Af.  Fabius  Dorsoy  consul,  vii.  2^. 
M.  Fabius  Vibulanus^  consul,  iv.  11.  Consular  tribune,  25. 
A7.  Fabius  Butco^  dictator,  without  a  master  of  hoi’se,  created 
for  the  purpose  of  filling  up  the  senate,  xxiii.  22. 
M.  Fabius  Buteo^  curule  sedile,  xxx.  26.  Prxtor,  40. 
Numerius  Fabius  Ambustus^  consular  tribune,  iv.  58. 
Xumerius  Fabius  Vibulanus^  consul,  iv.  43.  Consular  tribune. 
49.  Again,  57. 
Q.  Fabius^  consul,  ii.  41.  Again,  43.  Slain  in  battle,  46. 
Q.  Fabius^  the  only  survivor  of  the  disaster  at  Cremera,  consul, 
iii.  1.  Again,  2.  A  third  time  consul,  he  conquers  the  Vol¬ 
vo  j.  VI. — 

INDEX. 

hcians,  aud  is  made  one  of  the  decemvirs  for  forming  laws,  36 . 
He  is  banished  with  his  colleagues,  58. 
Q,  Fabius^  ambassador  to  the  Gauls,  kills  one  of  their  leaders, 
and  is  made  consular  tribune,  v.  35,  36.  He,  with  his  bro- 
thers,  is  called  to  an  account  for  his  conduct  towards  the 
Gauls,  and  dies,  vi.  1. 
Q,  Fabius  Ambustusy  consul,  iv.  52.  Master  of  horse,  vii.  28 
Dictator,  ix.  T. 
Q,  Fabius  GurgeSy  consul,  x.  47. 
Q.  Fabius  Maximus  Rullianusy  curule  sedile,  viii.  18.  Mastei 
of  horse,  29.  Fights  the  Samnites  contrary  to  the  order  oi 
the  dictator  Papirius,  and  is  successful,  30.  His  dispute  with 
the  dictator,  to  36.  He  is  made  consul,  38.  Interrex,  ix.  7. 
Dictator,  he  defeats  the  Samnites,  23.  Again  consul^  he 
defeats  the  Etrurians,  35.  Though  at  enmity  with  Papirius, 
nominates  him  dictator,  38.  A  third  time  consul,  he  over¬ 
throws  the  Samnites  and  Umbrians,  41.  Censor,  he  distri¬ 
butes  the  lowest  rabble  among  the  four  city  tribes,  and  thence 
gains  the  surname  of  Maximus,  46.  A  fourth  time  consul, 
he  overcomes  the  Samnites,  x.  13,  14.  Is  made  consul  a  fifth 
time,  22,  Triumphs,  30. 
Q.  Fabius  Vibulanusy  consul,  iv.  37.  Consular  tribune,  49. 
Q,  Fabius  Maximus  Verruc^susy  ambassador  to  Carthage,  xxi. 
18.  Prodictator,  xxii.  8.  His  cautious  method  of  conduct¬ 
ing  the  war,  11  to  17.  He  sells  his  estate  to  ransom  prison¬ 
ers,  23.  Saves  from  total  defeat  his  master  of  horse,  who  had 
fought  Hannibal  contrary  to  his  judgment,  28,  29.  His 
advice  to  the  consul  iEmilius,  39.  He  is  made  chief  pontiff, 
xxiii.  21.  A  third  time  consul,  31.  His  actions,  46.  48.  Is 
consul  a  fourth  time,  xxiv.  8.  Acts  as  lieutenant-general  un¬ 
der  his  son,  44.  Is  made  consul  a  fifth  time,xxvii.  7.  Prince 
of  the  senate,  1 1.  He  takes  Tarentum,  15.  Effects  a  recon¬ 
ciliation  between  the  consuls  Livius  and  Nero,  35.  Opposes 
Scipio’s  design  of  carrying  the  war  into  Africa,  xxviii.  40 
xxix.  19.  Dies,  XXX.  26. 
Q,  Fabiusy  son  of  the  preceding,  praetor,  xxiv.  9.  Consul,  43, 
Makes  his  father  dismount  on  approaching  him,  44.  Take^, 
Arpi,  46. 
Q,  Fabiusy  lieutenant-general,  dispatched  to  the  senate  b> 
Livius,  xxviii.  9. 
Q.  Fabius  PictoVy  sent  to  consult  the  oracle  at  Delphi,  xxii.  57 
Returns,  xxiii.  11. 
Q.  Fabius  LabeOy  praetor,  xxxvii.  47. 
Q.  Fabius  flam en  of  Quirinus,  and  praetor,  xxxvii.  47. 
Fabraternians  taken  into  protection  by  the  Romans,  viii.  19, 
C,  Fabricius  LuscinuSy  praetor,  xxxiii.  43.  xxxvii.  4. 
Feesulae^  xxii.  3. 

INDEX, 

Faith  solemnly  worsliipped,  by  order  of  Numa,  i.  21. 
Falerine  tribe  added,  ix.  20. 
Faleriansy  or  Faliscians^  assist  the  Veians  and  Fidenatians,  iv 
17.  Attack  the  Roman  camp  at  Veii,  v,  8.  13.  Are  defeated 
by  Camiilus,  their  camp  taken,  and  their  city* besieged,  19. 
26.  The  treacherous  schoolmaster  is  punished,  and  the  town 
surrenders,  27.  They  revive  hostilities,  vii.  17.  Obtain  a 
truce,  22.  War  is  proclaimed  agaist  them,  x.  45.  A  truce 
granted,  46. 
Falemian  landa^  as  far  as  the  river  Vulturnus,  divided  among 
the  commons  of  Rome,  viii.  1 1 . 
Fathers^  ConBcrifit^  ii.  1.  See  Senate^  Patricians, 
Faustulus  saves  Romulus  and  Remus,  i.  4,  5. 
Fasces  do  not  attend  both  consuls  in  the  city,  ii.  1.  Lowered, 
in  compliment  to  the  people,  by  Publicola,  7. 
FeceniCy  Hisfiala^  a  courtezan,  discovers  the  practices  of  the 
Bacchanalians,  xxxix.  9.  11  13.  Is  rewarded,  19. 
FeraliCy  festival  of  the  infernal  deities,  xxxv.  7. 
Ferentine  grovcyi,  50.  52.  Water,  51.  Source  of  it,  ii.  5^3. 
Ferentuniy  taken  by  the  Romans,  x.  34. 
fa,  her  temple,  i.  30.  Her  temple  and  grove,  xxvi.  12. 
xxvii.  4,  Her  temple  at  Capena  struck  by  lightning,  xxxiii.  26 
Fescinine  verses^  vii.  -2. 
Ficulneaj  i.  3.  Ficulnean,  or  Nomentan  road,  iii.  52. 
Fig-tree^  Ruminal,^  i.  4.  x.  23. 
Fidenm^  colony,  i.  27.  iv.  17.  Revolts,  and  is  reduced,  22.  33,  34. 
Fidenatians  make  war  on  the  Romans,  and  are  conquered,  i.  14. 
Again,  27.  Are  besieged,  ii.  19,  Kill  Roman  ambassadors, 
iv.  17.  Are  subdued,  33,  34. 
Field  of  Mars^  i.  4.  ii.  5.  vi.  20. 
Fires^  great,  at  Rome,  xxiv.  47.  xxvi.  27. 
Flamens  instituted  by  Numa,  i.  20. 
Flamen  of  Jupiter  must  not  spend  one  night  out  of  the  city. 
V.  52. 
Flaminian  circus^  iii.  54.  xl.  52. 
. . meadows^  iii,  54.  65. 
C.  Flaminius^  a  second  time  consul,  xxi.  57.  Goes  privately  to 
Ariminum,  where  he  assumes  the  office,  63.  Is  killed  in  the 
battle  of  Thrasimeue,  xxii.  4.  6. 
r.  Fiaminius^  quaestor,  xxvi.  47. 
C.  Flaminius,^  consul,  xxxviii.  42.  Defends  M.  Fulvius,  43 
Defeats  the  Ligurians,  xxxix. 
r,  Flaminiusj  commissioner  of  a  colony,  xl.  34. 
L,  Flamimus^  xliii.  1 1. 
Q.  Flaminiua^  commissioner  of  lands,  xxxi.  4. 
Cn.  Flavius^  a  notary,  made  curule  sedile,  and  opposes  the  pa^ 

INDEX. 

tricians ;  publishes  the  civil  law,  and  exhibits  the  calendar 
in  tablets  hung  round  the  Forum,  ix.  46 
M,  Flavius^  mak^es  a  distribution  of  flesh  meat,  viiL  22.  Is 
made  plebeian  tribune,  57. 
Flavius^  a  Lucanian,  betrays  Tib.  Gracchus,  xxv.  16. 
M,  F lav  oleins^  centurion,  ii.  45. 
Fleet  launched  in  forty-five  days  after  the  timber  was  brought 
from  the  wood,  xx\iii.  45. 
Floronia^  a  vestal  convicted  of  incontinence,  xxii.  57. 
Flumentan  gate,  vi.  20.  xxxv.  9.  21. 
M.  Fonteius,  praetor,  xlv.  44. 
P.  FonteiuH  HalbuH,  praetor,  xliv.  17. 
P.  Fonteim  Cafiito,  praetor,  xliii.  1  h 
T.  Fonteius,  xxv.  84.  xxvi.  17. 
P.  Fonteim  Cafiito,  praetor,  xl.  58. 
Formians  made  Roman  citizens,  without  right  of  suffrage,  viii. 
14.  That  right  granteil  to  them,  xxxviii.  36. 
Fortune,  her  temple  at  Rome,  xxv.  7.  At  Praeneste,  xxiii.  19. 
That  of  Fors  Fortuiia,  xxvii  11.  Of  Female  Fortune,  ii  40. 
Fortuna  Primigenia,  xxix.  36.  xxxiv.  52. 
Forum,  Roman,  i.  12.  Adorned  with  the  gilded  shields  of  the 
Samnites,  ix.  40. 
Forum  boarium,  or  cattle-market,  xxi.  62.  xxvii.  37.  xxix.  37. 
- olitorium,  or  herb-market,  xxi.  62. 
- piscatorium,  or  fish-market,  xxvi.  27. 
M,  Foslim,  consular  tribune,  iv.  25. 
M.  Foslim  Flaccinator,  consul,  ix.  20.  Master  of  horse,  26, 
Again,  28. 
Fregellte,  colony,  viii.  22.  Seized  by  the  Samnites,  ix.  12, 
Recovered,  28.  Its  fidelity  to  the  Romans,  xxvii.  10.  Bra¬ 
very  of  its  horsemen,  xxvi.  27. 
Frusinians  mulcted  a  third  part  of  their  lands,  x.  i, 
Fruaino,  or  Frusinum,  xxvii.  37. 
Fucine  lake,  iv.  57. 
C.  Pw/cmms,  Roman  ambassador,  killed  by  order  of  Tolumnius, 
iv.  17. 
C.  Fulvius  Carvus,  plebeian  acdile,  x.  23. 
Cn.  Fulvius,  consul,  x.  11.  Defeats  the  Samnites,  and  tri¬ 
umphs,  12.  Propraetor,  he  overthrows  the  Etrurians,  26, 
27  30. 
Cn.  Fulvius,  quaestor,  delivered  up  to  Hannibal  by  the  Ligu¬ 
rians,  xxi.  59. 
Cn.  Fulvius,  lieutenant-general,  xxvi.  14.  33.  xxvii.  8.  • 
Cn.  Fulvius  Centumalus,  curule  aedile,  made  praetor,  xxiv.  43. 
Consul,  xxv.  41.  xxvi.  i.  Is  defeated  by  Hannibal  at  Her- 
donea,  and  slain,  xxvii.  1. 
Cn.  Fulvius  Flaceus.,  pr.^'tor,  xx'  Is  intoxi''‘ated  with  suC* 

INDEX. 

cess,  20.  Defeated  by  Hannibal  at  Herdonea,  21.  Called 
to  account  for  misconduct,  xxvi.  2.  He  goes  into  exile,  3. 
i..  Fulviusy  consul,  viii.  38.  Master  of  horse,  ix.  21. 
J/,  Fuhnus^  military  tribune,  killed  in  battle,  xxvii.  12. 
M,  Fuhntis  Centumalusy  praetor,  xxxv,  10.  20. 
M,  Fulvius  Flaccusy  commissioner  of  lands, *xxxi.  4.  Lieuten¬ 
ant-general,  xliii.  11. 
J/.  Fulvius  XobilioVy  praetor,  xxxiv.  54.  Defeats  the  Celtibe- 
rians,  and  their  allies,  taking  their  king  prisoner,  xxxv.  7. 
His  ovation,  xxxvi.  21.  A  second,  38.  Is  chosen  consul, 
xxxvii.  48.  Wages  war  with  success  against  the  .^tolians, 
xxxviii,  4  to  12.  A  triumph  is  decreed  to  him  after  some 
dispute,  xxxix,  5.  He  triumphs,  xl.  45. 
M,  Fulvius  p£tinusy  consul,  x.  9. 
Q,  Fulviusy  curule  aedile,  xxx.  39. 
Q,  Fulvius  Flaccusy  pontiff,  xxiii.  21.  Praetor,  xxiv,  30.  Mas¬ 
ter  of  horse,  and  consul,  xxv.  %  Takes  Hanno’s  camp,  13. 
14.  Lays  siege  to  Capua,  xxvi.  4.  Follows  Hannibal  on  his 
route  to  Rome,  8,  9,  10.  Beheads  the  Campanian  senators, 
15.  Is  accused  by  the  Campanians,  27.  33.  Created  dicta¬ 
tor,  xxvii.  5.  Consul  a  fourth  time,  6.  His  reputation  loset. 
its  lustre,  20.  He  is  continued  in  command  at  Capua,  22. 
Q,  Fulvius  Gilloy  lieutenant-general  under  Scipio,  xxx.  21. 
Praetor,  xxxi.  4. 
Q,  Fulvius  Flaccus^  praetor,  xxxviii.  42.  xxxix.  56.  Is  made  a 
pontiff,  xl.  42.  Triumphs  over  the  Celtiberians,  and  is  cho¬ 
sen  consul,  43.  Triumphs  over  the  Ligurians,  59.  Is  mad(‘ 
censor,  xli.  27.  Strips  the  temple  of  Juno  Lacinia,  xlii.  5, 
Hangs  himself,  28. 
FundfCy  its  inhabitants  made  Roman  citizens  without  right  oi 
suffrage,  viii.  14. 
Funeral  orations yVi.  47.  61.  Allowed  to  matrons,  v.  50.  Often 
misrepresent  facts,  viii.  40. 
Fttrius  and  Fusiusy  the  same,  iii.  4. 
Furiusy  lieutenant-general,  brother  of  the  consul  Sp.  Furius, 
killed  by  the  ^quans,  iii.  5 
A^rifipa  F'uriusy  iii.  66.  70,  Consular  tribune,  v. 
(:.  Furius  PaciluSy  consul,  iv.  12.  Censor,  22.  Disfranchises 
Mamercus  j^milius,  24.  Is  made  consular  tribune,  3 1 .  Con¬ 
sul  again,  52. 
Furius  Aculeoy  quaestor,  xxxviii.  55. 
Furiusy  consul,  opposes  the  agrarian  law,  ii.  54. 
L.  Furius^  consular  tribune  with  Camillus,  vi.  22.  Dispute 
betw^een  them,  23,  24,  25. 
FuriuSy  plebeian  tribune,  ix.  42. 
L.  Fur  ms  Camillus^  dictator,  restores  the  consulship  to  the  pa- 

INDEX, 

Iricians,  and  is  elected  consul,  vii.  24.  Defeats  the  Gauls, 
26.  Is  made  dictator,  28. 
L,  Furius  Cam27/w«, consul,  takes  Pedum,  and  triumphs,  viii.  13. 
Consul  a  second  time,  29. 
L.  Furius  Mcdullinus^  a  person  or  persons  of  this  name  held 
the  following  oflRffces,  but  the  accounts  are  obscure  :  Consular 
tribune,  iv.  25.  35.  Again,  44.  Consul,  51.  Again,  54. 
Consular  tribune,  57.  Again,  61.  A  third  time,  v.  14.  A 
fourth,  16.  A  fifth,  24.  A  sixth,  26.  A  seventh,  32. 
X.  Furius  Pur/iureo^  military  tribune,  xxvii.  2.  Attends  a  ge^ 
neral  assembly  of  the  JStolians,  xxxi.  29.  Is  made  consul, 
xxxiii.  24, 
M,  Furius  Camillus^  consular  tribune,  v.  1.  Again,  10,  A 
third  time,  he  ravages  Campania,  14.  Interrex,  17,  Dic¬ 
tator,  19.  Defeats  the  Faliscians,  and  takes  Veii,  25.  Op. 
poses  the  design  of  removing  to  Veii,  and  is  made  consu¬ 
lar  tribune  a  fourth  time,  26.  Sends  back  to  the  Falerians 
their  children,  and  the  traitor  who  brought  them  to  his  camp, 
27.  Interrex,  he  is  accused  by  Apuleius  ;  goes  into  exile, 
and  is  fined,  32.  Is  recalled,  and  rnade  dictator,  46.  Utterly 
vanquishes  the  Gauls,  and  triumphs,  49.  Dictator  a  third 
time,  he  takes  the  Volscian  camp,  vi,  1.  Consular  tribune  a 
fifth  time,  6.  His  services,  7 — 10.  Consular  tribune  a 
sixth  time,  18.  A  seventh,  22.  His  moderation  towards  his 
colleague,  and  success  in  war,  23.  25.  Dictator  a  fourth  time, 
38.  A  fifth,  he  triumphs  over  the  Gauls,  42.  His  death,  and 
character,  vii.  1. 
Jl/.  Furius  defends  M.  Aurelius  against  charges  made  by  Philip, 
XXX.  42. 
M.  Furius  Crassi^ies^  commissioner  of  lands,  xxxiv.  53.  Praetor, 
xxxviii.  42.  Again,  xli.  28. 
P.  Furius^  consul,  ii.  56. 
P.  Furius  Philusy  praetor,  xxii.  35.  55.  Returns  wounded  from 
Africa,  xxiii.  11.  Is  made  censor,  xxiv.  U.;  and  acts  with 
severity,  1 8.  Is  accused  by  Metellus,  plebeian  tribune,  and 
dies,  43. 
<3.  Furius^  chief  pontiff,  iii.  54. 
Se:r.  consul,  ii.  39. 
Sft,  Furius^  consul,  ii,  43. 
FuriuSj  consul,  worsted  by  the  ^quans,  and  surrounded  in 
his  camp,  iii.  4.  Is  relieved  by  T.  Quintius,  5. 
371.  Furius^  consular  tribune,  vi.  31. 
6/1.  Furius  Camillus^  son  of  Marcus,  first  praetor,  vii.  1. 
Sp.,  Fustu£,  pater  patratus,  i.  24. 

INDEX. 

G 
Gabii  taken  by  the  treachery  of  Sex.  Tarquinius,  i.  So,  54. 
xxiv.  10.  xxvi.  9. 
Gabians^  Hi.  8.  vi.  21. 
Gabian  Toady  iii.  6. 
Gabine  cincture y  v.  46.  viii.  9.  x.  7. 
Gabinius  made  governor  of  Scodra,  xlv  26. 
Gadesy  xxi.  21,  xxiv.  49.  xxvi.  43.  xxviii.  1. 
Gaetuhan  troops,  xxiii.  18. 
Galuy  King  of  Numidia,  xxiv.  48,  49.  xxix.  29.  xl.  17. 
Gamely  Roman,  or  great,  exhibited  by  Romulus,  i.  9.  Esta' 
Wished  by  Tarquinius  Priscus,  to  be  performed  annually,  S3, 
. —  Capitoline,  v.  50. 
- Apollinarian,  instituted,  xxv.  12.  Established,  xxvii.  23. 
Circensian,  xxx.  27. 
— j— -  Megalesian,  xxix.  14. 
— - —  Plebeian,  xxiii.  30. 
■  —  Funeral,  remarkable,  exhibited  by  the  sons  of  -/Emilius 
Lepidus,  xxiii.  30. 
- Olympic,  xxvii.  35. 
- Nemaean,  xxvii.  30,  31. 
- Isthmian,  xxxiii.  32. 
Gates  of  a  Roman  camp,  praetorian  in  front,  xl.  27.  Decuman, 
or  quaestorian,  in  the  rear,  iii.  5.  x.  32.  Right  and  left  prin¬ 
cipal,  xl.  27. 
Gates  of  the  city  of  Rome  : — 
Capuan,  or  Capena,  i.  26,  iii.  22. 
Carmental,  ii.  49.  or  Wicked. 
Colline,  i.  51.  ii.  11. 
Esquiiinc,  ii,  11.  iii.  36.  . 
Flumentan,  vi.  20. 
Naevian,  ii.  11. 
Numentan,  vi.  20, 
Trigemina,  iv.  16. 
GaramantianSy  xxix.  33. 
Gallic  tumult,  vii.  9.  11.  Bay,  xxvi.  19.  xxx.  19. 
Gallogreciansy  xxxvii.  8.  Their  origin,  xxxviii.  16.  They  arc 
subdued  by  Cn.  Manlius  Vulso,  23.  Who  triumphs  over 
them,  xxxix.  6. 
G an governor  of  iEnus,  for  Ptolemy,  betrays  it  to  Philip. 
XX  xi.  16. 
(iaritenes  murdered  by  Philip,  xxxii.  21. 
Gavillius^  Cn.  and  L.y  cause  a  great  alarm  at  Rome,  xli.  6. 
Gauty  province,  called  Ariminum,  xxviii.  38. 
enticed  hv  tho  delicious  fruits  and  wiries,  had  romr  iritr* 

INDEX. 

Italy  200  years  before  the  taking  of  Rome,  v.  17,  Their  seve¬ 
ral  migrations,  33,  34,  35.  The  Senones  besiege  ClusiuiH, 
35.  Quarrel  with  the  Romans,  36.  March  to  Rome,  and 
gain  a  victory  at  the  Allia,  37,  38,  Burn  Rome,  41.  Arc 
utterly  defeated  by  Camillus,  49.  Are  again  routed  by  Ca- 
millus,  vi.  42.  Advance  within  three  miles  of  Rome,  vii.  9 
On  their  champion  being  slain  by  Manlius,  retire  in  dismay, 
9.  11.  Various  engagements  with  them,  12  to  15.  23,  24.  viii. 
20.  The  combat  of  V alerius  Corvus,  vii,  26.  The  Gauls,  for 
a  large  sum  of  money,  make  peace  with  the  Etrurians,  x.  10. 
They,  in  conjunction  with  the  Etrurians,  Samnites,  and  Um^ 
brians,  are  defeated  by  the  Romans,  27.  29.  The  Senones 
cut  olf  a  Roman  legion,  26.  Character  of  the  Gauls,  v.  37  to 
46,  and  x.  28.  Transalpine  Gauls  join  Hannibal,  xxi.  20  to 
28.  Make  an  irruption  into  Italy,  xxxix.  22.  45.  Submit  to 
the  Roman  consul,  and  retire,  54. 
Gaurus^  mount,  vii.  32. 
Gecffc  save  the  Capitol,  v.  47. 
Gcganian  family^  Alban,  admitted  among  Roman  patricians, 
i.  30. 
L,  Geganiiis^  consular  tribune,  vi.  31. 
M,  Geganius^  consular  tribune,  vi.  42. 
M.  Geganius  Macerinusj  consul,  quashes  the  combinations  of 
the  plebeian  tribunes  against  the  patricians,  iii.  65.  Is  made 
consul  a  second  time,  iv.  8,  He  overthrows  the  Volscians, 
sends  them  under  the  yoke,  and  triumphs,  10.  Is  a  third  time 
consul,  17.  Censor,  22.  See  ix.  33,  34. 
T  Geganiufiy  consul,  ii.  34. 
Ge/o^  son  of  Hiero,  favouring  the  Carthaginians,  is  carried  off 
by  a  sudden  death,  xxiii.  30.  His  character,  xxiv.  5. 
Geininius  Metius^  Etrurian,  his  single  combat  with  T.  Manlius, 
viii.  7. 
Gmiua^  a  deity,  xxi.  62. 
Gentius^  King  of  Illyria,  xl.  42.  Ambassadors  sent  to  him  trom 
Rome,  xlii.  26.  He  imprisons  the  ambassadors*,  and  takes 
part  with  Perseus,  xliv.  27.  Murders  his  brother,  and  his 
two  friends,  39.  Surrenders  himself  to  the  Roman  praetor, 
Anicius,  31.  Is  led  in  triumph,  with  his  queen,  children,  and 
brother,  xlv.  43. 
Genua,  xxi.  32.  Taken  by  Mago,  and  demolished,  xxviii.  46 
Rebuilt  by  the  Romans,  xxx.  1. 
GemiciuH^  plebeian  tribune,  killed  in  his  own  house,  ii.  54. 
Cn,  Genuciuit^  plebeian  consular  tribune,  v,  13.  A  second  Uine. 
when  he  falls  in  battle,  18. 
Cn.  Genjicius^  consul,  vii  3, 
Cn.  Genuciufi^  one  of  the  first  plebeian  augurs,  x.  9 

INDEX. 

L.  Genucim^  plebeian  consul^  vii.  1.  A  second  time^  4.  Is 
slain  in  battle  with'  the  Hernicians,  6. 
L.  Gemuciusy  plebeian  tribune,  proposes  a  law  ag^nst  usury, 
vii  42. 
L.  Genuciusj  consul,  1 .  ^ 
L.  GenuciuB^  ambassador  to  Syphax,  xxvii.  4. 
M.  Genuciusy  consul,  iv.  1. 
T.  Genuciusy  plebeian  tribune,  proposes  an  Agrarian  law,  and 
accuses  T,  Menenius,  ii.  52.  Makes  a  heavy  charge  on  the 
consuls  of  the  preceding  year,  and  is  put  to  death,  54. 
T.  Genuciu^y  ^cemvir,  iii.  33. 
GeroniumyULxxi.  18.  24.  39. 
GisgOy  Cartha^nian  ambassador  to  Philip,  xxiiL  34. 
GUgo^  arguing  against  peace,  is  treated  rou^ly  by  HannibaU 
XXX.  37. 
Gladiators  exhibited,  xxiii.  30.  xxviii.  2 1 . 
- — ^  called  Samnites  by  the  Campanians,  ix.  40. 
Godsy  c^elestial  and  infernal,  x.  28. 
- Indigetes,  and  Novensiles,  viii.  9. 
- Manes,  viii,  6.  9.  x,  28. 
—  Penates,  or  household,  i,  1 . 
—  Tutelar,  of  Rome,  iii.  7. 
The  custom  of  calling  them  out  from  the  town  of  an  enemy^  and 
the  ceremonies  used  in  removing  their  images,  v.  21,  22.  ' 
Goldy  vicesimary,  xxvii.  lO, 
—  1000  pounds  weight  stipulated  as  the  ransom  of  the  Ro¬ 
man  people,  V.  48.  Retaken,  and  placed  under  the  throne  of 
Jupiter,  50. 
Goods  of  Porsenua  for  sale,  whence  the  phrase  arose,  u.  14. 
GovfHy  bordered  with  purple,  prsetexta,  borrowed  from  the 
Etrurians,  i.  8. 
Gomfihiy  xxxi.  41.  Taken  by  the  Romans,  xxxvi.  13, 
Gonniy  xxxvi.  10,  xlii.  54.  67- 
Gradivusy  MarSy  ii.  45  His  priests  Salii  instituted  by  Numa, 
i.  20. 
Grauisc^ey  Roman  colony,  xl.  29. 
Grecian  arts  first  admired  by  the  Romans,  xxv,  40. 
Grecian  fleet  infests  the  coast  of  Italy,  vii  25,  26.  Another, 
under  Cleon y mu s,  a  Spartan,  is  compelled  to  retire  by  the 
Patavians,  x.  2. 
Grecian  man  and  woman  buried  alive  in  the  Forum,  xxii.  57. 
Grecian  states  declared  free  by  T.  Quintius,  at  the  Isthmian 
games,  xxxiii.  32. 
Greece y  the  farther,  vii.  26. 
- the  greater,  revolts  to  Hannibal,  xxii.  61.  xxxi.  7. 
Greek  fables,  xxviii.  43.  Trench,  46. 
Gulfih  in  the  Forum  closes,  on  Curtius  leaping  into  it,  vii.  8. 
voi..  VI. — [FT 

INDEX. 

Gulussa^  son  of  Masinissa^  pleads  before  the  senate  in  favour  of 
his  father,  xiu.  24. 
Gythium  taken  by  T.  Quintius,  xxxiv.  29.  By  Nabis,  xxxv.  27. 
H  . 
Hadrumetutn^  city  in  Africa,  xxx.  29.  35. 
Haliucmon^  river,  xlii.  53. 
Haliartus^  city,  favous  Perseus,  xlii.  46.  Is  taken  by  the  prac* 
tor  Lucretius,  63. 
Horlicarnassians  obliged  to  the  Rhodians  for  thetr  liberty,  xxxiii. 
20.  ^c?alous  to  serve  the  Romans,  xxxvii.  16. 
Halya^  river,  its  banks  inhabited  by  Gauls,  xxxviii.  16. 
Hamse^  near  Cumae,  the  camp  of  the  Campahians,  is  surprised 
there  by  Gracchus,  xxiii.  35. 
Hamilcavy  forming  plans  for  a  war  against  the  Romans,  dies, 
xxi.  I,  2.  5.  This  happened  at  a  place  in  Spain  called  High- 
fort,  xxiv.  41. 
Hamilcar^  acting  in  concert  with  the  Insubrian  Gauls,  is  killed 
in  battle  at  Cremona,  xxxi.  21, 
Hamilcar^  son  of  Bomilcar,  defeated  by  the  Scipios,  xxiii.  49. 
Hamilcar^  son  of  Gisgo,  given  up  to  the  Romans  with  the  isle 
of  Melita,  xxi.  5 1 . 
Hamilcar^  Carthaginian  general,  made  prisoner  by  Cn.  Corne¬ 
lius,  xxxii.  30.  Is  led  in  triumph,  xxxiii.  23. . 
Hamfiskora^  Sardinian  chief,  meditates  a  revolt,, xxiii.  32.  Kills 
himself,  41. 
Hannibal^  about  nine  years  old,  swears  perpetual  enmity  to  the 
Romans,  xxi.  i.  Is  appointed  general  in  the  place  of  Has- 
drubal,  3.  His  character,  4.  He  besieges  and  takes  Sagun- 
turn,  6.  14.  Passes  the  Iberus  and  Pyrenaean  mountains,  23. 
Crosses  the  Rhone,  31.  The  Alps, *32.  The  number  of  his 
forces,  42..  He  defeats  the  Romans  at  the  Ticinus,  46. 
Again  at  the  Trebia,  54.  Again,  at  Placentia,  59.  Again 
at  the  lake  Trasimenus,  Xxii.  4.  Escapes  out  of  a  defile  by 
the  stratagem  of  tying  faggots  to  the  horns  of  oxen,  16. 
Worsts  Minucius,  who  is  saved  by  Fabius,  29,  Pretends 
flight,  but  his  scheme  is  detected,  42.  Distressed  and  per¬ 
plexed,  he  removes  to  Cannae,  43.  There  overthrows  the 
Romans  with  great  slaughter,  49.  Goes  to  Capua,  xxiii.  7. 
Is  defeated  at  Nola  by  Marcellus,  16.  His  men  enervated  by 
the  luxury  of  Capua,  18.  Are  long  resisted  by  a  small  body 
.of  Praenestines,  at  CasilinuBi,  which  at  last  surrenders,  19 
He  gains  possession  of  Tarentum  by  treachery,  xxv.  8,  9,  10. 
Defeats  Cn.  Fulvius,  praetor,  at  Herdenia,  21.  Resolves  to 
lay  siege  to  Rome,  xxvi,  7.  Encamps  within  three  miles  of 
that  city,  10.  Failing  in  his  attempt,  he  retires,  11.  Van- 

INDEX. 

quishes  Cn.  Fulvius,  proconsul,  at  Herdonia,  xxvii.  i.  He 
surrouiUs  Marcellus,  who  is  slain,  27.*  After  the  death  of 
Hasdrubal  he  retires  into  Bruttium,  51.  Worsted  by  Scipio, 
he  retires  from  Locri,  xxix.  7.  Is  recalled  from  Italy,  xxx. 
19.  Holds  a  conference  with  Scipio,  29.  Is  conquered  at 
Zama,  and  flies  to  Adrumetum,  35.  Is  kindly  received  by 
Antiochus,  at  Ephesus,  xxxiii.  49.  Advises  Antiochus  to 
attack  the  Romans  in  Italy,  xxxiv.  60.  Converses  with  Sci¬ 
pio,  XXXV,  14.  Loses  the  favour  of  Antiochus,  43.  Is  re¬ 
stored  to  his  good  opinion,  xxxvi.  6.  15.  41.  Is  defeated  at 
sea  by  the  Rhodians,  xxxvii.  24.  Is  compelled  by  the  Ro¬ 
mans  to  leave  the  court  of  Antiochus,  45.  Having  found 
refuge  with  Prusias,  but  being  still  persecuted  by  the  Romans, 
he  swallows  poison,  xxxix.  51. 
Hannoy  head  of  the  faction  which  opposed  the  Barcine,  insists 
that  Hannibal  ought  not  to  be  sent  into  Spain,  xxi.  3. ;  but 
to  be  given  up  to  the  Romans,  9.  Aftefr  the  battle  of  Cannae, 
he  recommends  making  proposals  of  peace  to  the  Romans, 
xxiii.  13, 
Hanno^  son  of  Bomilcar,  distinguishes  himself  in  the  passage  of 
the  Rhone,  xxi.  27,  28. 
Hanno^  defeated  and  taken  in  Spain  by  Cn.  Scipio,  xxi.  60. 
Hanno^  driven  out  of  Lucania  by  Semproniu^Longus,  xxiii.  17. 
Persuades  the  Grecian  cities  in  Bruttium  to  join  him,  xxiv.  I . 
Fights  a  desperate  battle  with  Gracchus,  14,15.  Flies  to 
Bruttium,  XXV.  14.  Commands  the  garrison  of  Metapontum, 
xxvii.  42. 
Hanno  succeeds  Hasdrubal  Barcas  as  commander  in  Spain, 
xxviii.  1.  Is  made  prisoner  Hby  the  Romans,  2. ;  and  sent  to 
Rome,  4. 
Hanno^  an  oflicer  under  Mago,  is  routed  by  L.  Marcias,  xxviii. 
30. 
Hanno^  general  of  cavalry,  falls  in  battle,  xxix.  29.  35. 
Hanno ^  son  of  Hamilcar,  defeated  and  slain  by  Masinissa,  xxix. 
34. 
Harmonia^  daughter  of  Gelon,  put  to  death,  xxiv.  24,  25. 
Harfialus^  ambassador  from  Perseus,  gives  offence  to  the  senate, 
xlii.  14. 
Hasdrubal^  son-in-law  and  successor  of  Hamilcar,  killed  by  a 
savage,  xxi.  2. 
Hasdrubal^  brother  of  Hannibal,  is  left  commander  in  Spain, 
xxi,  22.  Is  defeated  by  the  Scipios,  xxiii,  29.  Cuts  off  the 
two  Roman  generals,  with  the  greatest  part  of  their  men, 
XXV  32.  Bafiies  Nero,  xxvi.  17.  Is  defeated  by  Scipio, 
xxvii.  18,  19  Passes  into  Gaul,  and  over  the  Alps,  36.  39. 
Lays  siege  to  Placentia,  43.  Is  vanquished  at  the  Metaurus, 
-and  slain,  48,  49.  His  head  is  thrown  into  HannibaPs  camp, 
51. 

INDEX, 

HmdrubaL  Calvmis  sent  into  Sicily^  xxiii,  32.  34,  Defeated 
and  taken,  40,  41.  ^  ♦ 
Hasdrubal^  son  of  Gisgo,  commands,  in  Spain,  xxiv.  41.  Is 
overthrown  by  Scipio,  xxviii.  15,  16.  Flies  into  Africa,  17. 
He  and  Scipio  dine  together  in  the  house  of  Syphax,  18.  He 
gives  his  daughter  in  marriage  to  Syphax, xxix.  23,  He  and 
Syphax  are  defeated  by  Scipio,  xxx.  5,  6. 
Hasdrubal  Hsedus  advises  the  Carthaginians  to  conclude  a  peace, 
xxx.  42.  Reproves  Hannibal’s  laughter,  44. 
Healthy  her  temple,  ix,  43.  x.  1. 
Higeas^  commander  of  Neapolitan  cavalry,  xxxiii.  1. 
Hellenfiont^  xxxi.  15.  xxxvii.  9. 
Helorus^  xxiv.  35. 
Cw.  Helviusy  military  tribune,  killed,  xxx.  18. 
Cn,  ffelvius,  praetor,  xxxii.  7,  8.  Commands  in  Spain,  xxxiii 
21.  Is  honoured  with  an  ovation,  xxxiv.  10. 
xxxiii.  35.* 
Heraclea^  in  Greece,  xxviii.  5.7.  xxxvi,  22.  24.  xUv.  8,  9. 
Heraclea^  in  Italy,  i.  18.  viii.  24. 
Her ac lea  Minor ^  in  Sicily,  xxiv.  35.  xxv.  40. 
Heraclea  Sintice,  in  Macedonia,  xlv.  29. 
Heratlidesy  one  of  Philip’s  generals,  xxxi.  16.  Is  thrown  into 
prison,  xxxii.  5. 
Heraclidesy  By^santian,  xxxvii.  34. 
Heraclitus  ScotinuB^  Philip’s  ambassador  to  Hannibal,  xxiii.  39, 
Heraca^  xxviii.  7,  8.  The  direction  of  the  Heraean,  or  Junonian 
games,  is  conferred  on  Philip,  xxvii.  30. 
HerbesBUB  taken  by  Marcellus,  xxiv.  30.  35. 
Hercmian  foresty  v.  34. 
Herculaneum  taken  by  Carvilius,  x.  45. 
Herculesy  in  Latium,  i.  7,  A  iectisternium,  or  banquet,  in  hon¬ 
our  of  him,  v.  13.  His  ministers  Potitii,  i.  7.  ix.  29.  His 
pillars,  xxi.  43. 
Herdoneuy  xxv.  21.  Is  taken  by  Hannibal,  and  the  inhabitants 
are  expelled,  xxvii.  l. 
Afy,  Herdoniusy  a  Sabine,  seizes  the  Capitol,  iii.  15.  Is  killed, 
18. 
TurnuB  Herdonius  inveighs  against  Tarquinius,  i.  5.  Who 
procures  his  death,  51. 
HerenniuB  Bubbilb  and  Herius  Pettius  J^olans  confer  with  H an¬ 
no,  xxiii.  43. 
Herenniua  Pontiusy  Samnite,  ix.  1.  His  opposite  opinions  re¬ 
specting  the  Romans  at  Caudium,  3. 
Hermandica  stormed  by  Hannibal,  xxi.  5. 
Pars  H^rminiUBy  consul,  iii.  *65.  ^ 
T.  HerminiuB  assists  Horatius  Codes  in  defending  the  bridge, 
ii.  10.  Is  slain  at  Regillus,  20.  • 
HermionCy  town,  xxxi.  44, 

INDEX. 

Hernkiam  pr«pare  for  war,  ix.  22.  Are  conquered,  40.  Their 
lands  are  wasted  by  ^quans  and  Volscians,  iii.  6*  Tl^y  re¬ 
volt  from  the  Romans,  vi.  2.  Who  are  defeated  by  them, 
vU.  They  are  subdued  by  C.  Plautins,  15.  They  make 
war  again,  ix.  42.  Surrender,  43. 
Htrodicu*^  Thessalian,  killed  by  Philip,  and  his  family  persecut¬ 
ed,  xl.  4.  ♦ 
HexafiyloTiy  at  Athens,  xxv.  24.  32.  39. 
Hitro^  King  of  Syracuse,  promises  com  and  clothing  to  the 
Roman  legions,  xxi.  50.  After  the  defeat  at  Trasimenus,  he 
sends  ample  supplies  to  the  Romans,  and  a  golden  image  of 
Victory,  xxii,  37.  Dies,xxiv.  4. 
Hieronymus^  Hiero's  grandson  and  successor,  his  character,  and 
a  conspiracy  formed  against  him,  xxiv.  4.  Sr  He  sneers  al 
the  Roman  ambassador,  6.  Is  slain  by  the  conspirators,  7. 
Himera^  river,  xxiv.  6.  xxv.  49. 
Himilco  leads  an  army  into  Sicily,  xxiv.  35.  36.  Retires  to 
Agrigentum,  39.  Brings  supplies  to  Syracuse,  and  dies  ol 
the  plague,  xxv.  26. 
Hififio  Royal^  in  Africa,  xxix.  4.  32. 
HipfiOy  in  Spain,  xxxix.  30. 
Hififiocrates^  in  conjunction  with  the  Carthaginians,  carries  on 
war  against  Marcellus,  xxiv.  35.  Is  defeated,  36.  Brings 
supplies  to  Syracuse,  and  dies,  xxv.  26. 
Hirfiinians^  xxii.  13.  Joins  the  Carthaginians,  61.  xxiii.  1 
Their  towns  arc  taken  by  the  Romans,  17.  They  submit, 
xxvii.  15. 
Honour  and  Virtue ^  their  temples,  xxvii.  25. 
Hope^  her. temple,  ii.  51. 
Horatii^  brothers,  fight  the  Curiatii,  i.  24,  25. 
Horatius  Coties  maintain  the  Sublician  bridge,  leaps  into  the 
river,  and  escapes,  ii.  10. 
C.  Horatius^  consid,  fights  the  Etrurians,  ii.  51. 
C,  Horatius  Pulvillus^  consul,  routes  the  jEquans,  iii.  30.  Dies 
augur,  32. 
L.  Horatius  Barbatus  warmly  opposes  the  decemvirs,  iii.  39 
Drives  Ap.  Claudius  out  of  the  Forum,  49.  Is  made  consul, 
55.  Defeats  the  Sabines,  and  triumphs  without  leave  of  the 
senate,  61.  63.  See  iv.  6.  ^ 
M,  Horatius  consul,  ii.  8.  vii.  3. 
M,  Horatius^  consular  tribune,  vi.  31. 
P.  Horatius  labours  to  save  his  son  from  the  punishment  incur 
red  by  killing  his  sister,  i.  26. 
Horses^  public,  given  to  the  knights,  i.  43.  v.  7.  Taken  from 
some  by  the  censors,  xxiv*  18.  xxvii.  11. 
of  the  Taretitrnes,  attempting  an  escape,  are  seized, 
and  put  to  death,  xxv.  7. 

INDEX. 

Hostages  of  the  Spanish  states  are  restored  to  their  friends  by 
Scipio,  xxvi.  49. 
Hostages  required  from  the  Carthaginians,  xxx.  31. 
HosHlian  senate-house,  i.  30. 
Hostilius  Cato^  two  of  this  name,  A.  and  C.  xxvii.  35. 
C.  Hostilius  Tubulusy  praetor,  xxvii.  6.  Defeats  Hannibsd,  40. 
Is  continued  in  command,  xxviii.  K5. 
A,  Hostilius  Mancinus<y  praetor,  xl.  35. 
i.  Hostilius  Mancinusy  sent  by  Minucius  with  four  hundred 
horsemen  to  procure  intelligence,  is  cut  off  by  the  Carthagi¬ 
nians,  xxii.  15. 
Tullus  Hostilius^  hing,  i.  22  to  31. 
Host  us  Hostilius  distinguishes  himself  in  battle  against  the  Sa¬ 
bines,  and  falls,  i.  12. 
Hybla^  xxvi.  21. 
Hypata^  xxxvi.  17.  xxxvii.  7.  xli.  25. 
Hyrcanian  plains ^  xxxvii,  38. 
I  and  J 
Jampkorina^  ’capital  city  of  Maedica,  surrendered  to  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  xxvi.  25. 
Janie ulum  added  to  the  city,  i.  33.  Is  seized  by  the  Etrurians, 
ii.  10.  51. 
Janus^  his  temple  shut  twice  after  the  reign  of  Numa,  i.  19. 
Jassus  demanded  by  the  Rhodians,  xxxii.  3^.  The  Romans 
raise  the  siege  of  it,  at  the  request  of  the  Rhodians,  xxxvii.  17. 
Jbera,  city,  xxiii.  28.  So  called  from 
Iberusj  river,  the  boundary  between  the  Romans  and  Carthagi¬ 
nians  in  Spam,xxi.  2.  5.  xxvi.  17. 
L.  Iciliusy  betrothed  to  Virginia,  iii.  44  to  5 1.  Is  made  plebeian 
tribune  on  the  Aventine,  54. 
L.  Iciliusj  plebeian  tribune,  iv.  52.  -  * 
Sp.  Iciliusy  plebeian  tribune,  ii.  58 
Icilius^  three  of  that  name  plebeian  tribunes  in  one  year,  iv.  54. 
Idsean  Mother  brought  to  Rome  from  Pessinus  in  Asia,  xxix. 
10.  14. 
Ilergetians  subdued  by  Hannibal,  xxi.  23.  Their  country  wasted 
by  Cn.  Scipio,  62.  They  renew  the  war,  xxii.  21,  They 
implore  aid  from  the  Romans,  xxxiv.  11. 
Ilians^  xxix,  12.  xxxviii.  39. 
Iliutny  XXXV.  43.  xxxvii.  9. 
JlltberiSy  xxi.  24^. 
Illiturgis  is  besieged  by  the  Carthaginians,  and  relieved  by  the 
Romans,  xxiii.  49.  Is  again  besieged  and  relieved,  xxiv.  41. 
xxvi.  17.  Revolts  to  the  Carthaginians,  xxviii.  19.  Is  taken 
by  Scipio,  and  burnt,  20.  25. 

INDEX. 

Illyrians^  their  designs  in  favour  of  Philip  are  discovered  to 
the  Romans,  xlii.  26.  They  join  Perseus,  xliv.  30,  31,  32, 
Are  declared  free,  xlv.  18. 
Ilvatian  Ligurians^  xxxi.  10.  xx^.  29. 
Ilva^  island,  xxx.  39.  ^ 
India^  ix.  17,  xxxv.  32.  xlv.  9. 
Indians^  bad  soldiers,  ix.  19. 
Indibilis^  Prince  of  the  Ilergetians,  xxii.  21.  xxv.  34.  His  fa¬ 
mily  kindly  treated  by  Scipio,  xxvi.  49.  He  joins  Scipio, 
xxvii.  17.  Changes  sides  again,  xxviii.  24.  Submits  to  Sci¬ 
pio,  and  is  pardoned,  34.  Revolts,  and  is  killed  in  battle, 
xxix.  2,  3. 
Indigca  Jufiiter^  .Eneas  so  called,  i.  2. 
Indigete^y  deities,  viii.  9. 
Indtcs^  river,  xxxviii.  1 4. 
Ingaunian  Ligutians^  xxviii.  46.  xxx.  19.  A  treaty  between 
them  and  the  Romans,  xxxi.  2.  .  • 
Insubrian  'Gaulsy  a  canton  of  the  .Eduans,  found  Mediolanum, 
V,  34.  Plunder  and  burn  Placentia,  xxxi.  10.  Are  defeated 
by  the  Romans,  xxxii.  SO. 
Interar^nay  Roman  colony,  ix.  28.  In  vain  attempted  by  the 
Samnites,  x.  36*  Refuses  supplies,  xxvil.  9,  Is  compelled 
to  contribute  more  than  usual,  xxix.  15. 
Interest  of  money y  vii.  16.  21.  Reduced,  27. 
Intermarriage  of  patricians  and  plebeians,  iv.  1.  3,  4. 
Inuusy  Pan  so  called,  i.  5. 
Interregnumsy  i.  17.  22.  iii.  8.  iv.  7.  43.  51.  v.  17.  31.  vi.  1.  5 
vii  17.  21.  28.  viii.  3.  17.  ix.  7.  x.  11.  xi.  10.  23.  33. 
loniay  xxxiii.  38.  xxxiv.  58.  xxxviii.  13. 
Ionian  Seuy  xiii.  35.  xxiii.  33.  xlii.  48. 
Isalcay  Gaetulian  general,  xxiii.  18. 
Issay  island,  xliii.  9. 
Issseans  join  the  Roman  fleet,  xxxi.  45.  Complain  of  the  Mace¬ 
donians,  xlii.  26. 
Istriqnsy  a  savage  nation,  x.  2.  xxi.  16.  The  Romans  at  war 
with  them,  xli.  1.11. 
Istevy  rivei',  xxxix.  35.  xl.  31.  57. 
Isthmus  of  Corinth,  xlv. ^8. 
Jubellius  Taureuy  Campanian,  his  encounter  with  Cl.  Asellns. 
xxiii.  8.  47.  His  death,  xxvi.  15. 
Jugarian-streety  in  Rome,  xxiv.  47.  xxvii.  37.  xxxv.  21. 
Julian  family  y  originally  Alban,  i.  30. 
C.  Julius  Julusy  consul,  ii.  43.  Decemvir,  iii.  33.  Is  deputed 
by  the  senate  to  the  seceders  on  the  Aventine,  50. 
C.  Juliusy  consul,  iii.  65.  Again,  iv.  21.  A  third  time,  23. 
(\  Julius  JuluSy  consular  ti  ibune,  h  .  56.  Again,  6 1 .  Dies  cen¬ 
sor,  V.  3  ] . 

INDEX. 

C.  Julius^  dictator,  v4i.  21. 
C.  Julius  Mento^  consul,  disputes  with  his  colleague  and  the 
senate,  iy.  26. 
L.  consular  tribune,  i%.  16.  Master  of  horse,  26.  Con* 
sul,  30.  , 
X,  Julius^  consular  tribune,  vi.  30. 
L.  Julius  JuluH^  consular  tribune,  v-.  1. 
X.  Julius  Julus^  consular  tribune,  v.  10.  Again,  16. 
Sex  Julius^  consular  tribune,  iv.  35. 
Sex,  Julius  Caesar^  praetor,  xxvii,  21.  Deputed  to  the  consul, 
29. 
(  Junius  Bubulcus^  consul,  ix.  20  A  second  time,  28.  Die 
tator,  29.  A  third  time  consul^  30.  Master  of  horse,  38 
Censor,  43  Dictator,  x.  1.  He  triumphs  over  the  jEquans 
X.  Junius  Brutus,^  master  of  horse,  viii.  IX  Consul,  29. 
D,  Junius  Brutus  Scae^Lfa^  lieutenant-general,  x.  43.  Consul,  47 
D.  Junius^  commander  at  the  mouth  of  the  Volturqus,  xxv.  22 
X.  Junius  Brutus  is  sent  to  Delphi  with  the  sons  of  Tarquinius, 
i.  56.  Accompanies  Collatinus  to  Lucretia,  58.  Takes  the 
lead  in  expelling  the  Tarquins,  59.  Is  created  consul,  60 
Puts  his  own  sons  to  death  for  a  conspiracy,  y.  2,  .  Falls  in 
fight,  together  with  Aruns,  his  antagonist,  6. 
X.  Xwnm#,  commissioner  to  Macedonia,  xlv.  17.  ^ 
M,  Junius  Pennus^  plebeian  aedile,  xxix.  1 1.  Praetor,  xxx.  40 
>X  Junius  Pera^  dictator,  after  the  battle  of  Cannae,  xxii.  57. 
xxiii.  14. 
M,  Junius^  deputed  to  the  senate  by  the  prisoners  in  the  hands 
of  Hannibal,  xxii.  59. 
M,  Junius  Silunus^  praetor,  xxv.  2.  Lieutenant-general  to  P 
Scipio,  xxvi.  19.  He  gains  a  victory  over  Mago  and  Hanno. 
xxviii.  2. 
M.  Junius  Brutus^  praetor,  xxxv.  24.  Commissioner  to  settle 
the  affairs  of  Asia,  xKxvii.  55.  Consul,  xl.  59. 
P.  Junius  Brutus^  plebeian  tribune,  supports  the  Oppian  law  . 
xxxiv.  1.  Plebeian  aedile  ;  he  punishes  usurers,  xxxv.*41. 
P.  Junius^  praetor,  xxxvi.  45.  Leads  an  army  against  the  Etru¬ 
rians,  xxxvii.  2. 
Q.  Junius^  plebeian  tribune,  propose*  to  revenge  the  death  ol 
Maelius,  iv.  16. 
Juno^  i.  32. 
-  Moneta^  vii.  28. 
-  Sospita,^  viii.  14.  xxxiv.  26. 
- -  Lacinia^^  xxii.  1.  xxiii.  33.  xxiv.  3.  xxviii.  46.  xxx.  20. 
- Regina^  v.  21.  Brought  from  Veii  to  Rome,  22.  An  oi- 
fering  made  to  her  by  Camillus,  vi.  4.  A  temple  dedicated 
to. her  by  M.  jEmilius,  xl.  52, 

INDEX, 

Ju/iiter  CafiUolmu»yU  55.  vi.  i7i 
- Dodomeusy  viii.  24.  : 
- EliciuB^  i.  20,' 
- Feretriusy  i.  10. 
- ImficratoTj  vi.  29. 
™  0fitimu9  Maanmus^  iv.  2. 
— - Stator^  i.  12.  41.x.  36. 
.  Victor y  X.  29. 
-"■■■  —  LatiarU^  xxi.  63.  xxii.  J , 
■■  ■  Olyntfiim^  xxiv^  21,  - 
-  Trofihonim^  :^v.  27. 
. .  Vicilinus^  xxiv,  44. 
JuverUas^  goddess,  v.  54.  xxi.  62.  xxxvii.  36. 
Z.  Juventius  Thalna^  lieutenant-general,  xxxix.  31. 
M.  Juventiu9  ^halna^  plebeian  tribune,  accuses  Lucretius,  xJiii. 
8.  Prsetor,  xlv.  16. 

R 
JRng#  banished  from  Rome,  i.  59. 
King  of  the  aacrijicee^  ii.  2.  vi.  41.  ix,  34. 
Knights^  three  centuries  instituted  by  Romulus,  i.  13.  Thenumi- 
♦ber  doubled  by  Scrv.  Tuilius,  43.  There  are  three  hundred 
in  each  legion,  viii,  8,  They  are  furnished  with  horses  by 
the  public,  i.  43.  45.  They  wear  gold  rings,  xxiii.  12.  Are 
reviewed  annually,  ix.  46.  They  serve  on  tiieir  own  horses, 
and  pay  is  assi^ed  to  them,  v.  7.  The  censors  punish  seve» 
ral  for  misconduct,  by  depriving  them  of  their  horses,  xxiv. 
18,'xxvii.  11 .  xxix.  37 H  Six  hundred  are  given  as  hoetag^n 
to  the  Samnites,  ix,  5.,  Are  recovered,  15. 
L 
Labeatiems  subject  to  Gentius,  xliii.  19.  xliv.  31. 
Cn.  Labeo^  military  tribune,  xxxiii.  22. 
JLabici^  or  La-viciy  taken  by  Corio^anus,  ii.  39,  Its  lands  wast; 
ed  by  Gracchus,  iii.  25.  It  is  taken  by  the  Romanf,  who  set: 
tie  a  colony  there,  iv.  47.  49.  Lavican  road,  41. 
C.  Laceriua^  plebeian  tribune,  v.  10. 
Lacedaemon  robbed  by  Nabis  and  his  wife,  xx3di.  40.  Besieged 
by  Quintius,  xxxiv.  40.  Visited  by  P.  .Emilius,  xlv.  28.  See 
Sfiarta, 
Lacedaetnoniana^  or  Laconians^  under  Cleonymus,  infest  the  coast 
of  Italy,  X.  2.  Quarrel  with  the  Achaeans,  xxai.  25.  War  is 
declared  against  them  by  the  Romans,  xxxiv.  22.  They  are 
subdued  by  T.  Quintius,  xxvL  40.  Are  given  in  charge  to 
the  Achaeans,  xxxv.  1 3,  Their  towns  on  the  coast  are  attack- 
VO  I.  Vi.— .[Gl 

1NX>EX. 

ei  by  Nabis,  22.  They  are  delivered  from  the  tyranny  of 
Nabis,  who  is  assassinated  by  J^tolians,  and  they  join  the 
Achaean  league,  36. 
Lacetania^  xxi.  23. 
Lacetanians  are  reduced  by^Scipio,  xxi.  60,  *61.  They  attack 
the  allies  of  the  Romans,  xxviii.  24,  M.  Silanus  is  sent  against 
them,  26.  See  xxxiii.  34. 
Luciniuniy  xxxvi.  42. 
Lacumaces^  Numidian,  called  king  by  Mezetulus,  xxix.  29,  30. 
C.  Laeliii^  is  appointed  commander  of  the  fleet  by  Scipio,  xxvi. 
42.  Sent  to  Rome  with  dispatches,  xxvti.  7.  Sent  to  Africa, 
xxix.  1.  4.  6.  Goes  with  Scipio  into  Africa,  25.  He  ami 
Masinissa  pursue  and  defeat  Syphax,  xxx.  9.  H.  13.  17. 
C.  Laelius^  praetor,  xxxiii,  25.  Consul,  xxxvi.  45. 
C.  Laetoriusy  curule  sedile,  xxiii.  30.  xxv.  2B.  Pr^tor,  xxvi.  23. 
xxvii.  8. 
Cn.  Lsetoriua^  lieutenant-general,  xxxi.  21, 
L.  Laetorius^  plebeian  aedile,  xxx.  39. 
M  Lfetoriua^  chief  centurion,  is  appointed  to  dedicate  a  temple 
of  Mercury,  ii.  27. 
Lake^  Alban,  rises  to  an  unusual  height,  v.  15, 
—  Curtian,  i.  13.  vii.  6. 
- Fucine,  iv.  57. 
.  Regillus,  ii.  19.  vi.  2. 
— ~  Vadimony  ix.  39. 
'  ■ '  Avemus,  xxiv.  13.  20. 
— —  Trasimentts,’xxii.  4. 
— Ostia,  xxvii.  1 1. 
Lamiay  Jltolians  defeated  there  by  Phjlip,  xxvii,  30.  xxxy.  43. 
Besieged  by  him,  xxxvi.  25.  By  Acilius,  xxxvii.  4.^  Is  ta¬ 
ken,  5. 
Lamp-meus  attacked  by  Antiochus,  xxxiii.  38.  xxxv.  42.  Is  ad¬ 
mitted  into  alliance  with  Rome,  xliii.  6. 
Lanuviuin^  iii.  29.  vi.  xxvi.  8.  xxix.  14. 
Lanuviana  revolt,  vi,  21.  Are  made  citizens  of  Rome,  viii.  14. 
Larea^  household  gods,  viii.  9.  Permarini,  xl.  52. 
Lara^  or  lAtrtea.  See  Poraenrta  and  Tolurmiiua. 
LarUaa^  a  council  of  the  Thessalians  held  there,  xx^vi,  8.  Phi¬ 
lip’s  forces  assembled,  xxviii.  5.  xxxii.  15.  25.  33.  xxxvi,  9. 
Lariaaa^  Cremaste,  xlii.  56. 
Lariaaua^  river,  xxvii.  3 1 . 
Sp,  lAirtxua  assists  Hpratius  in  defence  of  the  bridge,  iL  10. 
T,  Lartiua^  consul  and  first  dictator,  li.  18.  A  second  time 
consul,  21.  ^ 
haticlavea  laid  aside  in  mourning,  ix.  7. 
Latinea^  whence  so  called,  i.  2.  Ancient  Latines,  3.  32.  52. 
Latinea  are  conquered  by  Ancus  Marcius,  and  many  removed 
to  Rome,  i.  32,  33.  Their  wars  with  Tarquinius  Priscus,  36, 

INDEX. 

38.  A  treaty  concluded  with  thein^  30.  ^2.  They  suffer  a 
severe  overthrow  at  the  lake  RegUla^s,  ii,  19,  20.  Are  admit¬ 
ted  into  alliance,  33.  They  assist  the  Romans  aga^t  the 
iEquans  and  Volscians,  iii.  7.  Revolt,  vi.  2.  Obtain  peace, 
vii.  12.  Ravage  Samnium,  viii.  2.  Require  a  consul,  and 
half  ^  senate  of  Rome,  to  be  chosen  out  of  Larium,  5.  The 
Romans  declare  war,  and  entirely  subdue  them,  6  to  14. 
JLaHne-festivaly  v.  17.  19.  vi.  42.  xxi.  63.  xxii.  1.  xx.v,  U,  xxxii. 
L  xxxvii.  3.  xj.,  45. 
IjUtinusj  King,  forms  an  alliance  and  aflinity  with  JEneas,  i.  1. 
Latinm  ^yluius^  King  of  Alba,  i.  3. 
Latona^  v.  x»v.  12.  ‘ 
Lavinia  married  vto  jEneas,  and  Lavinium  built,  i.  L 
JLaurentiaTiSy  the  treaty  with  them  renewed  annually,  ten  days 
after  the  Latine  festival,  viii.  1 1. 
Lautia^  entertainment  furnished  to  ambassadors,  xxviii.  39. 
XXX.  17. 
Lautulae^  vii.  39.  ix.  23. 
Lautumiae^  xxvi.  27.  xxxvii.  3.  xxxix.  44. 
Lawj  divine  and  human,  i.  18. 
— ,  civil,  published  by  Flavius,  ix.  46. 
JLaw  of  the  twelve  tables,  iii.  34*  57. 
Lebadia^  xlv.  27.  . 
Lectisterniumy  or  banquet  of  the  gods,  tfee  first  at  Rome,  and 
the  ceremonies  used,  v.  13.  vii.  2.  *27.  viii.  24.  xxii,  1.  10.  %cC. 
One  at  Caere,  xxi.  62. 
Le^iouy  and  its  divisions,  described,  viii.  8,  Linen  legion  of 
the  Samnites,  x.  38.  / 
Lemno^’i  island,  xxviii.  5. 
Leonoriua  and  Lutarius^  Gallic  chieftains,  seize  Byzantium, 
XXX  viii.  16. 
LeonatuBy  commander  of  the  chosen  band  of  Perseus,  xlii.  51. 
Leonidesy  Lacedaemonian,  commands  Uie  Grecian  auxiliaries 
under  Perseus,  xlii.  51. 
Leontini^  Hieronymus  is  slain  there,  xxiv.  7.  The  city  is  occu¬ 
pied  by  Hippocrates  and  Bipicydes,  29.  Taken  by  Marcel- 
lus,  30. 
Le/itis,  XXX.  25.  The  dominion  of  U  disputed  by  Masinissa  and 
the  Carthaginians,  xxxiv.  62. 
Letusy  mount,  where  the  Ligurians  are  defeated,  xii.  18. 
Leucusy  promontory  and  island,  xxvi.  26.  xxxiii.  16.  Taken 
by  the  Romans,  17.  Is  exempted  from  the  government  of 
the  Acamanians,  xlv.  31. 
L^ucasfiie  fihalanXy  xliv.  41. 
Levy  of  troops  not  made  out  of  the  whole  people  indiscrimi¬ 
nately,  iv.  46. 
- - of  volunteer,  ix.  10. 

INDEX. 

X*evy  oi  all  kinds  of  men,  x.  21. 
of  slaves  xxii.  57.  xxiii.  14. 
made  wHh  difficulty,  xxv.  4.  Sec  xxii.  37,  38.  xsdv.  11. 
xxvi.  35.  xxvii.  38. 
Liber  and  Libera^  their  temple,  iii.  55. 
Liberty^  temple  of,  xxiv.  16.  Court  in  which  the  Tarentine 
hostages  were  kept,  xxv.  7.  xxxiv.  44. 
Libitina^  xl.  19.  xli.  21,  * 
Libuan  Gauh^  xxi.  38. 
Libyfihcenicians^  xxi.  22.  xxv,  40. 
Liburnians^  a  savage  people,  x.  2. 
Licinius  Macer,  who  wrote  a  history  of  Rome,  iv.  7.  20.  23.  vii. 
9.  X.  9.  &c. 
C.  Licinius^  plebeian  tribune,  ii.  33. 
C.  Licinim^  consular  tribune,  vi.  31.  First  plebeian  master  of 
horse,  39.x.  8. 
C.  Licinius  Calvus  Stoloy  plebeian,  married  to  the  daughter  of 
Fab.  Ambustus,  is  made  plebeian  tribune,  vi.  35.  Being  ple¬ 
beian  tribune  a  tenth  time,  he  effects  the  passing  of  his  laws 
against  the  patricians,  vi.  42.  Is  consul,  ix.  2.  Again,  9. 
Is  condemned  on  one  of  his  own  laws,  16, 
C.  /.fciniM®,  ambassador  to  Carthage,  xxi.  18. 
C.  Licinius  Cressus,  praetor,  xlii.  9.  27.  Consul,  28.  Procon¬ 
sul  and  commissioner  to  settle  the  affairs  of  Macedonia,  xlv. 
17* 
L,  Liciniusy  praetor,  xxvii.  8. 
X.  Licinius  PolliOy  xxvii.  29- 
L,  Licinius  LucuUusy  curule  aedile,  xxx.  39. 
Af.  Liciniusy  military  tribune,  slain,  xxvii.  12. 
M.  Licinius  Lucullusy  praetor,  xxxix.  6. 
M.  Licinius  StrabOy  military  tribune,  xli.  2. 
P.  Licinius  Calvusy  first  plebeian  consular  tribune,  v.  12.  The 
same  post  being  offered  to  him  again,  he  requests  it  may  be 
conferred  on  his  son,  18. 
P.  Licinius  Calvusy  consular  tribune,  v.  18.  20. 
P,  Licinius  Crassus^  chief  pontiff,  xxv.  5,  Master  of  horse, 
xxvii.  5.  Censor,  6.  Praetor,  21.  Consul,  xxviii.  38.  He 
and  his  army  suffer  sickness,  xxix.  10.  He  and  the  consul 
Sempronius  defeat  Hannibal,  36.  His  character,  xxxi.  1. 
P.  Licinius  Varusy  curule  aedile,  xxvii.  6.  Praetor,  21. 
P,  Liciniusy  chief  pontiff,  disputes  with  Fabius,  fiameh  of  Qui- 
rinus,  xxxvii.  51.  His  death,  xxxix.  46. 
P.  Licinius  Crassusy  praetor,  xli.  14.  Consul,  xlii,  28, 
P.  Licinius  Tegula,  poet,  xxxi.  12. 
Liguriansy  v.  35.  Ambassadors  sent  to  them  from  Rome, 
xxii,  33.  They  prepare  aid  for  Hasdrubal,  xx^ii.  39.  Join 
Mago,  xxviii.  46.  xxix.  5.  Ravage  the  country  on  the  Poj 

INDEX, 

xxxiv.  56.  ♦Invest  Pisoii^v,  3.  Are  subdued  by  Minuchis, 
xxx^i.  2.  Both  consuls  are  sent  against  them,  xxxviii.  42. 
They  surrender,  and  are  removed  from  the  mountains,  xJ.  38. 
41.  They  prepare  for  war,  xli.  1 1.  Are  defeated  by  C.  Clau¬ 
dius,  12.  They  seize  Mutina,  xli.  14.  Are  defeated,  18. 
Again^xfii.  7.  They  and  their  effects‘*are  sold,  8. 
Sfi.  Ligu9tinu8  receives  public  thanks  for  encouraging  the  levies, 
.  xlH.  34. 
Lilybmtmy  promontory,  xxv.  31.  xxvii.  5.  Sea  fight  near  U, 
xxi.  50. 
LingonianSy  v.  35. 
LAnen  book8y\v ,  1 , 
xxU.  I6.xxiii.  35. 
Lifiaremian  pirateSy  v.  "28. 
Ldparm  ialandSy  xxi.  49. 
LiriSy  river,  x.  21.  xxvi.  9,  34. 
Litanuy  wood,  whea^the  Gauls  destroy  a  Roman  army,  xxiii.  24, 
Lrviu3y  poet,  first  who  wrote  comedy  on  a  regular  plot,  vii.  2. 
C,  LrviU8y  pontiff,  xxvi.  23.  Curule  aedile,  xxix.  38.  Praetor, 
XXX.  26.  Consul,  xXxVui.  SS.xliii.  11. 
L,  Liviusy  praetor,  xlv.  44. 
M.  Livius  DenteVy  consul,  x.  1 .  One  of  the  first  plebeian  pon¬ 
tiffs,  9.  Dictates  to  Decius  the  foriri  of  devoting  hindael^  28. 
M,  Liviusy  ambassador  to  Carthage, xxi.  18.  Eight  years  ^ter 
a  severe  sentence  had  been  passed  on  him,  he  is  brought  back 
•  to  Rom^,  and  against  his  will  made  consul  a  second  time, 
xxvii.  34.  He  vanquishes  Hasdrubal,  46.  49.  Triumphs, 
xxviii.  9.  Is  made  dictator,  10.  Censor,  he  acquires  the  sur¬ 
name  Salinator,  and  maintains  a  shameful  dispute  with  his 
colleague,  xXix.  37. 
M,  Livius  defends  Tarentum,  xxiv.  20.  Is  obliged  to  retire 
into  the  citadel,  xxv.  10,  11.  xxvi.  39.  A  dispute  about  him 
in  the  senate,  xxvii.  25. 
Af.  Livius  MacatuSy  xxvii.  34. 
T.  Livius  wrote  in  the  reign  of  Augustus,  xxviii.  12.  See  iv,  20. 
Locri  revolts  to  the  Carthaginians,  xxii.  60.  xxiii.  36^  Is  be¬ 
sieged  by  Crispinus,  xxvii.  25.  Retaken  by  Scipio,  xxix.  6, 
7.  Is  put  under  the  command  of  Pleminius,  8.  His  conduct 
there,  to  21.  Its  laws  and  liberty  are  restored  by  the  se¬ 
nate,  21. 
Locrisy  in  €?reece,  xxvi.  26.  xxviii,  6.  xxxii.  18.  32. 
Locusts  waste  Campania,  xxx.  1 1. 
Longuluy  ii.  33.  ix.  39. 
Lorymuy  port,  xxxvii.  17.  xlv.  10. 
Luuy  mother,  viii,  I. 
LucUy  xxi.  59.  xli.  13. 
Lucaniana  support  the  Samnites  against  Alexander  of  Epirus, 
viii,  17.  Make  an  alliance  with  the  Romans,  25.  Revolt, 

INDEX. 

27.  Are  suppressed,  x.  1  i.  l8.^Sera*ai  Iheir  tdwijs  are 
taken  by  the  Homans,  xxy.  1.  They  sul>xiut,  xxvil  15. 
Xuceres,  tribe,  L  IS,  x. 
- century  of  knights,  i.  13.  36. 
Luceriuy  ix.  2.  Roman  hostages  kept  there,  13-  Is  taken  by 
the  Romans,  15.  Lpst,  and  recovered,  and  set^ed  as  a  colo¬ 
ny,  26.  Is  attacked  by  the  Samnites,  x.  35. 
Xwcreria,  wife  of  Collatinus,  i.  57.  Violated  by  Sex.  Tarquini- 
us,  she ’kills  herself,  58.  t 
C.  Lucretius^  commander  of  a  fleet,  xl.  26.  Is  accused  by 
people  of  Chalcis,  xliii.  7. ;  and  condemned,  S. 
C.  Lucretius  Gallusy  praetor,  xlii.  28. 
Hostus  Lucretius  Tricifiitinusy  consul,  iv.  30,  . 
X,  Lucretius  Flavus^  consul,  defeats  the  .^kiuans,  v,  29, 
lar  tribune,  he  defeats  the  Volsinians,  32. 
X.  Lucretius  Tricipitinus^  consul,  vanquishes  the  Volscians,  and 
triumphs,  iii.  8.  10. 
X.  Lucretius  Tricipitinusy  consular  tribunp,  iv.  4.  A  second 
time,  21.  A  third,  22. 
X.  Lucretiusy  quaestor,  betrayed  to  Hannibal,  xxi.  59. 
Af.  Lucretiusy  plebeian  tribune,  xxvii.  5. 
P.  Lucretiusy  consul,  ii.  15. 
P.  Lucpetius  Tricipitinusy  consular  tribune,  iy.  44,  Again,  47. 
P.  X«cre^w«,  governor  of  Rome,  iii.  24. 
^p,  Lucretiusy  father  of  Lucretia,i,  58.  Dies  in  the  consulship, 
ii.  8.  '  .  . 
Sp,  LucretiuSy  praetor,  xxviii,  38.  Is  continued  in  command, 
xxix.  13.  Again,  xxx.  1. 
T.  Lucretiusy  consul,  ii.  8,  Again,  16. 
LucumOy  son  of  Demaratus,  removes  to  Rome,  where  he  is  call¬ 
ed  Tarquinius,  i.  34. 
Lucumo  debauches  the  wife  of  Aruns  of  Clusium,  v.  33. 
Lunuy  city,  xli.  19.  xliii.  9.  xlv.  13. 
- harbour,  xxxiv.  8.  xxxix.  21, 
Lupercaly  i.  5. 
Lusitankiy  xxi.  43.  xxvii.  20.  Is  subdue^  by  .fimilius  PauUus, 
xxxvii.  57. 
Lutariusy  Gallic  chieftain,  xxxviii.  16, 
Cn.  Lutatius  made  prisoner  by  the  Boians,  xxi.  25.  Is  restored 
to  liberty  sixteen  years  after,  xxx.  19. 
Cn.  Lutatius  Cercoy  ^bassador  to  Ptolemy,  xlii.  6. 
Lustrum.  See  Survey. 
Q.  LutatiuSy  consul,  xxx.  44. 
Lycaoniay  xxxviii.  38.  xxxix.  54. 
Lycaeumy  dt  Athens,  burned  by  Philip,  xxxi.  24. 
Lycean  Party  i.  5. 
Lt/cia,  xxxiii.  41.  xxxvii.  16.  23.  The  Lycians  complain  of  the 
Rhodians,  xli.  6. 

INDEX. 

Lycortasy  of  Megalopolis,  feneral  of  horse,  father  of  Polybius^ 
the  historian,  xxxv.  29.  Ambassador  of  thopAchseans  to 
Rome,  ^xviii,  32.  Praetor,  xxxix.  35. 
Lycurgus^  tyrant  of  Lacedaemon,  xxxiv.  26. 
LycurguB^  lawgiver,  his  laws  and  institutions  abolished,  xxxviii. 
34.  xxxix.  33.  36. 
JLycusy  in  Dassaretio,  xxxi.  33.  xxxii.  9. 
Lydiay  xxxviii.  39.  ♦ 
Lyncusy  xxvi.  25. 
Lysitnachiay  having  been  sacked  and  burned  by  the  Thracians, 
is  rebuilt  by  Antiochus,  xxxiii.  38.  40,  41.  xxxiv,  58. 
Lymmachusy  King,  xxxiv^  58. 
Lysimackusy  Macedonian  courtier,  xl.  8. 
LyMinoe,  city,  xxxviii.  15. 

M 
Macedoniay  i.  L  ix.  18.  An  obscure  state  before  the  reign  of 
Plulip,  son  of  Amyntas,  subsisted  from  its  highest  summit  of 
grandeur  under  Alexander  to  Perseus,  the  last  king,  150  years, 
xlv.  9.  30.  See  Philifiy  Per9€U9, 
MacedoTiiitn  army  compared  with  the  Roman,  ix.  19.  Solem¬ 
nity  of  its  puri&cation,  xl.  6. 
- - phalanx,  ix.  19. 
■■■>■'  territory,  divided  into  four  districts, xlv.  29. 
Machanidasy  tymnt  of  Sparta,  makes  war  on  the  Achaeans,  xxvii. 
^b.  xxviii.  5.  7. 
Macriy  or  long  plains,  so  called,  xli.  18.  xlv.  12. 
MacrUy  island,  xxxvii,  13.  28.  29. 
MaduattnianSy  xxxviii.  40. 
Maeandcry  river,  xxxvii.  55.  xxxviii.  13.  15. 
Maecian  trihe  added,  viii.  17. 
Sfi.  MaacUiuSy  a  turbulent  plebeian  tribune,  iv.  48. 
Maedicuy  xxvi.  25.  xl.  21,  22. 
P.  consular  tribune,  v.  12.  Again,  18. 
Q.  Maeliusy  plebeian  tribune,  ix.  8. 
Sfi,  Maeliua  aspires  to  absolute  power,  iv.  13.  Is  summoned  to 
attend  the  dictator  Cincinnatus,  and  slain  by  Servilius  Ahala, 
14.  His  house  is  demolished,  16. 
Maenalusy  mount,  xxxiv.  28. 
C.  Maenimy  consul,  triumphs  over  the  Aricians  and  Lavinians, 
viii.  13.  Dictator ;  he  abdicates,  is  accused,  and  acquitted, 
ix.  26.  34. 
L,  Maeniiay  plebeian  tribune,  regulates  the  interest  of  money, 
vii.  16. 
M,  Maeniua  proposes  an  Agrarian  law,-  and  obstructs  the  levies, 
iv.  53. 
Msenius^  plebeian  tribune,  in  the  commotions  excited  by 

INDEX. 
Manlius,  submits  to  the  directi<Mi  of  the  senate,  vi.  19. ;  and 
prosecutet*Manlius,  20. 
M.  iVfeniMs,  military  tribune,  falls  in  a  battle  with  Ma^o,  xxx.  18. 
P,  Msenius^  consular  tribune,  v,  12. 
T,  Matnius^  praetor,  xxxix.  6.  8. 
i^Iaesian  woorf,  i.  33. 
mount,  xxxviii.  19. 
Mitgalus^  fioian  chief,  xxi.  29. 
MagiatratcBy  curule,  iv.  7.  Their  election  prevented  during  five 
years  by  the  plebeian  tribunes,  vi.  35.  Auspices  are  not  ob¬ 
served  at  the  election  of  plebeian  magistrates,  vi.  41. 
Cn.  Magius^  medixtuticus,  or  chief  magistrate  of  Campania, 
xxiv.  19. 
Decius  Magiua^  Capuan,  maintains  his  fidelity  to  the  Romans, 
and  takes  refuge  in  Egypt,  xxiii.  7.  10. 
Magnesia^  on  the  Maeander,  xxxviL  45. 
Magnesia^  near  Sipylus,  xxxvi.  43.  xxxvii.  11.  37.  44. 
Magnesiam^  and  Magnetatch^  xxxiii.  34.  xxxv.  31. 
Mago^  brother  of  Hannibal,  xxi.  47.  54.  xxii.  46,  Carries  to 
Carthage  an  account  of  Hannibal’s  successes,  xxiii,  12,  13. 
Is  sent  into  Spain,  and  defeated  at  Illiturgi,  32.  49,  He 
levies  troops,  xxiv.  42.  In  conjunction  with  Hasdrubal  Gis- 
go,  defeats  P,  Scipio,  xxv.  32.  34.  His  camp  is  taken  by 
Marcius,  39.  He  joins  his  brother  Hasdrubal,  xxvii.  20.  Is 
obliged  to  fly,  xxviii.  2.  Sails  to  Italy,  and  takes  Genua,  37. 
46.  Is  defeated  by  the  Romans,  xxx.  18.  Dies,  19. 
Mago,  Carthaginian  ambassador  to  Philip,  xxiii.  34.  ^ 
Mago  Barcine  made  prisoner  in  Sardinia,  xxiii.  41. 
MagOy  governor  of  New  Carthage,  surrenders  to  Scipio,  xxvi. 
44.  46. 
Maharbal^  son  of  Himilco,  xxi.  12.  45.  Pursues  the  Romans 
flying  from  Trasimenus,  xxii.  6,  Advises  Hannibal,  after  the 
battle  of  Cannse,  to  march  directly  to  Rome,  51.  xxiii.  18. 
Malea^  promontory,  xxxi.  44.  47.  xxxii.  16.  xlii,  56. 
Malian  bay^  xxvii.  30.  xxxi.  46. 
Maleventumy  ix.  27.  x.  15. 
Mallma^  xxxi.  41.  . 
Mamertines^  xxviii.  28,  xxx.  31, 
C.  Mamilius  Vitulus^  first  plebeian  chief  curio,  xxvii.  8.  Am¬ 
bassador  to  Philip,  xxx.  26.  Praetor,  xxxv.  38. 
L,  MamilitiBj  dictator,  of  Tusculum,  assists  the  Romans,  iii.  18. 
18.  29. 
Oct.  Mamilius^  of  Tusculum,  descended  from  Ulysses  and  Circe, 
marries  the  daughter  of  Tarquinius  the  Proud,  U  49.  En¬ 
tertains  him  in  his  exile,  ii.  15.  Raises  thirty  states  against 
the  Romans,  18.  Is  wounded  at  Regillus,  19. 
Q.  Maimlhia^  plebeian  aedile,  xxvii.  36. 

INDEX. 

Q,  Mamilim  Thurinus^  praetor,  xxviii.  10. 
Mandonius^  xxii.  22.  Brother  of  IndibiliB,  chief  of  the  Herge- 
tians,  xxvi.  49,  He  joins  the  Romans,  and  his  wife  and  chil¬ 
dren  are  restored  to  him,  xxvii.  17.  He  goes  over  to  the 
enemy,  xxviii.  24.  Is  defeated,  33.;  and  pardoned  by  Scipio, 
34.  Rebels,  is  taken  and  put  to  death,  xxix.  3. 
Manduria  taken  by  Fabius,  xxvii.  15. 
Manes^  the  rites  proper  for  appeasing  them  are  directed  by  the 
chief  pontiff,  i.  20.  Decius  devotes  himself  to  the  gods, 
manes,  and  the  earth,  viii.  9. 
Maniciusy  praetor  of  Praeneste,  xxiii.  19. 
Sejc.  Manilius^  a  leader  in  the  secession  of  the  soldiers,  iii.  5. 
Manifiulus^  a  company  of  soldiers,  i.  52.  vii.  24.  viii.  8. 
Manlian  orders^  iv.  29.  viii.  7. 
.4ul,  Manlius^  consul,  is  accused,  ii.  54.  His  accuser  is  mur¬ 
dered,  and  he  is  made  decemvir,  iii.  33. 
AuL  Manlius^  consular  tribune,  iv.  61.  A  second  time,  v.  8. 
A  third,  16.  Sent  with  a  golden  bason  to  Delphi,  is  taken  by 
Lyparaean  pirates,  and  set  at  liberty,  28. 
A.  Manlius  consular  tribune,  vi.  1.  Again,  11.  A 
third  time,  21.  A  fourth,  36. 
A,  Manliusj  military  tribune,  killed,  xxvii.  27. 
A.  Manlius^  consul  when  the  first  Punic  war  was  terminated, 
XXX.  44. 
A,  Manlius  VulsOy  consul,  xl.  59. 
C.  ManliitSy  consular  tribune,  vi.  30. 
Cn,  Manliusy  consul,  ii.  43. 
Cw.  Manliusy  consul,  defeats  the  Tiburtians,  vii.  12,  Again 
consul,  16.  Interrex,  17.  Censor,  22.  Master  of  horse,  28. 
C\  Manlius  VulsOy  praetor,  xxxiii.  42.  Consul,  xxxvii.  47.  Com¬ 
mands  in  Gallograecia,  xxxvlii.  12.  And  after  surmounting 
many  difficulties,  entirely  subdues  the  Gauls,  27.  Is  accused 
by  his  own  lieutenant-generals,  xxxviii.  45.  A  triumph  is 
decreed  to  him,  50.  xxxix.  6. 
X.  Manlius  Imperiosusy  dictator,  vii.  3.  His  severity  to  his  son, 
and  the  dutiful  conduct  of  the  latter,  4,  5. 
X.  Manlius  Cop^iloltnus^  consular  tribune,  iv.  42. 
X.  Manlius  Torquatusy  lieutenant-general,  slain  by  the  Gauls, 
X.  26. 
X.  Manliusy  praetor,  is  defeated  by  the  Boian  Gauls,  xxi.  17.  25. 
X.  Manlius  Acidinusy  praetor,  xxvi.  23.  Commands  an  army  at 
Narnia,  xxvii.  43.  50.  Succeeds  Scipio  in  the  province  of 
Spain,  xxviii.  38.  His  conduct  there,  xxix.  2,  3.  13.  He  is 
disappointed  of  an  ovation  by  M.  Porcius  Laeca,  xxxii.  7. 
X.  Manlius  having  assaulted  Carthaginian  ambassadors,  is  de¬ 
livered  up  to  them  by  the  feciales,  and  sent  to  Carthage, 
xxxviii,  42. 
VOL.  VI. — [HI 

INDEX. 

jL.  Maniiusy  praetor,  xxxviii.  35.  Is  refused  a  triumph,  and 
allowed  an  ovation,  xxxix.  29.  Consul,  xl.  43. 
M,  Manlius^  consular  tribune,  iv,  44. 
*M.  Manlius  Cafiitolinus^  consul,  v.  31.  He  saves  the  Capitol, 
47.  Is  made  interrex,  vi.  5.  His  ambition  and  seditious  be¬ 
haviour,  11  to  18.  He  is  brought  to  trial,  condemned,  and 
thrown  from  the  Tarpeian  rock,  20. 
jP.  Manliusj  consular  tribune,  vi.  30.  Dictator,  38. 
P.  Manlius  Vulso^  praetor,  xxvi.  23.  xxvii.  6. 
7\  Manlius^  son  of  L.,  an  example  of  filial  duty,  vii.  5.  He  kills 
a  Gaul  in  single  combat,  and  is  named  Torquatus,  10.  Is 
made  dictator,  19.  A  second  time,  26.  Consul,  27.  Again, 
28.  A  third  time,  viii.  3.  Puts  his  son  to  death,  7. 
T.  Manlius  Torquatus^  consul,  dies  in  consequence  of  a  fail  from 
his  horse,  x.  1 1. 
T.  Manlius  Torquatus  votes  against  ransoming  the  prisoners 
taken  at  Cannae,  xxii.  60.  Is  sent  governor  of  Sardinia,  and 
subdues  the  island,  xxiii.  34.  40,  41.  Is  a  candidate  for  the 
post  of  chief  pontiff,  xxv.  5.  Refuses  the  consulship,  xxvi 
22.  Is  made  dictator,  xxvii.  33. 
Manly  gown^  xxvi.  19. 
Mannusj  a  slave,  discovers  a  plot  of  the  Calavii  to  bum  Rome, 
xxvi.  27. 
xxix.  10, 
Martian  shield^  xxv.  39. 
C.  Marcius  signalizes  himself  in  the  taking  of  CorioU,  and  is 
surnamed  Coriolanus,  ii,  33.  Warmly  opposes  the  plebeian 
tribunes,  34.  Goes  into  exile,  35.  “  Is  made  general  of  the 
Volscians,  39.  Is  prevailed  on  by  his  mother  to  retire  from 
Rome,  and  dies,  40. 
C.  Marcius^  plebeian  tribune,  prosecutes  Q.  Fabius  for  taking 
part  in  a  fight  against  the  Gauls,  vi.  1 .  '' 
C.  Marcius  Rutilus^  consul,  triumphs  over  the  Privernians,  vli. 
16.  First  plebeian  dictator,  he  triumphs  without  leave  of 
the  senate,  27.  Consul  a  second  time,  21.  First  plebeian 
censor,  22.  A  third  time  consul,  28,  A  fourth,  38. 
C.  Marcius^  augur,  x.  9. 
Q,  Martins  Rutilus^  consul,  ix.  33.  Takes  Allifae,  38,  Is  pon 
tiff,  X.  9.  Censor,  47. 
Marcius  chosen  genera!  by  the  soldiers  on  the  death  of  the 
two  Scipios  in  Spain,  xxv.  37.  He  takes  the  two  camps  oi 
the  enemy,  39.  He  gives  offence  to  the  senate,  xxvi.  ^ 
Takes  Astapa,  xxviii.  22. 
M.  MarciuSy  xxvii.  6. 
M.  Marcius  R^allUy  prsetor,  xxix.  1 1.  xxx.  38. 
M.  Marcius  SermOy  and  Q.  Marcius  Scyiluy  xlii.  21. 
S^uma  MarciuSy  pontiff,  *.20. 

IJ^DEX. 

Q.  Marcius  Phili/ifiuay  praetor,  xxxviii.  35.  Consul,  xxxix.  6 
Commissioner  of  religious  affairs,  xl,  42.  His  conference 
’with  Perseus,  and  insidious  conduct, xlii.  40.  43.  Again  con¬ 
sul,  xliii.  1 1.  Goes  into  Macedonia,  xliv.  1.16, 
Q.  Marcius  Rallay  xxxv.  41. 
Q.  Mareius  Rex^  plebeian  tribune,  xxxiii.  25. 
^larcius^  a  soothsayer,  xxv.  12. 
Marica*a  grove ^  xxvii.  37. 
Maronea^  in  Samnium,  xxvii.  1. 
Maronea^  in  Greece,  xxxi.  16.  xxxvii.  60. 
Marius  Blosiusy  praetor,  at  Capua,  favours  Hannibal,  xxiii.  7, 
Marius  Statilius  detects  a  stratagem  of  Hannibal,  xxii.  42. 
MarucinianSy  viii.  29.  ix.  45.  xxii.  9. 
Mars  GradivuSy  i.  20.  ii.  45. 
Marses  field  dedicated,  i.  44,  ii.  5. 
Marsiansy  viii.  6.  Revolt,  ix.  41.  Are  conquered  and  fined,  x. 
3.  xxii.  9.  They  furnish  seamen,  xxviii.  45. 
Marsyasy  river,  xxxvlii.  13. 
Masmsyliansy  subjects  of  Syphax,  xxiv.  48.  xxviii.  17.  xxix.  32. 
XXX.  11. 
Masgabay  son  of  Masinissa,  comes  to  Rome,  xLv.  13,  14. 
Masinissay  King  of  the  Masylian  Numidians,  overthrows  Sy¬ 
phax,  xxiv.  48,  49.  In  alliance  with  the  Carthaginians,  he 
gives  much  trouble  to  P.  Scipio,  xxv.  34.  Confers,  and  forms 
a  treaty  with  him,  xxviii.  16.  35.  Complains  of  Scipio’s  de¬ 
lay,  xxix.  4.  His  various  turns  of  fortune,  and  expulsion  from 
his  kingdom,  29  to  32.  He  joins  Scipio,  33.  Burns  the  camp 
of  Syphax,  xxx.  5.  Recovers  his  kingdom,  1 1.  Marries  So- 
phonisba,  and,  being  reproved  by  Scipio,  sends  her  poison, 
12.  14,  15.  Receives  a  large  addition  to  his  dominions,  44. 
Presents  sent  to  him  from  Rome,  xxxi.  1 1.  He  sends  a  sup¬ 
ply  to  the  Romans,  19.  Another,  very  large,  xxxvi.  4.  A 
dispute  between  him  and  the  Carthaginians  is  pleaded  at 
Rome,  xlii.  23,  24. 
Massiliansy  a  colony  from  Phocaea,  v.  34.  Inform  the  Romans 
of  HannibaPs  passing  the  Iberus,  xxi.  25.  Act  as  guides  to 
Scipio,  26. 
Massivay  nephew  of  Masinissa,  is  taken  prisoner,  and  sent  back 
to  his  uncle  by  Scipio,  xxvii.  19.  xxviii.  35. 
Master  of  horsey  the  first,  Sp.  Cassius,  ii.  18.  The  first  plebeian, 
C.  Licinius,  vi.  39.  Master  of  horse  raised  to  an  equality  of 
power  with  the  dictator,  xxii.  25.  A  dictator  without  a 
master  of  horse,  xxiii.  22,  23. 
M.  Matienusy  praetor,  xli.  28.  Goes  into  exile,  xliii.  2. 
F,  Matienusy  military  tribune,  abused  by  Pleminius,  xxix.  6.  8 
MatutOy  mother y  v.  21.  xxv.  7.  xxix.  37.  xli.  28. 
Morvorss  Mars,  xxii.  1. 

INBEX, 

Matrons  mourn  a  year  for  Brutus,  ii.  7. ;  and  for  Publicola,  16 
Bring-  all  their  gold  and  ornaments  to  the  treasury,  v,  23 
Make  a  contribution  towards  satisfying  the  Gauls,  50.  Are 
repaid,  vi.  4.  A  dispute  between  the  patricians  and  plebeians, 
X.  23.  They  dedicate  a  brazen  statue  to  Juno  on  the  Aven- 
tine,  xxi.  62.  Also  a  golden  bason,  xxvii.  37.  Receive  the 
mother  of  the  gods,  xxix.  14. 
Mauru  or  J/oors,  auxiliaries  to  Hasdrubal  in  Spain, »xxi.  22 
XXV iii.  17.  Escort  Masinissa,  xxix.  30. 
Maurusia7is,  xxiv.  49. 
X.  Meciliusy  plebeian  tribune,  ii.  58. 
Maedtans^  Thracian,  xxviii.  5. 
Medians^  Asiatic,  xxxv.  48. 
Mediolanum  founded  by  the  Gauls,  v.  34.  Defeat  of  the  Gauls 
there,  xxxiv.  46. 
Medixtuticusy  title  of  the  chief  magistrate  of  Campania,  xxiv 
19.  xxvi.  6. 
Medullia,  i.  33.  38. 
Megalesian  gawes^  xxix.  14, 
MegalofioliSj 5.  xxxvi.  31. 
Megalofiolitans^  xxviii.  8.  xxxii.  22. 
Megara^  in  Sicily,  xxiv.  30.  35. 
Megara^  in  Greece,  xxviii,  7.  xxxi.  22, 
Megiste,  port,  xxxvii.  22,  24.  44. 
Mele^  or  Meles^  xxiv.  20.  xxvii.  1. 
Melessumy  xxviii.  3. 
Melibea^  xxxvi.  13.  Besieged  by  the  Romans,  xliv.  13.  Taken. 
46. 
Melita^  island,  xxi,  51. 
C.  Memmius^  praetor,  xlii.  10. 
Memnon^  xxxii.  22. 
AZrm/iAzs,  xlv.  12. 
Agrififia  Menenius^  consul,  ii.  16.  He  brings  home  the  com 
mons  from  the  sacred  mount,  32.  Dies,  33. 
Agrippa  Menenius^  commissioner  of  a  colony,  iv.  11. 
Agrippa  Menenius  Lanatus^  consul,  iv.  13.  Consular  tribune. 
45.  Again,  47. 
C.  Menenius^  consul,  iii.  32. 
L.  Menenius  Lanatus^  consul,  iv.  12. 
£.  Mcnenins^  consular  tribune,  vi.  5.  Again,  2. 
T.  Menenius^  consul,  ii.  51,  52. 
Mcninx^  island,  xxii.  31. 
Menippus^  Macedonian  general,  xxvii.  32.  xxviii.  5. 
Menippus.^  envoy  of  Antiochus  to  the  ^tolians, xxxv.  32.  xxxvi. 
10. 
M^ns^  mind,  a  temple  dedicated  to  her,  xxii.  10.  xxiii.  31. 
Mensarii  triumviri^  commissioners  of  the  public  accounts  ap  ¬ 
pointed  for  the  liquidation  of  debts,  vii.  21.  xxiii.  2L 

IND«K. 

Mercenary  troops  first  employed  by  the  Romans,  xxiv.  49. 
Merchants^  a  college  of  them,  ii.  27. 
Mercury^  ii.  21.  v.  13. 
Mercury" s  hxll^  xxvi.  44.  Promontory,  xxix.  27. 
Mericus^  a  Spaniard,  betrays  the  Island  a  part  of  Syracuse  to  the 
Romans,  xxv.  30.  Is  rewarded  with  the  freedom  of  Rome, 
and  a  golden  crown,  xxvi.  21. 
Messana^  in  Sicily,  X3tl.  49.  xxiv.  i.  xxix.  7.  9. 
Messapians^  viii.  24. 
Messene^  in  Peloponnesus,  xxix.  1 2.  Is  besieged  by  the  Achaeans, 
and  united  to  them,  xxxvi.  3 1 . 
Metapontus^i.  18.  viii.  24.  xxv.  11.  xxvii.  1. 
Metapontines^  after  the  battle  of  Cannae,  revolt  to  Hannibal, xxii 
61.  xxv.  15.  xxvii,  16. 
Metapontine  lands^  xxiv,  20. 
Metaurusy  river,  xxvii.  47. 
Q,  MeteUus^  curule  sedile,  xxvii.  36.  Argues  in  favour  of  P 
Scipio,  xxix.  20 
M.  Metihufi^  plebeian  tribune,  inveighs  against  Fabi\is,  xxii.  15 
Proposes  to  give  the  master  of  horse  equal  authority  with  th^ 
dictator,  25. 
Sp,  Metilius^  plebeian  tribune,  iv.  48. 
7’.  Metilins  Croto^  lieutenant-general,  xxiii.  31. 
Metropolis  surrenders  to  the  Romans,  xxxii.  15.  xxxvi.  10. 
Mettius  Curtius^  i.  12,  13. 
Met  tins  Fuffetius^  dictator  of  Alba,  i.  23.  His  treachery,  27 
Punishment,  28. 
Vectius  Mettius^  Volscian,  distinguishes  himself  highly  in  battle, 
iv.  28. 
41. 
Mezentius^  King  of  Etruria,  i.  2. 
Mezetulus^  Numidian,  disputes  the  throne  with  Capusa,  xxix 
29.  Is  obliged  to  fly,  30. 
Mictio^  general  at  Chalcis,  xxxv.  38. 
Milesians^  xxxviii.  39. 
Afz/erus,  xxxviii.  13. 
Milionia^  x.  3.  34. 
MilOy  favourite  of  Perseus,  xliv.  32.  Forsakes  him,  45. 
Milvian^  or  Mulvian-bridgt^  xxvii.  51. 
Mines  in  a  siege,  v.  19.  21.  xxiii.  18. 
Afmnws,  river,  xxiv.  10.  xxxii.  30. 
Minerva  discovered  the  use  of  numbers,  vii.  3. 
Minerva  AlctSy  xlii.  5 1 . 
- Itoniay  xxxvi.  20. 
Minerva" s  promontory,  xl.  18.  xlii.  20. 
Mimi  entertain  Hannibal  in  Capua,  xxiii.  8. 
MiniOy  prime  minister  of  Antiochus,  xxxv.  15,  16.  xxxvii.  40. 
Mmoa  Heracleuy  xxiv.  35. 

INDEX. 

Minors^  their  money  lent  to  the  public,  xxiv,  \S. 
MinturnXy  viii.  11.  ix.  25.  A  colony  settle  there, x.  21.  xxvii.  38 
Minuria^  a  vestal,  buried  alive,  viii.  15. 
L.  Minucius^  consular  tribune,  his  bad  conduct,  iii.  25,  26.  He 
is  relieved  by  the  dictator  Cinciunatus,  and  ordered  to  abdi¬ 
cate,  29. 
L.  A/mu dw.9,  decemvir,  iii.  35. 
L.  Minucius^  director  of  the  market,  discovers  to  th#  senate  the 
designs  of  Maelius,  iv.  13.  ls*rewarded,  16. 
X.  Minucius  My  r  til  us  having  ill-treated  ambassadors  of  Car¬ 
thage,  is  sent  thither  in  custody,  xxxviii.  42, 
X.  Minucius j  praetor,  x?.xi.  4. 
AI.  Minucius^  consul,  ii.  21.  Again,  34. 
Af.  A'hnucius^  plebeian  tribune,  v.  1 1. 
Af.  Mtnucius  FessusypXcheid^n  augur,  x.  9. 
AX  Minucius  Rufus^  master  of  horse  to  Fabius,  xxii.  8.  Cen- 
sures  his  caution,  14.  Is  invested  with  equal  authority,  26. 
Engages  Hannibal,  and  is  saved  by  Fabius  from  a  total  de¬ 
feat,  28,  29.  Acknowledges  his  misconduct,  30.  Is  killed  at 
Cannx,  49. 
AX.  Minucius^  plebeian  tribune,  xxiii.  2 1 . 
JP.  Minucius^  military  tribune,  xxxv.  5. 
Minucius^  consul,  iii.  30. 
Q,  Minucius^  lieutenant-general,  xxvi.  33. 
Q.  Minucius  Thermus^  praetor,  xxxiii.  24. 
Q.  Minucius  Rufus^  praetor,  xxxi.  4.  Consul,  xxxii.  27. 
Q.  Minucius  Thermus^  curule  aedile,  xxxii.  27.  Praetor,  xxxiii 
26.  Consul,  xxxiv.  54.  xxxv.  20.  Defeats  the  Ligurians,  21 
Is  refused  a  triumph,  xxxvii.  46.  Dies,  xxxviii.  41. 
T.  Minucius^  consul,  defeats  the  Samnites,  ix.  44. 
Tt  Minucius  Rufus^  xlii.  54. 
T,  Minucius  Molliculus^  praetor,  xl.  35. 
Misagenesy  son  of  Masinissa,  xlii.  29.  Brings  aid  to  the  Ro¬ 
mans  against  Perseus,  62. 
AXisenum,  promontory,  xxiv.  13. 
Mithridates^  son  of  Antiochus,  xxxiii.  19, 
Alitylene^  xxxvii.  21. 
Molossisj  viii.  24. 
Moneta^  Juno^  vi.  20, 
Money  ^  lent  out  of  the  treasury,  secured  by  mortgages  and  bonds, 
xxii.  60. 
Aloney  of  widows  and  minors  lent  to  the  public,  xxiv,  18. 
Mopsian  faction,  at  Compsa,  xxiii.  1 . 
Mother,  Iddean,  xxix.  10.  Her  priests  come  out  of  Pessinus  to 
meet  the  consul  Manlius,  xxxviii.  18. 
Atucian,  meadovx>s,n,  13. 
P.  Mucius  mistakes  Porsenna’s  secretary  for  the  King,  and  kills 

INDEX. 
him,  burns  his  right-hand,  and  is  thence  cafled  Scaevola,  ii. 
12,  13. 
P.  Mucius^  praetor,  xl.  44. 
Q,  MuciuH  Scsevola^  praetor,  xxiii.  24. 
C.  praetor,  xli.  8. 
L.  and  Q.  Mummius  oppose  the  proposal  of  Petillius  respect¬ 
ing  Scipio  Africanus,  xxxviii.  54. 
C,  Munatius^  praetor,  xlii.  4. 
xxiv.  42.  Taken  by  Gracchus,  xl.  47. 
Murcia^  goddess,  i.  33. 
Murgantia^'wi  Samnium,  taken,  x.  17. 
Murgantia^m  Sicily,  xxiv.  17.  36.  xxvL  21. 
Mutina^  xxi.  25.  xxvii.  21.  xxxv.  4.  6. 
MutincB^  having  learned  the  art  of  war  under  Hannibal,  is  very 
troublesome  to  the  Romans  in  Sicily,  xxv.  40.  xxvi.  21.  Is 
ill-treated  by  Hanno,  40.  Surrenders  Agrigentura  to  the 
Romans,  xxvii.  5. 
Mutiny  of  Roman  soldiers,  iv.  50.  xxviii.  24,  &.€. 
Afyndw®,  xxxvii.  16, 
Myceniccy  near  Argos,  xxxii.  39 
Myluy  river,  xxiv.  30,  3 1 . 
MysiUy  xxxviii.  39. 

N 

tyrant  of  Lacedaemon,  xxix.  12.  Forms  an  alliance  with 
Philip,  xxxii.  38.  Sends  aid  to  the  Romans,  40.  War  is 
declared  against  him  by  the  other  states  of  Greece,  xxxiv.  24. 
He  refuses  the  terms  of  peace  offered  by  the  Romans,  36. 
Being  besieged  in  Lacedaemon,  he  is  forced  to  comply  with 
them,  40.  The  Achaeans  declare  war  against  him,  xxxv.  25. 
He  is  defeated,  30.  Put  to  death,  35. 
JVeevian  gatCy  ii,  1 1 . 
JSTadagaray  a  conference  there  between  Scipio  and  Hannibal, 
Xxx.  29. 
Q.  JSTaevius  CristUy  praefect  of  allies,  drives  Philip  out  of  his 
camp  at  Apollonia,  xxiv.  40. 
X.  J^sevim  BalbuSy  praetor,  xlv.  13. 
M,  •N'geviusy  said  by  some  to  be  the  accuser  of  P.  Scipio, 
xxxviii.  56. 
Q,  2 wff,  commissioner  of  a  colony,  xxxiv.  53.  xxxv.  40. 
Q,  Maevius  MathOy  praetor,  xxxix.  32. 
J^ail  driven  by  a  dictator,  vii.  3.  ix.  28.  viii.  18. 
JVarniUy  colony,  x.  9,  10.  Refuses  supplies,  xxvii.  9.  xxix.  15. 
Jstarnian  mdc,  vi.  5.  xxix.  37. 
Kasosy  or  Islandy  part  of  Syracuse,  xxv.  24.  Taken  by  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  30. 

INDEX,  > 

.icciua  J^'aviuSy  U  36, 
Q.  JSTavius  advises  to  mix  footmen  with  the  cavalry,  xxvi.  4, 
His  brave  conduct,  5. 
J^aufiactuTTiy  xxvi.  26,  xxvii.  30.  xxxvi.  30, 
port  at  Phocaea,  xxxvii.*  31 .  ^ 
C.  Xautiuny  consul,  ii.  52.  Again,  iii.  25.  He  routes  the  Sa¬ 
bines,  xxvi.  29. 
C,  JS/'autius  Rutilusy  consul  iv.  52. 
Sfi.  J^Tautiuay  consul,  ii.  39, 
Sfi,  JSTautiua  consular  tribune,  iv.  35.  Again,  45. 
Sft,  JVautim  Rutilusy  commands  the  cohorts  of  the  allies, x.  4i. 
Is  honoured  for  his  bravery,  44. 
J^eafiolwy  viii.  22.  Its  ambassadors  offer  gold  to  the  Romans, 
who  accepM:  the  smallest  bason,  xxii.  32.  Its  lands  are  ra¬ 
vaged  by  Hannibal,  xxiv,  13. 
Xemean  gamcsy  the  direction  of  them  given  to  Philip,  xxvii.  30, 
31.  to  T.  Quintius,  xxxiv.  41. 
S^efiete  is  taken  by  the  Etrurians,  and  recovered  by  the  Romans, 
vi.  9,  10.  A  colony  is  settled*there,  21.  It  refuses  supplies, 
xxvii,  9.  Is  punished,  xxix,  15. 
J\€fituney  equestrian,  i.  9.  A  lectisternium.to  obtain  his  favour, 
V.  13.  xxii.  10.  , 
A'^efitunian  lakcy  xxxix.  44. 
J\rerulum  stormed  by  the  Romans,  ix,  20. 
XeasuBy  river,  xlv.  29. 
.Vicaea,  city,  on  the  Male  an  bay,  xxviii.  5.  xxxv.  26. 
Xicandevy  a  leader  of  pirates,  xxxvii.  1 1 . 
A  icandevy  .Stolian  praetor,  xxxviii.  4,  5, 
.Yiciasy  Achaean  praetor,  xxviii.  8. 
Xiciasy  Macedonian,  put  to  death  by  Perseus,  xliv.  lO. 
JV*ico  forms  a  conspiracy,  and  betrays  Tarentum  to  Hannibah 
XXV.  8,  9.  Kills  D.  Quintius,  xxvi.  39.  Is  killed  in  the  cap¬ 
ture  of  Tarentum,  xxvii.  16.  ^ 
Xicodamusy  iEtolian  general,  xl.  5. 
Xiicy  river,  xliv.  19. 
Xola  taken  by  the  Romans,  ix.  28.  Is  besieged  by  Hannibal, 
xxiii.  14.  16.  Again,  43.  46.  The  plebeian  party  invite 
Hannibal,  xxiv.  13. 
.Yomentan  roady  hi.  52. 
Xomentum  taken  by  Tarquinius  Priscus,  i.  38.  iv.  22. 
XorbUy  Roman  colony,  ii,  34.  Is  attacked  by  the  Privemians, 
vii.  42.  Maintains  constant  friendship  with  the  Romans^ 
xxvii.  10. 
Xortiay  Etrurian  goddess,  vii.  3. 
Xovendiale  sacrumy  or  nine  days'  festival,  i.  31.  xxi.  62.  xxv.  7. 
xxvi,  23,  See. 
Yovenailes^  deities,  viii.  9. 

INDEX. 

A'liceria,  ix.  38.  Is  taken  by  Hannibal,  xxiii.  15,  16.  The 
inhabitants  are  removed  to  Atella,  xxvii.  30. 
JStumerius  Decimiusy  Samnite,  xxii.  24. 
JVuma  Pompilius  is  chosen  king,  i.  18.  His  various  religious 
institutions,  21.  His  commentaries,  32.  His  books  of  phi- 
losophy  discovered,  xl.  29. 
A^umiciusy  river,  i.  2. 
Pfumiciusy  Latine  praetor,  summoned  to  Rome,  viii.  3. 
T.  JsTumicius  Priscusy  consul,  defeats  the  Volscians,  ii.  63. 
.'Vwmit/zG/zs,  xxi.  22.  xxiv.  48.  xxix,  23.  31.  34,  xxx.  12.  xxxv.  1 1. 
See  Syphaxy  Masinissay  Gala. 
.’N'umisiusy  Latine  general,  viii.  1 1. 
JVumitory  King  of  Alba,  i.  3.  5. 
L.  Pfumitorius  chosen  tribune  in  an  assembly  of  the  tribes,  ii.  58. 
JVursians  promise  soldiers  to  Scipio,  xxviii.  45. 
.Vyrnphaem  betrays  Palaepolis  to  the  Romans,  viii.  25,  26. 
O 

OcrkuluniyY^.  41.  xxii.  H. 
Octavius  MetiuSy  x.  41. 
Cn.  Octaviusy  praetor,  xxviii.  38.  He  captures  eighty  Cartha- 
ginian  ships,  45.  Is  sent  ambassador  to  Africa,  xxxi.  II. 
Made  commissioner  of  a  colony,  xxxiv.  45.  Praetor,  xliv,  17. 
He  triumphs  over  Macedonia,  xlv.  42. 
Octolophusy  in  Dassaretia,  xxxi.  36. 
OdrysianSy  xxxix.  53.  xliv.  42. 
Orwrwm,  xliii.  19. 
Oenusy  river,  xxxiv.  28, 
Oesalces  succeeds  his  brother  Gala  in  the  kingdom  of  Numidia. 
xxix.  29,  30,  31. 
OetUy  mount,  the  highest  part  called  Callidromos,  xxxvi.  15.  22. 
30.  xxxvii.  5.  xli,  22. 
Ofilius  Calaviusy  a  Campanian,  his  opinion  of  the  silence  of  the 
Romans  going  home  from  Caudium,  ix.  6. 
Aul.  Ogulnmsy  military  tribune,  xxxiii.  36. 
Cn.  and  Q.  Og-ulmus.,  plebeian  tribunes,  propose  a  law  to  open 
the  priesthood  to  plebeians,  x.  6.  Are  curule  aediles,  23. 
M.  Ogulnius  is  sent  into  Etruria  to  purchase  corn,  xxvii.  3. 
Olbuy  in  Sardinia,  ravaged  by  Hamilcar,  xxvii.  6. 
Olcajdesy  islands,  conquered  by  Hannibal,  xxi.  5. 
Olympiay  xxvi.  24.  xlv.  28. 
Olympian  gameSy  xxvii.  35.  xxviii.  7. 
Olympian  Jupiter y  xxiv.  21. 
Olijmpiumy  temple,  near  Syracuse,  xxiv.  33. 
Olympiasy  mother  of  Alexander  the  Great,  viii.  24. 
Olympiasy  city,  formerly  Connocondylum,  xxxix,  2:^ 
VOL.  VI. — [1^ 

INDEX. 

Olymfius^moMtii^  xxxvm»  18,  19,  20.  23. 
Olziniiim^  xlv,  26. 
Onesimus^  a  Macedonian,  is  received  kindly  by  the  Roman  se¬ 
nate,  admitted  an  ally,  and  presented  with  a  house  and  land, 
xliv.  16. 
Onomastus^  by  order  of  Philip,  massacres  the  Maronites,  xxxix 
34.  xl.  8. 
Ofiimia^  a  vestal,  buried  alive,  xxii.  S7, 
L.  Opimtus  Pan^^  quxstor,  x.  32. 
OpSy  her  temple  struck  by  lightning,  xxxix.  22. 
L.  OpiturniuH^  aFaliscian,  a  leader  of  the  Bacchanals,  xxxix.  17, 
OppiCy  a  vestal,  condemned  for  a  breach  of  chastity,  ii.  42. 
Oppia  and  Cluvia^  Campanian  women,  their  liberty  and  goods 
are  restored  by  the  Romans,  xxvi.  33,  34. 
C.  Oppius^  plebeian  tribune,  iii,  54. 
C.  Oppiusy  prxfect  of  allies,  is  surprised  by  the  Gauls,  and  slain, 
xxxi.  2. 
C.  Oppiusy  proposer  of  the  law  forbidding  women  the  use  of 
golden  ornaments,  and  a  debate  about  that  law,  xxxi.  1,  2,  Etc. 
L,  0ppiu8y  plebeian  tribune,  xxxii.  28. 
i.  Oppius  SalinatoTy  commander  of  a  fleet  protecting  Sicily, 
XXXV.  23.  Praetor,  24. 
M.  Oppiusy  leader  of  the  seceding  soldiers,  iii.  51. 
Sp.  Oppius  Comic euy  decemvir,  iii.  35.  Is  left  in  Rome  with 
Ap.  Claudius,  41.  Endeavours  to  assist  him,  49.  Assembles 
the  senate,  50.  Accused,  and  ordered  into  prison,  he  lays 
violent  hands  on  himself,  58. 
Opus  is  sacked  by  Attains,  xxviii.  7.  Dissensions  there,  xxxii 
32.  Its  port  Cynus,  xxviii.  6. 
Oracle  of  Delphiy  i.  56.  v.  15.  xxix.  10,  11. 
- of  Jupiter y  at  Dodona,  viu.  24. 
Orbitaniuviy  xxiv.  20. 
Orest iSy  xxvii.  33.  * 
OretariSy  xxi.  1 1, 
OreuTtiy  xxviii.  5.7,  8.  Taken  by  the  Romans,  xxviii.  6.  Again, 
/by  them  and  Attains,  xxxi.  46.  xxxiii.  31.  34. 
Oricum  is  taken  by  Philip,  and  retaken  by  the  Romans,  xxiv,  40 
xxvi.  25.  xxxiv.  51,  52.  xlv.  33. 
OringiSy  or  ./furmx,  xxviii.  3. 
Oroanda,  xxxviii.  18.  37.39. 
OroandeSy  a  Cretan,  robs  Perseus  of  his  treasure,  xlv.  6. 
Oropusy  xlv.  27. 
Orsua  and  Corbis  determine  in  single  combat  their  disputf? 
about  the  throne,  xxviii.  21 . 
Orthobulay  wife  of  Proxenus,  is  condemned  for  poisoning  her 
husband,  xli.  25, 

INDEX. 
Ortiagorij  a  Gallic  chief,  xxxviiL  19.  His  wife*s  ill  treatment, 
and  revenge,  24. 
Ortona^  ii.  43. 
Oscan  silver^  from  Osca,  now  Huesca,  in  Spain,  xxxiv.  10. 
Osciam^  inventors  of  the  Atellan  farce,  vii,  2. 
Osaa^  mount,  xlii.  54. 
OsUa^  built  at  the  mouth  of  the  Tiber,  by  Ancus  Marcius,  i.  33 
xxii.  1 1.  27.  xxiii.  38.  xxv.  20.  xxvii.  22.  xxix.  14. 
T,  Otactliufi,  praetor,  xxii.  10.  Is  sent  as  propraetor  with  a  fleet 
to  Sicily,  xxiii.  32.  Is  disappointed  in  a  near  prospect  of  the 
consulship,  by  Q.  Fabius,  xxiv.  7.  9.  xxv.  31.  xxvi.  1.  22,  23. 
Ovation^  iii.  10,  kc. 
Ovile^  inclosure  in  the  field  of  Mars,  where  the  centuries  gave 
their  votes,  xxvi.  22. 
Ovius  Paccius^  Samnite  priest,  directs  the  ceremonies  in  de¬ 
voting  the  soldiers,  x.  8. 

P 
Pachymtm,  promontory,  xxiv.  27.  35.  xxv.  27. 
Pactiussind  Vibius,  brothers,  men  of  eminence  in  Bruttium,  ap 
ply  to  Q.  Fabius,  xxvii.  15. 
Padus^  now  Poy  river,  v.  33.  35.  xxi.  43.  47.  52. 
Pseonia^  xxxiii.  19.  xxxviii.  17.  xxxix.  54.  Afterwards  caller 
Emathia,  xl.  3, 
Paestum^  viii.  17.  xxii.  36.  xx\i.  39.  xxvii.  10. 
Palaefiharsalus^  xliv.  1. 
Palsefiolia  viii.  22.  Surrendered  to  the  Romans,  xxv.  26. 
Palatine  hill^  i.  5.  7.  33.  ii.  10.  xxix.  37. 
Palinurus^  promontory,  xxxvii.  11, 
Pallene^  xxxi.  45.  xxxviii.  28.  xUv,  11.  xlv.  30. 
Palm  branches  first  given  in  token  of  victory  at  the  Roman 
games,  x.  47. 
Palumbinum  taken  by  the  Romans,  x.  45. 
Pamfihylia^  xxxvii.  23.  40.  xliv.  14.  xlv.  22. 
Pan,  Lycaejin,  called  by  the  Romans  Inuus,  i.  5.  ♦ 
Panaetoliumy  general  assembly  of  the  .^Etolians,  xxxi.  30.  52 
XXXV.  32. 
Pandosiay  viii.  24.  Is  surrendered  to  the  Romans,  xxix.  38. 
Panormusy  in  Sicily,  xxiv.  36.  xxix.  1. 
Panormus^  in  Samos,  xxxvii.  1 1. 
Pantaleouy  ^tolian  chief,  protects  Eumenes  at  Delphi,  xlii.  15 
Pantauchusy  ambassador,  and  intimate  friend  of  Philip,  xlii.  39 
xliv.  23.  Surrenders  Bercea  to  the  Romans,  45. 
Pap-hlagoniay  i,  1.  • 
Papirian  tribe,  viii.  37. 
- cruelty,  x.  3. 
C\  Pii/iirius  Crass{a\  consular  tribune,  vi.  18. 

INDEX. 

C.  JPapirius  Maso^  xxi.  25.  Dies  pontiff,  xxv.  2.  ■  d 
C.  Papirius  Turdus^  plebeian  tribune,  xli.  6. 
C.  Papirius  Car  bo  ^  praetor,  xliv.  17. 
P.  Papirius^  consular  tribune,  vi.  22.  o8. 
L,  Papirius^  praetor,  viii.  17. 
X.  Papirius^  a  detestable  usurer,  viii.  28. 
X.  Papirius  Crassus^  consul,  iv.  21. 
X.  Papirius  Crassus^  consul,  iv.  30. 
X.  dictator,  viii.  12.  Consul,  16.  Again,  19 
Master  of  horse,  36. 
X,  Papirius  Cursor^  consular  tribune,  vi.  5.  Again,  11.  He 
was  censor  when  the  city  was  taken,  ix.  34. 
X.  Pa/iirfwfi  Cwr«or,  master  of  horse,  viii.  12.  Consul,  23.  Dic¬ 
tator,  29.  Determines  to  punish  Fabius,  his  master  of  horse, 
for  fighting  contrary  to  orders,  30.  34.  On  the  request  of  the 
people  forgives  him,  35.  •  Is  made  consul  a  second  time,  ix.  7. 
He  takes  Luceria,  and  sends  the  Samnites  under  the  yoke,  10. 
Is  a  third  time  consul,  15.  Triumphs,  16.  Is  made  consul 
a  fourth  time,  22.  A  fifth,  28.  Dictator  a  second  time ;  he 
triumphs  over  the  Samnites,  40. 
X.  Papirius  Cursor^  consul,  x.  9.  Pays  little  attention  to  aus¬ 
pices,  40.  Triumphs  over  the  Samnites,  46.  Is  chosen 
praetor,  47. 
X.  Papirius  Mugillanus^  consul,  iv.  7.  The  first  censor,  8.  Is 
consul  a  second  time,  30.  Consular  tribune,  42.  Interrex,  43. 
X.  Papirius  Mugillanus^  consul,  viii.  23. 
M.  Papirius^  one  df  the  elders,  slain  by  the  Gauls  on  their  en¬ 
tering  Rome,  V.  41. 
M,  Papiriusy  a  commissioner  for  the  liquidation  of  debts,  vii.  2 1 . 
Af.  Papirius  Atratinus^  consul,  iv.  52. 
M.  Papirius  Crassus^  consul,  iv.  12.  Dictator,  viii.  17. 
M,  Papirius  Mugillanus^  consular  tribune,  iv.  45.  Again,  47 
Sp.  Papirius^  praetor,  vi.  22.  Again,  27. 
Sp,  Papirius  informs  his  uncle,  the  consul,  of  a  defect  in  the 
auspices,  x.  40. 
Pa nVifl! festival,  xl.  2. 
Parma^  Roman  colony,  xxxix.  55. 
Parnassus^  mount,  xlii.  16. 
Paroreia,  xxxix.  27.  xlii.  51. 
Par 08^  island,  xxxi.  15. 
Partheniusy  mount,  xxxiv.  26. 
Parthiansy  iiL,  18. 
ParMmian®,  xxix,  12.  xxxiii.  34. 
Patara^  capital  of  Lycia,  xxxiii.  41.  xxxvii.  15. 
Pata.'tium^  X.  2.  xli.  27. 
Patrx^  xxxvi.  21.  xxxviii.  29. 
Pa  u^anias^  praetor  of  Epirus,  xxxii.  10.  xxxvi.  9. 
P ausistratus^  praetor  of  Rhodes,  xxxiii.  18.  xxxvii.  \  i. 

INDEX. 

Patricians^  why  so  called,  i.  8.  x.  8.  They  insist  that  they  only 
have  the  power  of  taking  auspices,  and  consequently  a  right 
to  magistracies,  and  the  command  of  armies,  iiL  1.  vi.  41.  vii 
6.  Their  contest  with  the  plebeians  about  the  consulship,  iv. 
1,  Is  compromised,  6.  Renewed,  vi.  34.  vii.  18  to  28.  x.  15. 
They  claim  the  offices  of  praetor  and  curule  aedile,  vi.  42.  vii. 
1.  They  have  the  power  of  appointing  an  interrex,  vi.  41. 
Are  not  eligible  to  plebeian  magistracies,  iv.  25.  The  law  is 
repealed,  which  forbade  their  intermarrying  with  plebeians, 
iv.  6. 
Patrician  chastity^  its  chapel,  x.  23. 
1\  Pedanius^  centurion,  throws  the  standard  among  the  enemy, 
and  forces  the  Carthaginian  camp,  xxv.  14. 
Pedum  taken  by  Coriolanus,  ii.  39.  vii.  12.  By  Camillus,  and 
the  inhabitants  made  citizens  of  Rome,  viii.  13. 
jPc/agoma,  xxvi.  25.  xxxi.  39. 
PelignianSy  viii.  6.  29.  Revolt,  and  are  defeated,  ix,  4d.  Peace 
is  granted  to  them,  45.  x.  30. 
Pella j  xxvi.  25.  xliv.  42  to  46. 
xxxiii,  14,  15. 
Pelliti^  tribe  of  Sardinians,  xxiii.  40. 
Pellinuy  xxxi.  39. 
Pelofionnesus^  i.  7. 
Pelofis^  King  of  Lacedaemon,  xxxiv.  32. 
Pelusium^  xliv.  19.  Pelusian  mouth  of  the  Nile,  xlv.  i  i. 
Penestia^yiXni,  19,20,  21.  xliv.  11. 
Peneus^  river,  xxxii.  15.  xlii.  38.  55.  60.  xliv.  6.  xlv.  29. 
Pennine^  summit  of  the  Alps,  v.  35.  xxi.  38. 
Pentrian  tribe  of  Samnites,  ix.  31.  xxil  6i. 
Pefiarethus^  island,  xxviii.  5.  City,  xxxi.  28. 
Pereettj  xxxii.  34,  35. 
Pergamus^  xxix.  11.  xxxi.  46.  xxxvii.  18,  19. 
Perolla  resolves  to  kill  Hannibal,  xxii,  8. 
Perfienna  and  Petillius^  Roman  ambassadors,  imprisoned  b) 
Gentius,  xliv.  27. 
Perrhsebia^  xxxi.  41.  xxxii.  15.  xlii.  36.  53.  xliv.  35. 
Persians^  ix.  18,  19.  xxxvi.  15. 
Perseus^  Macedonian  general,  xxvi.  25. 
Perseusj  son  of  King  Philip,  xxxi.  28.  Quarrels  with  his  bro¬ 
ther  Demetrius,  xl.  6  to  16.  His  forgery  of  letters  detected, 
xl.  54,55.  He  gets  possession  of  the  kingdom,  57,  58.  Pre- 
pares  for  war  against  the  Romans,  xli.  22,  23.  Is  accused  at 
Rome  by  Eumenes,  xlii.  11,  12,  13.  Employs  assassins  to 
murder  Eumenes,  15,  16.;  and  Raramius  of  Bnindusium  to 
poison  the  Roman  ambassadors,  17.  Confers  with  Q.  Mar- 
cius,  39  to  43  Collects  a  very  large  army,  51.  Is  worsted 
by  the  Romans,  59.  66.  Gains  advantages  in  Thrace  and 

INDEX. 

Illyria,  xliii.  18,  19  to  23.  Is  utterly  defeated  at  Pydna  by 
^Emilius  Paulius,  xliv.  42.  Flies  to  Samothrace,  46. ;  where 
he  and  his  children  are  taken,  xlv.  6,  7. ;  and  are  led  in  tri¬ 
umph,  40. 
Perusia^  ix.  37.  40.  x.  30,  31.  37.  xxiii.  17.  xxviii.  45. 
J^esstnus^  xxix.  10,  11. 
Pete  line  grove  ^  vi.  20. 
Feteliay  xxiii.  20.  30.  xxvii.  26. 
Petilliiy  accuser  of  Scipio  Africanus,  xxxviii.  54. 
Petruy  xl.  22.  xliv.  32. 
Phalannay  xlii.  54.  65. 
Phalanx y  Macedonian,  compared  with  Roman  troops,  viii.  8. 
ix,  19.  '  . 
Phaleray  xxvii.  30.  xxxv.  43.  xxxvi.  29. 
Phansey  harbour,  xxxvi.  43.  xly.  10. 
Phaneas  or  Phxneasy  .Etolian  praetor,  xxxii.  32.  34.  xxxviii.  8. 
His  dispute  with  M.  Acilius,  xxxvi.  28. 
Phamacesy  King  of  Pontus,  sends  ambassadors  to  Rome,xl.  20. 
Pharsalusy  iii.  35.  xxxvi.  14. 
Phaselisy  xxxvii.  23.  The  fleet  of  Antiochus,  commanded  by 
Hannibal  and  Apollonius,  is  defeated  there,  24. 
PAerap,  xxxii.  13.  xxxiii  6.  xxxv.  30.  xxxvi.  9.  14. 
Phileasy  Tarentine,  xxv.  7. 
PhilemenuH  betrays  Tarentum  to  Hannibal,  xxv.  8,  9.  xxvii.  16 
Phileteerusy  brother  of  Eumenes,  xlii.  55. 
Phtlipy  King  of  Macedonia,  33.  Forms  an  alliance  with 
Hannibal,  xxiii.  33.  39.  Commences  hostilities  by  taking 
Oricum,  and  is  obliged  to  fly  from  Apollonia,  xxiv.  40. 
Makes  several  incursions  on  the  Thessalians  and  others,  xxvi. 
25.  xxvii.  30.  xxviii.  7.  Concludes  a  peace  with  the  Romans 
and  iEtolians,  xxxix.  12.  Demands  the  Macedonian  prison¬ 
ers,  who  had  served  under  Hannibal,  and  is  refused  by  the 
senate,  xxx.  42.  War  is  renewed,  xxxi.  8.  He  ravages 
Attica,  14.  Besieges  Abydos,  16.  Makes  a  fruitless  attempt- 
on  Athens,  24.  Is  defeated  by  the  Romans,  37.  Holds  a 
conference  with  the  consul  Quintius,  xxxii.  10.  Is  defeated, 
and  flies  to  Thessaly,  12.  At  another  conference  he  obtains 
a  truce,  36.  ;  but  his  application  to  the  senate  is  rejected,  37. 
He  makes  an  alliance  with  Nabis,  38.  ;  who  breaks  it,  39. 
He  is  utterly  defeated  by  Quintius,  xxxiii.  7.  9.  A  peace  is 
concluded,  13.  He  assists  the  Romans  against  Antiochus, 
xxxvi.  1 3.  Is  offended  at  the  behaviour  of  the  Romans,  xxxix. 
23.  29.  His  cruelty  to  Herodicus  and  bis  family,  xl.  4.  His 
sons  quarrel,  5  to  16.  He  employs  Didas  to  poison  Demc- 
Irius,  24.  Discovers  the  villany  of  Perseus,  and  resolves  to 
leave  the  crown  to  Antigonus,  but  dies,  54,  55. 
Philip y  praetor  of  Epirus,  xxix.  12. 

INDEX. 

of  Megalopolis,  defends  PeHinsEura,  xxxvi.  13.  Is  sneer¬ 
ed  at  by  King  Philip,  1 4.  Is  made  governor  of  Zacynthus,  35! 
Philip,^  governor  of  Cassandrea,  xliv.,  12. 
Philippic^  golden  coin,  xxxviL  59.  xxxix.  5.  7, 
Philippopolis^  xxxix.  25.  53. 
Philo^  of  Chalcis,  xxxvii.  4. 
Macedonian  general,  xxxi.  16.  xxxii.  16,  xxxiv.  32. 
Ambassador  to  Rome,  xl.  20. 
Philocrates^  Rhodian  ambassador,  xlv.  25.  * 
Philodemus  betrays  mount  EuryaJus  to  the  Romans,  xxv.  25. 
Philopasmen^  praetor  of  Achaia,  xxxv.  25.  Defeated  in  a  sea- 
fight  by  Nabis,  26.  His  method  of  acquiring  skill  in  war,  28. 
Surprises  and  vanquishes  Nabis  on  land,  27.  29.  Is  taken 
by  the  Messenians,  and  poisoned,  xxxix,  50. 
Philostratus^  praetor  of  Epirus,  xliii.  23. 
Phocsea^  xxxvii.  31.  Taken  by  the  the  Romans,  32. 
Phocaeansy  xxxiii.  32.  34.  xxxviii.  39. 
Phocisy  xxviii.  7. 
Phaeniccy  in  Epirus,  xxix.  12. 
PhliuBy  xxviii.  7. 
PhragandaBy  xxvi.  25. 
Phrygia,  xxix.  1 1. 
PhrygianSy  xxxvii.  40.  xxxviii.  17. 
PhthiotianSy  xxxiii.  36.  xxxvi.  15. 
PhylacCy  xlv.  26. 
PicenuTTiy  xxi.  62.  xxvii.  43. 
Picenian  territoryy  xxii.  9. 
Pieriay  xxxix.  26.  xliv.  9.  Pierian  wood,  43. 
Pinariiy  priests  of  Hercules,  i.  7. 
L.  Pinariusy  govemor  of  Enna,  suppresses  an  insurrection,  xxiv 
37.  39. 
Z.  PinariuSy  consul,  ii.  56. 
Z.  Pinarius  MamercinuSy  consular  tribune,  iv.  25. 
Z.  Pinariusy  master  of  horse,  vii-  3.  Praetor,  25. 
AT.  PinariuSy  praetor,  xl,  18. 
Piraeeus^  port  of  Athens,  xxxi.  25,  26.  xxxv.  50.  xxxvi.  42. 
Pisaey  xxi.  39.  xxxiv.  56.  xl.  43. 
Pisaururriy  colony,  xxxix.  44. 
Pisidiay  xxxv.  14.  xxxvii.  56.  xxxviii.  15. 
PtsistratidaSy  Hippias  and  Hipparchus,  sons  of  Pisistratut; 
xxxi.  44.  - 
Pmstratusy  a  Boeotian  of  eminence,  put  to  death  fm*  the  murder 
of  Brachyllas,  xxxiii.  28. 
Pkoy  the  historian,  i.  55.  ii.  58.  ix.  44.  x.  9.  xxv.  39. 
Ptthecusaey  island,  viii.  22, 
Pityusuy  island,  xxviii.  37. 
Placentiay  colony,  xxi,  56,  The  Roman  troops  take  refuge 

INDEX. 

there,  57.  59.  It  is  besieged  by  Hasdrubal,  xxvii.  39,  llic 
siege  raised  43.  It  is  sacked  by  Gauls'  and  Ligurians,  xxxi. 
10. 
Placentians.,  xxxiii.  23.  Their  lands  wasted,  xxxiv.  56. 
Plains.,  Old,  name  of  a  place,  xxv,  16. 
Platar,  Macedonian,  governor  of  Oreum,  gives  it  up  to  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  xxviH.  6,  7. 
Plator,  brother  of  Gentius,  murdered  by  him,  xliv.  30. 
C.  Plautius,  consul,  vii.  12,  Master  of  horse,  17. 
C.  Plautius,  consul,  vii.  27.  Again,  viii.  1. 
C.  Plautius,  consul,  triumphs  over  the  Privernians,  viii.  20> 
Censor,  ix.  29.  33. 
i.  Plautius  Hyfts^Bus,  praetor,  xxxvii.  47. 
Plebeian  nobles,  xxii.  34,  35. 
Q.  Pleminius,  propraetor,  takes  one  of  the  citadels  of  Locri, 
xxix.  6.  Is  appointed  by  Scipio  governor  of  the  city,  dis¬ 
plays  great  cruelty  and  avarice,  and  robs  the  temple  of  Pro¬ 
serpine,  8.  Is  sent  to  Rome  in  chains,  21.;  and  put  to  death 
for  a  plot  to  burn  the  city,  xxxlv.  44. 
Plestina  taken  by  the  Romans,  x.  3. 
C.  Pletorius,  commissioner  of  a  colony,  xxxiv.  45.  Ambassa¬ 
dor  to  Gentius,  xlii.  26. 
Pleuratus,  King  of  Illyria,  xxvL  24.  xxvii.  30.  xxviii.  5.  xxxi. 
28.  xxxviii.  7.  xliv,  30. 
Politorium,  i.  33. 
PoUian  tribe,  viii.  37. 
Pollentia  or  Palentia,  colony,  xxxix.  44.  xli.  27. 
Polusca,  ii.  33. 
Polyaratus,  a  man  of  power  in  Rhodes,  xliv.  23.  29.  xlv.  22. 
Polybius,  a  writer  deserving  great  credit,  xxx.  10.  45. 
Polyaenus,  of  Syracuse,  his  free  and  moderate  address  to  his 
countrymen,  xxiv.  22. 
Polyfihantes,  Macedonian  general,  xxvii.  32.  xxviii.  5. 
Polyxenidas,  a  Rhodian,  commander  of  Antiochus’s  fleet,  de¬ 
feated  by  the  Romans,  xxxvi.  45.  Imposes  on  the  Rhodian 
commander,  defeats  and  kills  him,  xxxvii.  10,  11.  Is  defeat¬ 
ed  by  the  Romans  and  Rhodians,  30. 
Pometia,  See  Suessa. 
Pomaerium,  i.  26.  44. 
Pomfieii,  ix.  38. 
L.  Pomfieiva,  military  tribune,  xlii.  65. 
L.  Pomfionhs,  praefect  of  allies,  xxv.  I. 
L.  Pomfionius,  an  infamous  farmer  of  the  revenues,  3. 
Man.  Pomfionius  Mat  ho,  master  of  horse,  abdicates,  because  his 
appointment  proved  to  be  irregular,  xxii.  33.  Praetor,  35. 
xxii.  55.  xxiii.  24.  xxvi.  23. 
Man.  Pomfionius  Matho,  plebeian  aedile,  xxviii.  10. 
M,  Pomfionius  Matho,  deputed  to  carry  an  offering  to  Delphi, 

INDEX. 

xsviii.  45.  Praetor,  xxix.  11.  Appointed  to  command  a 
fleet,  XXX.  2. 
M.  Pomfionius^  plebeian  tribune,  protests  against  a  war  with 
Rhodes,  xlv.  21. 
Sex,  Pomtioniu^y  xxi.  51. 
M,  Pomfioniua,^  plebeian  tribune,  accuses  L.  Manlius,  whose 
son  deters  him  from  the  prosecution,  vii.  45. 
Pomfitine  tribe^  vii.  15. 
Pom/itine  lands^W,  34.  iv.  25.  vi.  5.  21.  Wasted  by  locusts, 
xlii.  2. 
Pontiff,^  chief,  created  by  Numa,  his  duties  and  privileges,  i.  20. 
iv.  44.  Inferior  pontiffs,  xxii.  57. 
TV.  Pontijicius,^  plebeian  tribune,  proposer  of  the  Agrarian  law, 
ii.  44 
Pontius  Cominius,^  swimming  down  the  Tiber,  conveys  intelli¬ 
gence  from  Camillas  to  the  besieged  in  the  Capitol,  v.  46. 
C,  Pontius^  Samnite  general,  shuts  up  the  Roman  army  in  the 
defiles  of  Caudium-,  and  sends  them  under  the  yoke,  ix.  1  to 
15. 
C.  Popilius  Sabellus  distinguishes  himself  in  fight,  xll.  4. 
C.  Pofiilius  Ldenas^  consul,  xlii.  9.  Ambassador  to  Antiochus, 
and  Ptolemy,  xliv.  19.  xlv.  10. 
M,  Popilius  Ldenas^  consul,  overthrows  the  Tiburtians,  vii.  12. 
Again  consul,  17.  A  third  time,  23.  A  fourth,  26. 
M,  PopiliuSy  consul,  ix.  21. 
P,  Popilius,^  ambassador  to  Syphax,  xxvii.  4. 
T.  Popilius^  XX vi.  6. 
L.  Porcius  lieutenant-general,  xxvi.  6.  Plebeian  aedile, 
XX vii.  6.  Praetor,  xxxv.  39. 
L.  Porcius^  consul,  xxxix.  33. 
L,  Porcius  Licinius,^  xl,  34, 
M.  Porcius  Cato,^  quaestor  to  Scipio,  xxix.  25.  Consul,  xxxiii. 
42.  Pleads  in  support  of  the  Oppian  law,  xxxiv.  2.  Goes 
into  Spain,  8.  And  effectually  subdues  all  the  countiT  as 
far  as  the  Iberus,  17.  Triumphs,  46.  Shews  himself  a  bit¬ 
ter  enemy  to  Scipio  Africanus,  xxxviii.  54.  Censor,  xxxix. 
41.  Acts  with  strict  severity,  42.  44.  Favours  the  Rhodians, 
xlv,  25. 
M.  Porcius  Cato^  praetor,  xxxii.  7. . 
Porcian  x  9. 
Xnr,  or  Lartes  Porsenna^  King  of  Clusium,  entertains  the  Tar- 
quins,  and  makes  war  on  the  Romans,  ii.  9.  Besieges  Rome, 
1 1 .  Restores  the  hostages,  and  concludes  a  treaty  of  friend¬ 
ship  with  the  Romans,  15. 
Porsenna^^  goods  for  sale,  whence  the  phrase,  ii.  14. 
Postumia,^  a  vestal,  rebuked  for  too  much  attention  to  dress,  iv. 
44. 
VOL.  VI. — [K*] 

INDEX. 

A,  Postumius^  dictator,  vanquishes  the  Latines  at  Regillus,  and 
triumphs,  ii.  19,  20.  Is  made  consul,  21. 
A,  Postuinius  AlbiLs^  consul,  iii.  4.  Ambassador  to  the  ^quans, 
is  affronted  by  their  general,  25. 
A,  Postumius  Regillensis^  consular  tribune,  overpowers  the  Tar- 
quinians,  v,  16.  Again  consular  tribune,  vi.  22. 
A.  Postumim  Tibertus^  master  of  horse,  iv.  23.  Dictator ;  de¬ 
feats  the  dLquans  and  Volscians,  26.  29. 
A.  Postuinius  AlbinuH^  praetor,  xxxix.  23. 
A.  Postumius  Albinus  Luscus^  consul,  xl  35.  Censor,  xli.  27. 
A,  Postumius  Luscus^  commissioner  to  settle  Macedonia,  xlv. 
17. 
JL,  Postumius  Albums^  consular  tribune,  vi.  1.  Again,  22. 
i.  Postumius  Megellus^  consul,  triumph^  over  the  Samnites,  ix. 
44.  Propraetor,  x.  26.  Again  consul,  32.  Triumphs  over 
Etruria,  in  opposition  to  the  senate  and  people,  37. 
i.  Postumius^  consul  elect,  cut  off  with  his  army  in  the  wood 
Litina,  xxiii.  24. 
JL.  Postumius  Albinus.^  praetor,  xl.  35.  Triumphs  over  Lusita¬ 
nia,  xli.  7  Consul,  28.  Candidate  for  the  censorship,  xliii. 
14.  Flamen  Quirinalis,  xlv.  15. 
M.  Postumius^  consular  tribune,  iv.  31.  Fined  10,000  asses,  41. 
M.  Postumius  Albinus.^  consular  tribune,  v.  1. 
M.  Postumius  Regillensts^  consular  tribune,  iv.  49.  Stoned  by 
his  army,  50, 
M.  Postumius  Purgensisy  a  contractor  for  supplying  the  armies, 
outlawed,  and  his  property  confiscated,  for  fraudulent  prac¬ 
tices,  XXV.  3,  4. 
P.  Postumiusy  consul,  triumphs  over  the  Sabines,  ii.  16, 
Sp.  Postumiusy  consul,  iii.  2.  Decemvir,  33. 
Sp.  Postumius  Albusy  consular  tribune,  v.  26.  Overcomes  the 
jEquans,  28. 
Sp.  PostumiuSy  consul,  viii.  16.  Censor,  17.  Master  of  horse, 
23.  Again  consul,  ix.  1 .  Is  sent  under  the  yoke  at  Caudium, 
6. 
Sp.  Postumius  RegillensiSy  censor,  vi.  27. 
Sp.  Postumius  Albinusy  praetor,  xxxvii.  47.  Consul,  xxxix.  6. 
Augur,  45. 
Potiiian  family y  priests  of  Hercules,  1.  7.  Delegate  the  office 
to  slaves,  and  the  family  becomes  extinct,  ix.  29. 
Potidaniay  xxviii.  8. 
Praeneste^  vi.  29.  vii.  12. 
Praenestmes  vtyoXlyWi.  21.  Are  conquered,  and  the  statue  of 
Imperial  Jupiter  is  removed  to  Rome,  28.  They  aid  the 
Pedans,  and  are  punished,  viii.  12.  14.  Five  hundred  Prae- 
nes tines  defend  Casilinum,  xxiii,  17.  19.  Are  rewarded,  20. 
Praerogative  century y  v.  18.  x.  22. 

INDEX. 

Prsetor  chosen  out  of  the  patricians  to  administer  justice  in  the 
city,  vi.  42.  vii.  1.  Was  elected  under  the  same  auspices, 
and  considered  as  a  colleague  of  the  consuls,  iii.  55.  viii.  32. 
The  first  plebeian,  viii.  1. 
Prsetorium^  general’s  pavilion,  vii.  12. 
Praetutian  lands^  xxii.  9.  xxvii.  45. 
Praxoy  a  woman  of  distinction  at  Delphi,  confidant  of  Perseus, 
xlii.  15.  17. 
Priene^  xxxviii.  13. 
Priests  chosen  by  Numa  out  of  the  patricians,  i.  20.  Plebeians 
added,  x.  6.  8. 
Primigenia^  Fortuna^  xxix.  36. 
Prince  or  chief  of  the  senate^  the  mode  of  choosing  him  altered, 
xxvii.  1 1. 
Prison^  first,  built  in  Rome,  i.  33.  Private  prisons,  vi.  36. 
Privernuniy  the  inhabitants  ravage  tlie  Roman  territory,  vii.  15. 
Are  defeated,  and  their  city  taken  by  C.  Marcius,  16.  Re¬ 
new  the  war,  are  conquered,  and  two  parts  of  their  lands  ta¬ 
ken  from  them,  viii.  1.  Again  commence  hostilities,  are 
conquered,  and  their  senate  banished  beyond  the  Tiber,  19, 
20.  Undaunted  reply  of  one  of  their  ambassadors,  21, 
Procasy  King  of  Alba,  i.  3. 
Proconsuly  first  mentioned  by  Livy,  iii.  4.  The  first  who  was 
continued  in  command  on  the  expiration  of  his  consulate, 
Publius  Philo,  viii.  26.  Proconsuls  had  no  authority  in  the. 
city,  xxvi.  9. 
Proculus  Giganius  consul,  iv.  12. 
Proculus  JuliuSyi.  16. 
Proculus  Virginiusy  consul,  his  contest  with  his  colleague  about 
the  Agrarian  law,  ii.  41. 
Profiont is y  ^^diy  xxxviii.  16.  18. 
Prodictatory  Q.  Fabius  Maximus,  xxii.  8. 
Prosecutiony  capital,  ii.  52.  Pecuniary,  xxvi.  3. 
Proserfline y  xxiv.  39.  Her  temple  at  Locri  robbed  by  Plemin- 
ius,  xxix  7.  Complaint  made  by  the  Locrians,  18.  By  the 
praetor  Minucius,  xxxi.  12.;  who  replaces  the  treasure,  13. 
See  xxix.  20,  21. 
Progcenusy  ^tolian,  poisoned  by  his  wife,  xli.  25. 
Prusiasy  King  of  Bythynia,  solicited  by  Antiochus  to  join  him 
in  war  against  the  Romans,  is  prevented  by  a  letter  from 
Scipio  Africanus,  xxxvii.  25.  After  giving  refuge  to  Hanni¬ 
bal,  he  consents  to  surrender  him  to  T.  Quintius,  xxxix.  51. 
Proposes  to  mediate  between  the  Romans  and  Perseus,  xliv. 
14.  Comes  to  Rome,  and  behaves  with  abject  meanness, 
xlv.  44. 
Prytanisy  the  title  of  the  chief  magistrate  of  Rhodes,  xlii.  45. 
/^re/ewm, XXXV,  43.  Is  demolished,  xlii.  67. 

INDEX. 

Ptolemy  Philofiater^  K.ing  of  Egypt,  his  statue  affords  refuge  te 
Magius  the  Capuan,  xxiii.  10.  He  renews  a  treaty  of  friend¬ 
ship  with  the  Romans,  xxvii.  4.  Offers  to  repress  the  in¬ 
roads  of  Philip,  xxxi.  9. 
Ptolemy^  King  of  Egypt,  xxxii.  33.  Marries  the  daughter  of 
Antiochus,  xxxv.  13. 
Ptolemy  and  Cleofiatra^  King  and  Queen  of  Egypt,  offer  aid  to 
the  Romans  against  Antiochus,  xxxvii.  3.  Implore  their  as¬ 
sistance  against  him,  xliv.  19.  The  elder  Ptolemy  is  recon¬ 
ciled  to  his  brother  and  sister,  and  received  in  Alexandria, 
xlv.  11.  They  are  saved  from  the  attempts  of  Antiochus  by 
Roman  ambassadors,  12. 
Publicans^  farmers  of  the  revenue,  furnish  supplies  to  the  troops 
at  their  own  expense,  on  being  promised  payment  when  mo¬ 
ney  should  come  into  the  treasury,  xxiii.  48,  49.  Fraudulent 
practices  and  turbulent  behaviour  of  some  of  them,  xxv.  3,4. 
C.  Puhlicius  Bibulus^  plebeian  tribune,  his  charges  against  Mar- 
cellus  and  the  patricians,  xxvii.  21. 
L,  Puhlicius  Bibulus^  military  tribune,  xxii.  53. 
Publilian  added,  vii.  15*. 
C.  Publilius  confined  for  his  father’s  debts,  viii.  28. 
L,  Publilius  Volscusy  consular  tribune,  v,  12. 
Q.  Publilius,  plebeian  tribune,  during  the  dissensions  excited  by 
Manlius,  supports  the  cause  of  the  senate,  Vi.  19. ;  and  com¬ 
mences  a  prosecution  against  Manlius,  20. 
Q.  Publius  Philo,  consul,  defeats  the  Latines,  is  nominated  dic¬ 
tator,  procures  laws  to  be  passed  in  favour  of  the  commons, 
viii.  12.  He  is  the  first  plebeian  praetor,  15.  Is  made  mas¬ 
ter  of  horse,  16.  Censor,  17.  Consul  a  second  time,  22.  He 
is  the  first  person  continued  in  command  on  the  expiration  of 
his  consulate,  and  the  first  that  triumphed  when  out  of  office, 
26.  Consul  a  third  time,  ix.  7.  He  vanquishes  the  Sam- 
nites,  13,  14,  15. 
T.  Publilius,  plebeian  augur,  x.  9. 
Valero  Publilius,  a  plebeian,  refuses  to  enlist  in  the  army,  and 
appeals  to  the  tribunes,  and  to  the  people,  ii.  55.  Is  chosen 
plebeian  tribune,  56.  Proposes  a  law,  that  plebeian  magis¬ 
trates  should  be  elected  in  assemblies  of  the  tribes ;  is  re¬ 
elected  tribune,  ibid. 
Valero  Publilius,  consular  tribune,  v.  13. 
Pufiinian  district,  x'  vi.  9. 
Cn.  Pufiius,  a  commissioner  to  build  a  temple  of  Concord,  xxii. 
33. 
L.  Pufiius,  candidate  for  the  praetorship,  xxxix.  39.  Praetor,  45. 
P.  Pufiius,  one  of  the  first  pleix’idH  quae^*-  iv.  54. 
Puteoli,  xxiv.  12.  xxv.  22.  xxvi.  17.  Attacked  in  vain  by  Han¬ 
nibal,  xxiv.  13. 

INDEX. 

Pydna^  xliv.  6.  10.  42.  Sacked  by  the  Romans,  45. 
TylXy  or  Thermofiylse^  xxxii.  4. 
Tyiaic  council^  xxxiii.  35. 
Fylsemenes^  King  of  the  Heneti,  i.  1. 
Pylos^  xxvii.  30. 
Fyra^  on  mount  (Eta,  the  place  where  Hercules  was  burned, 
xxxvi.  30. 
Pyrene^  promontory,  xxvi.  19. 
Pyrenxan  mountaim^  ii.  23.  Harbour,  xxxiv.  8. 
Pyrgus^  fort,  xxvii.  32. 
Pyrrheum^  fort,  at  Ambracia,  xxxvrii.  5,  6. 
Pyrrhias^  praetor  of  ^tolia,  defeated  by  Philip,  xxvii.  30. 
Pyrrhus^  King  of  Epirus,  his  kind  treatment  of  Roman  prison¬ 
ers,  xxii.  59.  His  character  mentioned  by  Scipio,  xxxv.  14. 
He  was  warned  by  the  Romans  to  guard  against  poison,  xxxix. 
51.  His  dishonourable  death  a  punishment  for  robbing  the 
temple  of  Proserpine,  xxix.  18. 
cam/2,  name  of  a  place  in  Macedonia,  xxxii.  13,  xxxv. 
27. 
Pythagoras^  the  Samian  philosopher  posterior  to  Numa,  i.  18. 
Some  supposed  that  Numa’s  books  were  written  by  him,  xl.  29. 
Pythagoras^  son-in-law  of  Nabis,  governor  of  Sparta,  xxxiv,  25. 
Makes  a  vigorous  defence,  39. 
*  Pythian  Jfiollo^  his  answer  brought  by  Fabius  Pictor  the  histo¬ 
rian,  xxiii.  1 1 . 
Pytho^  Macedonian,  governor  of  Cassandrea,  repulses  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  xliv.  12. 
Pythium^  xlii.  53.  xliv.  2.  35. 

Q 
Quadrants^  contributed  by  the  people  to  bury  Valerius,  iii.  18. 
Quadrigati^  coin  so  called,  xxii.  52. 
Quadrireme^  galley  of  four  banks  of  oars,  xxx.  25. 
Quinquatra^y  feast  of  Minerva,  lasting  five  days,  xxvi.  27.  xliv. 
20. 
Quinquereme^  five-banked  galley,  xxL  1 7. 
Quintilis^  month,  the  nones  appointed  for  the  Appollinarian 
games,  xxvii.  23.  15.  Calling  magistrates  into  office,  v.  32. 
Knights  reviewed,  ix.  46. 
Quadrufilator^  a  term  of  reproach,  iii.  72. 
Quaestors^  first  mentioned  by  Livy,  ii.  41.  Their  number 
doubled,  iv.  43.  First  plebeian,  54. 
Quxstorium^  part  of  a  camp  taken  by  the  Samnites',  x.  32. 
Quintilius  Varus^  xxx.  1 . 
Cn,  Quintiliu^^  dictator,  to  drive  a  nail  in  the  Capitol,  viii.  18, 
M,  Quintilius  Farw*,  consular  tribune,  v.  i. 

INDEX. 

M,  Quintilius^  18. 
P,  Quintilius  Farus^  praetor,  xxix.  38.  xxx.  1.  Defeats  M ago 
in  Insubrian  Gaul,  18. 
P,  Quintilius  Farus^  flamen  of  Mars,  xiiv.  18. 
Sextus  Quintilius^  consul,  iii.  32. 
T.  Quintilius  Farus^xxxxx.  31. 
Quint ian  family^  iii.  12.  Meadows,  26. 
Quinta^  Albans  made  Roman  senators,  i.  30. 
Quintius  CincinnatuSy  consular  tribune,  iv.  49. 
Caeso  Quintius  warmly  opposes  the  tribunes,  iii.  11.  Is  falsely 
charged  with  murder  ;  is  the  first  that  gives  bail  to  the  peo¬ 
ple  ;  goes  into  exile,  13. 
Ceeso  Quintius  Flamininus^  commissioner  to  build  a  temple  of 
Concord,  xxii,  33. 
C.  Quintius  Cincinnatus^  consular  tribune,  vi.  32. 
Cn.  Quintius  Cafiitolinus^  first  curule  sedile,  vii.  1. 
D.  Quintius^  of  obscure  birth,  remarkable  for  bravery  and  con¬ 
duct,  commander  of  a  Roman  fleet,  is  killed  in  a  sea-fight  with 
the  Tarentines,  xxvi.  39. 
L.  Quintius^  military  tribune,  yiii.  25. 
L.  Quintius  Cincinnatus  supplicates  the  people  in  favour  of  his 
son  C’aeso,  iii.  12  Consul,  19.  Refuses  to  be  re-elected  con¬ 
sul,  21.  Is  called  from  the  plough  to  the  dictatorship,  26. 
Surrounds  and  vanquishes  the  .^quans,  and  sends  them  un¬ 
der  the  yoke,  27,  28  Is  presented  by  his  army  with  a  gold¬ 
en  crown,  and  triumphs,  29.  A  candidate  for  the  decern vi- 
rate,  fails,  35.  Executes  the  business  of  censor  with  mode¬ 
ration,  iv.  6.  Is  again  dictator,  13. 
L,  Quintius^  son  of  Cincinnatus,  consular  tribune,  iv.  16.  Mas¬ 
ter  of  horse,  17.  Consular  tribune,  35.  Again,  44.  A  fourth 
time,  vi.  6.  Again,  32.  Recovers  Tusculum,  33. 
L.  Quintius  Cafiitolinus^  consular  tribune,  vi,  11. 
L,  Quintius  FlamininuSy  augur,  xxv.  2.  Praetor,  xxxi.  49. 
L,  Quintius  Crisfiinus^  praetor,  xxxix.  6,  Commissioner  of  a 
colony,  55.  Triumphs  over  the  Celtiberians  and  Lusitanians, 
xxxix.  42. 
1m,  Quintius  Flamininua,^  brother  of  the  consul  Titus,  admiral 
of  tne  fleet  on  the  coast  of  Greece,  xxxii.  16.  Consul,  xxxv. 
10.  Is  expelled  the  senate  for  barbarous  cruelty,  xxxix.  42. 
P,  Quintius  consular  tribune,  iv.  61. 
Q.  Quintius,^  consular  tribune,  vi.  36. 
T.  Quintius  Barbatus  Cafntolinus,^  consul,  appeases  the  fury  of 
the  populace,  ii.  56.  Is  thanked  by  the  senate,  57,  A  fa¬ 
vourite  of  the  soldiers,  60.  Is  raised  again  to  the  consulship 
by  the  patricians,  and  by  a  stratagem  defeats  the  Volscians, 
64.  Commissioner  of  a  colony,  iii.  1.  Consul  a  third  time, 
2.  Proconsul :  rescues  the  consul  from  imminent  danger,  4, 

N  N  .“i  .s 

INDEX. 

5.  Pleads  in  favour  of  Caeso  Quintius^  12,  13,  Quaestor, 
arraigns  Volscius,  on  whose  evidence  Caeso  had  been  con¬ 
demned,  25.  A  candidate  for  the  censorship,  is  disappoint¬ 
ed,  35.  A  fourth  time  consul,  66.  His  character,  69.  He 
defeats  the  ^quans  and  Volscians,  70.  Interrex,  iv.  7.  A 
fifth  time  consul,  8.  A  sixth ;  he  nominates  L.  Quin  tins 
Cincinuatus  dictator,  13.  Supplicates  the  people  in  favour 
of  T.  Quintius,  son  of  Cincinnatus  41. 
T.  Quintius  Cincinnatus  Pennus^  iv.  26.  His  disputes  with  his 
colleague,  and  activity  in  the  field,  27.  29.  Again  consul,  30. 
Consular  tribune;  unsuccessful  at  Veil,  31.  Shares  in  victo¬ 
ry  with  the  dictator,  32,  33.  Is  brought  to  trial,  and  acquit¬ 
ted,  41. 
T’.  Quintius  Cafiitolinus^  son  of  Capitolinus,  consul,  iv.  43. 
Consular  tribune,  61. 
71  Quintius  Cincinnatus^  consular  tribune,  vi.  4.  Again,  18. 
Dictator;  he  subdues  the  Praenestines,  28,  29.  And  in  his 
triumph  conveys  to  the  Capitol  the  image  of  Imperial  Jove, 
brought  from  Praeneste. 
7!.  Quintius  Capitolinus^  consular  tribune,  and  master  of  horse, 
vi.  II, 
Quintius^  consular  tribune,  vi.  38. 
Quintius  Pennusy  master  of  horse,  vi,  42. 
QuintiuSy  dictator,  vii.  9.  Master  of  horse,  11.  Consul,  18. 
Quintius  PennuSy  consul,  vii.  22. 
Qudntiusy  chosen  as  leader  by  the  troops  in  mutiny,  vii.  39. 
41. 
T*.  Quintiusy  commissioner  of  a  colony,  viii,  16. 
T.  Quintius  Cri&pinus  appointed  by  Marcellus  to  the  command 
of  a  fleet,  xxiv.  39  Praetor,  xx  vii.  6.  Consul,  21.  Is  wounded, 
27.  Disconcerts  a  scheme  of  Hannibal,  28.  Dies  of  his 
wound,  33. 
T.  Quintius  Crispinusy  his  singular  encounter  with  Badius,  a 
Campanian,  XXV.  18. 
T,  Quintius  Flamininusy  curule  aedile,  exhibits  stage  plays  with 
great  magnificence,  xxxi.  4.  Consul,  xxxii.  7.  Sails  to 
Greece,  9.  Holds  a  conference  with  Philip,  without  effect,  10. 
Defeats  Philip,  12.  Is  obliged  to  raise  the  seige  of  Atrax,  18. 
Holds  another  conference  with  Philip,  which  produces  a  truce, 
but  not  a  peace,  32.  37.  Gives  Philip  a  total  overthrow, 
xxxiii.  9,  10.  Concludes  a  peace  with  him,  13.  24.  30  Pro¬ 
claims  liberty  to  the  states  of  Greece,  32.  Leads  an  army  to 
Argo,  xxxiv.  25.  Lays  siege  to  Lacedaemon,  26.  Refuses  at 
first  to  listen  to  Nabis,  and  afterwards  grants  him  peace,  40, 
Triumphs  during  three  days,  52.  Procures  the  siege  of  Nau- 
pactum  to  be  raised,  xxxvi.  35.  Censor,  xxxvii.  58.  xxxviii. 
?8.  Augur,  xlv.  44. 

INDEX. 

Quirinal  Jiamen  created  by  Numa,  i.  20, 
Quirinal  hill  added  to  the  city,  i.  44. 
QuirinuB^  i.  20.  v.  52,  viii.  9.  His  temple,  iv.  21.  Dedicated, 
and  adorned  with  spoils  of  ihe  enemy,  X.  46. 
Quiritea^  why  so  called,!.  13. 
Quiritian  trench  made  by  Anc.  Marcius,  i.  33. 
R 
Man.  Rabuleius.,  decemvir,  iii.  35. 
Racilia^  wife  of  Quintius  Cincinnatus,  iii.  26. 
Z.  Ramnius^  a  Brundusian,  tempted  by  Perseus  to  poison  the 
Roman  ambassadors  and  officers,  discovers  the  matter  to  the 
Romans,  xlii.  17.  41. 
Ramnenaes  or  Ramnes^  one  of  the  first  tribes,  and  a  century  of 
knights,  i.  13.  36.  x.  6. 
Red  rocka^  ii.  49.  Sea,  xlv.  9, 
Reate^  xxv.  7.  xxvi.  1 1.  Promises  soldiers  to  Scipio,  xxviii.  43. 
Regillum.^  town  of  the  Sabines,  ii.  16. 
Regillus.,  lake,  near  which  Postumius  routed  the  Latines,  li.  19, 
20.  vi.  2. 
Religion  established  by  Numa,  i.  19.  A  passion  for  foreign  re¬ 
ligious  rites  prevails,  iv.  30.  Religious  worship  performed 
with  more  piety  than  magnificence,  iii.  57.  The  bad  conse¬ 
quences  of  introducing  foreign  modes  of  worship,  xxv.  1. 
Remus^  made  prisoner,  and  given  up  to  Amulius;  assists  in  re¬ 
storing  his  grandfather,  and  is  slain  by  his  brother,  L  5. 
M,  Retina^  ambassador  to  Gaul,  xxvii.  36. 
Revenue  managed  by  the  censors,  iy.  8. 
Rhegium^  faithful  to  the  Romans,  xxiii.  30.  Attempted  by  the 
Carthaginians,  xxiv.  1.  xxvi.  12.  xxix.  6.  Furnishes  the  Ro¬ 
mans  with  a  supply  of  ships,  xxxvi.  42. 
Rhea  Sylvia.,  i.  3,  4. 
Rhafihiay  xxxv.  13. 
Rhsetians.,  v,  33. 
Rhinocoluray  xlv.  11. 
Rhion  or  Rhium.,  streight  between  Naupactum  and  Patrae,  being 
the  entrance  to  the  b^ay  of  Corinth,  xxvii.  30.  xxyiii.  7. 
Rhisiaaua.,  of  Pellene,  threatens  his  son  Memnon  with  death,  if 
he  persists  in  obstructing  the  proceedings  of  a  council  of  the 
Achaeans,  xxxii.  22. 
Rhizon.,  xlv.  26. 
Rhone.,  xxi.  31.  xxvii.  39.  Crossed  by  Hannibal,  xxi.  26. 
Rhodiana  send  ambassadors  to  compose  disputes  between  Phi¬ 
lip  and  the  jEtolians,  xxvii,  30.  xxviii.  7.  Send  a  fleet  to  aid 
the  Romans  against  Philip,  xxxi.  46.  Recover  Peraea  from 
the  Macedonians,  xxxiii.  18.  Join  their  fleet  to  the  Roman 

INDEX. 

sigainst  Antiochus,  xxxvii.  9.  Defeat  his  fleet,  commanded 
by  Hannibal,  xxiii.  24.  Again,  in  conjunction  with  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  defeat  Polyxenidas,  30.  Receive  Lycia  and  Caria, 
after  the  reduction  of  Antiochus,  xxxviii.  39.  Send  to  the 
Roman  consul  a  menacing  embassy  in  favour  of  Perseus,  xliv. 
14.  Implore  pardon  of  the  Roman  ambassadors,  and  punish 
the  advisers  of  their  misconduct,  xlv.  10.  Juvencius  Thalna, 
praetor,  proposes  to  the  Roman  commissioners  a  declaration 
of  war  against  Rhodes,  and  is  opposed  by  the  tribunes,  21. 
Rhoduntia^  one  of  the  summits  of  mount  CEta,  near  Thermo- 
pylae,  xxxvi.  1^.  18. 
Rhcttum^  promontory,  xxxvii.  9.  37.  xxxviiL  39. 
Rings  laid  aside  in  mourning,  ix.  7. 
Rome,  built  by  Romulus,  i.  16.  Augmented  by  the  destruction 
of  Alba,  30.  Surrounded  with  a  stone  wall,  38.  Besieged 
by  Porsenna,  ii.  11.  Sacked  and  burned  by  the  Gauls, 
V.  41,  42.  Rebuilt,  55.  and  vi.  4.  Its  situation  and  advan¬ 
tages  described,  v.  54.  Doubled  by  the  accession  of  the  Sa¬ 
bines,  i.  13.  Attempted  by  Hannibal,  xxvi.  10.  Sufl’ers 
much  by  fire,  xxiv.  47.  xxvi  27. 
Romans,  their  magnanimity,  iv.  6.  Love  of  liberty,  ii.  15.  vi. 
19.  Moderation  in  prosperity,  xxx.  42.  Fortitude  in  adver¬ 
sity,  ix.  3.  Love  of  their  country,  xxiii.  49.  xxiv.  18.  xxvi. 
36.  Gratitude  to  its  friends,  Li.  10.  13.  v.  47.  Justice,  v.  27. 
Regard  to  religion,  i.  21.  Military  abilities,  ix.  17.  19. 
See  Army,  Camfi,  Discipline,  They  long  held  poverty  in 
honour.  See  Poverty,  It  is  the  character  of  a  Roman,  both 
to  act  and  to  suffer  with  fortitude,  ii.  12. 
T,  Romilius,  consul,  brought  to  trial  on  a  charge  made  by  CL 
Cicero,  iii.  31.  Decemvir,  33. 
Romular,  afterwards  Ruminal  fig-tree,  i.  4. 
Romulea  taken  by  the  Romans,  x.  17. 
Romulus  Sylvius,  King  of  Alba,  i.  3. 
Romulus,  son  of  Rhea,  kills  his  brother  Remus ;  builds  a  city 
on  the  Palatine  hill,  and,  from  his  own  name,  calls  it  Rome, 
i.  6.  Forms  the  government,  enlarges  the  city,  opens  a 
sanctuary,  and  forms  a  senate,  8.  Orders  the  seizure  of  the 
Sabine  women,  9.  Overthrows  the  Caeninians,  killing  their 
King,  offers  the  grand  spoils  to  Jupiter  Feretritis,  and  dedi¬ 
cates  to  him  the  first  temple  i»  Rome,  10.  Defeats  the  An- 
temnians  and  Crustumnians,  1 1 .  Distressed  in  battle  with 
the  Sabines,  wows  a  temple  to  Jupiter  Stator,  1 2.  Makes 
peace  with  the  Sabines,  and  divides  the  city  into  thirty  cu¬ 
rias,  13.  Conquers  the  Fidentians  and  Veians,  appoints  300 
celcres  to  guard  his  penon,  15.  Dies,  and  is  esteemed  a  di¬ 
vinity,  16. 
Rorarian  soldiers,  viii.  8. 
VOL.  vi.^[Ll 

INDEX, 

Ln  Roscim^  Roman  ambassador,  killed  by  order  of  Tolumnius, 
iv.  17. 
Ruscino^  where  some  states  of  Gaul  assembled,  with  intent  to 
oppose  Hannibal,  xxi.  24. 
Ruscino^  a  sea-port  in  Africa,  xxx.  10. 
Rusellan  lands^  x.  4.  Wasted,  and  the  city  taken,  37. 
Sfi.  Rutihus  Crassus^  consular  tribune,  iv.  47. 
P.  Rutiliusy  plebeian  tribune,  warmly  opposes  the  censors,  and 
brings  them  to  trial,  xliii.  16.  Is  fined,  and  disfranchised, 
xliv.  16. 
P.  Rutilius  Calvus^  praetor,  xlv.  44. 
Rutulians  vanquished  by  jE.neas,  i.  2.  By  Tarquinius  the 
Proud,  57. 

S 

Sabatine  tribe^  vi.  5. 
Sabatines^  xxvi.  33. 
Sabellan  cohor^s^'s.,  19.  Country,  viii.  1, 
Sabine  women  seized  by  the  Romans,  i.  9.  Put  an  end  to  the 
fight  between  the  Romans  and  Sabines  ;  their  names  given  to 
the  curias,  13. 
Sabines  make  war  on  the  Romans,  i.  9,  10.  Seize  the  citadel, 
11.  Maintain  a  furious  fight,  and  afterwrrds  make  a  peace, 
13.  Are  attacked  and  conquered  by  T.  Hostilius,  30,  31. 
Those  who  removed  to  Rome  with  Tatius  reside  on  the  Ca¬ 
pitol  and  citadel,  33.  The  Sabines  are  attacked,  and  defeat¬ 
ed  by  Tarquinius,  36,  37.  Make  preparations  for  war,  ii.  16. 
Sue  for  peace,  18.  Make  a  predatory  inroad  as  far  as  the 
Anio,  and  are  dispersed,  26.  Renew  the  war,  and  are  de¬ 
feated,  31.  Join  the  Veians  against  Rome,  and  are  over¬ 
thrown,  53.  Advance  to  the  gates  of  the  city,  63,  64.  Re¬ 
commence  hostilities,  iii,  26.  30.  Are  defeated,  63. 
Sacred  Mounts  ii.  32.  iii.  52.  Street,  ii.  13,  Rites,  foreign, 
forbidden  at  Rome,  xxv.  I .  Shock^g  rites  of  the  Samnites, 
X.  38,  39.  Sacred  spring,  xxxiv.  44. 
Sacrifices^  several  extraordinary,  performed  by  direction  of  the 
Sibylline  books,  xxii.  57.  The  anniversary  sacrifice  of  Ceres 
omitted  after  the  battle  of  Cannae,  xxii.  56. 
5acrj/iorf2i«,  harbour,  near  Tarentum,  xxvi.  39. 
SagminayVtrv2iin/i.  2^.  xxx.  43. 
Saguntum^  an  opulent  city  on  the  Iberus,  xxi.  7.  Besieged,  and 
taken  by  Hannibal,  the  inhabitants  throw  their  valuables  and 
themselves. into  a  fire,  14,  15.  Spanish  hostages  are  kept  at 
Saguntum,  xxii.  22.  It  is  retaken  by  the  Romans,  and  res¬ 
tored  to  its  old  inhabitants,  xxiv.  42.  xxviii.  39. 

INDEX. 

threatened  by  Hannibal,  send  ambassadors  to  Rome, 
xxi.  2.  6.  Show  great  firmness  in  supporting  the  siege,  11. 
Send  an  embassy  to  Rome  with  thanks  to  the  senate,  xxviii. 
39.  Another  embassy,  xxx.  21. 
Salafiia^  xxiv.  20.  47.  Surrendered  to  Marcellas  with  the  Car¬ 
thaginian  garrison,  xxvi.  38.  xxvii.  1. 
Sala/iians  over-reach  Hannibal,  xxvii.  28. 
Salarian  street^  vii.  9. 
Salernunij  colony,  xxxii.  29.  xxxiv.  45. 
Salassians  dwelling  on  the  Alps,  xxi.  38 • 
Salera^  in  Africa,  xxix.  34. 
SaiU^  twelve  priests  of  Mars  instituted  by  Numa,  i.  20.  Twelve 
more  vowed  by  Tullus,  and  called  Agonales,  or  Colline,  27. 
Salinator^  why  Livius  was  so  surnamed,  xxix.  37. 
Sallentines  conquered,  ix.  42.  Some  of  their  towns  revolt  to 
Hannibal,  XXV.  1.  Their  country,  x.  2.  xxiv.  20. 
C.  Salonius^  commissioner  of  a  colony,  xxxiv.  44.  xlii.  4. 
F,  Saloniusy  alternately  military  tribune  and  chief  centurion,  en¬ 
treats  the  senators  not,  on  his  account,  to  reluse  the  demands 
of  the  mutinous  soldiers,  vii.  41. 
Salfiinians  infest  the  Roman  lands,  v.  31,  32. 
Salyi^  or  Salyes^  or  Salluvii^  people  of  Gaul,  v.  35.  .  Their 
mountains,  xxi.  26. 
Same,  or  Samos^  island,  xxxvi.  42.  Samians,  xxxi.  3 1 .  xxxiii.  20. 
Samseans^  in  Cephallenia,  break  the  peace,  which  had  been 
concluded,  and  are  besieged,  xxxviii,  28.  After  a  vigorous 
defence  the  city  is  taken,  and  sacked,  29. 
Samnites  form  an  alliance  with  the  Romans,  vii.  19.  Origin  of 
the  war  between  those  states,  29.  Ambassadors  sent  to’ the 
Samnites  receive  a  rude  and  menacing  answer,  31.  War  is 
proclaimed,  32.  A  furious  battle  in  which  the  Samnites  are 
defeated,  33.  Are  again  defeated  in  Samnium,  36.  A  third 
time,  37.  They  send  ambassadors  to  sue  for  peace,  viii.  i. 
The  old  treaty  is  renewed,  2.  They  join  the  Lucaniaus 
against  Alexander  of  Epire,  17.  Answer  with  haughtiness 
the  expostulations  of  the  Romans,  23.  Are  expelled  Palae- 
polis,  26.  Defeated  by  Fabius,  master  of  horse,  30.  Again, 
by  Papirius,  dictator,  36.  Make  a  truce  for  a  year,  break  it, 
and,  after  a  desperate  engagement,  are  defeated,  38,  39.  En¬ 
trap  the  Roman  army  at  the  Caudine  forks,  ix.  2. ;  ^nd  after 
violent  exertions,  and  suffering  many  defeats,  13,  14,  15,  16. 
21,  22,  23.  27.  31.  40,  41.  they  submit  and  are  sent  under  the 
yoke,  42.  Their  gold  and  silver  shielded  battalions,  40.  The 
old  treaty  is  renewed  with  them,  45.  They  take  arms  again, 
and  are  worsted,  x.  12.  Fight  a  furious  battle,  and  are  oblig¬ 
ed  to  fly  into  Etruria,  16.  Are  again  defeated,  19.  Again, 

INDEX. 

and  their  general  taken,  20.  They  join  the  Etrurians,  Um¬ 
brians,  and  Gauls,  21.  With  the  Gauls  invade  the  Roman 
territories,  27. ;  and  are  defeated,  29.  Their  character  as 
soldiers,  28.  They  are  defeated  in  a  bloody  battle,  31.  They 
assault  the  Roman  camp,  32. ;  and  are  repulsed,  33.  Seven 
thousand  of  them  are  sent  under  the  yoke,  36.  Again,  by 
Papirius,  xli.  42.  Their  towns  taken,  45.  They,  excepting 
the  Pentrians,  revolt  to  Hannibal,  xxii.  61.  Their  country 
severely  ravaged  by  Marcellus,  xxiii.  42. 
Samnites^  gladiators  so  .called,  ix.  40. 
Samnium,  vii.  .32. 
Samothracej  island,  xliv.  25.  Perseus  takes  refuge  there,  45, 46 
xlv.  2.  5. 
island,  xxxvii.  10, 11,  &c. 
Sangarius^  river,  abounding  with  fish,  xxxviii.  18. 
Sapfiinian  tribe ^  district  of  Umbria,  xxxi.  2.  xxxiii.  37. 
Sardes^  xlv.  34. 
Sardians^  or  Sardinians^ 'x.Ti.i.  16.  Send  a  secret  embassy  to  the 
Carthaginians, xxiii.  32.  Are  vanquished  by  the  Romans,  40 > 
Entirely  subdued,  4U  Successes  of  Sempronius  against  them 
xli.  12. 
Sardinia^  island,  xxi.  I.  xxii.  31.  Ravaged  by  a  Carthaginian 
fleet,  xxvii.  6.  A  Roman  army  ordered  to  be  sent  thither, 
xli.  9.  Are  conquered  by  Sempronius  Gracchus,  and  a  pic* 
ture  hung  up,  xli.  28. 
Sarpedon^  promontory,  xxxviii.  38. 
Sarus^  river,  fleet  of  Antiochus  shipwrecked  at  its  mouth,  xxxiii 
41. 
Salsula^  vii.  19. 
Saticula^  vii.  32.  34.  Besieged  by  the  Romans,  ix.  21.  Taken, 
22.  Its  territory,  xxiii.  14.  Its  inhabitants  commended  by 
the  Romans,  xxvii.  10, 
Satricum  taken  from  the  Romans  by  Coriolanus,  ii.  39.  By  the 
Romans  from  the  Volscians,  vi.  8.  By  the  Praenestines  and 
Volscians,  22.  Burned  by  the  Latines,  33.  The  Antians 
settle  a  colony  there,  and  the  Romans  sack  and  bum  the  city, 
vii.  27.  The  Volscians  take  post  at  Satricum,  viii.  1.  It  is 
taken  by  Papirius,  ix.  16. 
Sdturx^  interludes,  vii.  2; 
Saturnalia  instituted,  ii.  21.  Proclaimed  to  last  a  day  and  a 
night,  and  to  be  observed  for  ever,  xxii.  I . 
Saturn* 8  temple y  li.  2 1 .  Sacrifices  and  a  lectistemium  at  it, 
xxii.  1. 
Satyrusy  Rhodian  ambassador,  xUi.  14. 
Scsevola.  See  Mutius, 
P.  Scantiniusy  pontiff,  xxiiii.  21, 
Senptian  tribe  added,  viii.  17. 

INDEX. 

P.  Scafitius  persuades  the  Roman  people,  in  a  case  where  they 
are  arbitrators,  to  assume  to  themselves  some  lands  ip  dis-» 
pute  between  the  Ardeans  and  Aricians,  iii.  71. 
Scarcity^  and  consequent  disturbances,  ii.  34.  iv.  12. 
Scharfihia,  xxxvi.  19, 
Scea^  called  Tripolis,  xlii.  55. 
&cerdil!edus^  King  of  Illyria,  xxvi.  24.  xxvii.  30.  xxviii.  5. 
Scerdilmdusy  son  of  Gentius,  xliv.  32. 
Schdenusy  merchant,  informs  Quintius  of  the  roads  to  Perrhaebia, 
xliv.  35. 
Sciathua  demolished  by  Philip,  xxxi.  28.  45.  xxxv.  43. 
Scissisy  xxi.  60. 
Scodruy  capital  of  Illyria,  xliii.  20.  xliv.  31,  S2.  xlv.  26. 
Scodrusy  mount,  xliv.  31. 
Scofiasy  praetor  of  the  ^tolians,  xxvi.  24.  Makes  war  on  the 
Acamanians,  25.  Carries  a  large  body  of  troops  to  Egypt, 
xxxi.  43. 
5cor/j/ons,  engines,  the  number  found  in  New  Carthage,  xxvi.  47. 
Scotusaay  xxviii.  5.7.  Plain  of  Scotussa,  or  Melambium,  xxxiii.  6. 
C.  Scribaniua  Curioy  plebeian  aedile,  prosecutes  farmers  of  the 
public  lands,  xxxiii.  42.  Is  madexhief  curio,  xli.  21.  Prx- 
tor,  xxxiv.  54. 
Z.  Scriboniusy  deputy  from  the  Roman  prisoners  taken  by  Han¬ 
nibal,  xxii.  61. 
Z.  Scribonius  LibOy  commissioner  of  the  exchequer,  xxiii.  21. 
See  xxii.  61.  Praetor,  xxix.  11. 
Z.  ^cribontua  LibOy  praetor,  xxxv.  10. 
Z.  Scriboniua  LibOy  praetor,  xxxix.  23. 
ScuHennay  river,  at  which  the  Ligurians  are  defeated  by  (' 
Claudius,  xli.  12.  18. 
Scylldeumy  promontory,  xxxi.  44.  xxxvi.  42. 
Seamen  supplied  by  private  persons,  xxiv.  11, 
Scyrtesy  xxxi.  45.  xxxiii.  30. 
Secession  of  the  commons  to  the  Sacred  Mount,  ix.  32,  33. ;  to 
the  Aventine,  iii.  50,  51.;  and  thence  to  the  Sacred  Mount, 
52. ;  of  the  soldiers,  vii.  39.  42. 
Sedentary  occufiationsy  people  of,  summoned  to  take  arms,  viii, 
20. 
Sedetania  country  wasted  by  Mandonius,  xxviii.  24.  xxix*  2,  . 
Sedetaniana  join  the  Romans,  xxxiv.  20. 
Seditious  commotions  at  Rome,  ii.  23.  28.  56.  iii.  66,  See.  &c 
SegisticUy  xxxiv.  17. 
Seguntiuy  xxxiv.  19. 
Seleuciuy  Macedonian  colony,  xxxiii  41.  xxxviii.  17. 
Seleucusy  son  of  Lysimachus,  xxxiii.  40. 
St  leucusy  son  of  Antiochus, xxxiii.  40.  Recavers  PhocaEa,xxxvii. 
1 1.  Wastes  the  country  of  Pergamus,  and  lays  siege  to  the 

INDEX. 

city,  xxxvii.  18.  Is  compelled  by  Diophanes,  an  Achaean,  to 
retire  out  of  the  country,  21. 
Selinus  taken  by  Antiochus,  xxxiii.  20. 
A.  Sellius^  plebeian  tribune,  iv.  42. 
Selymbria^  xxxiii.  39. 
BemproniuB  Blsesus^  quaestor,  is  slain  with  one  thousand  of  his 
men,  xxii.  31. 
Semfironius^  con^vAy  ii.  21.  Again,  34. 
A,  Semfironiiis  Atratinus^  one  of  the  first  consular  tribunes,  iv.  7. 
Again,  44.  A  third  time,  47.  Master  of  horse,  vi.  28. 
C.  Semfironius  Atratmiis^  consul,  his  negligence  and  rashness, 
iv.  37.  He  is  accused  by  L.  Hortensius,  plebeian  tribune, 
and  saved  by  the  entreaties  of  the  military  tribunes  of  his  ar¬ 
my,  42.  Is  again  accused  and  condemned,  44. 
C.  Sempromus  Blsesus  brings  to  a  trial  Cn.  Fulvius,  for  the  loss 
of  his  army,  xxvi.  2. 
Cn,  Sempronius  Bl^sus^  lieutenant-general  under  Q.  Fulvius, 
XXV ii.  6. 
C.  Sempronius  Blaesus^  plebeian  aedile,  xxxix.  7.  Praetor,  32. 
C.  Sempronius  Longus^  commissioner  of  religious  affairs,  xli.  21- 
X.  Sempronius  Atratinus^  consul,  iv.  7.  Censor,  8. 
M,  Sempronius  Tuditanus^  on  the  capture  of  New  Carthage,  ap¬ 
pointed  arbiter  in  the  dispute  about  a  mural  crown,  xxvi.  48. 
Praetor,  xxxvii.  47.  Consul,  xxxix.  23.  Chief  pontiff,  46. 
Dies  of  the  plague,  xli.  21. 
P.  Sempronius  Tuditanus^  ambassador  to  Ptolemy  Epiphanes, 
xxxi.  2.  Curule  aedile,  is  made  pi*aetor,  xxiv.  43,  44.  xxv.  3. 
xxvi.  I .  Censor,  xxvii.  1  ] .  Consul,  xxix.  1 1.  Makes  peace 
with  Philip,  12.  Engages  in  an  irregular  combat  with  Han- 
.  nibal,  and  is  worsted :  Engages  him  again,  and  gains  the 
.  victory,  36. 
P,  Sempronius  Sophus^  plebeian  tribune,  ix.  33.  Inveighs 
against  Appius  Claudius,  censor  and  orders  him  to  be  im¬ 
prisoned,  34.  Consul,  he  enjoys  a  triumph,  45.  Is  made  pon¬ 
tiff,  X.  9.  Praetor,  21. 
P.  Sempronius  Blaesus^  plebeian  tribune,  opposes  the  grant  of  a 
triumph  to  P.  Cornelius  Scipio,  xxxvi.  39. 
P,  Sempronius  Gracchus^  plebeian  tribune,  and  CaiuS,  accuse 
Acilius  Glabrio  of  peculation,  xxxvii.  58. 
P.  Sempronius  Longus^  praetor,  xxxix.  32. 
Tib,  Sempronius  Gracc/iuSj  master  of  horse,  xxii.  57.  Sends 
com  and  nuts  down  the  river  to  the  beseiged  in  Casilinum, 
xxiii.  19.  Curule  aedile,  is  made  consul,  24.  Supports  the 
spirits  of  the  senate,  25.  Takes  the  command  of  the  volun¬ 
teer  slaves,  32.  His  services,  35,  36,  37.  He  defeats  Flanno, 
xxiv.  14,  15.  Gives  freedom  to  the  volunteer  slaves,  16. 
Again  consul,  43.  His  actions  in  Lucania,  xxv.  l.  He  is 
ensnared  by  treachery,  and  his  body  it  sent  to  Hannibal^  16. 

INDEX. 

Tib,  Semfironius  Gracchus^  when  very  young,  is  tnade  augu^ 
xxix.  38.  Chosen,  as  remarkably  spirited,  by  Scipio,  for  an 
expeditious  journey  to  Philip,  xxxvii.  f. 
Tib,  Semfironius  Longus^  consul,  xxi.  6.  Is  sent  into  Sicily,  17. 
Recalled,  and  joins  his  colleague,  51.  Is  defeated  by  Hanni¬ 
bal,  55.  Fights  Hannibal  again,  is  successful  at  first,  but 
worsted  afterwards,  59.  Fights  Hanno  with  good  success, 
xxiii.  37. 
Tib,  Semfironius  Gracchus,^  plebeian  tribune,  although  at  enmity 
with  Scipio  African  us,  stops  the  prosecution  against  him,  and 
receives  thanks  from  the  senate  for  his  honourable  conduct, 
xxxviii.  53.  Prevents  the  imprisonment  of  L.  Scipio,  60. 
Tib,  Semfironius  Gracchus,^  commissioner  of  a  colony,  xxxix.  55 
Praetor,  xl,  35.  Consul,  xli.  8.  Triumphs  over  the  Celti- 
berians,  7. 
Tib,  Semfironius  Longus,^  son  of  Caius,  commissioner  of  re¬ 
ligious  affairs,  xxvii.  6.  Praetor,  xxxiii.  24.  Consul,  xxxiv. 
42.  Informs  the  senate  of  an  insurrection  in  Liguria,  56. 
Tib,  Semfironius  Musca^  commissioner  of  lands,  xlv.  13. 
Sena^  colony,  xxvii.  46. 
Senate,^  instituted  by  Romans,  consisting  of  one  hundred  mem¬ 
bers,  called  Patres,  and  their  descendants,  Patricians,  i.  8. 
Why  called  Conscript  Fathers,  ii.  1.  Their  number  aug¬ 
mented  on  the  destruction  of  Alba,  i.  17.  30.  to  two  hundred, 
and  to  three  hundred  by  the  first  Tarquinius,  called  Fathers  of 
Inferior  Birth,  35.  Is  diminished  by  the  cruelty  of  Tarqui¬ 
nius  the  Proud,  49. ;  and  filled  up  by  Brutus,  ii.  1.  Chiefs  of 
the  Albans  chosen  into  the  senate,  i.  30.  The  first  mention 
by  Livy  of  a  plebeian  senator,  v.  12.  Appius  Claudius  pro¬ 
cures  the  admission  of  sons  of  freed  men  into  the  senate,  but 
this  practice  is  not  followed,  ix.  46,  The  rule  altered,  which 
required  the  senate’s  previous  approbation  of  a  law,  before  it 
was  passed  by  the  people,  i.  1 7.  Senators  chosen  first  by  the 
kings,  i.  8.  30.  35. ;  afterwards  by  the  consuls,  ii.  1. ;  and  from 
the  year  three  hundred  by  the  censors,  iv.  8.  After  the  bat¬ 
tle  of  Cannse,  a  dictator  created  to  choose  the  senate,  xxiii. 
22.  Prince  of  the  senate  generally  the  member  alive  who  had 
been  censor  first,  xxvii.  11.  This  rule  not  klways  observed, 
13.  A  particular  place  assigned  to  senators  at  the  public 
shows,  xxxiv.  54.  Decrees  of  the  senate  first  kept  by  the 
aediles  in  the  temple  of  Ceres,  iii.  55.  Afterwards  in  the 
treasury,  iii,  9.  Decree  of  the  last  necessity,  iii.  4,  Sena¬ 
tors  forbidden  to  deal  in  merchandise,  xxi.  63.  Liable  to  a 
fine  for  non-attendance,  iii.  38.  Judgment  of  the  senate,  auc- 
toritas,  iv.  57. 
Senones,^  people  of  Gaul,  advance  to  Clusium,  and  to  Rome,  v. 

INDEX. 

S5 .  See  Gauls,  Surround  and  cut  to  pitces  a  Roman  legion, 
X.  26. 
Sentina^  x.  27,  30. 
Sefimum  taken  by  L.  Papirius,  x.  44,  45. 
Se/ifiitis  Lesiusy  the  last  Campanian  who  was  chief  magistrate  at 
Capua,  xxvi.  6.  13. 
SergUiy  practised  in  poisoning,  put  to  death  by  a  dose  of  her 
own  composition,  viii.  18.  ^ 
C.  Sergituty  consular  tribune,  vi.  4.  Again,  11.  A  third  time, 
27. 
L.  Sergiusy  carrying  an  offering  to  Delphi,  taken  by  pirates,  and 
dismissed,  v.  28. 
X.  Sergius  JFidenasy  military  tribune,  v.  16.  Consul,  17.  Con¬ 
sular  tribune,  25.  A  second  time  consul,  30.  A  second  time 
consular  tribune,  35.  A  third  time,  45. 
X.  Sergius  FidenaSy  consular  tribune,  iv.  35. 
Manlius  Sergius^  decemvir,  iii.  35. 
Man,  Sergius  Fidenasy  consular  tribune,  iv,  61.  Again,  v.  8. 
On  his  camp  being  attacked  by  the  Faliscians,  he  chooses  to 
be  vanquished  by  the  enemy,  rather  than  send  to  his  col¬ 
league  for  succour,  for  which  he  is  brought  to  trial,  11.;  and 
fined,  12. 
Man.  Sergiusy  military  tribune,  assists  in  the  taking  of  Locri, 
xxix.  6.  Is  scourged  by  Pleminius,  and  put  to  death,  9. 
Man,  Sergius  Silusy  praetor,  when  the  number  was  increased  to 
six,  X2ULii.  27.  Lieutenant-general,  xliv.  30. 
Serrhiuniy  fort,  taken  by  Philip,  xxxi.  16. 
Serviliiy  Albans,  chosen  into  the  senate  by  Tullus  Hostilius,  i. 
30. 
C.  Serviliusy  commissioner  of  lands,  obliged  to  fly  by  an  inroad 
of  the  Boians,  xxi.  25. 
C.  ServiliuSy  consul,  ii.  49. 
C.  Serviliusy  consular  tribune,  contending  with  his  colleagues, 
submits  to  the  advice  of  his  father,  iv.  45. 
C,  Servilius  Ahaluy  master  of  hoj'se,  kills  Maelius,  iv.  13,  14.  Is 
commended  by  the  dictator,  15.  Made  consul,  30.  Consular 
tribune,  56.  Master  of  horse,  and  a  second  time  consular 
tribune,  57. ;  a  third  time,  v.  8.  In  obedience  to  the  will  of 
the  senate  he  obliges  his  colleagues  to  abdicate,  9. 
C.  Servilius  Ahatuy  master  of  horse,  vi.  2. 
C.  Servilius y  commissioner  for  conducting  a  colony  to  Placen¬ 
tia,  is  seized  by  the  Gauls,  xxi.  25.;  and  sixteen  years  after 
is  (felivered,  and  brought  home  by  his  son,  xxx.  19, 
C.  ServiliuSy  son  of  the  preceding  lieutenant-general,  throws 
supplies  into  the  citadel  of  Tarentum,  xxv.  1 5.  Is  made  pon¬ 
tiff,  xxvii.  6.  Plebeian  aedile,  21.  Master  of  horse,  and  cu- 
>’ule  aedile,  33.  36.  Praetor,  xxviii.  10.  46.  Consul,  xxix.  3^ 

INDEX. 

XXX.  1.  Liberates  and  brings  home  his  father,  xxx.  19.  Dic¬ 
tator,  39.  Chief  pontiff,  xxxix  46,  Is  ordered  to  find  out 
expiations  in  lime  of  a  pestilence,  xl.  3T.  Dies,  42. 
C.  Strviltus  Casca^  plebeian  tribune,  xxv.  3. 
Cw,  Servihus  Caefiio^  pontiff,  xxv.  2.  Curule  aedile,  xxviii.  10. 
Praetor,  xxxviii.  46.  Consul,  xxix.  38.  xxx  1.  Goes  over  to 
Sicily  in  pursuit  of  Hannibal,  but  is  recalled  by  a  dictator 
appointed  for  the  purpose,  24.  Dies,  xli.  21. 
Cn.  Servilius  Geminus^  consul,  xxi.  57  xxii.  1.  He  ravages 
the  island  of  Maninx,  31.  Follows  the  plan  of  Fabius  in  con¬ 
ducting  the  war,  32.  43.  Is  slain  at  Cannae,  49. 
L,  SersDilius  Structm^  consular  tribune,  iv.  47. 
M,  Servilius^  augur,  xxvi.  23.  Curule  aedile,  xxix.  38.  Mas¬ 
ter  of  horse,  xxx.  24.  Consul,  26,  27.  Is  continued  in  com¬ 
mand,  41.  His  speech  in  favour  of  .^Emilius  Paulius,  xlv. 
37.  &c. 
M.  ServiUiia^  military  tribune,  xl.  27.  Pontiff,  xliii  11. 
JM,  SewiliuH  Gcminus^  master  of  horSe,  xxx.  24.  27.  Commis¬ 
sioner  of  lands,  xxxi  4.  Of  a  colony,  xxxii.  29. 
P.  ServiliuH^  consul,  ii.  21.  NoX  pleasing  either  to  the  patri¬ 
cians  or  plebeians,  27. 
P,  Servilivs^  consul,  iii  6.  Dies,  7. 
Servilius^  consul,  ii.  6.  Again;  and  is  sent  against  the 
.Slcjuans,  iii  2. 
Q.  Servilius^  quaestor,  prosecutes  M.  Volscius  for  false  evidence 
against  Caeso,  iii.  24.  • 
Q,  Servilius  Priscus^  dictator,  iv.  21,  Routes  the  Etrurians, 
and  takes  Fidenae,  22  Calls  on  the  tribunes  to  make  the 
consuls  name  a  dictator,  26.  Is  made  dictator,  46.  Defeats 
the  ^quans,  47. 
Q,  Se'rvilius  Fidenas^  consular  tribune,  v.  8.  Again,  14.  In¬ 
terrex,  17.  Consular  tribune  a  third  time,  24.  A  fourth,  36. 
A  fifth,  vi,  4.  A  sixth,  6. 
Q.  Servihus^  consular  tribune,  xi.  22.  Again,  31.  A  third 
time,  36. 
Q.  Servilius  Ahala^  consul,  vii.  1.  A  second  time,  4.  Dicta¬ 
tor  ;  he,  by  direction  of  the  senate,  vows  the  great  games,  and, 
after  several  services,  abdicates,  11.  Is  made  interrex,  17. 
Q.  Servilius^  master  of  horse,  vii.  22.  Consul,  38. 
S/i.  Serviliusy  consul,  repulses  the  Vcians ;  is  afterwards  worst¬ 
ed  by  them,  and  saved  by  his  colleague,  ii.  51.  52. 
S/i,  Servilius  Priscus^  consul,  vi.  31.  Consular  tribune,  38. 
Servius  Cornelius^  consul- ii.  41- 
Servius  Tullius^  i.  18.  Son  of  a  prisoner  taken  at  Coniiculum, 
39.  and  iv.  3.  Advanced  to  the  throne  by  the  senate,  41. 
Marries  his  daughters  to  the  Tarquins,  42.  Institutes  the 
voi,.  VI. — [M] 

INDEX. 

census,  42, ;  and  closes  the  lustrum,  44.  Is  murdered,  48.  His 
commentaries,  60. 
JP.  Sestius  Cafiitolinus^  consul,  iii.  22.  Decemvir,  33. 
F.  Sestius^  a  patrician  brought  to  trial  before  the  people  by  C- 
Julius,  decemvir,  iii.  33. 
F.  iSestius^  quaestor,  iv.  30. 
Sestos^  or  Sestus,  on  the  Hellespont,  xxxii.  33. 
Setia^  colony,  vi.  30.  Plundered  by  the  Privernians,  vii.  42. 
xxvi.  8.  XXX.  14.  Refuses  supplies,  xxvii.  9.  Decree  of  the 
senate  on  the  occasion,  xxix.  15. 
Setia?is  inform  of  the  revolt  of  the  Privernians,  viii.  1. 
C.  Sextilius^  a  plebeian  consular  tribune,  vi.  30. 
ikf.  Sextilius^  of  Fregellae,  answers  for  eighteen  colonies,  that 
they  would  supply  troops,  xxvii.  10. 
X.  plebeian  tribune,  iv.  49. 
L,  Sextius^  plebeian  tribune,  proposes  laws  concerning  debts, 
concerning  lands,  and  the  admission  of  plebeians  to  the  con¬ 
sulship,  and  prevents  the  election  of  curule  magistrates,  vi. 
35.  Being  a  tenth  time  tribune,  he  is  made  the  first  plebeiatt 
consul,  42. 
71/.  Sextius  Sabinus^  praetor,  xxx.  26. 
great,  constructed  by  Tarquinius  the  Proud,  i.  55. 
Shi/iSj  long,  or  ships  of  war,  v.  28. 
- light,  xxi,  28. 
— - transport,  xxii.  1 1. 
- ]ti’3Ctorian,  or  chief  commander’s,  xxix.  25. 
- beaked,  xxviii.  45,  46.  xxx.  10. 
- scout,  xxx.  10. 
- conveyed  over  land  at  Tarentum,  xxv.  1 1. 
Ship  7'ace^  annual,  at  Putavium,  x.  2. 
Shopfi  of  the  silver-smiths  in  the  Roman  Forum  set  up  to  sale 
by  Hannibal,  xxvi.  11. 
Sibaris^  xxvi.  39. 
Sybils  i.  7. 
Sybilline  books^  iii.  10.  v.  13.  he, 
L.  Siccius  murdered  by  contrivance  of  the  decemvirs,  iii.  43. 
Sicilians^  their  affairs  regulated  by  Marcellus,  xxiv.  40.  They 
complain  to  the  senate  of  Marcellus,  xxvi.  29.  The  humble 
supplication  of  the  ambassadors  to  him,  33. 
Sicilian  nvar^  xxiv.  36.  xxv.  40.  Streight,  i.  2. 
S'cilius,^  who  had  excited  the  Herpiniaiis  to  a  revolt,  beheaded, 
xxiii.  37. 
Sicily,,  ^Eneas  arrives  there,  i.  1.  Com  is  purchased  there  by 
the  Romans,  ii.  34.  The  Carthaginians  first  send  an  army 
thither,  iv.  29.  A  fleet,  sent,  as  supposed  by  Livy,  by  the 
tyrants  of  Sicily,  infests  the  Tuscan  sea,  Aii.  25.  'I'he  island 
is  abandoned  by  the  Carthaginians,  xxvi.  40.  Its  affairs  ad¬ 
justed  by  Scipio,  xxix.  1. 

INDEX. 

C.  Sicinius  advises  the  secession  to  the  Sacred  Mount,  ii.  32. 
Is  one  of  the  first  plebeian  tribunes,  33.  See,  iii.  54. 
Cn.  Sicinius^  praetor,  xlii.  10.  Is  sent  with  an  array  to  Mace¬ 
donia,  27 
L,  Sicinius^  plebeian  tribune,  vi.  6. 
T.  Siciniusy  consul,  ii.  40.  Defeats  the  Volscians,  41. 
T.  Siciniua  proposes  that  the  Romans  should  remove  to  Veii, 
V.  24. 
Sicyoriy  xxvii.  13.  xxxii.  23.  39. 
Sicyoniansy  Aratus  (father  and  son)  murdered  by  Philip,  xxxii. 
21.  The  country  wasted,  xxxiii.  15. 
Sidetansy  people,  xxxv.  13. 
Sidiciniansy  attacked  by  the  Samnites,  procure  the  assistance  of 
the  Campanians,^ii.  29.  Wish  to  surrender  themselves  to 
the  Romans;  anJfbeing rejected,  are  reduced  by  the  Latines, 
viii.  I,  2.  Wage  war  with  the  Aurunclans,  15.  Are  con¬ 
quered  by  the  Romans,  16,  17. 
Hidicinian  lands  ravaged  by  Hannibal,  xxvi.  9. 
Sidoniansy  xxxv.  48. 
Sig^eumy  promontory,  xliv.  28. 
colony,  i.  55.  ii.  21.  viii.  3.  Faithful  to  the  Romans, 
xxvii.  10. 
Sigovesusy  leader  of  the  Celts  into  Italy,  v.  34. 
Q,  Siliusy  first  plebeian  quaestor,  iv.  54. 
Sinopey  afterwards  SinuessUy  x.  21.  xxvii.  38.  xxxii,  9. 
Sinuessay  y\xi,  11.  Colony,  x.  2 1.  xxii.  14. 
Silenusy  a  Greek  writer,  xxvi.  49. 
Sinuessan  watersy  xxii.  13. 
sup  lay  XX  viii.  12. 
Silver  accruing  from  fines,  by  which  brazen  images  were  pur¬ 
chased,  and  set  up  in  the  temple  of  Ceres,  xxvii.  6.  and  xxx, 
39. 
Silvery  contribution  of,  to  the  treasury,  xxviii.  38.  xxx.  45. 
Silver  mines  in  Spain,  xxviii.  3. 
Sipontum  taken  by  Alexander  of  Epirus,  viii.  24. 
Siponturriy  colony,  xxxiv.  45.  Deserted,  xxxix.  23. 
Sipyrrhicasy  ^Etolian  ambassador,  xxxi.  46. 
SlingerSy'^iLi.  21.  xxviii.  37.  xxxviii,  21.  29. 
Smyrna  asserts  its  freedom,  xxxiii.  38.  Defends  itself  with 
bravery,  xxxv.  42.  Is  honoured  by  the  Romans,  and  reward¬ 
ed  with  an  addition  of  territory,  xxxviii.  39. 
Soldiersy  Roman,  first  receive  pay,  iv.  59.  Donations  usually 
made  to  them  by  a  general  at  his  triumph,  x.  44,  Their  ver¬ 
ses,  iii.  26.  iv.  40.  See  Army  and  Legion. 
Solly  fort,  xxxiii.  20. 
Solon's  laws  copied  by  the  Romans,  iii.  31. 
Hopater  made  praetor  at  Syracuse,  xxiv.  33, 

INDEX. 

Sofiater^  one  of  Philip’s  generals,  carries  four  thousand  men  to 
Africa,  /.xx.  26.  Is  refused  to  the  demand  of  Philip’s  am¬ 
bassadors,  42. 
Sophofihbay  daughter  of  Hasdrubal,  wife  of  Syphax,  marries 
Masinissa,  xxx.  22.  Swallows  poison,  15. 
Sora^  taken  by  the  Romans,  vii.  28  Inhabitants  kill  the  Ro¬ 
man  colonists,  and  joins  the  Samnites,  ix.  23  It  is  taken  by 
the  Romans,  by  means  of  a  deserter,  24.  Retaken  by  the 
Samnites,  43.  Recovered  by  the  Romans,  44.  A  colony 
settled  there,  x  1.  Decree  oi'  the  senate  on  its  refusing  sup¬ 
plies,  xxix.  15. 
Sosis^  and  Theodotus,  as  soon  as  Hieronymus  was  slain,  hasten 
to  Syracuse,  xxiv  21. 
Sosis  sent  by  Marcellus  to  the  governor  o^he  fort  Euryalus, 
XXV.  5.  Wears  a  golden  crown  in  Mar^lus’s  triumph,  and 
is  rewarded  with  the  freedom  of  Rome,  xxvi.  21. 
Sofiistheus  Magnus^  ambassador  of  Philip  to  Hannibal,  xxiii.  39. 
Juno^  viii.  14. 
Sotimus^  page  to  Alexander  of  Epirus,  viii,  24. 
Sfiatn  divided  between  the  Romans  and  Carthaginians  by  the 
river  Iberus,  xxi.  2.  Cn.  Scipio  the  first  Roman  who  headed 
an  army  there,  xxi.  32.  xxv.  37 .  The  first  conquest  attempt¬ 
ed  on  the  continent,  and  the  last  completed,  xxviii.  12.  The 
inhabitants  restless,  and  fond  of  change,  xxii.  21. 
S/iartUy  in  early  times,  had  not  walls,  xxxiv.  38.  Romans  at¬ 
tempt  to  storm  it,  39.  Its  mode  of  education  rough  and  hardy, 
xxxviii.  17,  See  Lacedaemon. 
S/ie7'chiae^  xxxii.  13. 
S/ierchiu8^  river,  xxxvi.  14.  xxxvii.  4. 
S/ioletum  attempted  in  vain  by  Hannibal,  xxii.  9.  xxiv.  10.  The 
inhabitants  commended  by  the  Romans,  xxvii.  10. 
Springy  sacred,  xxxii i.  44. 
Spy  of  the  Carthaginians  discovered  at  Rome,  had  his  hands  cut 
ofi’,  and  was  sent  away,  xxii.  33. 
Spies  employed  by  Hannibal,  taken  by  the  Roman  guards,  are 
by  the  order  of  Scipio  conducted  through  all  parts  of  the 
camp,  and  dismissed,  xxx.  29. 
Spoilsy  grand,  offered  by  Romulus  to  Jupiter  Feretrius,  i.  10. 
Offered  again  by  Corn.  Cossus,  iv.  20.  32. 
- ,  equestrian,  viii.  7.  ^ 
- ,  burned  in  honour  of  V^ulcan,  i.  37. 
Spurius  JVautius  RutiluSy  consular  tribune,  iv.  6 1 .  See  Kau- 
tins. 
Q.  Statorius  left  with  Syphax  to  discipline  his  troops,  xxiv.  48. 
xxx.  28. 
StatieUaey  a  Ligurian  city,  unjustly  attacked  by  M,  Popilius,  xlii. 
7,  8.  21,  He  eludes  punishment,  22. 

INDEX. 

ManiuB  ^tatilius^  a  Lucanian,  detects  a  stratagem  of  Hannibal, 
xxii.  42,  43. 
Statius  promises  to  put  Hannibal  in  possession  of  Comp< 
sa,  xxiii.  1. 
Statius  Metius^  commander  of  the  celebrated  garrison  of  Casili* 
nuin,  xxiv.  19 
T.  Statius^  plebeian  tribune,  accuses  Sp.  Servilius,  ii.  52. 
Statius  Gtlliusy  Sainnite  general,  is  taken  by  the  Romans,  ix.  44. 
Statius  Minatiusy  Saiiinite  general,  is  made  prisoner,  x.  20. 
Stator.  See  Jufiiter. 
Stellatian  filams^  ix.  44.  x.  31. 
Stellatine  tribe^  vi,  5. 
Stemus  Minius  Cc/er,  one  of  Hannibars  hosts  at  Capua,  xxiii.  8. 
C.  Stertinius^  praetor,  xxxviii.  35. 
L.  Stertinius^  commissioner  to  give  liberty  to  several  Thracian 
states,  xxxiii.  35. 
StenUj  dehle,  near  Aiitigouia,  xxxii.  5. 
Sttmo^  xxxii.  14. 
Stodiy  xxxiii.  19. 
Stratoniccy  a  fruitless  expedition  of  the  Rhodians  against  it, 
xxxiii  18.  It  is  assigned  to  the  Rhodians  by  tne  Romans,  30. 
Stratonides^  accomplice  of  Zeuxippus  in  a  plot  against  Rrachyi- 
las,  xxxiii.  28. 
Stratum^  xxxvi.  11.  xxxviii.  4,  5.  xliii.  21. 
Streets.^  cause  of  their  irregularity,  v.  55. 
Strymon^  river,  xliv.  44,  45. 
Stubera^  xxxi.  39.  xliii.  19. 
Stymtihalia^  xxxiii  14.  The  same  as  Stymphalis,  xlv.  30. 
Sublictan  bridge^  v.  40. 
Suburra^  part  of  Rome,  iii.  13. 
A  sub-centurion  conquers  a  Latine  centurion,  viii.  8. 
Suessa  Pometia^  taken  from  the  V^oiscians,  i.  41.  Revolts,  ii. 
16.  Is  taken,  17. 
Suessa  Aurunca^  viii.  15.  Colony,  ix.  28.  Refuses  supplies, 
xxvii.  9.  Decree  of  the  senate  in  consequence,  xxix.  15. 
Suessetans^  people  of  Spain,  xxv.  34.  Their  lands  wasted  by 
Mandonius,  xxviii.  24.  xxxiv.  20. 
Suessula.,  vii.  37.  xxiii.  14.  17.  xxiv.  46.  xxv.  7.  22.  xxvi.  9. 
xxviii.  9. 
Suessulans  are  complimented  with  the  freedom  of  Rome  with¬ 
out  right  of  suftrage,  viii.  14. 
Sussetes^  title  of  tlie  chief  magistrate  at  Carthage,  xxviii.  37. 
XXX.  7. 
Suismomontium,  mount,  xxxix.  2.  xl.  41. 
Sulmoy  x^vi.  11. 
Sul/iiciay  mother-in-law  to  the  consul  Posiumius,  gives  hini  a 

INDEX. 

gof^d  character  of  jEbutia,  in  the  affair  of  the  Bacchanals^ 
xxxix.  1 1 . 
C.  Suljiicius  Camerinus  abdicates  the  censorship,  vi.  27. 
C.  Sulfiicius  Longus^  consul,  viii.  15.  Again,  37.  A  third  time, 
ix.  24.  Defeats  the  Samnites,  27. 
C.  Suljiicius^  lieutenant-general,  vanquishes  the  Hernicians,  vii. 
7.  Probably  the  same  with  C.  Sulpicius  Paeticus,  consul,  vii. 
2.  Again,  9.  He  takes  Ferrentinum,  9.  Is  made  dictator, 
and  defers  coming  to  action,  to  the  dissatisfaction  of  his  ar¬ 
my,  12.  His  stratagem,  14.  He  defeats  the  Gauls,  and  tri¬ 
umphs,  15.  Is  made  interrex,  and  a  third  time  consul,  17. 
A  fourth  time,  19.  A  second  time  interrex,  and  a  fifth  time 
consul,  22. 
C.  Sulpicius^  praetor,  xxv.  41. 
C.  Sulpicius  Gallus^  pontiff,  xxxii.  7. 
C.  Sulpicius  augur,  xli.  21. 
C.  Suljiicius  Gallus^  praetor,  is  chosen  a  patron  by  Hither  Spain, 
xliii.  2.  Praetor,  1 1.  Military  tribune  :  foretells  to  the  army 
an  eclipse  of  the  moon,  xliv.  37.  Consul,  xlv.  44. 
Sulpicius^  military  tribune,  xL  27. 
F.  Sulpicius  Severest  consul,  triumphs  over  the  jEquans,  ix.  45. 
Censor,  x.  9 
jp.  Sulpicius  Galba^  before  he  had  held  any  curule  office,  made 
consul,  xxv.  41.  Is  sent  into  Apulia^  and  thence  to  Mace¬ 
donia,  xxlv.  22.  28.  His  exploits,  xxvii.  10.  31,  32.  xxviii. 
5.7.  Dictator,  xxx.  24. 
P.  Sulpicius  Galbu^  consul,  xxxi.  5.  Sent  to  Macedonia,  14. 
Hi-  services  there,  to  47. 
Q,  Sulpicius^  lieutenant-general  under  A,  Postumius,  dictator, 
iv.  27. 
Q.  Sulpicius  consular  tribune,  v.  8.  Again,  14. 
Q.  Sulpicius  Longusy  consular  tribune,  v.  36.  47.  Makes  terms 
with  Brennus  for  raising  the  siege  of  the  Capitol,  48. 
Servius  Sulpicius  Galba^  curule  aedile,  xxvii.  21.  Ambassador 
to  Attalus,  xxix.  1 1.  Pontiff,  xxx.  26. 
Servius  Sulpicius^  consul,  ii.  19. 
Servius  Sulpicius^  chief  curio,  iii.  7. 
Servius  Sulpicius^  consul^  iii.  10.  Deputy  to  Athens,  to  collect 
laws,  31.  Decemvir,  33.  Deputy  to  the  seceding  troops  on 
the  Aventine,  50. 
Servius  Sulpicius  Camerinus^  consul,  vii.  28. 
Servius  Sulpicius  Rufus^  consular  tribune,  vi.  4.  A  second  time, 
18.  A  third  time,  vi.  21. 
Servius  Sulpicius^  consular  tribune,  vi.  22.  Again,  32.  Re¬ 
takes  Tusculum,  33.  His  wife,  daughter  of  M.  Fabius  Am- 
bustus,  34.  Consular  tribune  a  third  time,  26.  A  fourth,  38. 

INDEX. 

^ervius  Sul/iicius  GalbUy  praetor,  xxxviii.  42.  Instigates  the 
second  legion  to  oppose  the  triumph  of  P.  ^Emilius,  xlv.  35. 
Sumtnanusy  Pluto,  his  temple  at  Rome,  xxxii.  29. 
Sunium^  promontory,  xxviii.  8.  xxxi.  23.  xxxii.  17. 

Suo-vetaurilia^  i.  44.  viii.  10. 
P,  Sura^  lieutenant-general,  xxii.  31. 
Surreniines  revolt  to  the  Carthaginians,  xxii.  61. 
Survey^  general,  instituted  by  Ser.  Tullius,  i.  42. 
Performed,  i.  44.  Number  rated  -  -  80,000 
- iii.3. . 124,214 
-  24. . 132,409 
- X.  9.  47. .  262,322 
- xxvii,  36. .  137,108 
- xxix.  37, .  214,000 
- xxxviii.  36.  -  -  -  -  258,308 
- xlii.  10. .  269,015 
Sutrian  lands ^  xxvi.  34. 

Sutrium  taken  by  Etrurians,  and  retaken  by  Camillus,  vi.  5. 
The  city  is  besieged  by  the  Etrurians,  and  relieved,  9  Con¬ 
sidered  as  the  key  of  Etruria,  and  again  besieged,  ix.  32.  35. 
See  X.  14.  Refuses  supplies  as  a  colony,  xxvii.  9.  Decree  of 
the  senate  in  consequence,  xxix.  15. 
Swine  used  in  confirming  a  treaty,  i.  24.  ix.  5. 
Sy curium^  operations  of  Perseus  and  the  Romans  near  it,  xlil. 
54.  57.  62.  64. 
Syleum^  xxxviii.  14. 
Synnada^  xxxviii.  l5.  xlv.  34. 
Sylvanus^  supposed  to  have  uttered  a  loud  voice  from  the  Ar- 
sian  wood,  ii.  7. 
Sylvius^  surname  of  the  Alban  kings,  i.  3. 
Syfihax^  King  of  Numidia,  solicited  by  Scipio,  forms  a  treaty 
of  amity  with  the  Romans,  xxiv.  48.  Defeated  by  Masinissa, 
he  flies  to  the  Maurusians,  49.  Sends  an  embassy  to  Rome, 
and  receives  one  from  thence,  xxvii.  4.  Is  visited  by  Scipio 
and  Hasdrubal,  and  makes  an  alliance  with  Scipio,  xxviii. 
17,  18.  Marries  a  daughter  of  Hasdrubal,  and  renounces  the 
friendship  of  Scipio,  xxix.  23.  His  war  \\ith  Masinissa, 
xxix.  23.  His  camp  is  burned  by  Scipio  and  Masinissa,  xxx. 
5.  He  advances  against  Masinissa  and  Laelius ;  is  defeated 
and  taken,  U.  His  discourse  to  Scipio  on  being  brought  to 
the  Roman  camp,  13.  He  is  sent  to  Rome,  17.  and  dies  in 
confinement,  45. 
Sypheum  comes  over  to  the  Romans,  xxx.  19. 
Syracuse  suffers  great  disturbances  after  the  death  of  Hierony¬ 
mus,  xxiv.  21.  27,  28.  Falls  under  the  command  of  Hippo¬ 
crates  and  Epicydes,  33.  Is  besieged  by  Marcellus,  and  de¬ 
fended  by  Archimedes,  and  the  siege  turned  into  a  blockade. 

INDEX. 

o4.  The  city  is  taken,  xxv,  23.  31.  The  spoils  carried  to 
Rome,  40 
Syracusans  put  their  city  under  the  patronage  of  Marcellus, 
xxvi.  32. 
Syrians  by  nature  fitted  for  slavery,  xxxvi.  17. 
Syria,  xxxvii.  3. 
Syrtis,  lesser,  xxix.  33. 

T 

Tabse,  xxxviii.  13. 
Tables,  twelve,  of  laws,  iii.  34.  37.  Engraved  in  brass,  and  hung 
up  in  public,  57. 
Tagus,  river,  xxi.  5.  xxvii.  19. 
Tallasto,  whence  the  practice  of  repeating  this  word  at  wed¬ 
dings,  i,  9. 
Tanagra,  xxxiii,  28. 
Tanais,  river,  xxxviii.  38. 
Tanaquil,  wife  of  Lucumo,  skilled  in  augury,  i.  34.  Advises 
her  husband  to  give  the  best  education  to  Servius  Tullius,  39. 
Conceals  the  death  of  Tarquiiiius,  until  Servius  secures  the 
throne,  41.  See  47. 
Tarentines  engage  the  Lucanians  in  a  war  against  Rome,  viii. 
27.  Their  insolent  embassy  derided  by  Papirius,  ix.  14. 
They  join  the  Carthaginians,  xxii.  61.  Send  ambassadors  to 
Hannibal,  xxiv.  13.  Their  hostages,  apprehended  in  flight 
from  Rome,  are  thrown  from  the  Tarpeian  rock,  xxv.  7. 
They  join  the  enemy,  8.,  See.  Their  fleet  defeats  that  of  the 
Romans,  w^hile  the  Romans  defeat  their  army  on  land,  xxvi. 
39. 
Tarentum  betrayed  to  Hannibal,  xxv.  8,  9,  Taken  by  Fabius 
Maximus,  xxvii.  15.  The  citadel  besieged  by  Hannibal,  xxv. 
11.  Its  defence  provided  for  by  the  Romans,  15. 
Tarentum,  country  of,  xxvii.  40.  Its  harbour,  xxiii.  33. 
Sfi,  Tarfieius,  commander  in  the  citadel  of  Rome,  his  daughtei 
bribed  by  T.  Tatius,  admits  the  Sabines  into  the  fortress, 
i.  11. 
Sfi,  Tarjieius  accused,  on  the  expiration  of  his  consulate,  iii.  31. 
Is  one  of  the  deputies  sent  to  the  seceders  on  the  Aventine, 
50.  Made  plebeian  tribune,  65. 
Tarpeian  mount,  i.  55.  Rock,  vi.  20. 
Tarquinii,  i.  34.  xxvii.  4. 
Tarqiiinians  take  arms  in  favour  of  Tarquinius  the  Proud  ;  and, 
after  a  battle  with  the  Romans,  ii.  6.  return  home,  7.  Ra¬ 
vage  the  Roman  territory,  are  defeated,  and  treated  with 
severity,  for  having  massacred  Roman  soldiers,  19.  A  truce 
of  forty  years  is  granted  to  them,  22.  The  Tarquinians  and 

INDEX. 

Taliscians  defeat  the  consul  Fabius,  by  means  of  snakes  and 
burning  torches,  vii.  17. 
X.  Targuinius  Priscusy  appointed  tutor  to  the  king’s  sons,  forms 
designs  on  the  throne,  i.  34.  Is  elected  king,  adds  one  hun¬ 
dred  to  the  senate,  wages  war  with  the  Latines,  35.  with  the 
Sabines,  36.  His  works,  38.  Death,  40. 
Z.  Targuinim  aspires  to  the  crown,  i.  46.  Instigated  by  his  wife, 
seizes  it  by  force,  47.  Puts  the  principal  senators  to  death, 
secures  his  person  by  a  strong  guard,  neglects  the  practice  of 
consulting  the  senate,  courts  the  favour  of  the  Latines,  mar¬ 
ries  his  daughter  to  Mamilius  of  Tusculum,  is  suruamed  the 
Proud,  49.  Is  severely  censured  by  Herdonius,  50. ;  whose 
death  he  procures,  51.  He  makes  war  on  the  Volscians,  and 
takes  Suessa  Pometia ;  takes  Gabii  by  stratagem,  53,  54. 
Builds  the  temple  of  Jupiter  Capitolinus,  and  executes  other 
works,  55.  Lays  siege  to  Ardea,  57.  Is  dethroned,  and  ban¬ 
ished,  60.  Attempts  to  recover  the  kingdom  by  the  aid  of 
the  V'eians  and  Tarquinians,  ii.  6. ;  then  of  Porsenna,  and  is 
wounded  at  the  battle  of  Regillus,  19.  Dies,  21. 
jlruns  Targuiniusy  son  of  the  Proud,  sent  to  Delphi,!.  56.  Falls 
in  battle,  together  with  his  antagonist  L.  J.  Brutus,  ii.  6. 
Z.  Targumiusy  son  of  the  Proud,  i.  56.  Is  present  in  the  battle 
of  Regillus,  ii.  19,  20. 
Sex,  Targuiniusy  son  of  the  same,  betrays  Gabii  to  his  father, 
i.  53,  54.  His  treatment  of  Lucretia,  58.  He  is  killed  at 
Gabii,  60. 
Auruns  Tarquiniusy  brother  of  the  Proud,  mild  in  disposition,  is 
murdered  by  his  wife,  i.  46. 
Targuinius  Collatinusy  son  of  Egerius,  husband  of  Lucretia, 
i.  57.  Is  made  consul,  60.  Abdicates,  and  goes  into  exile, 
ii.  2. 
L,  Tarquitiu^m^^\.tT  of  horse,  iii.  37. 
TarracinUy  formerly  AnxuVy  iv.  59.  Colony,  pleads  exemption 
from  sea-service,  xxxvi.  3.  xxii.  15.  xxvii.  4.  xxviii.  1 1. 
Tarracinay  river,  xxiv.  44. 
jiirracoy  xxi.  61.  xxii.  19.  xxvi.  17.  5 1.  Its  harbour,  xxii.  22. 
An  assembly  of  all  the  Spanish  allies  is  held  there  by  Scipio, 
xxvi.  19. 
Tartessiansy  Spanish  people,  xxiii.  26, 
Taulantian8y-%X\.  26. 
r,  Tatiusy  i.  10,  11.  13,  14. 
Taurea*  See  Jubellius, 
Taurilliay  games,  xxxix.  22. 
Taurine  forest y  v.  34. 
Tauriniansy  their  capital  city  taken  by  Hannibal,  xxi.  39., 
Taurofwlosy  Diana  so  called  at  Amphipolis,  xliv.  44. 
VOL,  VI.— [N] 

INDEX. 

Taurts,  mount,  xxxv.  13.  xxxvii.  35.  45.  52,  53,  54.  xxxviii.  ST 
37,  38.  47.  53.  59. 
Taurus^  river,  xxxviii.  15. 
Taxes  remitted  to  the  commons  of  Rome,  ii.  9.  Imposed  for 
payment  of  the  army,  and  collected  in  spite  of  the  tribunes, 
iv.  60.  Are  collected  with  difficulty,  v.  10.  12.  A  tax  for 
building  a  wall  of  hewn  stone,  vi.  32.  Another  for  paying 
the  army,  x.  46.  Double  taxes  imposed,  xxiii.  32. 
Taygetus^  mount,  xxxiv.  28. 
FeanianSy  ix.  20. 
Teanurriy  city  in  Apulia,  xxiii.  24.  In  Sidicinia,  xxii.  57. 
Tectosagian  Gauls  settle  in  the  inland  part  of  Asia,  xxxviii.  16, 
Form  an  ambush  for  the  Roman  consul,  25. ;  and  are  defeat¬ 
ed,  27.  Ordered  not  to  carry  arms  beyond  their  own  bounds, 
40. 
Tegeay  xxxv.  27.  xxxviii.  34. 
Tegmoriy  xlv.  26. 
Tellensey  i.  33. 
Telesia  taken  by  Hannibal,  xxii.  13.  Stormed  by  the  Romans, 
xxiv.  20. 
Telmessusy  xxxviii.  59. 
Telmessian  bayy  xxxvii.  16. 
Tellus^  goddess,  x.  28.  Her  temple,  ii.  41, 
Sex,  Temfianiusy  decurio  of  horse,  by  making  the  cavalry  dis¬ 
mount,  prevents  a  total  defeat,  iv.  38.  His  prudent  answer 
respecting  the  consul  Sempronius,  4  1.  He  is  made  plebeian 
tribune,  42. 
Tern  fie  y  vale  in  Thessaly,  xxxii.  15.  A  meeting  there  of  Cn. 
Cornelius  and  Philip,  xxxiii.  35.xxxvi.  10.  xlii.  67,  xliv.  6,  7, 
xxxiii.  18. 
Tenedosy  island,  xxxi.  16.  xliv.  28. 
Teosy  island,  supplies  Antiochus  with  provisions,  xxxvii.  27.  Is 
plundered  by  the  Romans,  and  compelled  to  furnish  supplies. 
28.  A  naval  victory  gained  there  by  the  Romans  over  Anti* 
ochus,  30, 
C.  Terentillus  ArsUy  plebeian  tribune,  proposes  the  ^creation  of 
five  commissioners  to  compose  laws  for  restraining  the  power 
of  the  consuls,  iii.  9. 
Terentine  tribCy  x.  9, 
A.  Terentius  Farroy  praetor,  xxxix.  32.  Deputy  to  Greece, 
xlv.  17. 
C.  lerentius  FarrOy  of  mean  birth,  proposes  an  order  of  the  peo¬ 
ple,  giving  the  master  of  horse  authority  equal  to  that  of  the 
dictator,  and  is  made  consul,  xxii.  25.  35.  Disagreement  be¬ 
tween  him  and  his  colleague  jEmilius,  41.  44.  Gives  the 
signal  of  battle  at  Cannae,  45.  Flies  to  V^enusia,  49.  At  his 
return  to  Rome,  receives  general  thanks,  61.  His  speech  to 

INDEX. 

the  Campanian  deputies,  xxiii.  5.  He  is  continued  in  com¬ 
mand  during  several  years,  xxv.  6.  xxvii.  35.  Sent  ambassa¬ 
dor  to  Philip,  XXX.  26.;  to  Africa,  xxxi.  11.  Commissioner 
of  a  colony,  49. 
L,  Terentius  sent  one  of  ten  deputies  to  adjust  a  dispute  be¬ 
tween  Antiochus  and  Ptolemy,  xxxiii.  59. 
L.  Terentius  Massa^ plebeian  aedile, xxxi.  50.  Praetor,  xxxviii.  42. 
P.  Terentius  Tuscvvicanus^  xlv.  17. 
Q.  Terentius^  deputy  to  the  consul  Flaminius,  xxi.  63. 
Q.  Terentius  CulleOy  a  senator,  after  having  been  long  a  prison¬ 
er  of  the  Carthaginians,  is  restored  to  his  country,  xxx.  43. 
Follows  Scipio  in  his  triumph,  45.  Ambassador  to  Carthage, 
xxxiii.  47.  Praetor,  xxxviii.  42.  Is  commissioned  to  hold  an 
enquiry  respecting  the  conduct  of  Scipio,  55. 
Terentine  tribe^  x.  9. 
Terina  taken  by  Alexander  of  Epire,  viii.  24. 
Terminalia  festival^  xliii.  ll.  xlv.  44. 
Termessus^  xxxviii.  15. 
Terminus^  deity,  i.  55.  v.  54. 
Tetrafikilia  delivered  from  the  Macedonian  garrison,  xxviii. 
Tessera^  ticket,  mode  of  conveying  orders,  vii.  35.  ix.  32.  xxvii, 
46.  xxviii.  14. 
Thaumaci  besieged  by  Philip,  relieved  by  the  iEtoIians,  xxxii. 
4.  Taken  by  the  Romans,  xxxvi.  14. 
Thanksgiving  of  one  day,  iii.  7.  Two  days,  x.  23.  Three  days, 
xxvii.  51.  Four  days.  xxix.  14.  Five  days,  xxx.  21. 
Thebe  filainy  celebrated  by  Homer,  xxxvii.  19. 
Thebes^  capital  of  Boeotia,  its  ruins,  ix.  18.  It  is  seized  by  T. 
Quintius,  xxxiii.  1,  2.  The  inhabitants  divided  into  two 
parties,  the  stronger  of  w  hich  surrenders  the  city  to  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  xlii.  44. .  The  Romans  again  take  possession  of  it,  63. 
Thebes^  in  Phthiotis,  xxviii.  7.  Retained  by  the  Romans,  in  op¬ 
position  to  the  iEtolians,  xxxiii.  13.  xxxix.  25. 
Testudo^  fence,  formed  of  closed  shields,  x.  29.  43. 
Thensee^  carriages  for  the  images  of  the  gods,  v.  41.  ix.  40. 
Themistus^  son-in-law^  of  Gelon,  accomplice  of  Andranodorus, 
put  to  death,  xxiv.  24.  25. 
Theodotus^  one  of  the  conspirators  against  Hieronymus,  when 
put  to  the  torture,  conceals  his  accomplices,  and  falsely  ac¬ 
cuses  Thraso,  xxiv.  5.  Hastens  with  Sosis  to  Syracuse,  after 
the  death  of  Hieronymus,  21. 
Theogenesy  Macedonian  general,  xliv.  32. 
Theondasy  king  of  Samothrace,  summons  Evander  of  Crete  to 
stand  trial  for  murder,  is  bribed  afterwards  by  Perseus,  xlv.  5. 
TtieoxenUy  daughter  of  Herodicus,  a  Thessalian  chieftain,  her 
extraordinary  afi'ection  for  the  children  of  her  sister  A rcho, 
and  her  courageous  death,  xl.  4. 

INDEX. 

Thermopylx^  streights,  xxviii.  5.  7.  Pylaic  council  held  there, 
xxxiii.  35. 
Thermopylae^  why  so  called,  rendered  memorable  by  the  efforts 
of  the  Lacedaemonians  against  the  Persians,  xxxviii.  15.  De¬ 
feat  of  Antiochus  near  it,  18,  19.  See  42.  and  xlv.  22. 
Thesprotians  assist  Ap.  Claudius  in  Epirus,  xliii.  21. 
Thesprotian  bay  receives  the  river  Acheron,  viii.  24. 
Thesmlian  cavalry^  ix.  19. 
Thessaly^  xxvii  30.  32.  Its  rich  plains  tempt  the  .^tolians, 
xxxi.  41.  It  is  plundered  by  three  armies  at  once,  xxxii.  14, 
15.  Philip  defeated  there  by  T.  Quintius,  xxxiii.  7,  8.  24. 
Thessalians  make  heavy  complaints  against  Philip,  xxxix.  25 
Are  answered  by  him  in  a  menacing  manner,  26.  Raise  in¬ 
surrections  on  account  of  debts,  xlii.  5. 
Thessalonice^  a  congress  held  there,  concerning  Thracian  cities 
seized  by  Philip,  xxxix.  27.  xL  56. 
Thetidium^  xxxiii.  6,  7. 
Thoasy  praetor  of  the  ^tolians,  persuades  them  to  engage  An¬ 
tiochus,  Philip,  and  Nabis,  in  alliance  against  the  Romans, 
XXXV.  12.  Exaggerates  the  power  of  Antiochus,  32.  Dis¬ 
suades  Antiochus  from  employing  Hannibal,  42.  Opposes 
Phaeneas’s  proposal  of  an  accommodation,  45.  Is  required 
to  be  given  up  to  the  Romans,  xxxviii.  38. 
Thrace^  xxxvii.  60.  Invaded  by  the  Gauls,  xxxviii.  16. 
Thracians  attack  the  troops  of  Manlius  on  their  march,  xxxviii. 
40,  41.  46.  Consent  to  give  a  passage  to  the  Bastarnians, 
xl.  57.  On  the  death  of  Philip,  quarrel  with,  and  expel  them, 
58.  Send  ambassadors  to  Rome,  and  form  an  alliance  and 
friendship,  xlii.  19.  Wage  frequent  wars  with  the  Macedo¬ 
nians,  52.  Attack  the  Roman  cavalry  with  extraordinary 
fury,  59.  Send  an  embassy  to  Rome  to  ransom  prisoners, 
and  obtain  them  without  ransom,  xlv.  42.  - 
Thrasippusy  Macedonian,  commander  of  a  chosen  band  of  tar- 
geteers,  xlii.  51. 
Thrasoy  intimate  friend  of  Hieronymus,  King  of  Syracuse,  false¬ 
ly  accused  as  a  conspirator,  and  put  to  death,  xxiv.  5. 
Thrasimency  or  Trasimency  lake,  the  battle  near  it,  xxii.  6,  7. 
xxiv.  13. 
plunderers,  put  to  flight  by  the  Romans,  xxxviii.  41. 
Throniumy  a  conference  held  there  between  Philip  and  Quin¬ 
tius,  xxxii.  36.  XXXV.  37.  xxxvi.  20. 
Thuriaey  or  Thuriiy  ix.  19.  x.  2.  Having  revolted  to  Hannibal, 
returns  to  its  former  friendship  with  Rome,  xxv.  1 .  Revolts 
again  to  Hannibal,  the  Roman  garrison  being  treacherously 
exposed  to  Hannibal’s  stratagem,  1 5. 
ThyatirUy  xxxvii.  8.  21. 
Thymbrisy  river,  xxxviii.  18. 

INDEX. 

7%yriw7»,  xxvi.  11.  Refusing  an  alliance  with  Antiochus,  is 
besieged  by  him,  but  the  siege  is  soon  raised,  12.  A  council 
of  the  Acamanians  held  there,  to  give  audience  to  Roman 
commissioners,  xliii.  17. 
Thunder  being  heard  while  an  assembly  is  held,  vitiates  the 
proceedings,  xxiii.  31. 
Tiberina^  island,  ii.  5. 
Tiberinus^  tenth  king  of  Alba,  i.  3. 
Tiber^  or  Tiberinus  river,  formerly  Albula^  until  King  Tiberi- 
nus  was  drowned  in  it,  i.  3.  Frozen  so  hard,  that  the  navi¬ 
gation  is  stopped,  XV.  13.  Remarkable  floods  in  it,  xxiv.  9. 
XXX.  38.  XXXV.  9.  Two  bridges  and  many  buildings  in  Rome 
destroyed,  21.  The  field  of  Mars,  and  low  parts  of  the  city, 
overflowed  twelve  times  in  one  year,  xxxviii.  28. 
xxii.  12. 
Tiburtians^  war  declared  against  them  by  the  Romans,  vii.  9. , 
who  gain  a  victory  over  them,  1 1 .  They  come  in  the  dead 
of  the  night  to  the  walls  of  Rome,  and  are  defeated,  12. 
Compelled  to  submit  to  the  Romans,  19.  They  support  the 
Pedians,  viiL  12.  Are  conquered  by  L.  Furius,  13.  And 
stripped  of  part  of  their  lands,  14. 
Ticinus^  river,  v.  34. 
Tichiiis^  a  summit  of  Mount  CEta,  xxvi.  16.  13, 
Tifatay  mount,  vii.  29.  xxiii.  36.  xxvi.  5.  xxxii.  7 , 
Tifernurriy  ix.  44.  X.  14.  31. 
Timanovy  Macedonian  general,  xlii.  58. 
Timisicratesy  Rhodian  naval  commander,  xxxvii.  14. 
Timasitheusy  commander  of  the  Liparean  pirates,  protects  the 
Roman  ambassadors,  v.  28. 
Ti?navusy  lake,  xli.  2. 
Timocratesy  governor  of  Gythium,  xxxiv.  29.  40. 
TimoHy  a  person  of  consequence  in  Phthiotic  Thebes,  xxxiii,  5 
Timon  made  governor  of  Lydia  by  Antiochus,  xxxvii.  44. 
Timotheusy  Macedonian  general,  xlii.  67. 
Titiensesy  a  century  of  Roman  knights,  and  an  old  tribe,  i.  1 3 
36.  X.  6. 
L,  Titiniu^y  consular  tribune,  v.  12.  Again,  he  is  unsuccessful 
against  the  Faliscians,  18. 
M,  Titiniusy  plebeian  tribune,  iii.  54. 
M.  TitiniuSy  master  of  horse,  x.  1 . 
M.  Titinius  CurvuSy  praetor,  xl.  59. 
M.  and  C.  Titiniusy  plebeian  tribunes,  oppose  the  suit  of  L.  Cor 
nelius  for  a  triumph,  xxxv.  8. 
P.  Titiniusy  lieutenant-general,  xxxi.  2 1 . 
Toletumy  xxxv.  7.  Taken  by  M.  Fulvius,  22. 
Tvliatoboian  xxxviii.  16.  19. 

INDEX. 

JLars  Tolumnim^  King*  of  the  Veians,  orders  the  Roman  ain- 
bassadors  to  be  slain,  iv.  17.  Is  killed  in  battle  by  Cornelius 
Cossus,  military  tribune,  19. 
Torquatus.  See  Manlius, 
Tor  one  taken  by  Philip,  xxviii.  7.  xliv.  12. 
Torone,^  promontory,  xxxi.  45. 
Tra Ilians,^  Jllyrtan,^  xxvii.  32.  xxxi.  35.  xxxvii.  39.  40. 
Tralles,^  in  Asia,  surrendered  to  the  Romans,  xxxvii.  45.  As 
signed  to  Eumenes,  xxxviii.  39. 
Treasufry,^  ii.  23.  iv.  22.  xxiv.  18.  xxvi.  36. 
M.  Trebellius^'sXui.  21. 
Q.  Trebellius,^  centurion,  claims  the  mural  crown  at  New  Car¬ 
thage,  xxvi.  48. 
Trebia  taken  by  Coriolanus,  ii.  39. 
Trebia^  river,  where  Hannibal  defeats  the  Romans,  xxi.  48. 
Trebius  procures  the  surrender  of  Compsa  to  Hannibal,  xxiii.  I 
C.  Trebonius^  plebeian  tribune,  v.  1 1. 
C.  Trebonius,^  lieutenant-general,  x.  40. 
L,  Trebonius,^  plebeian  tribune,  a  bitter  adversary  to  the  patri¬ 
cians,  thence  surnamed  Asper,  iii.  65. 
M,  Trebonius,^  consular  tribune,  vi,  21. 
Trebonian  /cw,  vi.  11,  12. 
Trebula  stormed  by  Fabius,  xxiii.  39. 
Trebiilans  made  free  of  Rome,  x.  1. 
C.  TremcHius  Flaccus^  ambassador  to  Attalus,  xxix.  11.  Prae¬ 
tor,  XXX.  26. 
C.  Tremeliius^  commissioner  of  lands,  xxii.  4. 
C.  Tremellius  Flaccus^  plebeian  aedile,  xxx.  26. 
Cn,  Tremellius,^  plebeian  tribune,  protests  against  the  censors 
being  continued  in  office,  xlv.  15. 
veteran  soldiers,  ii.  47.  vii.  23.  viii.  S. 
Tribune  of  the  celeres,  i.  59. 
Tribunes,^  military,  on  the  secession  of  the  soldiers,  are  ap¬ 
pointed  by  the  troops,  iii.  5 1 . 
Tribunes,,  military,  as  lirst  appointed  by  the  generals,  after¬ 
wards  in  part  by  the  people,  vii  5.  ix.  30. 
Tribunes^  consular,  three  in  number,  first  elected,  iv.  67,  Four 
elected,  31.  Six  are  elected,  61.  Eight  are  elected,  v.  1. 
All  patricians  during  forty-four  years,  vi.  37.  The  first  ple¬ 
beian,  V.  12. 
Tribunes,^  plebeian,  first  created,  ii,  33.  Their  persons  invio¬ 
lable,  iii.  55.  Magistrates  of  the  commons,  not  of  the  peo¬ 
ple  at  large,  ii.  35.  56.  Ordered  to  be  elected  in  an  assem¬ 
bly  of  the  tribes,  and  three  added  to  their  number,  56.  58, 
The  number  encreased  to  ten,  iii.  30.  The  office  laid  aside 
on  the  creation  of  decemvirs,  32.  Restored,  54.  Two  are 
brought  in  by  choice  of  tlieir  college,  64.  and  v.  10.  This 
mode  of  co-optation  forbidden,  iii.  65.  and  v.  11.  A  pic- 

INDEX. 

beian  tribute  orders  his  beadle  to  seize  a  consul,  ii.  56.  The 
tribunes  threaten  to  imprison  the  consuls,  iv.  26,  Do  the 
same  to  the  consular  tribunes,  v.  9.  Prevent  the  election  of 
curule  magistrates  during  five  years,  vi.  35.  Their  povirer 
confined  within  the  walls  of  the  city,  iii.  20. 
Triccuy  xxxii.  13.  Recovei:ed  from  the  Athamanians,  xxxvi. 
13.  Disputed  by  Philip  and  tlie  Thessalians,  xxxix.  25. 
Tricorian  fieofilCy  xxi.  30. 
Trigemina  gatty  iv.  16.  xxxv.  10.  41.xli.  27. 
Trifiudium  Solistimuniy  when  the  chickens  eat  greedily,  x.  40- 
Trifihylia  restored  to  the  Achaeans  by  Philip,  xxviii.  8.  xxxii.  5. 
TrifioliSy  in  Laconia,  xxxv.  27. 
TrifioliSy  Scea,  in  Perraebia,  xlii.  53.  55.  67. 
Tritonoriy  xxviii.  7. 
Triumfih  of  Tarquinius  Priscus,  the  first  mentioned  by  Livy,  i. 
38. 
Triumfihy  iii.  29.  The  dress  of  generals  in  triumph,  x.  7.  The 
granting  of  a  triumph  belongs  properly  to  the  senate,  iii.  63. 
A  triumph  ordered  by  the  people,  without  the  approbation 
of  the  senate,  iii.  63.  vii.  17.  One  without  an  order  of  either, 
X.  37. 
A  triumjih  not  allowed  to  a  commander,  who  was  not  invested 
with  any  magistracy,  xxviii.  38. 
Triumph  of  Scipio  Africanus,  xxx.  45. 
Trocmiy  one  of  the  three  tribes  of  Gauls  that  migrated  to  Asia, 
xxxviii.  16. 
Trogtlii  harbouvy  xxv.  23. 
Troiliumy  x.  46. 
Tromentine  tribe  added,  vi.  5. 
Trophonian  Jupiter^  his  temple  in  Lebadia,  xlv.  27. 
Troy  taken ;  two  other  places  named  Troy,  i.  1. 
Trojan  district y  i.  1. 
Q.  Tuber Oy  historian,  iv.  23.  x.  9. 
M,  Tmccius,  curule  aedile,  xxxv.  41.  Prsetor,  xxxvi.  45.  Corn* 
missioner  of  a  colony,  xxxix.  23. 
TulUuy  two  of  the  name,  daughters  of  Servius  Tullius,  king, 
i.  46  to  59. 
Man,  TulUusy  consul,  ii,  19. 
Sex.  TulliuSy  chief  centurion  a  seventh  time,  addresses  the  dic¬ 
tator  Sulpicius  on  his  protracting  the  war,  vii.  13.  Shows 
extraordinary  bravery  in  battle,  16. 
Tullianumy  prison,  xxix.  22. 
Tumulty  Gallic,  vii.  9. 
TuneSy  a  strong  city,  fifteen  miles  distant  from  Carthage,  taken 
by  Scipio,  xxx.  9.  16. 
Turdetansy  or  Turduliansy  a  restless  people  in  Spain,  xxi.  6 
Are  entirely  subdued  by  the  Romans,  sold  by  auction,  and 

iNDliX. 

their  city  rased,  xxiv.  42.  Their  lands  tributary  to  Sagun- 
turn,  xxviii.  39.  They  are  defeated  by  P.  Manlius,  xxxiv.  17. 
19. 
Turniis^  King  of  the  Rutulians,  i,  2. 
Tuscans,  See  Etrurians, 
Tuscan  sca,^  v.  33.  xxvi.  19. 
Tuscan  street^  in  Rome,  ii.  14.  xxvii.  39. 
Tusculum^  ii.  15,  16.  Taken  by  the  Latines,  and  recovered,  vj. 
33.  Shuts  its  gates  against  Hannibal,  xxvi.  9.  Its  hills,  iii. 
7,  8.  Citadel,  23.  and  vi.  33. 
Tusculans  send  succours  to  Rome,  iii.  18.  War  declared  against 
them  by  the  Romans,  which  they  avoid  by  peaceable  demean¬ 
our,  obtain  peace,  and  privileges  of  Roman  citizens,  vi.  25, 
26.  viii.  14.  37. 
Tutia^  river,  xxvi.  1 1 . 
Tychuy  part  of  Syracuse,  xxiv.  21.  xxv.  25. 
XXXV iii.  18. 
Tyndarium^  xxxvi.  2. 
Tyrrheum,,  or  Thyrium^  xxxvi.  11.  xxxviii.  9. 
Tyrus,^  xxxiii.  48,  49.xxxiv.  61. 
U  and  V 
VaccBsans,^  people,  Spanish,  conquered  by  Hannibal,  xxi.  5. 
Defeated  by  M.  Fulvius,  xxxv.  7.  xl.  47.  50. 
Taccifirata^  viii.  19.  See  Vitruvius. 
Vadimon  iake^  a  furious  battle  fought  there  by  the  Romans  and 
Etrurians,  ix.  39. 
Valerius  Antias^  historian,  iii,  5.  Regardless  of  tmth,  xxvi.  49^ 
Quoted,  xxv.  39.  xxix.  35.xxx.  19.  29,  &c. 
Valerius  Flaccus,,  military  tribune,  xxv.  14.  xxxix.  4. 
C,  Valerius^  consular  tribune,  vi.  36. 
C.  Fa/eriw^,  consul,  viii.  18. 
C\  Valerius  Potitus,^  consular  tribune,  iv.  49.  Consul,  53.  Con- 
sular  tribune  a  second  time,  57.  A  third  time,  61. 
C.  Valerius  Flaccus  made  fiamen  of  Jupiter  against  his  will,  as¬ 
sumes  a  seat  in  the  senate,  xxvii,  8.  Made  curule  aedile,  he 
cannot  take  the  requisite  oath,  xxxi.  50. 
C.  Valerius  Tafifius^  plebeian  tribune,  xxxviii.  36. 
L,  Valerius,^  quaestor,  accuses  Spurius  Cassius  of  treason,  ii,  41. 
Is  made  consul,  42.  Again,  61.  Wages  war  with  the 
iEquans,  62. 
L,  Valerius^  interrex,  v.  1 7. 
L.  Valerius^  deputed  to  carry  to  Delphi  an  offering  to  Apollo,  is 
taken  by  pirates,  and  set  at  liberty,  v.  28. 
L,  Fa/erins,  master  of  horse,  viii.  18. 

INDEX, 

X.  ra/eriwff,  i^o/i/ico/a,  consular  tribune,  V.  26.  A  second  time, 
vi.  1.  A  third  time,  5.  A  fourth,  21.  A  fifth,  27. 
X.  r alerius  Potitus  commences  an  opposition  to  the  decemvirs, 
iii.  39.  41.  With  M.  Horatius  drives  Appius  out  of  the  Fo¬ 
rum,  49.  Is  deputed  by  thfe  senate  to  the  commissioners,  50. 
53.  Made  consul,  he  procures  laws  in  favour  of  the  commis¬ 
sioners,  55.  His  conduct  in  war,  60,  61.  He  triumphs  by 
order  of  the  people,  without  consent  of  the  senate,  63.  Re¬ 
fuses  to  be  continued  in  office,  64.  See  iv.  6. 
X.  Valerius  Potitus^  consular  tribune,  iv.  49.  A  second  time, 
58.  A  third,  v.  1.  A  fourth,  10.  A  fifth,  14.  Consul,  he 
defeats  the  ^Equans,  and  triumphs,  3 1 . 
i.  Valerius  Potitus^  interrex,  v.  32.  Again,  vi.  5. 
JL.  Valerius^  pontiff,  xxxiii.  44. 
i.  Valerius  Placcus^  curule  aedile,  xxxi.  4.  Praetor,  49.  Con¬ 
sul,  xxxiii.  42.  Defeats  the  Boians,  xxxiv.  21.  Proconsul, 
he  entirely  vanquishes  the  Boians,  and  Insubrians,  46. 
X.  Valerius  Flaccus^  with  L.  Valerius  Tap  pus,  commissioners 
of  colonies,  xxxvii.  46.  57.  Candidate  for  the  consulship,  58. 
X.  Valerius  Flaccus  chosen  censor  with  Cato,  in  opposition  to 
the  nobility,  xxxix.  41.  Pontiff;  dies  of  the  plague,  xl.  42. 
X.  Valerius  Tafipus^  praetor,  xxxv.  10.  Commissioner  of  co¬ 
lonies,  xxxvii.  46. 
M,  Valerius y  herald,  ratifies  a  treaty  in  form,  i.  24. 
Man,  Valerius^  brother  of  Popiicola,  consul,  triumphs  over  the 
Sabines,  ii.  16.  Is  slain  at  Regillus  in  attempting  to  kill  Tar- 
quinius,  20. 
Man.  Valerius,^  not  the  first  dictator,  ii.  1 8. 
Man,  Valerius.^  son  of  Volesus,  dictator,  ii.  30.  Triumphs  over 
the  Sabines,  and,  not  being  suffered  to  fulfil  the  hopes  that  he 
had  given  to  the  commissioners,  abdicates,  3 1 . 
Man.  quaestor,  iii  25.  Consul,  31. 
Man.  Valerius^  military  tribune,  gains  the  surname  of  Corvus, 
from  being  aided  by  a  crow  in  a  single  combat  with  a  Gaul, 
and  is  made  consul  at  twenty-three  years  of  age,  vii.  26.  A 
second  time  consul,  he  triumphs  over  the  Volscians,  27.  A 
third  time  consul,  28.  Is  beloved  by  the  soldiers,  33.  Tri¬ 
umphs  over  the  Samnites,  38.  Dictator,  39.  Composes  a 
mutiny  of  the  troops,  40,  41.  A  fourth  time  consul,  he  tri¬ 
umphs  over  the  Ausonians,  viii.  16.  Interrex,  17. ;  and  ix.  7. 
Dictator  a  second  time,  x.  3.  Triumphs,  5.  Consul  a  fifth 
time,  6,  A  sixth  time,  1 1 . 
ilX  Ta/erxMfi  consular  tribune,  V.  14.  Again,  24. 
M.  Valerius  Maximus.^  ix.  28.  Lieutenant-general,  40.  Prae¬ 
tor  a  fourth  time,  41. 
M.  Valerius  Pofilicola^  master  of  horse,  vii.  12.  Consul,  17 
Again,  19. 
VOL.  VI. — [OJ 

l^EX. 

Man,  Valerius  Falto^  ambassador  to  Attalus,  xxix.  11.  Carule 
aedile,  xxx.  26.  Praetor,  40. 
M.  Valerius  L^inusj  pTaetor,  xxiii.  24.  30,  31.  37.  Propraetor, 
he  guards  the  coast  at  Brundusium,  xxiv.  10.  His  exploits 
in  Greece  during  the  Macedoman  war,  40.  and  xxvi.  24.  26. 
He  is  chosen  consul  in  his  absence,  22.  Exchanges  provinces 
with  Marcelius,  29.  Persuades  the  senators  to  contribute 
their  gold,  silver,  and  money  to  the  treasury,  36.  Drives  the 
Carthaginians  quite  out  of  Sicily,  40.  Disputes  with  the 
senate  about  the  nomination  of  a  dictator,  xxvii.  5.  Procon¬ 
sul,  he  passes  from  Sicily  into  Africa,  xxviii.  4.  Is  sent  am¬ 
bassador  to  Attains,  xxix.  11.  Proposes  restitution  of  the 
money  contributed  by  private  citizens,  16.  Remarkable  fune¬ 
ral  games  are  exhibited  in  honour  of  him  by  his  sons,*  xxxi. 
50. 
M.  Valerius  Messala,^  admiral,  sails  to  Africa,  and  ravages  the 
coast,  xxvii  5.  Is  made  praetor,  xxxiv.  54.  Consul,  xxxvii. 
47.  A  second  time,  xxxviii.  35.  Pontiff,  xlii.  28. 
P,  Valerius^  son  of  Volesus,  accompanies  Collatinus  to  Lucre- 
tia,  i.  58.  Swears  after  Brutus,  59.  Is  made  consul  in  the 
place  of  Collatinus,  ii.  2.  Overcomes  the  Tarquinii  in  battle, 
6.  Is  accused  of  aiming  at  sovereignty,  clears  himself,  com¬ 
pliments  the  people,  and  is  sumamed  Publicola ;  is  also  made 
consul,  8.  A  third  time,  15.  A  fouttli,  he  defeats  the  Sa¬ 
bines,  triumphs,  and  dies  so  poor,  as  not  to  leave  sufficient 
money  for  his  funeral,  16. 
P,  Valerius^  consul,  ii.  52. 
P,  Valerius  Potitusy  consular  tribune,  vi.  6.  A  second  time,  1 8. 
A  third,  27.  A  fourth,  32.  A  fifth,  36.  A  sixth,  42. 
P.  Valerius  Publicola^  interrex,  iii.  8.  Consul,  15.  Attempts 
to  recover  the  Capitol  from  Herdonius,  and  is  slain,  18. 
P.  Valerius  Publicola^  consul,  vii.  21.  Praetor,  23.  Dictator, 
28.  Master  of  horse,  viii.  17. 
P.  Valerius  Flaccus^  ambassador  to  Hannibal,  xxi.  6.  Lieu¬ 
tenant-general  under  Marcelius,  xxiii,  16-  Commander  of 
the  fleet,  34.  38-  See  xxvi.  8. 
T,  Valerius^  lieutenant-general,  xxiv.  40. 
Vatican  lands^  X.  26. 
Vesiliusy  mount,  iii.  50. 
VettoTiea  defeated  by  M.  Fulvius,  xxxv.  7.  A  second  time,  22. 
Veians  make  incursions  on  the  Roman  territories,  and  are  rout¬ 
ed  by  Romulus,  i.  15.  Again,  by  Tulius,  27.  See  30.  42. 
They  assist  Tarquinius,  ii.  6.  Waste  the  lands  of  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  43.  Challenge  the  Romans  to  battle,  45.  Are  defeat¬ 
ed,  46,  47.  After  cutting  off  the  Fabii,  50.  Are  vanquished 
by  the  Romans,  51.  Are  defeated  again,  53.  They  kiU 
the  ambassadoi*s  sent  from  Rorne^  and  renew  the  war  with 

INDEX. 

bad  success,  iv.  17,  18,  19.  Force  the  Romans  to  retire,  31.; 
but  are  afterwards  routed,  33.  Obtain  a  truce  of  twenty 
years,  35.  Their  senate  g^ves  a  haughty  answer  to  Roman 
ambassadors,  58. ;  on  which  the  Romans  declare  war, 
The  Veians  elect  a  king,  which  disgusts  the  Etruiians,  v.  1. 
Veii  is  besieged  by  the  Romans,  iv.  61.  A  winter  encampment 
before  it,  v.  2.  Transactions  of  the  siege,  7  to  21.;  when  it 
is  taken  by  Camillus  after  a  siege  of  ten  years,  22.  A  design 
formed  at  Rome  of  removing  to  Veii  causes  great  commo¬ 
tions,  24,  25.  29. ;  is  laid  aside,  30.  The  relics  of  the  light 
at  Cannae  fly  to  Veii,  37.  Camillus  marches  thence  to  reco¬ 
ver  Rome,  46.  48.  The  proposal  of  removing  to  Veii  is  rer 
newed,  49,  50. ;  rejected,  55.  Such  as  had  gone  thither  are 
recalled,  vi.  4.  A  tenth  part  of  the  spoils  of  Veii  vowed  to 
Apollo  by  Camillus,  v.  21.  See  23.  25.  28. 
Veian  lands  are  divided  among  the  commons  of  Rome,  v.  30. 
Velabrumy  a  street  in  Rome,  xxvii.  37. 
Velia^  a  city  in  Lucania,  xxvi.  39. 
Velia^  a  district  in  Rome,  ii.  7. 
Velitrm^iu  30.  A  colony  3l.  Augmented,  34. 
Velitrans  revolt,  vi.  13.  21.  Are  subdued,  22.  29.  Attack  Tus- 
culum,  and  are  invested  by  the  Romans,  36  to  42.  Plunder 
the  Roman  territory,  vii.  15.  Revolt  again,  viii.  3.  12.  Are 
treated  with  severity  on  account  of  their  many  revolts,  and 
banished  beyond  the  Tiber,  14, 
Veneti^  in  Italy,  descended  from  the  Heneti  and  Trojans,  i.  1 .. 
Live  round  the  bottom  of  the  Adriatic  gulph,  v.  33.  x.  2. 
Venus^  i.  1.  Her  temple,  near  the  Circus,  built  out  of  lines 
levied  for  breach  of  chastity,  jt.  31. 
Venus  Cloacina^  iii.  48. 
>  Erycina^  xxii.  9.  xxiii.  30,  31.  xxx.  38. 
Venusians  give  a  hospitable  reception  to  the  fugitives  from 
Cannae,  xxii.  54.  Maintain  their  loyalty  to  the  Romans  dur¬ 
ing  a  general  defection,  xx vii.  10. 
Verag^rians^  an  Alpine  tribe,  xxi.  38. 
FJ?r^a?,xxx.  19. 
Vercellius  beheaded  for  promoting  a  revolt  of  the  Hirpinians, 
xxiii.  37. 
Vergium^  a  fort  in  Spain,  a  receptacle  of  robbers,  is  taken  by 
Cato  ;  the  robbers  are  put  to  death,  and  the  guilty  part  of  the 
inhabitants  sold,  xxxiv.  21. 
constellation,  xxi.  35. 
Vermina^  son  of  Syphax,  forces  Masinissa  to  fly,  xxix.  ^3. 
Brings  succours  to  the  Carthaginians,  xxx.  36.  Sends  am¬ 
bassadors  to  Rome,  xxxi.  11.  Submits  the  conditions  of 
peace  to  the  Romans,  19 
Verona^  v.  35, 

INDEX. 

Verrugo^  iv,  1.  55,  56.  v.  28. 
Verses^  Fcscennine^xii.  2. 
Feruiansj  ix.  42.  Prefer  their  own  laws  to  the  rights  of  Romaa 
citizens,  43.  Vertumnus,  his  statue,  xliv.  16. 
Vescelia,  xxxv.  22. 
Fescioy  viii.  1 1 .  Comes  into  the  hands  of  the  Romans,  ix.  25. 
Fescian  fieofile^  x.  20. 
- lands^  xxi.  31. 
Feserisy  river,  viii.  8.  x,  28. 
Festaj  a  couch  for  her  at  a  feast  of  the  gods,  xxii.  10.  The  fatal 
pledge  of  the  Roman  empire  is  kept  in  her  temple,  which  is 
saved  by  some  slaves  from  being  burnt,  xxvi.  27.  Her  fire  is 
extinguished,  xxviii.  11. 
Festal^  Rhea  Sylvia,  mother  of  Romulus,  is  made  one,  i.  3,  4. 
Fe&tal  Firginsy  chosen  by  Numa,  have  a  stipend  appointed,  and 
many  privileges  are  conferred  on  them,  i.  20. 
Festal  Virgins^  with  the  sacred  stores,  are  carried  to  Caere  by 
L.  Albinius,  v.  40. 
A  Festal  accused  is  dismissed,  with  a  charge  to  be  more  serious 
in  conversation,  and  more  grave  in  her  dress,  iv.  44. 
A  Festal^  convicted  of  a  breach  of  chastity,  is  buried  alive,  viii. 
15. 
A  Festal^  who  had  the  charge  of  the  sacred  fire,  when  it  was 
extinguished,  is  scourged  to  death,  xxviii.  11.  Of  two  ves¬ 
tals  found  guilty  of  incontinence,  one  is  buried  alive  at  the 
Colline  gate,  the  other  kills  herself,  xxii.  57. 
Festia  Ofifiia^  a  woman  of  Atellae,  who  had  offered  daily  sacri¬ 
fices  for  the  prosperity  of  the  Romans,  is  restored  to  her 
liberty  and  property,  xxvi.  33,  34. 
Fesriaws  join  the  Samnites,  are  routed  and  dispersed,  viii.  29. 
An  alliance  is  granted  on  their  petition,  x.  3. 
Fesuviusy  mount,  viii.  8. 
FettianSj  a  warlike  people,  adjoining  Macedonia,  xlv.  50. 
Feturia^  mother  of  Coriolanus,  prevails  on  him  to  retire  from 
Rome,  ii.  40. 
Feturian  century^  xxvi.  22. 
C.  Feturius^  consul,  is  charged  with  misconduct,  iii.  31.  Is 
made  an  augur,  32. 
C.  Feturius^  consular  tribune,  vi.  32.  Again,  36. 
L.  Feturius^  decemvir,  iii.  35. 
i.  Feturms^  consular  tribune,  vi.  38. 
L.  Feturius  Philo^  dictator,  to  hold  elections,  xxii.  33.  Cen¬ 
sor,  xxvii.  6. 
L,  Feturius  Philo ^  curule  aedile,  xxvii.  6.  Praetor,  7.  Proprae¬ 
tor  in  Gaul,  22.  Lieutenant-general,  xxviii.  9.  Consul,  10 
Master  pf  horse,  xxix.  11.  Is  sent  home  from  Africa,^nd 
recounts  the  exploits  of  Scipio,  xxx.  38.  40, 

IN£)EX. 

M.  Feturius^  consular  tribune,  v.  1 3. 
T,  Feturius  Philo^  flamen  of  Mars,  xxix.  38. 
T,  Feturitia  Calvinus^  consul,  viii.  16.  Again,  ix.  1.  Is  sent 
under  the  yoke  of  Caudium,  6.  Offered,  as  prisoner  to  the 
Sabines,  10. 
T.  Feturius  Geminus^  consul,  routes  and  disperses  the  Volscians, 
iii.  8.  Is  honoured  with  an  ovation,  10. 
C.  Fetusius^  consul,  ii.  19. 
T.  Fetusiusy  consul,  ii.  28.  Marches  against  the  .Squans,  30. 
Ufensy  river,  v.  35. 
Ufentine  tribe  added,  ix.  20. 
Vffugum  revolts  from  the  Carthaginians  to  the  Romans,  xxx. 
19. 
Fibius  Accuseusy  praefectof  aPelignian  cohort,  throws  the  stand¬ 
ard  into  the  enemy's  camp,  xxv.  14. 
Fibius  Firiusy  one  of  the  Campanian  ambassadors  to  the  consul 
Varro,  persuades  his  countrymen  to  join  the  Carthaginians, 
xxiii.  6.  Exhorts  the  senators  to  put  an  end  to  their  lives, 
xxvi.  13.  He  and  twenty-seven  senators  swallow  poison,  14. 
Fibiusy  a  Bruttian  of  distinction,  comes  ambassador  to  Rome 
with  offers  of  submission,  xxvii.  15.  , 
VibOy  xxxi.  3.  A  colony  settled  there,  xxxv.  40.  Its  lands, 
xxi.  51. 
Ftcsefiotay  or  Fictoryy  her  temple,  ii.  7. 
Ficilinusy  Jufiitevy  xxiv.  44. 
Fictimsy  of  the  larger  kinds,  xxx.  21. 
Fictory^  her  temple,  built  with  money  accruing  from  fines,  x.  33. 
Her  temple  on  the  Palatine,  xxix.  14.  A  chapel  of  Virgin 
Victory,  xxxv.  9.  A  golden  image  of  Victory,  weighing, 
three  hundred  and  twenty  pounds,  sent  by  Hiero  to  the  Roman 
senate,  xxii.  37.  Mount  of  Victory,  xxiv.  41. 
Q.  FictoTxuHy  chief  centgrion,  throws  a  standard  among  the  ene¬ 
my,  xxxiv.  46. 
FictumvisBy  sea-port,  xxi.  45.  Is  taken  with  great  slaughter  oi 
the  inhabitants,  57. 
Filla  fiublicuy  house  for  lodging  ambassadors,  and  strangers  of 
note,  built,  iv.  22.  Repaired,  xxxiv.  44. 
L,  Fillius  Tafipulusy  plebeian  aedile,  xxv.  2. 
X.  Fillius  Tappulusy  praetor,  xxxi.  49. 
P.  Fillius y  plebeian  tribune,  iii.  54. 
P,  Fillius  Tappulus  is  raised  from  the  office  of  plebeian  aedile 
to  that  of  praetor,  xxix.  38. 
P,  Filliusy  a  commissioner  to  adjust  a  dispute  between  Antio- 
chus  and  Ptolemy,  xxxiii.  39. 
P.  Fillius  Tappulusy  commissioner  of  lands  for  Scipio's  soldiers4 
xxxi.  4.  Consul,  49. 
Fiminal  hill  added  to  Rome,  i.  44 

INDEX 

Vindicius^  slave,  discovers  a  conspiracy  formed  for  restoring 
the  Tarquinii,  ii.  4.  Is  rewarded  with  liberty,  and  a  sum  of 
money,  5. 
Virbian  hilly  i.  48. 
Virginia^  daughter  of  Aulius,  a  patrician,  married  to  Volum- 
nius,  a  plebeian  consul,  being  excluded  from  the  temple  of 
Patrician  Chastity,  dedicates  a  chapel  and  altar  to  Plebeian 
Chastity,  x.  23. 
Virginia^  daughter  of  Lucius,  her  unfortunate  beauty,  lament' 
a.ble  death,  and  the  punishment  of  her  persecutors,  iii,  44- 
48.  58. 
Firginiusy  consul,  ii.  28.  Routes  the  Volscians,  30. 
Virginiusy  son  of  Appius,  consul,  ii.  63. 
A,  Firginius  RuiiluSy  consul,  ii.  51. 
A.  Firginiusy  commissioner  of  lands,  iii.  1. 
A.  Firginiusy  plebeian  tribune,  commences  a  capital  prosecu- 
tion  against  Cseso  Quintius,  which  causes  violent  contentions, 
iii.  11.  13. 
A,  Firginius  is  brought  to  trial  and  fined,  for  having,  in  his  tri- 
buneship,  favoured  the  senate,  v.  29. 
L,  Firginiusy  father  of  Virginia,  chief  centurion,  iii.  44.  His 
contest  with  Appius  about  his  daughter,  47.  He  kills  her,  48. 
Commotions  in  consequence,  49,  50.  He  advises  the  soldiers 
to  elect  ten  military  tribunes,  and  refuses  to  be  one,  51.  Is 
made  plebeian  tribune,  54.  Prosecutes  Appius,  56. ;  and  or¬ 
ders  him  to  be  imprisoned,  57  Remits  the  capital  punish¬ 
ment  of  Claudius,  who  had  claimed  Virginia,  58. 
X,  Firginiusy  consul,  iv.  21.  Again,  23. 
i.  Virginiusy  consular  tribune,  out  of  enmity  neglects  assisting 
his  colleague  Servius,  v.  8.  Both  are  compelled  to  resign 
the  office,  9.  He  is  brought  to  trial  by  a  plebeian  tribune, 
and  fined,  11,12.  ^ 
X.  FirginiuSy  consular  tribune,  vi.  1 . 
Ofiiter  Firginiusy  consul,  with  his  colleague,  takes  Pometia,  and 
triumphs,  ii.  17. 
Ofiiter  FirginiuSy  consul,  ii.  54. 
Pro  cuius  FirginiuSy  consul,  maintains  a  contest  with  his  col¬ 
league  about  the  Agrarian  law,  ii.  41. 
Sft,  FirginiuSy  consul,  iii.  31. 
T,  Virginiusy  consul,  ii.  21.  48. 
T,  Firginius  RutiluSy  augur,  iii.  7. 
T,  Firginius  Cseiimontanusy  consul,  iii.  65. 
Virtucy  her  temple  vowed  by  Marcellus,  xxvii.  2  5.  Dedicated 
by  his  son,  xxix.  II. 
FisceratiOy  distribution  of  flesh,  viii.  22. 
Vitellia  taken  by  Coriolanus,  ii.  39.  A  Roman  colony  taken 
by  the  ^qiians,  v.  29 

INDEX. 

Vitellh^  brothers,  conspirators  in  favour  of  the  Tarquinii,  ii.  4. 
Vitruvius  Faccus,  of  Fundae,  general  of  the  Privemians,  viii.  19. 
Is  scourged,  and  put  to  death  by  the  Romans,  his  house  rased, 
and  his  property  confiscated  to  Semo  Sanchus,  20.  The  site 
of  his  house  on  the  Palatine  is  called  V  acciprata. 
Ulysses  said  to  be  the  progenitor  of  Octavius  Mamilius,  i.  49. 
Umbria^  x.  1.  Part  of  it  called  the  Materine  tract,  ix.  4.. 
Another  part  the  Sappinian  tribe,  xxi.  2.  xxiL  9.  xxvii.  43. 
Umbrians  are  driven  out  of  their  country  by  the  Boians,  v.  35. 
They,  and  the  Etrurians,  are  defeated  by  the  Romans  at  the 
Ciminian  forest,  ix.  37.  Utterly  overthrown,  39.  They  boast 
that  they  will  attack  Rome,  are  vanquished,  and  compelled  to 
give  up  the  advisers  of  their  revolt,  41.  They  join  the  Etru¬ 
rians,  Samnites,  and  Gauls,  against  the  Romans,  x.  21.  27. 
Vocontiansy  xxi.  31. 
VoleBy  or  BolXy  belonging  to  the  ^Equans,  iv.  49.  51.  vi.  2. 
VolatenaSy  x.  12.  The  inhabitants  promise  Scipio  rigging  for 
his  ships,  and  com,  xxviii.  45. 
Fb/cflw#  oppose  Hannibal’s  passing  of  the  Rhone,  xxi.  26. 
Yolero,  See  Publilius,  The  tribunes  called  V oleros  by  Appiu?^ 
Claudius,  ii.  58. 
Volonesy  slaves  enlisted  in  the  armies,  xxii.  57.  xxiii.  32.  xxiv 
11.  Gracchus  promises  them  liberty,  on  condition  of  their 
bringing  the  heads  of  the  enemies,  xxiv.  14.  They  are  set 
free,  15.  Gracchus  orders  their  public  feast,  at  Beneventum, 
to  be  represented  in  painting ;  hangs  up  the  picture  in  the 
temple  of  Liberty,  16.  xxv.  20.  xxvii.  38.  xxviii.  46. 
Volscians  are  attacked  by  Tarquinius  Superbus,  i.  53.  Corn  is 
purchased  from  them,  ii.  9.  They  prepare  to  assist  the  La- 
tines,  but  give  hostages,  yet  secretly  prepare  for  war,  22. ; 
and  march  to  attack  Rome,  24.  Are  defeated,  25.  Renew 
the  war,  and  are  conquered,  30.  Deprived  of  part  of  their 
lands,  31.  Again  defeated,  33.  Are  ordered  to  quit  Rome, 
37.  At  the  instigation  of  Attius  Tullus  they  take  arms  against 
the  Romans,  xxxviii.  39.  Are  led  to  Rome  by  Coriolanus,  40. 
Are  conquered,  and  treated  with  the  harshest  severity,  53. 
A  truce  of  forty  years  is  granted  to  them,  54.  They  renew 
hostilities,  58.  Defeat  the  Romans,  59.  Attack  their  camp, 
and  are  severely  beaten,  64,  65.  They  invade  the  Roman 
territory,  are  utterly  routed,  and  the  nation  is  almost  extir¬ 
pated,  iii.  7,  8.  They  renew  the  war  in  conjunction  with  the 
jEquans,  10.  Are  vanquished,  12.  60.  They  lay  siege  to 
Ardea,  and  are  surrounded  by  the  Romans,  iv.  9.  Beaten, 
and  sent  under  the  yoke,  10.  They  again  join  the  ^Equans 
against  the  Romans,  26.  Attack  the  consul’s  camp,  27., 
Their  own  camp  is  taken,  and  all  the  prisoners,  except  sena¬ 
tors,  are  sold  as  slaves,  29.  Again  they  renew  hostilities,  37, 

INDEX. 

55,  56.  Suffer  a  defeat,  57.  Take  Venug^,  58.  Are  again 
worsted  in  battle,  61.  They  besiege  Anxur,  v.  16.  Obtain 
peace,  23.  Break  the  peace,  £md  are  reduced  to  submission 
by  Camillus,  vi,  2.  Meet  the  same  fate  in  two  subsequent 
efforts,  6.  8. 1 1.  13.  Join  the  Praenestines,  and  take  Satricum, 
22.  Suffer  several  discomfitures,  23.  32.  vii.  17.  viii.  1.  They 
desert  Hannibal,  and  submit  to  the  Romans,  xxvii.  15, 
Volscians  and  JE.quans^  so  often  conquered,  still  found  recruits 
for  their  armies;  this  is  accounted  for,  vi.  12. 
Volscians^  people  in  Spain,  their  much-approved  answer  to  the 
Roman  ambassadors,  xxi.  19. 
Af.  Volscius  Fictor  appears  as  a  witness  against  Caeso  Quintius, 
iii.  13.  Is  prosecuted  for  false  evidence  by  the  quaestors,  24. 
Condemned  and  banished,  29. 
Volsinians  make  inroads  on  the  Roman  territory,  v.  31  Are 
defeated,  and  obtain  a  truce  of  twenty  years,  32.  They  use 
nails,  fixed  in  the  temple  of  the  goddess  Nortia,  as  a  registry 
of  the  years,  vii.  3.  They  suffer  several  defeats,  ix.  41.  x.  37. 
Voltumna^  goddess,  her  temple,  iv.  23.  v.  17.  A  general  assem¬ 
bly  of  Etruria  is  summoned  thither,  iv.  23.  25.  v.  17.  A  con¬ 
spiracy  against  the  Romans  is  formed  there,  vi.  2. 
Volumnia^  wife  of  Coriolanus,  ii.  40. 
L,  Volumniua^  consul,  gets  the  better  of  the  Sallentines,  ix.  42. 
A  second  time  consul,  x.  15.  He  leaves  his  own  province  to 
succour  Appius  Claudius,  and,  after  some  altercation,  they 
gain  a  glorious  victory,  18,  19.  He  surprises  the  Samnites 
who  had  plundered  Campania,  20,  21.  Shows  remarkable 
moderation  and  prudence  at  the  elections,  21.  Is  continued 
in  command,  22. ;  and  acts  with  success  in  Samnium,  30,  31. 
P.  Volumnius^  consul,  iii.  10.  Ambassador  to  the  ^Equans,  he 
is  insulted  by  their  leader,  Gracchus  Cloelius,  25. 
Voluntary  contribution  to  the  treasury  by  the  senators,  xxvi.  36. 
Volunteer  soldiers^  v.  16.  xxvii.  46.  xxviii.  45.  xxix.  1.,  See. 
Volustana^  summit  of  the  Cambunian  mountains,  xliv.  2. 
Urbicua  taken  by  Fulvius  with  great  difficulty,  xl.  16. 
Urites^  people,  furnish  ships  to  the  Romans,  for  the  Macedonian 
war,  xUi.  48. 
Uscanuy  in  Illyria,  where  Appius  Claudius  is  ensnared  by  the 
garrison,  and  suffers  severely,  xliii.  10.  It  is  taken  by  Per¬ 
seus  after  an  obstinate  defence,  18.  Perseus,  in  violation  of 
the  capitulation,  sells  the  natives,  and  confines  the  Romans,  19 
Usurers  fined,  vii.  28.  x.  23.  Their  practices,  viii.  28. 
Utens^  river.  See  Ufens. 
Utica^  its  lands  ravaged  by  Otacilius,  xxv.  31.  Again  wasted, 
xxvii.  5.  Again  by  Valerius  Laevinus,  xxviii.  4.  Scipio  en¬ 
camps  ilfear  it,  xxix.  28.  Lays  siege  to  it,  and  retires,  35 

INDEX. 
Besieges  it  again,  xxx.  3.  5.  8.  His  fleet  is  attacked  by  the 
Carthaginians,  9,  10. 
P’ulcaTiy  the  arms  and  spoils  of  the  enemy  dedicated  to  him,  and 
burned,  i.  37.  viii.  10.  His  temple  in  the  field  of  Mars,  xxiv. 
10.  Arms  of  the  Carthaginians  offered  to  him  by  Scipio, 
XXX.  6.  Court  of  his  temple,  ix.  46.xxxix.  46.  xl.  19. 
Vulcan^s  w/and«,xxi.  49.  51. 
Vultumus^  river,  viii.  11.x.  20.  31.  xxii.  14.  xxiii.  14.  19.  Fort 
at  its  mouth,  afterwards  a  city,  xxv.  20.  22. 
Vultumus^  a  city  of  the  Etrurians,  seized  by  the  Samnites,  and 
called  Capua,  iv.  57. 
Vulturnus  wind  blows  dust  into  the  eyes  of  the  Romans  at  Can¬ 
nae,  xxii.  46. 

W 
WalUhviWX.  round  Rome,  i.  6.  33.  36.  44,  vi.  S3. 
War^  the  mode  of  declaring  it,  i.  32. 
Water  brought  into  the  city,  ix.  29. 
Waters  of  Cumee^  medicinal,  xli.  16.  Those  of  Sinuessa  much 
celebrated,  xxii.  13. 
Watches^  the  night  divided  into  four  ;  the  first,  v.  44.  Second, 
vii.  35.  Third,  ix.  44.  Fourth,  ix.  37. 
jnounted  by  senators,  iii.  6. 
Watches  posted  in  all  the  streets  of  Rome,  x.  4. 
Wicked  street^  i.  48. 
■'  ■  fields  viii.  15. 
Widows^  their  taxes  assigned  to  the  maintenance  of  horses  foi' 
the  knights,  i.  43.  Their  money  lent  to  the  public,  xxiv,  IR- 
Wine  for  sacrifices  supplied  by  the  public,  x.  33 
Wine  allured  the  Gauls  into  Italy,  v,  33. 
Winter  campaign  at  Veii,  v.  2. 
Winter,  uncommonly  severe,  v.  13 
Wood,  the  Arsian,  ii,  7. 
- Ciminian,  ix.  36. 
- Maesian,  i.  33. 
- Malitions,  i.  30. 
- Litana,  xxiii.  24. 
Writers  quoted  by  Livy 
Acilius’s  Annals,  xxv.  39, 
Cincius,  vii.  3. 
Claudius  Quadrigarius,  viii.  u- 
Clodius  Licinius,  xxix.  22 
Licinius  Macer,  iv.  *" 
Piso,  i.  55. 
Silenus,  xxvi.  49 
Tubero,  iv,  ?  > 
VOL,  VI  — rp ' 

INDEX, 

Valerius  Anlias,  iii.  5. 
Linen  books,  iv.  7. 
Books  of  the  magistrates,  iv.  20. 
Commentaries  of  the  pontiffs,  vi.  1.  See  iv.  3. 
said  to  have  suckled  Romulus  and  Remus,  i.  4.  Imageti 
of  the  wolf  and  infants,  x.  23. 
Wol^  sacred  to  Mars,  x.  27. 

X 
Xanthipfius^  Lacedaemonian  general,  xxviii.  43. 
Xenarchus^  praetor  of  the  Achaeans,  wishes  to  ingratiate  himself 
with  Perseus,  xli,  23. 
Xenaclides^  governor  of  Chalcis,  disappoints  an  attempt  of  Thoas 
and  the  ^tolians,  xxxv.  38.  Reinforces  the  garrison  of 
Chalcis,  50. 
Xenophanes^  head  of  an  embassy  from  Philip  to  Hannibal,  is  ta¬ 
ken  by  a  party  of  Romans,  and  escapes  through  an  artful  fic¬ 
tion,  xxiii.  3.  Is  taken  again,  and  conveyed  to  Rome,  xxxiv. 
38. 
Xenophon^  Achaean  chief,  accompanies  Quintius  at  a  conference 
with  Philip,  xxxii.  33. 
Xyniae^  xxxii.  13.  xxxiii.  3. 
Xychus^  accomplice  of  Perseus  in  compassing  the  ruin  of  De¬ 
metrius,  forges  letters  under  the  signature  of  Flamininus, 
xl.  55, 

Y 
Fear  is  divided  by  Numa  into  twelve  lunar  months,  i.  19. 
Years  reckoned  among  the  Volsinians  by  nails  fixed  in  the  walj 
of  a  temple,  vii.  3. 
YoAre,  military,  iii.  28.  A  Roman  army  sent  under  it,  ix.  5.  A 
Samnite  army,  15.  Seex.  36. 
Youth^  a  goddess,  v.  54.  A  feast  of  the  gods  in  honour  of  her. 
xxi.  62. 
Z 
Zacynthus^  island,  xxi.  7.  Is  taken  by  Laevinus,  xxvi.  24.  Is 
given  up  to  the  Romans,  xxxvi.  32. 
Zamc,  five  days’  journey  from  Carthage  ;  here  Scipio  defeated 
Hannibal,  xxx.  29. 
Zama^  or  Same^  island,  xxxii.  16. 
Zelasium^  promontory,  xxxi.  46. 
Zeno  supplicates  T.  Quintius  in  favour  of  his  countrymen  the 
Magnetians,  xxxv  .31. 
Zeno  is  made  governor  of  Aparnea  by  Antiochus,xxxvii.  44 

INDEX. 

4- 

Zflwo,  Macedonian,  governor  of  Theinm,  xxxviii.  uH 
Zeuxidesy  praetor  of  Acamania,  is  deposed  for  favourpg  tl^e 
Romans,  xxxiii.  16. 
Zeuxisy  ambassador  from  Antiochus  to  Scipio,  xxxvii.  45. 
Zoifi/iusy  son-in-law  of  Hiero,  guardian  of  Hieronymus,  xxiv.  4, 
5.  Being  sent  ambassador  to  Egypt,  he  remains  in  voluntary 
exile,  and  his  wife  and  daughters  are  murdered  by  the  Syra¬ 
cusans,  26. 
Zybea  holds  part  of  Bithynia  in  opposition  to  Nicomedes,  apd 
is  conquered  by  the  aid  of  the  Gauls,  xxxviii.  16, 

